25/06/2004
(Various sources - 18/06/04 - 25/06/04)
A review of business and economic news from the Balkans since 18 June:
The international rating agency Standard & Poor's announced it has revised the outlook for Croatia to positive from stable, attributing the change to progress made in structural reforms and to expectations that the new government will continue them.
At the same time, the agency affirmed Croatia's BBB-/A-3 foreign currency and BBB+/A-2 local currency ratings.
Standard & Poor's raised Bulgaria's sovereign rating one notch to BBB-, becoming the first influential agency to upgrade the country to investment grade.
The outlook on the ratings is stable.
The agency said the change reflected Bulgaria's sound economic growth, growth potential and prudent fiscal policies, as well as the likelihood of EU membership in 2007.
Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska and the head of the EC delegation to the country, Donato Chiarini, signed a financing agreement on an EU assistance package for 2004.
Under the agreement, Macedonia will receive 47.5m euros under the Community Assistance for Reconstruction, Development and Stabilisation programme.
The funds will be used to support reforms.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) government adopted a programme for public investments in BiH for the period 2004-2006, calling for a total of 128m euros to be allotted for 55 projects.
BiH authorities will finance three large-scale projects, including the feasibility study and construction of a local highway as part of the Pan-European Transport Corridor Vc.
A consortium led by Serbian investor Gradevinar Kraljevo said it would build two new hydropower plants in Vrbas, Republika Srpska.
The entity government is expected to approve a draft agreement on the project later this month.
The World Bank and the Romanian government announced plans to co-finance a $102m irrigation system project.
Of that, $80m will be provided as a 16-year loan from the Bank;
the government will contribute $20m, and the remainder will come from the Water Users' Association.
Turkey's Minimum Wage Fixing Commission announced new minimum wages of 245.3 euros (gross) and 175.75 euros (net).
The minimum wages regulations apply to all workers aged 16 and over and will be implemented as of 1 July.
The previous net minimum wage was 167.79 euros.
A Turkish firm, Bursel Textiles, has announced plans to build a knitwear factory worth $52m in Uzbekistan.
The factory's charter capital will amount to $12m, with Bursel contributing 65 per cent of the sum in cash.
Eighty per cent of production will be designated for export.
An expert delegation from Macedonia departed for Vermont to study the US state's experiences in the field of electric and natural gas utility regulation.
The delegation will meet with Vermont regulators and discuss how to transform state-run energy firms into market-oriented companies.
