30/06/2004
(Various sources - 23/06/04 - 30/06/04)
A review of sports, entertainment and other cultural news from the Balkans since 23 June:
The young Bulgarian player Sesil Karatancheva is number one in the International Tennis Federation's girls' combined ranking.
Karatancheva, who won the Girls' Singles Roland Garros Tournament a month ago, has also risen from 16th to 2nd place in the world ranking.
Croatian tennis champion Goran Ivanisevic ended his professional career on 25 June, following his match against Australia's Lleyton Hewitt in the third round of the Wimbledon tournament.
Ivanisevic, who lost, had already said the tournament would be his last.
He has one 22 titles in his singles career, including the Wimbledon cup in 2001.
Turkey's top literary prizes, the Yunus Nadi awards -- named for the founder of Hurriyet newspaper -- were given out at a special ceremony on 24 June.
The awards went to novelist Murat Gulsov, caricaturist Musa Gumus, poets Ahmet Erhan and Tugrul Keskin, and short story writer Behcet Necatigil.
The Education for a Culture of Peace conference was held in Sarajevo from 27 June to 29 June.
Experts from 16 countries attended.
An art exhibition, Peace and Tolerance, was held in conjunction with the forum.
Romania's Parliament passed legislation that would impose fines and jail sentences on doctors who prescribe doping substances to athletes.
Doctors convicted under the law would face fines of up to 3,700 euros and jail sentences ranging from one to three years.
The Macedonian town of Veles will host the Stobi Ancient Drama Festival from 28 July until 12 August.
The event will open with Stojan Stojanovski's production of Euripides' Orestes.
Theatre groups from Armenia and the Netherlands will also perform at the event.
The City Museum in Skopje is organising an Olympiad of Spirit to mark the Summer Olympics in Athens.
Five independent exhibitions of artists from Southeast Europe will be featured.
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew arrived in Rome for a formal visit at the invitation of Pope John Paul II.
The visit marks the 40th anniversary of the first meeting of the heads of the Orthodox and Roman Catholic Churches in Jerusalem.
Bartholomew attended a mass officiated by the pontiff on the occasion of the feast of Saints Peter and Paul.
