18/06/2004
(Various sources - 11/06/04 -18/06/04)
A review of business and economic news from the Balkans since 11 June:
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro signed a memorandum of understanding with the European Commission on the financing of a transport infrastructure project in the region.
A total of 16m euros in funds are to be provided under the agreement.
The project aims to reconstruct 6,000km of roads and 4,300km of railroads, as well as to upgrade the airports and ports in Rijeka, Split, Dubrovnik, Nis and Durrës.
The Turkish Parliament adopted a law on 16 June that lays the groundwork for the privatisation of Turk Telecom, eliminating restrictions on the sale of the company.
It also facilitates the privatisation of the GSM operator Telsim.
Bulgaria and the World Bank signed an agreement on the Second Programmatic Adjustment Loan, worth $150m.
The loan has a 17-year maturity and a 5-year grace period.
It is intended to support the government's mid-term economic reform programme.
The 5th International Venture Capital Forum opened in Athens.
In all, 65 companies submitted business plans, requiring a total of 155m euros in funding.
The event was organised by the Hellenic Centre for Investment.
Turkey's banking sector posted a 582.5m euro profit during the first quarter of this year -- an increase of 85 per cent compared to the same period in 2003.
The hike is attributed to a sharp increase in foreign exchange transactions, as a result of the lira's appreciation during the first three months of this year.
Spain will help fund a renewable energy product in the BiH Federation under a 350,000 euro agreement signed in Sarajevo last week.
The project is part of a wider programme for exploring opportunities for power generation in BiH, including small hydroelectric power projects in Republika Srpska.
Three Macedonian banks -- Tutunska Banka, Stopanska Banka-Bitola and Export-Credit Bank -- signed an agreement with the Macedonian Foundation for Development of Enterprises on providing financing for companies from the country's former crisis regions.
The banks established a fund with 500,000 euros in initial capital, which will serve as guarantee for the disbursed loans.
A British investment fund will invest nearly 200m euros in Bulgaria until 2006, focusing on projects in the infrastructure and service sectors.
The planned investments were announced during Economy Minister Lidia Shuleva's visit to London on 16 June.
