14/07/2004
(Various sources - 07/07/04 - 14/07/04)
A review of sports, entertainment and other cultural news from the Balkans since 7 July:
The Summer Festival in Dubrovnik, Croatia started on 10 July.
Considered Croatia's most important summer cultural event, the festival will feature 1,000 artists from more than 20 countries.
Dimitar Penev will coach Bulgaria's national football team starting on 15 July, said the chief of the country's football union, Ivan Slavkov.
Penev led the national team during the 1994 World Cup in the United States.
Bulgaria ranked fourth in that tournament.
The annual Ohrid Summer Festival in Macedonia opened on 13 July with a concert by the Macedonian Philharmonic, led by Azerbaijani conductor Ramiz Aslanov and featuring the celebrated Israeli violinist Shlomo Minz.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski is sponsoring the event.
Two Croatian films won awards at the 39th International Film Festival in Karlovy Vary.
"Tu" (Here), directed by Zrinko Ogresta, won the Crystal Globe -- considered the second highest award at the festival.
Vinko Bresan's "Sviedoci" (Witnesses) received the Phillip Morris Award for Best Film in the festival's East of the West programme.
The renowned Museum of Jews in Sarajevo has reopened after a nine-year break.
Besides permanent and travelling exhibitions, the museum will host concerts and other cultural events.
Painter Gjovalin Paci opened an exhibition at the National Gallery of Arts in Tirana.
His 43 acrylics feature mystical themes.
Folklore groups from Bulgaria, Turkey, Greece, Romania, Macedonia, and Kosovo are taking part in the Balkan Festival of Turkish Folklore that opened in the Bulgarian town of Kardzhali on 13 July.
The event was organised by the Bulgarian Ministry of Culture, the National Council on Ethnic and Demographic Issues, the Council of Ministers and seven municipalities from the Kardzhali region.
Greece will celebrate the 100th anniversary of composer Nikos Skalkottas' birth with performances by two leading symphony orchestras -- those of Thessaloniki and Athens.
The performances will take place on 16 July and 14 August.
The Serbia-Montenegro Embassy in London and the Serbian Council of Great Britain dedicated a memorial tablet to Serbian author Milos Crnjanski.
Crnjanski lived as an emigrant in London from 1941 until 1965.
A similar initiative is being planned for another Serbian writer who lived in London, Borislav Pekic.
