21/06/2004
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 21/06/04
The World Bank Forum convened in Munich, Germany, at the beginning of May. 
The gathering brought together top economic officials from Southeast Europe, Germany and the World Bank. 
Ministers from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, Macedonia, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and Slovenia took part, and hundreds of German businesspeople were in attendance. 
The forum's theme, Responsible Growth in Southeast Europe, was quite telling.
During the last few years, economic growth has been a general feature across the region. 
Economic reforms have been advancing, to a greater or lesser extent, in all countries. 
A perceptible change of climate has stimulated Foreign Direct Investment. 
However, the Western Balkans still have a long path ahead of them when it comes to institutional build-up, premises for durable growth and social cohesion. 
These issues made up the building blocks of the conference in Munich, and were the focus of several panels: governance; connectivity (infrastructure); human development and social cohesion; and private sector development.
World Bank President Jim Wolfensohn has frequently made the case that social and economic issues are inextricably interwoven in development, that growth can happen under various conditions and that its effects on people at large are not inconsequential. 
In the late 1990s, the Comprehensive Development Framework was put forward as a matrix for thinking about growth strategies. 
The framework was resuscitated during the Munich conference, in terms of the emphasis placed on social issues. 
Wolfensohn's keynote speech at the Forum was an application of this vision to a region where unemployment remains high by European standards, where crime is widespread and where hopes have yet to brighten for large segments of the population.
The Forum was quite indicative of the variety of conditions in Southeast Europe. 
Slovenia and Hungary are now EU member countries, and see themselves as a "springboard" for investments in the region. 
Romania and Bulgaria are focusing on closing the remaining negotiating chapters of EU accession, and hope that 2007 will be the year of their membership. 
For both countries the terms of accession are of great importance, given the size of their rural sectors, the need to modernise energy sectors and infrastructure, and the very demanding EU competition policy, which could bring many local companies to failure unless competitiveness challenges are addressed in a timely manner.
Croatia, which was recently put on a fast track to EU membership, hopes to join along with Bulgaria and Romania. 
Macedonia, too, has high hopes. 
In general, the countries of the Western Balkans, in spite of political uncertainties and status-related questions, are driven by the guiding belief that, sooner or later, they will join the EU. 
They view membership in the Union as the best anchor for stability and economic development. 
The EU's engagement in the region is crucial, and can be judged in terms of a strategic vision -- assistance, economic and trade arrangements and labour flows.
At the Forum, Wolfensohn noted that there are 5 billion poor people around the world who badly need the World Bank's attention. 
While this does not mean that the Bank is relinquishing its various assistance windows to the region, his observation was a stark reminder that Europe should not think about itself only, and that the EU has to shoulder more responsibilities where it can and where its strategic interests are unambiguous.
Debates were held on how to stimulate the development of the private sector; on whether public-private partnerships -- in the field of infrastructure development -- can work in countries where income per capita is low; and on ways to foster small- and medium-sized enterprises. 
The discussion on improving public and private sector governance showed that high-level policymakers and business people know what the major challenges are; less known are the best venues for overcoming obstacles.
In the end, tenacity, persistence, open-mindedness and intelligence should carry the day. 
There is an enormous amount of political, institutional and economic work to do in Southeast Europe; miracles cannot be achieved overnight. 
But the change is there and palpable, and joining the EU is a beacon which stimulates further political and economic transformation.
