19/07/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 19/07/04
With its recent admission to the Egmont Group of financial intelligence units, Macedonia will gain access to information on money laundering from 94 Egmont member states.
Vlado Naumovski, head of the Macedonian Directorate for Money Laundering Prevention, spoke with Southeast European Times correspondent Marija Lazarova in this exclusive interview.
Southeast European Times:
What are the advantages of joining the Egmont Group?
How will it help Macedonia prevent money laundering?
Vlado Naumovski:
The Egmont Group is a forum of specialised state-run agencies that are part of national anti-laundering systems.
Belonging to such an institution has many benefits, including exchange of information.
We are dealing with international crimes;
when we investigate channels of dirty money, we can usually assume that the money is going out of the country.
Membership in the Egmont Group enables us to receive information from 94 countries.
That means we can request information from the countries dirty money is being channelled to, as well as from those which are the originating point.
Investigating money laundering is not a simple process.
It almost always extends beyond a country's borders, and obtaining the necessary information can be a challenge.
SE Times:
Obtaining information on bank accounts is vital to the fight against money laundering, but also raises privacy issues.
How does the Egmont Group handle these issues?
Naumovski:
Generally, the principle of guaranteed secrecy of bank accounts applies everywhere.
The success which the Egmont Group has achieved in fighting money laundering, however, depends on the fact that its members are given access to banking information.
Certainly such information must not be misused;
Egmont Group documents clearly state that it can only be used in money laundering cases.
SE Times:
Under an amendment to Macedonia's anti-laundering laws, cash payments are now subject to restrictions.
What does this mean for citizens, and how much will it help the directorate?
Naumovski:The amendment stipulates that cash payments are only allowed up to 15,000 euros;
everything above this amount shall be paid on an account.
For citizens, the measure should not make any substantial difference.
They can still buy apartments or cars, but instead of paying companies directly, they will need to go through a bank.
This change will help many institutions in the country, including the National Bank.
It could have a positive effect on monetary and macroeconomic policies, since too much cashflow may have been our greatest problem.
As a result of the amendment, we will be able to direct money to the banking channels, which are easier to control.
That will enable us to conduct a more efficient fight against money laundering.
SE Times:
Is the amendment sufficient, or are further changes in the law necessary?
Naumovski:
Money laundering is a sophisticated criminal activity performed by highly skilled people who are always a step ahead of those who are working to stop it.
The measures and activities undertaken are never enough.
We are hoping that this amendment and an enlargement of the anti-laundering directorate will help us take preventive action, which is our job.
SE Times:
Are Macedonian regulations compatible with those of the EU?
Naumovski:
Macedonia is preparing for the EU Questionnaire, which will likely contain many questions on this topic.
We need to undertake many reforms in order to adapt to European legislation.
However, the existing laws are completely compatible with the UN Convention on Transnational Organised Crime, as well as with two EU directives and 40 recommendations from the Financial Action Task Force, plus eight special recommendations related to preventing money laundering.
We have amended the laws in consultations with international experts, who have given positive assessments of our efforts.
SE Times:
What is the level of co-operation between your directorate and those in neighbouring countries and Southeast Europe in general?
Naumovski:
Before becoming a member of the Egmont Group, the directorate signed bilateral co-operation agreements with Albania, Bulgaria, Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia.
An agreement with Montenegro is being negotiated.
Macedonia plans to sign an agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the effort to establish a directorate is currently under way.
Next year we are planning to organise a regional conference where we will discuss ways to operate more efficiently.
SE Times:
Are you satisfied with the level of regional co-operation?
Naumovski:
Yes, I am satisfied because we have exchanged substantial information that has later helped in revealing suspected transactions.
SE Times:
Are you satisfied with the level of co-operation with state-run institutions and banks?
Naumovski:
We have perfect co-operation with institutions within the finance ministry, including the customs service, the exchange inspectorate, the public prosecutor's office, the police and the national anti-corruption commission.
We have established higher levels of co-operation with banks now that the amendment has been passed.
An agreement on sending and receiving data via the Internet has also been reached.
SE Times:
How many suspected transactions have been reported in Macedonia?
Naumovski:
In the past two years, the banks, customs service and insurance companies have reported 46,000 regular transactions.
Of those, about 60 were designated as suspicious.
When a bank alerts us to a suspicious transaction, we investigate further.
If we come up with relevant information, we pass it along to the police.
