28/07/2004
(IMF, Reuters, AFX, RFE/RL, Mediafax - 27/07/04)
While praising Romania for its prudent macroeconomic policies and structural reform progress over the past three years, the IMF says more efforts are needed in those areas to sustain robust economic growth.
According to IMF projections, Romania's real GDP will reach 5 per cent this year, up from 4.9 per cent in 2003.
"Sustaining strong growth over the medium term will require further efforts to complete macroeconomic stabilisation and accelerate structural reform," the IMF said in a public information notice issued Tuesday (27 July), following consultations with Bucharest earlier this month.
Stressing the importance of maintaining a tight fiscal policy in the coming years, the Fund urged the government to reduce the budget gap to help curb inflation and contain the current account deficit within safe levels.
Romania managed to lower its budget deficit from 2.6 per cent in 2002 to 2.3 per cent in 2003, and the IMF is urging authorities to keep it below 2 per cent of GDP over the medium term. 
Inflation, meanwhile, declined from 40.7 per cent in 2000 to 14.1 per cent in 2003, and is expected to drop further to an annual 9.0 per cent in 2004. 
An increase in domestic demand last year has pushed the current account deficit to 5.9 per cent, reflecting a very rapid growth of credit to the private sector and a large minimum wage increase in January 2003.
Prudent wage policies are critical to maintaining macroeconomic stability, the IMF said, urging authorities to keep wage settlements in collective labour contracts in line with productivity growth. 
The Fund also urged officials to avoid further real increases in the minimum wage, as this would aggravate demand pressures and harm Romania's competitiveness.
The IMF also called for continued efforts to eliminate losses and quasi-fiscal activities in state-owned enterprises (SOE). 
It welcomed Romania's privatisation progress over the past three years and government plans to offer most of SOEs outside the energy sector for sale by the end of 2004.
Although energy sector privatisation has been slow, the IMF said, a number of key projects are now close to completion. 
Particularly important is the privatisation of Romania's largest company, oil and gas producer Petrom.
The Fund also praised the government for recent progress in improving the business climate, including judiciary reform and the implementation of measures in the fight against corruption.
"To attract higher private investment, it will be crucial to sustain these institutional reforms, further strengthen the fight against corruption -- in particular through further efforts to increase the independence and effectiveness of the judiciary -- and improve transparency in privatisation and public procurement," the Fund said.
It also urged the authorities "to keep up the momentum on these policies in the run-up to the general elections in November and in their immediate aftermath".
