26/07/2004
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 26/07/04
NATO and EU membership have been the twin strategic goals of most European post-communist countries since 1989.
Entry into these two Western clubs signifies belonging to an area of economic prosperity and political freedom, secured by institutional and military links among the member states.
It is easy to see why joining NATO is regarded as a milestone in a country's economic and political development.
Membership requires meeting certain conditions that demonstrate a country has reached a high level of economic progress and political maturity.
A well-functioning market economy ensures a strong economic performance, which is essential for supporting military infrastructure and contributing to the Alliance's needs.
Meanwhile, democratic institutions secure individuals' fundamental rights and help preclude domestic and regional conflicts.
However, questions can be raised concerning the degree to which NATO membership impacts economics development.
The Alliance is no longer what it was during the Cold War.The major ideological foe, Soviet Communism, no longer exists.
As a result, it has become harder to articulate common interests in operational terms, or to define concrete missions.
The impact of globalisation must also be considered.
With capital now flowing to all parts of the world, the most dynamic economic area now appears to be the Pacific Rim.
The region is attracting enormous amounts of capital, with China receiving the lion's share.
Geopolitics cannot avoid the need to assess the relative military, strategic and economic weight of the main players;
as these change, so does the outlook for the Alliance.
In the evolving climate, NATO membership is only one of the ingredients which can foster economic progress.
There are countries in the world which do not have the benefit of being members of the Alliance, yet have made great strides economically.
Moreover, the key player in NATO -- the United States -- must balance its huge technological, military and economic resources against the risk of overstretch.
That impacts its ability to provide material assistance to allies, as it did during the Cold War, unless adequate quid pro quos can be established.
One avenue may lie in the "strategic partnerships" which have proliferated in recent years and which increasingly shape bilateral ties.
But these partnerships are insufficiently defined when it comes to concrete economic co-operation and mutual gains.
In some cases, they may clash with the rules set by other organisations, particularly the EU.
A case in point is the Brasov-Bors highway project, which has become an object of scrutiny by the European Commission after Romania gave the contract to Bechtel without a proper tender.
For Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania, NATO membership needs to be viewed in conjunction with entry into the EU.
The latter is a formidable stimulus for institutional change and modernisation.
The prospect of EU entry is driving the pace of change in these countries and bringing in substantial capital.
The target date of 2007 has proved to be a catalyst for reform.
In the Western Balkans, the goal of NATO membership is a powerful anchor of stability, helping to defuse lingering interethnic animosities and disagreements over national boundaries.
Here too, however, the EU is increasingly becoming an engine driving democratic change and fostering economic progress.
The Union is also a major provider of economic assistance to the region.
NATO membership does matter greatly to the economic development of Southeast Europe.
In an increasingly complex geopolitical environment, however, joining the Alliance is not a catch-all solution.
Moreover, neither NATO nor EU membership should be regarded as a substitute for astute and consistent local policymaking.
Ultimately, long-term economic progress -- and the ability to meet the requirements for Euro-Atlantic integration -- depends on the countries themselves.
The energy driving reform must come from within.
