14/06/2004
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 14/06/04
Dusko Jovanovic, director and editor-in-chief of the daily newspaper Dan, died 28 May at the Pogdorica Clinical Centre from wounds sustained in a shooting outside the newspaper's offices.
An unidentified assailant opened fire with an automatic weapon a few seconds after Jovanovic entered his car.
In an editorial, Dan described the killing as an attack on free speech, democracy and the "freedom of the whole nation".
According to the newspaper, Jovanovic had been receiving threatening letters.
A few years ago, while serving as a member of parliament, he was attacked in front of his apartment.
Police suspect the shots that killed Jovanovic were fired from a dark blue Volkswagen Golf III with tinted windows which turned up in the center of Podgorica a couple of days later.
Two Kalashnikovs -- one in the back, another in the passenger seat -- were found in the car, along with spent cartridges.
Approximately 30m away from the car, police discovered a pair of surgical gloves.
The Volkswagen had been parked near Svetozar Markovic Street.
Police, who were running background checks on more than 200 cars with dark colours and tinted windows, found it had stolen license plates.
The interior ministry is offering 1m euros for information concerning the murder.
Interior Minister Dragan Djurovic has asked police organisations from France, the United Kingdom, Germany and the United States to send experts to assist the Montenegrin Police in shedding light on the case.
He announced that he would resign if the murderer was not found.
Montenegrin institutions, political parties, individuals and NGOs condemned Jovanovic's murder.
"This is an attack on the peace and stability of Montenegro and a threat to security of its citizens.
That is why it is very important to carefully analyse who could have had a motive to send us such a message through this crime," Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic said.
Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic expressed shock at the killing, adding that he is confident Serbia-Montenegro has the strength "to fight this evil".
Jovanovic's murder was an attack on Montenegrin journalism in general, said Vice President of the Association of Professional Journalists of Montenegro Dimo Ramovic.
"It is not the way to settle accounts with journalists.
They are responsible for what they are doing and there are courts for those who did not like what he was doing.
Shooting someone is not the way," Ramovic told the MINA news agency.
The association strongly condemned the murder, calling on police to find the killer as soon as possible.
The information director for Serbia-Montenegro's Council of Ministers, Slobodan Orlic, said the killing was a continuation of the violence initiated in the 1990s.
He said it demonstrated the urgent need for changes in the media environment.
A spokesperson for the European Commission's Foreign Affairs Commissariat, Emma Udwin, expressed shock at the assassination and expressed hope the perpetrators would be brought to justice.
Jovanovic was co-owner of the private company Ju Media Mont, comprising Dan, Radio D and the magazine Revija D. His newspaper was a longtime proponent of Slobodan Milosevic's political views and was once named in a lawsuit by the UN tribunal for revealing the identity of a protected witness.
After a public apology and a change of editorial policy towards The Hague tribunal, the lawsuit was withdrawn.
During the 1990s, Jovanovic was a member of the unified Democratic Party of Socialists.
After the split in 1997, he joined the Socialist People's Party, headed by Momir Bulatovic.
While a member of parliament, he was attacked once and his briefcase -- which, he claimed, contained important documents -- was stolen.
Prior to the foundation of Dan, he worked as a financial police officer at the interior ministry, and later as a financial police head in Niksic and Podgorica.
He was also head of Montenegro's Administration of Public Revenues.
Mili Perovic, who succeeded Jovanovic as editor of Dan, said the daily would continue to be published and would deal with the same issues as before.
