29/07/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 29/07/04
With the election of a pro-Western reformer as Serbian president, the state union's institutional system is complete and Serbia-Montenegro is poised for full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, according to top officials.
"The Serbia-Montenegro union is finally ready to show that it accepts its international obligations," Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic said, after the vote resulting in the election of Boris Tadic as president of Serbia.
But the window of opportunity will not remain open forever, warns Predrag Simic, a senior adviser to Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic.
"I'm afraid that this game of cat and mouse can do us serious damage.
It's up to the politicians to clarify this, and obviously this is a hot potato which is being passed from one to another."
On 8 July, the federal government established a national council for co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
Made up of top officials from both constituent republics and headed by Serbia-Montenegro Human Rights Minister Rasim Llajic, it has been tasked with taking immediate steps towards full co-operation, which the federal government has described as a strategic priority.
But haggling continues over who has jurisdiction over extraditing accused indictees, with some saying it is up to the council, and others calling on Serbian officials to take measures.
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte, meanwhile, continues to voice concern that talk about increased co-operation has yet to translate into concrete action.
"We are waiting for the police to begin arresting these individuals and for the government to announce to the public that arresting these people is the nation's international obligation and does not go against national interests," said del Ponte's spokeswoman, Florence Hartmann.
She says the most recent reason for concern is the lost opportunity to arrest indictee Goran Hadzic.
A UN tracking team photographed him leaving his house with a large bag, hours after Serbian officials were told he had been indicted.
The government has denied leaking the information.
Hartmann also insists that top war crimes indictee Ratko Mladic has been in Serbia-Montenegro for a considerable period of time, hiding out mostly in Serbia.
While Belgrade has officially maintained that he is in not in the country, authorities have reportedly been trying to negotiate his surrender in exchange for financial aid to his family.
On Thursday (29 July), Serbian Ambassador to Mexico Vesna Pesic said it is time for Belgrade to stop trying to convince the tribunal that Mladic isn't in Serbia.
"If there are negotiations with him, the negotiators are probably not travelling abroad for them," said Pesic, a former leader of the Civic Alliance of Serbia.
"Thank God we've stopped playing hide-and-seek.
That's a big step forward," Pesic told local media.
