29/07/2004
(AP, CNN, Deutsche Welle, Kathemerini, Macedonian Press Agency - 28/07/04; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, Macedonian Press Agency - 27/07/04)
As the start of the Athens Olympics approaches, Greece's unprecedented security plan for the Games is swinging into full gear. 
Dozens of Greek warships have begun patrolling coastal waters, a naval official said Wednesday (28 July), a day after armed Patriot missiles were deployed around Athens and surveillance cameras were switched on.
As part of the 1.2 billion-euro security plan, which includes a two-layer maritime security zone, at least 35 Greek vessels will be monitoring the Ionian Sea, the Aegean Sea and areas off the coasts of Crete and the Cyclades islands until the end of August.
NATO warships will patrol in the second zone, outside Greek territorial waters. 
The Alliance's entire Mediterranean fleet of about 15 warships, which has been on anti-terrorism duty since shortly after the 11 September 2001 attacks on New York and Washington, will take part in the operation, according to media reports.
Speaking on condition of anonymity, a Greek Navy official told the AP that about 70 vessels have been inspected over the past few weeks. 
In no case was cargo or personnel found to pose a potential threat. 
"Any ships with suspicious behaviour" are being checked, the source said, adding that the number of inspections would grow with the approach of the Games. 
The Greek ships are being backed by about ten navy helicopters and two military patrol aircraft.
Security measures have also been tightened at the port of Piraeus, less than 10km south of central Athens. 
Two large-scale X-ray machines, loaned by the United States, were recently installed, and US Customs and Border Patrol staff are assisting port officials in identifying potentially risky cargo.
The X-ray machines can rapidly scan entire containers for terrorist weapons. 
According to CNN, they can produce an interior image of a standard 12m container in less than a minute.
A frigate will be patrolling the waters off the port of Piraeus, with 200 sailors watching over at least eight cruise ships that will be used as floating hotels for high-level guests and dignitaries during the Games, which will be held from 13 August to 29 August.
A Greek air defence official said Tuesday that a no-fly zone would be imposed one week before the start of the Olympics.
