12/07/2004
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 12/07/04
Fiscal policy in reform-minded transition countries has been shaped by three key priorities:
simplifying the fiscal system, establishing transparency and clear procedures, and ensuring that legislation is applied fairly.
Over time, it has also become increasingly clear that tax hikes for the sake of increasing budget revenues can be self-defeating, and that public authorities should limit contributions to social security funds in order to stimulate job creation and the development of small- and medium-sized enterprises.
These lessons can be seen within the context of government efforts to streamline expenditures in order to keep budget and current account deficits under control.
At the same time, more than a few transition countries have grasped fiscal policy as a potent tool for attracting Foreign Direct Investment.
During the 1990s, Central European countries used tax holidays and other fiscal stimuli for this purpose.
The resulting impact on the volume and amount of capital inflows helped turn these economies around and improved their competitiveness.
While red tape and corruption are most often cited by investors as obstacles to business expansion, fiscal policy matters also.
How meaningful fiscal policy and tax competition can be is illustrated by Slovakia's success in inducing Hyundai to invest in a major automotive project.
The country competed fiercely with its neighbours, combining wage comparative advantages with impressive financial resources.
This example can be viewed from two perspectives.
One is with regard to the entry of ten new countries -- including eight formerly communist countries -- into the EU.
It appears that joining the Union compels member states to seek legislative uniformity.
Even so, there are areas in which national prerogatives remain significant, resulting in visible differences even when the general policy principles are the same.
Tax legislation is one such area.
A second perspective relates to the ability of governments to use fiscal policy in order to foster more business.
Some new entrants into the EU are lowering taxes to such a degree that old members are talking about "unfair competition".
Slovakia has introduced a single income tax quota (19 per cent), emulating the model Baltic countries have experimented with for years.
Corporate taxes have also been recently lowered in Poland and Hungary.
The policies of these Central European countries have prompted varying reactions among the older EU member states.
Austria, for instance, has determined that it must come up with similar policies in order to stem a possible capital flight.
Germany and France are arguing that tax competition is reminiscent of competitive devaluations, in which exchange rates are used to enhance export competitiveness.
The result, they warn, will be losses for everyone.
The French and Germans also insist that it is not appropriate for countries benefiting from EU structural and cohesion funds to practice tax competition against the donors.
Although national fiscal policies present a wide range of variation within the EU, the reaction from some of the more established member states should not be underestimated.
Strained welfare systems and high wages are speeding up outsourcing, offshoring and job losses.
At the same time, the EU's lack of success in implementing the goals of the Lisbon Agenda -- which aims to make the Union the most competitive area worldwide in terms of a knowledge-based economy -- reinforces these fears.
It may be only a matter of time before the European Commission in Brussels sets about defining "rules" intended to govern tax competition inside the Union.
Meanwhile, candidates and would-be candidates for EU membership are caught up in conflicting policy thrusts.
It is clear to Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia that they cannot simply overlook what their neighbours are doing, and that they must simplify and optimise their tax systems.
Romania, for instance, must reduce its social security contributions to a much lower level.
At the same time, these countries have to find ways to keep their budget deficits under control, while locating additional revenues necessary for funding development projects.
Tax competition presents both opportunities and perils.
Lower taxes can stimulate business and, under the right conditions, increase budget revenues.
Pushed too low, however, they can be inimical to budget revenues and endanger public goods such as infrastructure, education and healthcare.
In relatively poor countries, including many in Southeast Europe, it would be wishful thinking to expect such goods to be provided solely by the private sector.
True, more and more discussion is taking place about the role of public-private partnerships in developing infrastructure in the Balkans.
But when per capita income is low, and much of the population has a difficult time making ends meet, such partnerships will not be able to provide all the answers.
The state necessarily remains a major provider of public goods, and international financial institutions play an important role in assisting local governments to this end.
Governments have to find the right balance.
They must seek to improve efficiency and keep their fiscal systems competitive, while not going too far with taxation experiments.
