26/07/2004
By Mustafa Azizoglu for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 26/07/04
Turkey's Supreme Court rejected a decision by parliament to send former Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz and his economy minister, Gunes Taner, to trial on charges stemming from the privatisation of a state bank in 1998.
An overwhelming number of parliamentary deputies had approved the decision, which was part of a larger inquiry into alleged large-scale fraud affecting privatisation schemes, banking reforms and energy projects, thought to be costing Turkey billions of euros.
Of the 447 deputies present in the 550-seat parliament, 429 voted in favour of a draft law which would have made Yilmaz the first prime minister in Turkish history to stand trial.
Fifteen MPs voted against the measure, while three abstained.
Lawmakers also voted to send two former energy ministers -- Cumhur Ersumer and Zeki Cakan -- before the Supreme Court judges to answer charges of illegally manipulating energy contracts.
However, on Friday (23 July) the judges unanimously rejected the case on procedural grounds, saying that separate votes should have been held for Yilmaz and Taner.
Parliament now has the option of reconsidering the matter when it returns from summer recess.
Yilmaz has been accused of deciding in advance who would win the tender in the privatisation of state-run Turkbank, and of using a mafia boss to intimidate other bidders.
He and Taner allegedly encouraged businessman Korkmaz Yigit to buy Turkbank by offering him improper loans from other state banks.Yigit's ties to the mafia don, Alaattin Cakici, were exposed when recordings of their phone conversations were made public.
The businessman then implicated top officials, including the prime minister.
The resulting political scandal led to the fall of the government, but Yilmaz was cleared of corruption charges by parliament.
However, he became politically vulnerable after the 2002 general elections, when his Motherland Party failed to win a single seat in parliament.
Meanwhile, the new ruling Justice and Development Party came to power pledging to root out corruption, widely seen as one of the main reasons behind the country's recurring economic woes.
Yilmaz maintains he is innocent of any wrongdoing, saying he would welcome a trial as an opportunity to clear his name.
The Supreme Court is the only authority competent to try high level state officials such as presidents, prime ministers and ministers.
Until now, 12 former state ministers have been tried before the Court;
seven were fined or sentenced to jail.
