27/07/2004
(New York Daily News - 27/07/04;
AP, USA Today, NATO, Kathimerini, Reuters - 26/07/04)
NATO has reportedly agreed to a Greek government request for additional security support during next month's Olympics in Athens.
The Alliance, according to an AP report on Monday (26 July), has approved the assistance "in essence", but is still discussing some operational details.
The additional assistance would come in the form of a rapid reaction unit, which is likely to include 400 US troops based in Germany.
NATO has not yet decided where they will be located during the Games, the AP said.
On Monday, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer declined to give exact details concerning the location of the Special Forces.
"We never do that", he said, at a joint press conference with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana.
He confirmed that the troops would be under NATO command.
It is the second time Greece has sought NATO assistance in securing the Games.
In September, the Alliance agreed to a package of measures, including maritime surveillance, intelligence sharing, civil emergency planning, and deployment of a special unit to deal with potential WMD attacks.
Last month, NATO said the support would include airspace patrolling by AWACS aircraft.
In an interview with the Athens-based daily Kathimerini published on Monday, Greek Public Order Minister George Voulgarakis attributed the requests for NATO support to "gaps in equipment, expertise, or staff" encountered during drills.
But he also stressed, "management of and political responsibility for security belongs to the Greek authorities."
Meanwhile, Interpol Secretary General Ronald Noble said Monday his agency had not received any concrete information "about any specific threats or planned attacks that could occur at the Olympics".
Similar statements have come from US, Israeli and other intelligence agencies.
On Tuesday, a massive security umbrella designed to safeguard the Games went into operation.
Nearly 300 closed-circuit cameras began sweeping major roads and public squares, while three police helicopters and a high-tech blimp, equipped with more surveillance cameras, hovered above the capital.
Armed patriot missiles were in position at three locations around Athens, including a military base near the Olympic Village.
"This is the start of the operations.
The system will gradually be operated in full," Reuters quoted a police source as saying.
