30/07/2004
(AP, Beta, Radio B92 - 29/07/04; AP, Reuters, BBC - 17/07/04)
Belgrade has formally asked Greece to extradite a key suspect in the March 2003 assassination of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic, a senior Serbia-Montenegro official said Thursday (29 July).
On 16 July, Dejan Milenkovic, 34, was detained in the Greek port city of Thessaloniki on an international warrant.
"We've been on the case for a month and a half, since his wife came to Greece in early June," local police chief Costas Tzekis told reporters following Milenkovic's arrest. 
When he was detained, the suspect was carrying a travel bag with "a lot of money", but was unarmed and had no identification papers on him, Tzekis said.
Serbia-Montenegro Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic, whose ministry deals with extradition demands, told the Beta news agency Thursday that the formal extradition request was accompanied by more than 100 pages of documentation, translated into Greek. 
He said he hoped the Greek authorities would act quickly and efficiently on Belgrade's request.
Greek law allows Milenkovic to appeal any extradition motion, according to the AP.
Serbian prosecutors say Milenkovic, also known as Bugsy, was a member of the Zemun Clan organised crime group, believed to have orchestrated the plot against Djindjic.
Serbia's first democratically elected prime minister since World War II was killed by sniper fire as he stepped from his car outside the Serbian government headquarters on 12 March 2003. 
Milenkovic is among 13 crime bosses and paramilitary members charged in the case. 
Five of them -- including the man believed to have fired the fatal shot, Zvezdan Jovanovic -- are now on trial at Serbia's organised crime court.
Milenkovic is also the key suspect in a failed attempt on Djindjic's life on 21 February 2003. 
He was the driver of a truck that swerved into the lane in which Djindjic's motorcade was traveling and nearly hit the car carrying the prime minister. 
Arrested but soon released, Milenkovic then disappeared.
Serbian authorities have said the aim of Djindjic's assassination was to overthrow the pro-Western government, clearing the way for allies of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to return to power.
Djindjic, who was instrumental in Milosevic's extradition to The Hague, also planned to crack down on organised crime and boost Serbia's co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
