26/07/2004
(AP, USA Today, AFP - 25/07/04; Kathimerini - 24/07/04; AP, Reuters, Macedonian Press Agency - 23/07/04)
A drill aimed at testing the safety of Olympic transportation was held in the Greek capital early Sunday (25 July). 
With less than three weeks until the opening ceremony on 13 August, Greek officials say every scenario for a possible terrorist attack is being considered.
The focus of Sunday's drill was on managing traffic accidents with the help of a high-tech blimp, which made its first test flight over Athens on Friday, and on checking the operation of special Olympic traffic routes. 
Air and ground police units took part in the operation, conducted along key roads in the greater Athens area.
The three-hour exercise, codenamed "Olympic Hermes", also tested part of an electronic security network, two days after it was declared fully operational. 
The 255m-euro system includes more than 1,000 cameras, underwater sensors, iris scanners to check the identities of airport personnel, X-ray machines capable of looking through entire trucks and other security devices.
The 61m-long blimp is part of that system. 
Equipped with high-resolution cameras and chemical contamination "sniffers", it will patrol the skies over Athens for at least 16 hours a day during the Games, flying at a height of more than 1,200m. 
Images from its cameras -- as well as from cameras installed at Olympic venues, on major streets, and on helicopters and airplanes -- will be fed into a security command centre.
"Greece is ready," Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis said Friday as the security network was declared up and running. 
"Greece will host ... 
absolutely successful games in conditions of supreme safety."
The security budget for the Games has reached a record 1.2 billion euros -- three times the amount the country initially planned to spend -- as it seeks to ensure the safety of the first Summer Olympics to be held since the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington. 
Authorities say the amount will likely rise even further.
In other news, the Greek daily Kathimerini reported Saturday that a 1.6m-euro high-tech mobile laboratory designed to help protect the Olympics against potential biological or chemical attacks would be set up near Halkida, about 70km north of Athens, by the end of this month. 
The packable facility, belonging to the Hungarian Army, unfolds into a large tent, which is equipped with security devices and surveillance cameras.
A 100-strong NATO team of Czech anti-chemical warfare specialists will support the Hungarian-led unit operating the laboratory. 
In response to a Greek request for assistance, the Alliance has also agreed to provide AWACS surveillance planes to help maintain a no-fly zone over Athens, as well as other security support.
Greece is also being assisted in its security preparations by a seven-nation advisory group, which includes Britain, Israel and the United States.
