23/07/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 23/07/04
Newly elected Serbian President Boris Tadic started his five-year mandate with a visit to Washington this week, emphasising that Serbia's main goal is to access the European and NATO integration processes.
Tadic met with top US officials, including Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary of State Colin Powell, Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and several senators, congressmen and business leaders.
During the talks, it was clear that co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) remains the most serious issue affecting relations between Serbia and the international community.
Powell and Tadic agreed that co-operation with the ICTY "is extremely important for the future and stability of Serbia".
Powell reiterated that the United States wants to co-operate with Serbia in its bid to join NATO's Partnership for Peace programme, an important milestone on the way to Euro-Atlantic integration.
Tadic, who also met with US Ambassador for War Crimes Pierre-Richard Prosper, pledged that Serbia would co-operate with the ICTY, saying that "the key factor" in that co-operation is apprehending former Bosnian Serb military leader Ratko Mladic.
"All levels of democratic power have agreed" on the need to co-operate with the tribunal, Tadic said.
"We will try to find Mladic, because he is the main case for our co-operation with the ICTY.
After we arrest him, we will extradite him to The Hague tribunal," Tadic said.
He was unable to specify when Mladic might be arrested or whether he was in Serbia, as ICTY chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte has insisted.
Prosper said that the extradition of Mladic would open the way to possible trials of other ICTY indictees, including four army and police generals, before domestic courts.
Tadic also raised the possibility of deepening co-operation between Serbia and the United States.
In talks with Rumsfeld, Tadic said that bilateral military co-operation is in Serbia's national interest.
Tadic also requested aid from US authorities in protecting Kosovo Serbs.
He said that providing safety for all Kosovo citizens would greatly contribute to peace and stability in the Balkans.
Before his election last month, Tadic said he would act as "an ambassador of the Serbian economy".
In talks with Powell and Cheney, Tadic said that economic co-operation between Belgrade and Washington is essential to Serbia's economic stability.
"We need jobs and direct US investment," he said, adding that a new chapter has been opened in bilateral relations.
