26/07/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 26/07/04
Cautioning that some problems still need to be addressed, the OSCE has said Croatia is ready to take over a limited number of war crimes cases from The Hague.
In two reports presented last month, the organisation cited Croatian government efforts to prosecute war crimes indictees, changes in public attitudes concerning the prosecution of Croatian citizens, and a government programme to train judges to handle war crimes cases.
"Given the amount of effort invested in training of court officials and the visible change in atmosphere, we do not see why the Croatian judiciary should not take over trials for a limited number of war crimes trials from The Hague tribunal," OSCE Mission Chief in Croatia Peter Semneby said during a joint presentation of the reports' findings with Croatian Justice Minister Vesna Skare-Ozbolt.
The Croatian public "has become aware of the need for those trials, regardless of the nationality of the accused", Semneby said.
Welcoming the OSCE's assessment, Skare-Ozbolt said it was "of crucial importance" for the country, adding that she hoped it would encourage the UN tribunal to transfer more of its cases.
Approximately 500 individuals were processed for war crimes before 12 county courts from 2002 until mid-2004, according to the OSCE.
While acknowledging that substantial improvements have taken place, the reports found that the national and ethnic origin of defendants and victims still influences judicial proceedings, and that further reform is needed to ensure that war crimes cases are administered fairly.
Specific concerns include the high rate of war crimes verdicts overturned by the Croatian Supreme Court due to errors by lower courts, discrepancies in conviction rates among defendants standing trial for similar offences and the large number of in absentia proceedings conducted.
The reports urge continued monitoring by the international community to ensure unbiased, fair trials regardless of a defendant's ethnic origin.
"Lack of even-handedness in the treatment of war crimes in the courts continues to be an obstacle to refugee return," Semneby said.
The OSCE praised Chief State Prosecutor Mladen Bajic for his decision to order a review of around 1,850 pending cases.
Batic acted after determining that a significant number of past investigations and indictments were not adequately supported by evidence.
Observing that regional courts will likely continue to conduct the majority of war crimes trials, Semneby said training should be extended to all judges, prosecutors and defence lawyers involved, to ensure that a two-tier system does not develop.
The two OSCE reports also stress the need for interstate co-operation between judicial authorities to address all war crimes cases.
