28/07/2004
By Mustafa Azizoglu for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 28/07/04
During his three-day official visit to France, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan lobbied political and business leaders to support Turkey's entry into the EU. 
His trip came ahead of an important decision from the EU Commission on whether to start accession talks with Ankara.
France plays an especially critical role in Turkey's accession bid because it is the EU member state most divided on the issue. 
While French President Jacques Chirac has come out in favour of Turkish membership, several senior members of his centre-right UMP party resist the idea. 
The opposition Socialist Party says it will welcome Turkey to the EU, but has voiced concerns over the Armenian genocide claim. 
Opinion polls suggest that a majority of the public opposes Turkey's entry into the Union.
Erdogan characterised his visit to France as "positive", adding that he told Chirac and French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin that Turkey expects France to maintain a constructive attitude towards setting a date for opening accession talks.
While Chirac did not speak to reporters after the meeting, his office released a statement saying he had told Erdogan that "Turkey's entry into the EU is desirable as soon as it is possible".
According to analysts, Erdogan largely succeeded in his goal of raising support for Ankara's bid, mainly because of his focus on increased trade and investment. 
As he wrapped up his visit, Turkey's national airline announced it would buy 36 Airbus planes -- a deal potentially worth more than 2.5 billion euros. 
Erdogan also suggested his country could be in the market for French nuclear technology. 
French business leaders responded warmly, with the head of the French employers' association, Antoine Selliere, saying the business sector was "very much sympathetic" to Turkey's efforts.
Erdogan also met with the politicians who oppose Turkish membership, but their positions were unchanged.
The European Commission will release a report in October stating whether it believes Ankara has fulfilled the political, economic and human rights criteria to join the Union. 
Based on those findings, European leaders will decide at their summit in December whether to launch membership negotiations.
