21/07/2004
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 21/07/04
Bilateral co-operation was the focus of Albanian Foreign Minister Kastriot Islami's talks with Montenegrin leaders in Podgorica earlier this month. 
Islami met with Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic, Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, Foreign Minister Dragisa Burzan and the co-chairman of the Montenegrin Parliament, Rifat Rastoder.
Vujanovic told Islami and his delegation that good neighbourly relations with Albania are among the foreign ministry's highest priorities. 
Montenegro and Albania share not only a border, but common historical and other ties, he said, adding that co-operation boosts overall regional stability and increases the chances of EU membership -- a key strategic goal for both Podgorica and Tirana.
Hailing the number of bilateral agreements already been signed, Vujanovic and Islami agreed there is room for enhanced intergovernmental and economic co-operation in the future. 
They also said it is crucial for both countries to apply jointly to international institutions and financial organisations for aid with infrastructure projects. 
Albania and Montenegro are providing an excellent example of regional co-operation and a model for other countries aspiring to EU membership, they said.
Topping the agenda of Islami's meeting with Burzan was the signing of an international agreement on passenger and goods traffic. 
The two foreign ministers also established the Virpazar-Skadar boat line, set to open in the near future. 
In another important development, Montenegrin Economy Minister Darko Uskokovic and Albanian Industry and Energy Minister Viktor Doda -- who accompanied Islami on his visit -- signed a memorandum of understanding on construction of a 400kw high voltage power line between Podgorica and Tirana.
The power line project is expected to cost 80m euros and will financed by the EBRD and the German credit fund KFW. 
It is intended to synchronise operations of the Albanian and Montenegrin power systems, as well as contributing to the overall strength and flexibility of electricity networks in Southeastern Europe. 
The line will be 200km long on the Albanian side and 27km on the Montenegrin side. 
Construction should be completed within three years.
Islami's talks with Djukanovic touched on the Kosovo issue. 
Both called for resolving the issue as soon as possible through dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, and with the help of the international community, based on UN Security Council Resolution 1244.
