20/07/2004
(AP, Reuters, AFP, Tanjug, Radio B92 - 19/07/04;
NATO - 16/07/04)
While welcoming Serbia-Montenegro's progress towards resolving security problems and implementing reforms, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer has urged leaders to arrest war crimes indictees if the country wants closer ties with the Alliance.
"NATO considers it of great importance to have this region reach stability and to have it integrated into Euro-Atlantic structures," the AP quoted de Hoop Scheffer as saying Monday (19 July) during a daylong visit to Belgrade."But conditions for this will have to be met," he added.
Full co-operation with the International Criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is a key requirement Serbia-Montenegro must meet to be eligible for accession to EU and NATO structures.
One of the ICTY's most wanted indictees, wartime Bosnian Serb military chief Ratko Mladic, and about 15 other Serb war crimes suspects are believed to be hiding in Serbia.
"I sincerely hope we will see a political push ...
for this full co-operation,"said de Hoop Scheffer, whose visit to Belgrade came amid mounting international pressure on the country to meet its international obligations and hand over Mladic.
The former commander has been on the run since 1995, when the ICTY indicted him for his role in the 1992-1995 war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, charging him with genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre.
"I do not know where Mr. Mladic is -- the only thing I do know is that he should be at The Hague ...
and not running around free," the NATO chief said following talks with Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic.
During its summit in Istanbul last month, NATO decided to postpone an invitation to Serbia-Montenegro to join the Alliance's Partnership for Peace programme -- a stepping stone towards eventual full-fledged membership -- because of its failure to fully co-operate with The Hague tribunal.
Another important precondition Serbia-Montenegro should meet, de Hoop Scheffer said, is to drop a lawsuit the former Yugoslavia filed with the International Court of Justice over NATO's action during the 1998-1999 Kosovo conflict.
After his meeting with the NATO chief, Marovic told reporters that the door remains open, provided Serbia-Montenegro meets its obligations.
Belgrade-based Radio B92 quoted the president as urging indictees to remove the burden of responsibility from the public and assume it themselves.
De Hoop Scheffer also met on Monday with Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic.
In other news, UN chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte on Monday charged that the Serbian government leaked information about indictee Goran Hadzic on 13 July.
At a press conference, she said that a couple of hours after the tribunal handed over the indictment to the foreign ministry, Hadzic was seen leaving, carrying a large bag.
He was also seen in his house in Novi Sad prior to the date of the indictment, she said.
