22/07/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 22/07/04
Cutting the Serbian foreign debt by billions of euros has put Serbia-Montenegro back on the map of financially normal states, says Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic. 
A series of three write-off agreements reached with London and Paris creditors' clubs and the Russian Federation is being hailed as Belgrade's biggest financial success since the ouster of the Milosevic regime.
Weighed down by a colossal foreign debt -- totalling 11.5 billion euros at the end of 2003 --Serbia-Montenegro's economic prospects looked grim, and a crisis seemed inevitable. 
Many experts believed Serbia-Montenegro would likely succumb to the Argentine syndrome and be forced to declare bankruptcy. 
Out of the country's total debt, Serbia owed foreign creditors and its own citizens 9.8 billion euros. 
Montenegro's share was 672.8m euros. 
Kosovo owed the rest.
At the end of June, just four month after entering office, the Serbian government succeeded in negotiating the three crucial write-offs. 
Authorities arranged a 62 per cent write-off of Serbia's 2.1 billion-euro debt to the London Club; payments on the remainder were rescheduled over the next 20 years. 
The 202m-euro debt to Russia was settled, and 15 per cent -- approximately 500m euros -- written off of Serbia's debt to the Paris Club, which in 2001 had already written off 2 billion euros of the almost 3.8 billion euros owed.
Dinkic said that the arrangements "have finally given Serbia a credit rating" and the ability to participate in the global capital market. 
He added that as a result of the write-offs, Serbia could no longer be classified as heavily in debt, and that the ratio of indebtedness meets EU membership requirements.
Serbian authorities have also said that public revenues from taxes could now be redirected to foster consumption and investment. 
This also means that per capita, citizens will have to pay less than 161.6 euros annually over the next 20 years to pay off the foreign debt. 
Additionally, citizens will benefit from lower interest rates and loans made available by foreign banks.
