21/07/2004
(Reuters, AP, AFP, VOA, FENA - 20/07/04)
The parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS), has called on all indicted war crimes suspects, including wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, to turn themselves in immediately, or face arrest.
In a resolution on RS's co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) adopted late on Tuesday (20 July), lawmakers also asked the entity's government to take immediate steps towards meeting its obligations to The Hague-based tribunal. 
According to Reuters, the document, proposed by RS President Dragan Cavic, was supported by a huge majority of the MPs in the entity's 83-seat assembly.
The international community has made it clear that BiH's chances for Euro-Atlantic integration hinge on full co-operation with the ICTY, including the handover of suspects indicted for war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict. 
RS has yet to arrest a single war crimes fugitive, and its lack of co-operation with the tribunal recently cost BiH an invitation to join NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme.
Karadzic, who is among 20 ICTY-indicted suspects still at large, has been on the run since 1996 and is reportedly hiding in the mountainous parts in the country's east, aided by a network of supporters.
Following NATO's decision to postpone BiH's admission to the PfP, the top international envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, announced a package of wide-ranging measures targeting the country's stalled co-operation with the ICTY. 
As part of the measures, 59 Bosnian Serb officials believed to be obstructing the process were dismissed. 
Among them were Dragan Kalinic, the RS parliamentary speaker and leader of the Serb Democratic Party (SDS) founded by Karadzic, and Zoran Djeric, the entity's interior minister in charge of police.
Tuesday's resolution urged the government to make all necessary changes within the interior ministry to ensure that the entity's police forces are operationally capable of capturing war crimes indictees. 
It also called for drafting a bill that would establish an institute tasked with the investigation, documentation and assessment of crimes committed during the conflict in BiH.
Voicing their full support for BiH's Euro-Atlantic integration through NATO's PfP and the EU's Stabilisation and Association Process, the MPs also urged "all elected representatives of all constituent peoples in BiH to condemn the war crimes committed by the representatives of their peoples".
Earlier in the day, 44 of the lawmakers attending Tuesday's special session elected Dusan Stojicic, 40, as the parliament's new speaker. 
An SDS spokesman, he is not considered to be among those helping Karadzic evade justice, the AP reported.
Also on Tuesday, Ashdown urged RS to apply immediately the BiH Constitutional Court's February ruling on geographical names. 
In a letter sent to RS Prime Minister Dragan Mikerevic, he warned that legal amendments recently passed by the RS cabinet removing the prefix "Srpski" had stopped short of full compliance with the court's decision. 
In particular, he noted that the cabinet had left in place the double reference Foca/Srbinje for the municipality of Foca.
The court's ruling was final and compulsory, Ashdown said, adding that Mikerevic bore personal responsibility for ensuring compliance.
