20/07/2004
By Valentin Nesovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 20/07/04
Almost 80 per cent of cars in Macedonia are more than 15 years old, according to unofficial estimates by interior ministry sources. 
New cars -- under five years old -- constitute less than 10 per cent of Macedonia's 350,000 registered cars, the sources say.
The problem appears to be region-wide. 
Cars as old as those in Macedonia, if not older, are being driven in all the neighbouring countries except Greece, according to the same sources.
Borce Pesevski, a spokesman for the interior ministry, believes the situation has been improving over the past couple of years. 
"The average age of cars has decreased in this period because many second-hand cars have been imported, and people have also been buying new cars," he said.
Many Macedonians say they cannot buy newer cars because of the poor economic situation and the need to meet European environmental standards, as required by Macedonian law. 
Although the import of second-hand cars under 10 years old is allowed, only those which meet the standards are allowed into the country.
"Second-hand cars that meet the environmental standards in European markets are too expensive for the Macedonian living standards," an owner of a second-hand car lot said. 
The problem has led to calls for decreasing the customs and taxes on cars.
The glut of aging cars has been blamed for a substantial number of car accidents around the country, and was one of the main reasons for amendments to the law on passenger traffic that took effect on 1 July.
Under the amended law, owners of vehicles more than 15 years old must have them checked every six months, at a cost of 25 euros. 
Before the amendments were enacted, technical checks were made once a year.
For better traffic security, the new rules stipulate obligatory use of headlights during the day. 
If a motorist drives with the lights off, the fine is 32 euros. 
Talking on a mobile phone while driving is also banned. 
Violators can be fined up to 40 euros.
According to sources, traffic police have been instructed to step up enforcement of rules requiring the use of safety belts; the fine for violations is 16 euros.
