22/07/2004
(The Washington Post, Independent, The Scotsman - 22/07/04; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, CNN, VOA, UPI - 21/07/04)
The security budget of the Athens Olympics is up another 25 per cent, reaching over 1.2 billion euros, a Greek official said Wednesday (21 July). 
With another three weeks before the Games open on 13 August, the cost of the record-breaking security operation is expected to swell further.
"There are new bills coming up," Deputy Finance Minister Petros Doukas said Wednesday.
Earlier estimates put the cost of the security measures at about 1 billion euros -- nearly four times the amount spent for the 2000 Sydney Olympics. 
Doukas attributed the new budget increase to a growing international security demand.
Much of the security budget so far has been spent on high tech surveillance equipment, new weaponry, patrol boats, and a 255m-euro contract with a US-led consortium for a security network. 
According to Doukas, the new costs include more than 2m euros for a blimp outfitted with high-resolution cameras and chemical detection systems.
To guarantee the security of the Summer Olympics, the first Summer Olympics to be held since the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, Greece has been working with a seven-nation advisory group, which includes Britain, Israel and the United States. 
Athens also asked NATO for support following the March terrorist bombings in Madrid, which killed 191 people, and the Alliance is now considering a second Greek request. 
A decision will likely be made within the next several days, a NATO spokeswoman said.
Greek authorities have pledged that British, Israeli and US athletes -- considered at highest risk of becoming potential targets -- would be provided 24-hour armed protection. 
However, authorities have said that teams participating in the Olympics will not be allowed to bring their own armed security guards, as the country's constitution does not permit foreigners to bear arms on Greek soil.
Public Order Minister George Voulgarakis said Wednesday that only security personnel accompanying national leaders would be allowed to carry guns, on the basis of international protocols.
"As far as the Games are concerned, it is clear that Greek authorities have the exclusive responsibility, and they have done everything humanly possible for the Games to be held in a safe and peaceful environment," Voulgarakis said.
In Washington, US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld played down reports that the United States would send 400 Special Forces soldiers, noting that the force would be under NATO rather than US auspices.
"It wouldn't involve US troops per se, it would be only a NATO mission. 
That I know of, there's nothing going on other than the Greek-NATO relationship," the AFP quoted Rumsfeld as saying at a Pentagon press conference. 
"The United States is a part of NATO ... 
Greece is working with NATO," Rumsfeld said.
Meanwhile, the Greek naval fleet held an exercise Wednesday aiming to boost security preparedness for the Games. 
The same day, the main seaport in Athens was closed for two hours to allow divers to install an underwater monitoring system, part of a vast network of sensors and cameras designed to safeguard the Olympics.
In other news, two Molotov cocktails were thrown at a building associated with the Olympics early Thursday. 
The target was the culture ministry, which houses the Cultural Olympiad -- a four-year festival featuring art exhibitions and performances leading up to the Games. 
No damage or injuries were reported.
