16/07/2004
(AFP, VOA, RFE/RL, FENA, EU - 15/07/04)
The end of SFOR does not mean an end to NATO's commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said Thursday (15 July).
"NATO is not leaving BiH but it wants to support the EU and its mission," de Hoop Scheffer said during a joint visit to Sarajevo with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana. 
"The main message is that we want BiH to get closer to the EU and NATO," he added.
The two senior officials arrived in BiH to reaffirm the long-term commitment of their organisations ahead of the upcoming transfer of SFOR's mandate to an EU-led force (EUFOR).
During its summit in Istanbul last month, NATO leaders decided to end the Alliance's peacekeeping operation in BiH by the end of this year. 
The EU formally agreed to take over SFOR's mandate on Monday, paving the way for its largest military operation to date.
"NATO has full trust in the EU, in its responsibilities for the mission the EU will lead from early next year," de Hoop Scheffer told reporters following a meeting he and Solana had with the members of BiH's tripartite presidency.
"We are here to show our orientation to assist the people of BiH," Solana said. 
"The EU and NATO are two organisations whose member BiH wants to become and we will continue assisting you to realise that dream."
Full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is an essential condition for BiH's accession to Euro-Atlantic structures. 
The country's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS), has so far failed to arrest a single ICTY indictee. 
With key accused war criminals -- including wartime Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic -- still at large, NATO last month decided to postpone an invitation for BiH to join its Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme, considered a first step towards eventual membership.
De Hoop Scheffer rejected criticism that SFOR had not done enough to catch the two top fugitives, the targets of several raids by peacekeepers.
"I do not accept criticism along the lines that SFOR is doing too little or doing nothing," de Hoop Scheffer said. 
"Let me stress again: it is the responsibility, first of all, of the authorities of this country. 
The problem is that the authorities of the RS are not doing what they should do."
NATO will maintain a reduced presence after the end of SFOR and will work in co-operation with EUFOR on issues such as the hunt for war crimes suspects.
Describing the move as a "proof of overall stability and a positive situation" in his country, Sulejman Tihic, the current chairman of the BiH presidency, said it was another step on the road towards Euro-Atlantic integration. 
He stressed the presidency members' determination to fulfil the conditions for admission into the PfP, including the arrest of war crimes indictees.
"At the very end, all these efforts are not about the future of NATO or the EU," Solana said. 
"These efforts are about the future of this country. 
And this future is undoubtedly in Europe, in the European institutions."
