15/07/2004
By Mustafa Azizoglu for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 15/07/04
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan met with his Bulgarian counterpart, Simeon Saxe-Coburg, during an official visit to Sofia earlier this month. 
The two leaders discussed Turkey's EU accession bid, strengthening bilateral economic ties, and preserving cultural and religious sites.
In a joint press conference after the meeting, Erdogan said Turkey has met the Copenhagen criteria for EU membership, and that excluding his country from the Union would be "way out of the standards".
"Such a decision would upset our government and our nation seriously," Erdogan said.
Saxe-Coburg pledged Bulgarian support for Turkey's membership bid. 
He also outlined trade, investment and tourism as priority areas in the further development of economic ties with neighbouring Turkey.
"Bulgaria sees in Turkey a very promising economic partner," Saxe-Coburg said at the press conference. 
During Erdogan's visit, the two leaders attended the launch of a 129m-euro flat glass and tableware plant owned by Turkey's Sisecam Group. 
It is expected to create 700 jobs.
The conditions of mosques and other Ottoman-era sites in Bulgaria were also on the agenda. 
Noting that Turkey has restored Bulgarian churches in Istanbul and Edirne, Erdogan said his country expects comparable action from Bulgaria. 
He also requested help in creating an inventory of Ottoman works on Bulgarian soil.
The two leaders made progress in bolstering relations, despite tensions surrounding a lawsuit filed by members of Bulgaria's Turkish minority against the government in Sofia.
The suit stems from the assimilationist policies of Bulgaria's late communist dictator, Todor Zhivkov, who began systematically persecuting the minority in 1984. 
Five years later, the regime demanded that Turkey open its borders to receive Bulgarian Muslims. 
More than 300,000 left Bulgaria during the resulting mass exodus.
More than 140 petitions in the name of the Turkish minority have been handed to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. 
The plaintiffs say their judicial rights were curtailed and that they were forced to change their names and surnames and sign documents in which their origins were registered as Bulgarian.
However, Erdogan has not supported the lawsuit. 
While in Bulgaria, he met with Rights and Liberations Party leader Ahmet Dogan, cautioning the party "not to base their policies on ethnic grounds, or they will suffer marginalisation".
