15/07/2004
(International Herald Tribune - 15/07/04;
AFP, NATO, Office of the High Representative - 14/07/04;
FENA, FT - 13/07/04;
AFP - 12/07/04;
UN - 09/07/04)
During their joint visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Thursday (15 July), NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana are expected to assure officials in Sarajevo of continued support for their country.
The visit comes only days after the Union formally approved the EUFOR military force, which is to replace SFOR by the end of the year.
It will be the EU's largest military operation to date.
In an article published by the International Herald Tribune on Thursday, de Hoop Scheffer and Solana described their visit as "a sign that this transformation of the international presence -- the transition from SFOR to EUFOR -- is a common project of the EU and NATO".
It was also meant to signal the two organisations' determination that BiH authorities be fully involved in the process.
"This is not about the future of EU or NATO;
it is about the future of their country," the officials said.
De Hoop Scheffer and Solana hailed the progress BiH has made during its nine-year path from conflict to peace.
The security situation has improved immensely since the deployment of NATO-led forces following the 1992-1995 war, they noted.
Much has been achieved in the areas of post-war reconstruction and reconciliation, and most of the refugees have returned to their homes.
Democracy is being strengthened and reform has become a continuous process.
The EU-led mission, dubbed Althea and prepared in close consultation with NATO, will initially look very much like today's SFOR, in terms of number of troops and core tasks.
The 7,000-strong force, to be headed by British officer David Leaky, will be stationed at Camp Butmir in Sarajevo.
It will assume SFOR's tasks of keeping the peace in the country, training its military and supporting the rule of law.
Meanwhile, on key issues such as the hunt for suspected war criminals, EUFOR will work in close co-operation with NATO, which will maintain a reduced presence in BiH after SFOR's mandate ends.
Althea, the two officials pointed out, "will be part of a comprehensive support package", co-ordinated by the international community's top envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown.
The aim of the package is to assist BiH on its path from implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords to European integration, they said.
"The Union's objective is not only to stabilise the country, but also to help it make the required social, economic and political transformation," de Hoop Scheffer and Solana said, promising "effective international support" for BiH as it moves ahead in the process.
"But in the end the challenges of the new era can only be met by the people and political leaders of BiH," they stressed.
"They have already come a long way.
The next phase begins today -- the road ahead is to Europe.
The speed of the journey depends on the people of BiH.
We remain committed to help."
While in Sarajevo, de Hoop Scheffer and Solana are scheduled to meet with Ashdown, SFOR Commander Major General Virgil L. Packett, the members of BiH's tripartite presidency, Prime Minister Adnan Terzic and other senior officials.
De Hoop Scheffer will also address the SFOR troops at Camp Butmir.
