16/07/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 16/07/04
The release of a special commission's report on the ownership structure in Mobtel, one of two Serbian mobile operators, was an issue during Serbia's recent presidential election and will likely affect the government's plans for further development of the telecom sector. 
In its report, released last month, the commission determined that the state has a 58.76 per cent stake, while BK Trade -- a firm owned by Bogoljub Karic, the third-place finisher in the first round of the election -- has 41.24 per cent.
The finding was meant to settle an ongoing dispute which emerged following the democratisation of Serbia in 2000. 
When Mobtel was founded, during the Milosevic era, the state had a 49 per cent stake, while the controlling 51 per cent stake was held by BK Trade. 
It later emerged, however, that Karic's company never invested in Mobtel to the extent stipulated by the contract.
If BK Trade accepts the ownership structure proposed by the commission, it will be entered in the Commercial Court register. 
If not, the case may have to be settled at the Zurich-based international arbitrage court.
The Mobtel issue has led to a conflict between Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic -- who moved to block the company's accounts, saying that it owes extra-profit tax -- and Capital Investments Minister Velimir Ilic, who has ties to Karic. 
Analysts have suggested that Karic's recent political activism may have been driven by the wish to protect his business interests.
At the same time, state-owned Telekom Srbija has accused Mobtel of conducting illegal telephone traffic. 
Telekom Srbija, which operates the 064 mobile network and landline telephony, also handles international calls. 
It says Mobtel has been connecting directly with international exchanges, in violation of the law.
Dinkic says the government does not want to destroy Mobtel, but only to finally establish the state-held stake in the company. 
"The issue of Mobtel is not a political [issue], but an economic issue. 
We can understand Karic's interest in keeping the monopoly in Mobtel, but the state has its own interest to know how much it holds in the company, and how much profit it should net from it," he said.
The state wants to clear up the ownership structure in Mobtel so it can privatise the telecom sector -- a move which is not only necessary for the sector's development, but also for budgetary reasons. 
Authorities have already stated their intention to put Mobtel up for sale soon, hoping to complete the deal next year. 
Strategic investors such as UK Vodafone, German Deutsche Telekom, Austrian Mobilkom and US Citigroup are rumoured to be interested. 
But clearing up the ownership structure is a prerequisite for any such acquisition.
Other options for the government include the sale of Telekom Srbija or the entrance of a third mobile operator into the Serbian market. 
Foreign telecoms are hoping for the latter scenario, which would also lead to lower prices for consumers.
