19/07/2004
(Turkish Press, Athens News Agency - 18/07/04;
International herald tribune, VOA - 17/07/04;
AP, Reuters, BBC, VOA - 16/07/04)
Athens has welcomed a set of confidence-building measures outlined by Greek Cypriot authorities, describing them as beneficial for both communities on the divided island.
The proposed steps include a partial pullback from the UN-guarded ceasefire line, the opening of eight new crossing points, and the clearing of thousands of landmines inside the UN buffer zone.
The measures would help strengthen the feeling of security and encourage co-operation, Greek Foreign Ministry spokesman George Koumoutsakos said Sunday (18 July).
The Greek Cypriot government announced the proposals on Friday, saying it was prepared to withdraw troops from the walled part of Cyprus's capital, Nicosia, and two other areas along the ceasefire line, provided Turkey does the same.
The Greek Cypriots are also seeking the opening for joint operation of Famagusta, an eastern port town currently under Turkish Cypriot control, and restrictions on military exercises.
Speaking at a press conference in Nicosia Friday, government spokesman Kypros Chrysostomides voiced confidence that the initiative would contribute to "fostering trust and security" among Greek and Turkish Cypriots.
The initial reaction in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TNRC) was sceptical, with Prime Minister Mehmet Ali Talat describing the proposed measures as an attempt to shift attention away from the Greek Cypriots' rejection of UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's plan to end the island's 30-year division.
"It [the withdrawal offer] is an attempt to change the agenda.
There was an Annan plan, they rejected it," the AP quoted Talat as saying Friday in an interview with CNN-Turk television.
"Such military questions are not on the agenda ...
There are no military tensions ...
Where did these proposals spring from?"
Later, however, Turkish Cypriot leaders expressed a favourable view of some of the proposals.
On Sunday, Talat said the TNRC is ready to open a second border crossing at Bostanci Kapisi.
The new crossing would facilitate the trade of fruit and vegetables, as the existing one is located far from agricultural centres in the southern part of Cyprus, officials said.
Ankara has responded to the Greek Cypriot initiative with caution.
"Let's look at what they say.
We'll evaluate [the proposal] with our [Turkish Cypriot] friends and then we will make a decision," said Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul.
Meanwhile, an EU official said that measures to establish a climate of confidence on the island would be welcome and that Brussels would analyse the initiative.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said the United States "would welcome any and all mutually agreed steps that can reduce military tensions in Cyprus", but stressed that military confidence building was "no substitute" for the comprehensive settlement envisioned in Annan's plan.
