14/07/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 14/07/04
Last year's Serbian sugar export scandal is far from over. 
Renewed attention has been focused on the affair, which damaged Serbia-Montenegro's relations with the EU and led to the suspension of preferential tariffs meant to boost the country's sugar industry.
In August, EU investigators are to present their findings on the matter, and a decision will be made then on whether the concessions will be restored. 
The European Commission has explicitly requested that Serbia-Montenegro resolve the problem of illegal sugar exports, warning that mutual trade relations are increasingly undermined.
The case involves thousands of tonnes of sugar, imported to Serbia and then exported back to Europe under the preferential tariff arrangement, with the claim that it was manufactured in Serbia. 
According to the EU Office for Controlling Embezzlement, 150,000 tonnes of sugar may have been exported in 2001, 2002 and the first three months of 2003, while Serbian exporters and their partners in the EU could have embezzled tens of millions of euros.
"Even though formal regulations were broken to a negligible degree . 
this is a very serious problem for our country. 
A broader policy was not enforced, which would have been in keeping with good practice, which was expected of us," said Nemanja Nenandic of Transparency Serbia, a NGO.
A member of the Council for Battling Corruption, Ivan Lalic, believes that the state and manufacturing sectors are losing out because of the sugar affair, and because of the absence of sanctions against those involved. 
"We are talking here about a different sort of responsibility -- legal, criminal. 
We are entering a zone of speculation. 
Is there political will? 
Is it possible to prove anything? 
Will the courts do their job? 
I am very sceptical about the efficiency of our judiciary," Lalic said.
Despite the unresolved issues, Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic is optimistic about the possibility that preferential treatment for sugar exports could be reinstated within the next few months. 
"All suspect certificates on the origin of sugar have been withdrawn, and it is currently being debated who should pay the damages to the EU, and what their amount should be," Dinkic said.
At the centre of the scandal are the company MK Komerc and its owner, Miodrag Kostic. 
Detained in Montenegro on 15 June but released the same day, Kostic testified before the district court in Novi Sad on 1 July, claiming he is the victim of a political process.
"When someone accuses you of something just because you are the owner of a company and urges you to admit to something that you were not a part of -- all several weeks into presidential campaigning -- there is no other reason for this that is more obvious," Kostic told the court.
Kostic will testify again, this time about MK Komerc's dealings with the Serbian oil industry, sometime in late August.
