20/11/2007
EU security chief Javier Solana met on Sunday (November 18th) with Wolfgang Ischinger, the EU representative in the international mediating troika, to discuss preparations for Tuesday's round of Kosovo status talks.
They also discussed the report on Kosovo presented at the EU foreign ministers' meeting Monday.
"The stance of the EU is that negotiations on the status of Kosovo must go forward, even though the EU-27 are conscious of the difficulties and the fact that hitherto there has been very little progress," Solana's spokesperson told reporters.
Romanian Justice Minister Tudor Chiuariu and his Italian counterpart, Clemente Mastella, signed the first agreement on co-operation between their countries' judicial sectors on Saturday (November 17th), in Benevento, Italy.
Chiuariu said both countries want to intensify this collaboration and ensure security for their citizens.
Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev met with his Georgian counterpart, Zurab Nogaideli, in Tbilisi on Thursday (November 15th).
He stressed the need for democratic presidential elections in Georgia, saying he was asked by European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso to convey the EU's message that human rights and freedom of speech should be respected.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica met with his Hungarian counterpart, Ferenc Gyurcsany, in Budapest on Tuesday (November 13th).
He said Serbia is ready to grant an exceptionally high degree of autonomy to Kosovo, but would never accept its independence.
Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel met with British Foreign Secretary David Miliband and Minister for Europe Jim Murphy in London on Tuesday (November 13th), focusing on Kosovo and other developments in the Western Balkans.
Rupel said efforts to promote the region's European integration would be a priority in Slovenia's upcoming EU presidency.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski met on Tuesday (November 13th) with visiting US Assistant Secretary of State Christopher Hill.
Crvenkovski briefed him on actions the country has taken to implement reforms and fulfil criteria for NATO accession.
Macedonian Chief Prosecutor Ljupco Svrgovski met on Tuesday (November 13th) with his <b>Croatian</b> counterpart Mladen Bajic in Skopje.
They signed an agreement on co-operation in the fight against crime and corruption.
(Various sources 13/11/07-20/11/07)
