14/07/2004
(AP, RFE/RL - 13/07/04;
OSCE - 12/07/04)
Kosovo's temporary media commissioner has called for the establishment of clear guidelines that would control authorities' access to journalistic material, saying such measures are necessary to ward off a potential threat to freedom of expression in the province.
"There appears to be a growing pattern in which police and prosecutors are demanding that television stations provide videotapes of news events as evidence in criminal investigation," the AP quoted Robert Gillette as saying at a news conference in Pristina on Tuesday (13 July).
At least six television stations, he said, had reported incidents of police and prosecutors taking away tapes and exercising pressure on them to hand over material gathered by journalists.
There were also instances of journalists being summoned for questioning without a court order.
One case he referred to took place in June, when a prosecutor asked Kosovo's Koha Vision station to hand over all its tapes covering the ethnic clashes in March.
The station refused.
"It's a frightening thing to have police pounding on your door, waving a piece of paper and demanding your news materials," Gillette said.
"It does not happen elsewhere in settled democracies of Europe."
Warning about the possible "chilling effect" of such actions, Gillette said they could make residents reluctant to co-operate with journalists, who in turn could become the likely targets of attacks by those seeking to prevent the recording of events like those in mid-March.
Such developments could erode "the freedom of media -- and thus the freedom of expression -- in Kosovo", Gillette said.
"I would not say that freedom of expression is in crisis here, but this is a little threat, a potential threat .
we'd like to prevent it before it gets any worse," he added.
A US journalist, Gillette heads a UN-appointed commission tasked with licensing broadcast media and upholding the principles of freedom of opinion and expression.
The commission is part of the OSCE mission in Kosovo, which is leading efforts to implement UNMIK's mandate in the area of democratisation and institution building.
Gillette's statement came a day after OSCE mission chief Pascal Fieschi, who also serves as UNMIK's deputy head for institution-building, opened TV Herc, Kosovo's first multiethnic private television station.
It brings together Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians in a joint editorial team.
"The tragic events in March again showed that a lack of communication and inability to speak to each other led to biased reporting that produced hysteria and made matters worse," Fieschi said.
"Objective and unbiased reporting rather than deliberate misinformation can help avoid tensions."
