13/07/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 13/07/04
Testifying for the first time in court last month, the main suspect in the assassination of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic said he and the secret police unit he commanded had no connection to the March 2003 murder.
"Neither I, nor any of the members of the Unit for Special Operations, had any part in the organisation or execution of the assassination of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic," Milorad "Legija" Lukovic told the Belgrade court, pleading not guilty to all counts in the indictment against him.
Lukovic, 36, also claimed that he was part of a plot by leading members of Djindjic's Democratic Party -- including former Serbian Vice President Cedomir Jovanovic and Djindjic's security adviser, Zoran Janjusevic -- to sell drugs seized by the state. 
Djindjic's aides, Lukovic said, enlisted his help in smuggling around 700kg of heroin into Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Romania for eventual sale in Western Europe.
Though many had anticipated that Lukovic's testimony would help shed light on connections between the government, police and organised crime networks in Serbia, analysts dismissed his story as a political smear. 
"There is no demand that the law makes which forces him to tell the truth; he can defend himself in any way he chooses, even by telling untruths," lawyer Slobodan Soskic said.
According to police expert and lawyer Marko Nicovic, attacking members of the former government is a key part of Lukovic's defence strategy.
"He is stating the position 'I was very important to the government, I sold drugs for them', with the defence strategy being to pose the question of his motive -- why would he go ahead with the assassination when he was Djindjic's confidence man?" Nicovic said.
"I expected a statement that is only marginally more significant and of a different nature, even though [Lukovic] has the right to defend himself as best he can. 
He has the right to invent things, and even to direct the trial toward dead ends," said Dobrivoje Radovanovic, the director of the Institute for Criminal Investigations, adding that he had thought Lukovic would provide more material evidence to back up his claim that he had no part in the murder.
Lukovic, who now goes by his original family name of Ulemek, is also accused of killing former Serbian President Ivan Stambolic in 2000, and of attempting to kill opposition leader and current Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic in 1999.
