19/07/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 19/07/04
This year's report by the US State Department on global human trafficking placed Serbia-Montenegro on the "Tier 2 watch list". 
The watch list -- a new addition to the four-year-old survey -- contains countries that are not yet in compliance with US legal standards and may be downgraded, but have promised to make or are in the process of making significant efforts to meet the requirements.
Research by the Victims' Association of Serbia for the OSCE Mission in Belgrade found there are more than 1,134 human trafficking victims in Serbia-Montenegro, including 940 women, 94 children and 100 men. 
The actual number is certainly larger, since the study was conducted within a limited time frame -- between 1 May and 30 August 2003.
Serbia-Montenegro, the study found, is not only a country used for transit and temporary settlement of trafficked people, but is also increasingly becoming a country that recruits human trafficking victims.
Female victims are typically between 18 and 30 years of age. 
The majority of foreign victims come to Serbia-Montenegro from Moldova, Ukraine and Romania, although a significant number originate from Serbia-Montenegro. 
The women are mostly sold for the purpose of sexual exploitation.
When it comes to child trafficking, Serbia-Montenegro most frequently appears as a country of origin. 
The children at highest risk of being trafficking are Roma children, children without parents, children with special needs, and those from poor or broken families. 
Male human trafficking victims come mainly from China, Afghanistan, Romania, Iraq, Iran, Turkey, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Serbia-Montenegro. 
They too respond to promises of jobs in the EU, only to be forced into slavery.
According to OSCE representative Hannelore Valier, Serbia-Montenegro's first priority in combating trafficking should be the adoption of a national strategy. 
Penalties so far have been inadequate, she says. 
Only last year was trafficking defined for the first time as a separate criminal act under Serbian law; since then, police have achieved significant results. 
But official say there is much more Serbia-Montenegro must do to put an end to this type of crime.
