20/07/2004
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 20/07/04
Slovenia stands ready to assist Montenegro in its path towards EU membership, Slovenian European Integration Minister Milan Cvikl said during his visit to Podgorica last month. 
Meeting with Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic, Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic and other officials and political figures, Cvikl said his country is ready to share its expertise concerning the accession process.
"The path towards Europe must be transparent and must imply a consensus and support of all political parties," Cvikl said in remarks at parliament. 
Political consensus, he said, is essential because of the difficult political and economic reforms that must be carried out.
Slovenia, which joined the EU on 1 May, had to change its Constitution twice to meet EU criteria, he noted. 
Through political dialogue, he said, leaders can demonstrate to voters and opposition parties that membership in the Union will lead to a better life.
It is crucial that Montenegro know the steps required to become part of the EU, Cvikl said, citing stable democratic institutions and a well-functioning market economy as the basic criteria. 
During its 13 years of independence, he said, Slovenia prioritised three issues: macroeconomic stability, microeconomic transition and establishing laws and standards.
During a meeting with Montenegrin European Integration Minister Gordana Djurovic, Cvikl announced plans to set up a regional centre to assist Western Balkan countries in joining the EU. 
He extended an invitation to Montenegrin representatives to come to Slovenia for training and exchange of experience, and to establish contact with his European Affairs office.
During his talks with Cvikl, Vujanovic stressed that integration into European institutions is a major strategic goal for Montenegro, and that co-operation with Slovenia is an integral part of that effort. 
Cvikl conveyed Slovenia's readiness to help in every way it can.
Applauding the results that Slovenia has achieved in the process of European and Euro-Atlantic integration, Djukanovic said good relations with Slovenia are one of Montenegro's priorities. 
Cvikl said that it is very important to Slovenia that countries of the Western Balkans enter the EU -- thus ensuring the overall stability and development of Europe.
