24/09/2007
A team of scientists led by Croatia's Tomislav Domazet-Loso has announced a new method in evolutionary studies, called genomic philostratigraphy. 
Proposing that the genes of every living organism contain a record of the species' entire evolutionary history, the team developed a technique for deciphering this record. 
Scientists say the method can be used to tackle some of the most puzzling problems in evolutionary research.
***
Microsoft's newest operating system, Windows Vista, will soon be available in the three official languages in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) -- Bosniak, Croatian and Serbian -- and in both the Latin and Cyrillic alphabets, Microsoft BiH marketing manager Lejla Hadziabdic said on Friday (September 21st). 
Experts are performing final linguistic check of the local version and the product will be ready by the end of the year. 
She said the Sarajevo Technical Faculty is helping to implement the project.
***
The annual Science Week began in Bulgaria on Thursday (September 20th) under the motto "See the beauty of science; learn about the wonders of science; live out the night of scientists". 
Different Bulgarian organisations will hold various events during the nine-day event. 
Their goal is to show that science, traditionally perceived among young people as a boring occupation, is in fact interesting, funny and entertaining.
***
Banja Luka Communication 2007 opened in Republika Srpska's capital last week. 
This year the multimedia exposition will incorporate three fairs -- Information Technology and Communications, Media, and Books. 
More than 470 companies from Bosnia and Herzegovina and the regions will participate in the week-long forum.
***
A joint Israeli-Croatian commission for science and technology met on Wednesday (September 19th) in Jerusalem, the Croatian Science Ministry announced. 
Representatives of scientific circles from the two countries signed an agreement to launch a programme for scientific and technological co-operation.
***
The annual two-day Macedonian-Ukrainian science conference ended with a special ceremony on Wednesday (September 19th) in Bitola, Macedonia. 
This year's event was focused on two special topics -- "Ukrainian-Macedonian parallels in history and modern times" and "Energy situation and problems in Macedonia and Ukraine".
***
A modern laboratory for in-vitro skin and cartilage cultivation will be launched at Zagreb Hospital's traumatology department. 
The laboratory is expected to significantly reduce the waiting period for burn victims to receive life-saving skin grafts.
(Various sources 17/09/07-24/09/07)
