07/07/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 07/07/04
After years of living abroad, Albanian artists are returning to their homeland.
"Colours of Albania in the World," an exhibition held recently at the National Gallery of Art in Tirana, featured 23 artists who have migrated to other countries, including many who left during and immediately after the communist regime.
The exhibition was the first in Albania to bring together artists from the diaspora.
The focus was on the need to respect migrants and refugees, and on the positive contribution they make to their host societies.
According to the International Organisation of Migration (IOM), which organised the event together with the UNHCR, the purpose of the art show was to "spark debate and reflection not only on human suffering, but also on human dignity".
"This is really a unique event for Albania," said Albi Greva of the IOM office in Tirana.
"There are so many artists who have returned for this exhibit after their decision to emigrate from Albania in early 1990s.
It's so rare to have them all in one exhibition."
For Xhovalin Delia, an Albanian artist living in Florence, Italy, the event was "similar to the call of your own father to return to your home country".
During communism, notes UNHCR representative in Albania Marion Hoffman, artists "had to either perform according to the rules of dictatorship, or work in hiding, or flee .
In this exhibition, we discover colours which, until 14 years ago, would have been drably oppressed within the country's own hermetically closed borders."
The event was officially inaugurated by Prime Minister Fatos Nano.
At the opening ceremony, he hailed the participating artists, whom he said, "have introduced to their host societies certain values of Albanian culture such as passion, friendship and nobility".
"They are putting their mark on the artistic scene of their host societies and now have an opportunity to show their work in their own country.
They remind us that 20 million refugees and displaced persons around the world would also rather return home, if they could," Hoffmann said.
Funding for the exhibition was provided by local and international donors.
The artists featured were Adrian Paci, Flutura Preka, Besnik Haxhillari, Helidon Gjergji, Ibrahim Kodra, Omer Kaleshi, Ornela Vorpsi, Venera Kastrati, Anila Rubiku, Armando Lulaj, Bashkim Ahmeti, Bujar Marikaj, Arjan Risvani, Ilir Zefi, Xhovalin Delia, Bujar Luca, Astrit Vatnika, Artan Shabani, Agim Sula, Elton Milaqi, Pëllumb Puci, Valbona Musliu and Viktor Ferraj.
