08/07/2004
(AP, Reuters, AFP, UPI, VOA, Tanjug, Radio B92 - 07/07/04)
A senior US official has warned Serbia-Montenegro that it must extradite top war crimes suspects, including Bosnian Serb wartime commander Ratko Mladic, to the UN tribunal in The Hague if it wants to join the EU and NATO.
"We want Serbia-Montenegro to succeed and continue on the path of Euro-Atlantic integration," US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Marc Grossman said in Belgrade on Wednesday (7 July).
"There is a substantial obstacle in the way of that integration and it's time for that obstacle to be removed.
That is a matter of meeting the obligations to The Hague tribunal."
Grossman's statement came amid renewed international pressure on Serbia to hand over Mladic and four retired Serbian army and police generals -- Nebojsa Pavkovic, Vladimir Lazarevic, Vlastimir Djordjevic and Sreten Lukic.
Mladic, who has been charged with genocide for his role in the 1992-1995 war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, has been on the run for nine years.
He is believed to be hiding in Serbia, though authorities in Belgrade deny that.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) indicted Pavkovic, Lazarevic, Djordjevic and Lukic in October 2003 over their alleged involvement in war crimes committed during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo.
Urging the authorities to hand over the indictees, Grossman said they should do so not in order to please Washington or Brussels, but because "it's right for the Serbian people" and because Belgrade has an obligation to fulfil.
"It's time for Mr Mladic to be in The Hague.
It's time for the four generals to be in The Hague and it's time for justice to be done," Grossman said after talks with Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic.
Warning of the consequences his country could face if it fails to extradite the suspects, Draskovic said obligations to the UN are not something to bargain over.
Rather, he said, they must be met."We don't want to be an isolated island in the sea of European democracies.
All the excuses have been exhausted long ago."
Belgrade-based B92 Radio reported last week that Draskovic's ministry had sent the indictments against the four generals to the Belgrade District Court, but the process appears to have stalled.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, with whom Grossman also met Wednesday, has expressed opposition in the past to the generals' extradition to The Hague.
It is not known whether his position on the issue has changed.
In Belgrade, Grossman made clear that Serbia could not hope to prosecute the four generals at home until Mladic has been handed over to the UN tribunal.
During a visit to The Hague on Tuesday, US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Pierre-Richard Prosper voiced hope that the ICTY would wrap up its work in 2010 as planned.
However, he stressed that the tribunal would not close until Mladic and its other two most wanted indictees -- wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and retired Croatian General Ante Gotovina -- are brought to justice.
