13/07/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 13/07/04
Now that Croatia has been named an EU candidate, officials are hoping to receive access funds from the Union. 
"I believe that we could get access to EU candidate funds before the end of this year," said a senior Croatian official. 
"We could agree on some projects whose implementation could begin next year."
The EU made the decision on Croatia's candidacy at its summit in Brussels last month. 
As a result, the country is now in a position to receive between 127m euros and 152m euros annually for harmonisation and development. 
These amounts are on par with the funding that went to Lithuania and Slovakia, countries that entered the EU on 1 May, and which are in many respects similar to Croatia.
EU membership candidates have access to three sources of funding. 
The first one is the PHARE fund, which targets institution building and harmonisation of laws with the EU system. 
The ISPA fund is intended to finance infrastructure projects in the area of transportation and environmental protection. 
The Sapard fund aims to prepare candidates for participation in joint EU agricultural policy, and supports rural development.
The funds are provided as a grant, covering a portion of project costs. 
Countries are required to secure the remaining financing through state and local sources, and through the private sector. 
The Union maintains strict control over the money provided, its use, and the implementation of the projects it funds.
According to current estimates, about 1.4 billion euros remain in the three funds. 
Currently, Romania and Bulgaria are eligible for assistance from these funds, while Western Balkan countries are slated to receive 51m euros in assistance from the CARDS programme. 
It is not yet clear whether all access funds will be made available to Croatia. 
The issue will be clarified once the European Commission drafts an access strategy for the country, which in turn must be approved by the EU Council of Ministers.
The Croatian public, however, is counting on the funds being used to offset the cost of highway construction, one of the principal reasons for the explosion of the country's foreign debt in recent years. 
It is widely hoped that the EU money will be directed towards the building and reconstruction of European transport corridors that have already been completed or are almost finished.
