12/07/2004
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 12/07/04
Romanian Prime Minister Adrian Nastase, who is also leader of the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD), announced a cabinet reshuffle Saturday (10 July).
The surprise move is the latest in a series of dismissals, resignations and statements following the party's disappointing showing last month in local elections.
Communications Minister Dan Nica, Interior and Administration Minister Gabriel Oprea, Agriculture Minister Marian Sarbu and Labour Minister Elena Dumitra will resign their posts, the prime minister said.
Rovana Plumb will leave the post of state secretary to assume a higher executive position within the PSD.
In addition, Nastase said, the PSD Standing Delegation would be dissolved until an extraordinary congress is held in August.
He added that the PSD Co-ordinating Bureau would be expanded to perform some of the delegation's current tasks.
The move is aimed at improving efficiency before November's presidential and parliamentary elections.
Some analysts have also described it as a face-saving measure that will allow a number of senior officials to step out of the limelight without having to resign.
During the June vote, the PSD garnered only 32 per cent support and lost several key contests, including in traditional party strongholds.
The impact of those results is still reverberating throughout the party.
Nastase himself acknowledged that he had considered resigning, but said he had decided to stay on and oversee the PSD's reorganisation.
"The electorate changed, Romania changed, we have to change," Nastase said.
To that end, the PSD leadership decided on 30 June that those most responsible for the dismal electoral outcome should quit their positions in the party's local branches.
Party vice presidents Dan Ioan Popescu, Viorel Hrebenciuc and Doru Ioan Taracila -- the respective heads of the Bucharest, Bacau and Calarasi PSD branches -- were among those affected.
Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana, defeated in the Bucharest mayoral vote, was removed from his position as executive president of Bucharest's PSD branch while he was in Istanbul attending the NATO summit.
"It was not a friendly procedure," he said.
Another case involves Dumitru Sechelariu, a prominent local party baron, who lost the mayoral position in Bacau after having held it for 12 years.
Sechelariu decided to exit the PSD, announcing that he would make "spectacular disclosures" about party leaders.
The election aftermath has also seen a rift develop between Nastase and President Ion Iliescu, considered the party's spiritual father.
He has criticised the leadership for losing touch with voters.
Nastase has acknowledged "some tension and differences of approach", but said agreement has now been reached.
