13/07/2004
(AFP - 13/07/04;
AP, Bloomberg, NATO, Office of the High Representative - 12/07/04;
AFP - 10/07/04)
SFOR Commander Major General Virgil L. Packett said Monday (12 July) that the NATO-led force was beginning to "strangle" networks supporting fugitives wanted for war crime, including wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
"We've shut down six or seven businesses that have been known to support Karadzic," the US general said in Washington during a House Armed Services Committee briefing on Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
"We are hearing them squeal a bit."
As part of renewed and strengthened efforts to arrest suspects wanted by the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague, the international community has acted against those helping the fugitives evade capture, imposing travel bans and freezing their assets.
"They no longer have freedom of action, they can't move through Europe, they can no longer continue to move money back and forth," Packett was quoted as saying at Monday's meeting.
Two days earlier, in an interview with the independent Bosnian daily Nezavisne Novine, Packett said SFOR would do "everything within our power and mandate that Karadzic be arrested or surrenders," before SFOR leaves BiH at the end of this year to be replaced by an EU-led force.
Without offering further details, the AFP also quoted the general as saying that Karadzic, 59, appeared to be having "certain health problems" that require attention.
"Karadzic is not getting any younger, he is nearing an end," Packett said.
Karadzic and wartime Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic top the UN war crimes tribunal's list of wanted indictees.
Both have been charged with genocide for their roles in the 1992-1995 war in BiH.
Despite numerous SFOR-led attempts at their capture, they have managed to remain at large in the nine years since the war ended.
"Karadzic is holding this country hostage," Packett said Monday.
"They have to choose Karadzic or Europe."
During its Istanbul summit last month, NATO decided to postpone an invitation for BiH to join its Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme because of the country's lack of full co-operation with the UN tribunal.
BiH's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska, has failed to arrest even a single war crimes indictee.
Following NATO's decision, High Representative Paddy Ashdown imposed a series of wide-ranging measures against the Serb Democratic Party, founded by Karadzic, and against individuals believed to be helping the fugitive and obstructing co-operation with The Hague-based court.
In an article published Monday in The Wall Street Journal , Ashdown wrote "I could not allow the whole country's future to be held to ransom by a few who believe corruption and keeping war criminals free is more important than jobs, security and peace for all."
Meanwhile, in a speech at the European Policy Centre on Monday, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said the Alliance was still looking forward to welcoming BiH into the PfP.
That would happen, he said, after it has met the conditions for membership, including full co-operation with the UN tribunal.
