02/07/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 02/07/04
The EXIT music festival got under way in Novi Sad on Thursday (1 July), despite the recent controversy surrounding it.
Last month, EXIT founder Dusan Kovacevic and Managing Director Bojan Boskovic were arrested and sentenced to one-month jail terms for tax evasion.
EXIT management claims the arrests may have been politically motivated.
The lawyer for the pair, Vladimir Beljanski, said the timing of the arrests suggested a deliberate attempt to undermine the festival, because the charges concerned matters which the police had been aware of for a long time.
"They could have done this three months or a year ago, or in a month's time when the festival is over.
This makes me think that someone wants to prevent the festival being held this year.
And I think they're trying to win political points," Beljanski said.
The arrests drew fierce condemnation from Serbian intellectuals, and were also criticised by Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic.
"A 30-day detention is out of place for tax evasion, given that criminals are wandering freely through Serbian towns," he said.
The first EXIT was held in 2000 as a 100-day campaign by the Serbian Student Union, aimed at motivating younger generations to participate in elections and vote for their own future.
Since then, it has morphed into the biggest music festival in Southeast Europe, and is held at the medieval Danube fortress of Petrovaradin.
This year's programme is taking place on 20 stages, conceived in line with different musical genres.
Performers include Iggy Pop, Massive Attack and Cypress Hill.
Film and theatre programmes, as well as public panels, will also be held.
Some Novi Sad politicians, mostly members of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia, have openly advocated the festival's closure, saying that city funds earmarked for EXIT should be redirected to reconstruction of damaged Serbian churches.
However, the city's tourist organisation says EXIT has helped put Novi Sad back on the cultural map -- the festival has attracted 800,000 visitors in four years, including a significant number from abroad.
This year, organisers expect more than 250,000 visitors from all over the world.
In the days following the arrests, NGOs from Novi Sad and Belgrade launched a campaign for the release of the two young men and the protection of the festival's existence.
"Let Go of Our EXIT!" demonstrations were organised and the motto was used for thousands of T-shirts as well as graffiti.
The action bore fruit:
on 16 June, the court decided to suspend the sentences.
Kovacevic and Boskovic were very active in the "get out to vote" campaign, aimed mostly at young voters, during last month's presidential election.
As part of the campaign, Serbia's most popular rock bands held a concert in Belgrade's main square the night before the voting.
Serbian President-elect Boris Tadic expressed his support, accepting the organisers' invitation to open the festival on Thursday.
