06/07/2004
(The Scotsman, Telegraph - 06/07/04;
Reuters, AP, AFP, BBC, CNN, VOA, Kathimerini - 05/07/04;
Official Athens 2004 Web site)
Hundreds of thousands of Greeks lined streets in Athens on Monday (5 July), welcoming home the national football team after its triumph at the Euro 2004 championship in Portugal.
Initially viewed as an outsider, the Greek squad marched steadily to Sunday's final and to a 1-0 victory over host Portugal, resulting in its first ever European title.
More than 35,000 fans gathered at the Panathinaikon Stadium in central Athens -- the site of the first modern Olympics in 1896 -- to see the 23 players and their German coach Otto Rehhagel lift the cup and sing the national anthem.
Thousands of others joined the party outside the stadium.
The team's stunning success prompted celebrations elsewhere in Greece, as well as in other countries with sizeable Greek communities.
With just weeks before the Summer Olympics open in Athens on 13 August, officials and ordinary citizens hailed the soccer win as the best possible advertisement for the Games.
Organisers hope it would boost sluggish ticket sales.
Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis, who attended the final in Lisbon, said Greece was now on everyone's lips.
"These boys taught us a lesson as to what Greeks can do when we really believe in something, when we are united and have self-confidence, dynamism and method in achieving it," Karamanlis said Monday, addressing the packed stadium.
Athens Mayor Dora Bakoyianni also joined the celebrations.
"This is the biggest and best message for the Olympic Games:
that Athens is here, everything is wonderful, we filled this stadium, and another 100,000 are outside," Bakoyianni said.
"We showed that Greece has changed," the AFP quoted opposition leader and former Foreign Minister George Papandreou as saying Monday.
He described the victory as a "good response to all the press articles in recent months about Greece not being able to stage the Olympics".
Athens 2004 Organising Committee Chief Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki conveyed similar sentiments, saying the triumph "smashed the views of those who said we can't make it".
With the ongoing preparations causing traffic snarls and other problems, Athenians are said to have grown less enthusiastic about the Games during recent months.
Many Greeks are also uneasy about the spiraling budget:the cost of security measures alone has already reached about 1 billion euros.
Sunday's win, however, has rekindled national pride, and many say it will rejuvenate attitudes towards the Games as well.
Meanwhile, the Olympic torch, which began a 36-day global journey on 2 June, was due to arrive in Turkey on Tuesday and then proceed to Bulgaria and Cyprus, before it returns to Greece on Friday.
