05/07/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 05/07/04
Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska and Donato Chiarini, the head of the European Commission's delegation in Macedonia, signed a CARDS Financial Agreement on 24 June, under which the country will receive 47.4m euros.
The funds will be used to support reform and modernisation, and to help implement the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between Macedonia and the EU.
"This year is really important because the European partnership will make Macedonia very intensive," Chiarini said.
"The support we are providing in that direction will be essential and precious in advancing the objectives on our mutual agenda."
According to Sekerinska, the funds will go towards four key areas:
economic and social development, reform of the judiciary and internal affairs, strengthening democracy and the rule of law, and environmental protection.
The annual action programme for 2004 will be carried out by the EU Agency for Reconstruction and Development's office in Skopje.
Daniel Giuglaris, who heads the office, says it began with 202m euros in 2002 and has spent a total of 158m euros.
Last year, the amount spent was 34.5m euros.
Of the CARDS funds, about 22.5m euros are intended to support economic and social development, including aid to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Support will be given to the government and the banking sector to help improve access to capital and other services on behalf of SMEs.
The ministry of finance will assist in establishing standardised accounting systems and adequate mechanisms for tracking financial flows.
About 17m euros have been earmarked for the judiciary and police.
Assistance will be given to the new border police service, the police academy and the customs service.
The programme will also aid judicial reform, covering such issues as the establishment of an independent judiciary.
Such reforms will be carried out through a newly established institution for the training of judges in line with European standards.
Support for democracy and the rule of law has been allotted 3m euros.
These funds will be used to complete implementation of the Ohrid Agreement.
The programme will help achieve better representation of minorities in civil service, and will assist the process of establishing bilingual regimens at different public institutions.
About 2m euros will go towards protection of the environment and natural resources.
Support will be given to environmental legislation and to the implementation of measures aimed at bringing Macedonia closer to EU norms and standards.
