12/07/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 12/07/04
A fruit-freezing factory that opened in Potocari last month is not only the result of the first Foreign Direct Investment in this part of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) since the 1990s conflict, but also marks a shift from the region's old reliance on industry, and benefits dozens of people in a region known mostly for a horrific wartime massacre.
Swedish company Olle Svensson invested 500,000 euros in the Bos Agro Food factory, which will freeze organic raspberries bought from local farmers.
A lot choked with waist-high weeds contains the abandoned battery factory where thousands of Muslim men were executed by Bosnian Serb forces in July 1995.
But the gleaming white building in the middle of all of this can be seen as a sign that the municipality has the chance for future prosperity.
"After everything we've survived, we have the right to better times," said Srebrenica Mayor Abdurahman Malkic.
"This opens the door to agricultural production, especially the production of health foods."
The municipality, eager to attract investment to one of BiH's poorest post-war areas, donated the land to the factory, which employs about 30 people.
The amount of raspberries and blackberries growing here has increased enough since the war destroyed the region's industrial economy that Bos Agro Food intends to buy and freeze about 1,000 tonnes of berries from about 500 small farmers this year.
They'll sell the frozen fruit in Scandinavia and central Europe.
"Our serious aim is to help [the farmers] get started.
How can you do that better than to foster what they can grow and what they know how to do," said Bo Ahlstedt, marketing and sales director of Olle Svensson.
The farmers Olle Svensson is helping to get started include Muslim returnees to the area.
As of last year, 3,200 Muslims returned to the three area municipalities, and scores are involved in such small-scale farming.
Olle Svensson General Manager Armin Glamoc said the goal was to make it materially possible for more people who want to return to do so.
They also hope this first investment will inspire others to follow.
Officials have mentioned that a foreign chocolate producer is interested in the adjacent lot, and said they hoped that Bosnian companies would also open branch factories in the area.
The head of the Office of the High Representative's economic department said he believed this business model would work out and wished them a "fruitful" success.
"It is distinctive because the Swedish investor has identified a niche market -- organic berries -- and has worked its way back from consumer to producer," said Patrice Dreiski.
"[The economic situation] will not change overnight.
It's incremental, but its modest success will create conditions for more success."
