05/07/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 05/07/04
As neighbouring Greece prepares to host the Olympics next month, Albanian authorities are increasing security measures to prevent possible attacks or other dangerous activities.
Officials warn that borders will be enforced, and Tirana's Mother Teresa International Airport is installing electronic security equipment for the first time.
Tightened measures will be in effect at the airport before and during the Olympics.
"All the passengers going through the airport will have to go through detailed controls," said Minister of Transport and Telecommunications Spartak Poci, adding that the airport's documentation must be adjusted to bring it into line with the national programme of civil aviation security.
That includes adjusting the security plan of the airport, identifying possible problems and defining the measures to be taken, Poci said.
Albanian airspace will also be monitored, since there will be an increase in the number of aircraft flying over the country's territory during the Olympics.
"Full security during the Olympic Games means increasing the control of the movement of people," said Foreign Minister Kastriot Islami.
"This may also lead to delays and long queues at the borders."
In June, Prime Minister Fatos Nano ordered the establishment of an inter-governmental centre that will co-ordinate security activities and the monitoring of information from both inside and outside the country.
"The government's aim is the support for the security of the Olympic Games from attacks or other dangerous acts.
For this reason, our specialised structures are in continuous contact with the structures of Greece and other countries in the region, exchanging information for the prevention of any danger, and co-ordination of actions between the regional security structures," Nano said.
Together with intelligence services, the ministries of public order, defence, transport and telecommunication, finance and foreign affairs will work to implement the Albanian security strategy for the Summer Olympics.
