01/07/2004
By Emil Tsenkov for Southeast European Times in Sofia - 01/07/04
As is often the case with politically motivated scandals, there may be more media sensationalism than substance to the war of words between Bulgarian Defence Minister Nikolai Svinarov and Chief of General Staff General Nikola Kolev. 
Kolev has accused Svinarov of keeping the military isolated from the discussion of the strategic defence review.
The issue was politicised further last week when Kolev met with the leader of the Socialist Party, Sergei Stanishev. 
Stanishev declared the Socialists' support for the military and demanded Svinarov's resignation.
President Georgi Parvanov, who is nominally the commander-in-chief, is seen as supportive of Kolev. 
The outspoken general had made provocative comments suggesting the army is involved in domestic politics, but later refuted them publicly. 
Some analysts warn that such outbursts at the helm of the armed forces risk tarnishing the country's image during its first year of NATO membership.
The Strategic Defence Review reassesses the state of defence and the armed forces and sets guidelines for their long-term development. 
According to the defence ministry, "it is a tool to succeed in our efforts to build and maintain an effective and affordable defence system as well as a steady political, expert and public consensus on national defence policy and strategy."
The review was launched on 8 January 2003. 
Its principles and parameters were outlined in a policy framework adopted by the Council of Ministers last September. 
In May, a long-term vision for development of the armed forces was adopted by the cabinet and submitted to parliament for approval.
Some critics, however, say the review focuses primarily on the gradual reduction of the number of troops but fails to answer questions about the future of the local arms industry. 
According to Professor Dimitar Yonchev, a defence expert, there is still a need for a holistic security system to address new challenges in the post-Cold war period.
The official reaction to critics has been cool. 
Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg has stressed the importance of Bulgaria's newly coined relations with Washington and Brussels to enhancing security and creating economic opportunities. 
At the opening of the 1 July forum on NATO membership and investment opportunities in Southeast Europe, Deputy Prime Minister Plamen Panayotov said NATO membership would be a key factor for the revival of the Bulgarian defence industry.
