01/07/2004
(Reuters, AP, RFE/RL, Radio B92, ICTY - 30/06/04)
Serbia should take steps to extradite war crimes indictees to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Serbian President-elect Boris Tadic said Wednesday (30 June). 
He also called for new efforts to track down fugitive Ratko Mladic, saying the former Bosnian Serb military commander must face justice at The Hague.
Mladic, charged with genocide over the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the siege of Sarajevo, is one of the tribunal's three most wanted indictees. 
The other two are wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and retired Croatian General Ante Gotovina.
"The world wants a clear and strong political action which would be sufficient proof that we have tried everything to find out where he is," the Belgrade daily Blic quoted Serbia's new pro-reform president as saying.
Tadic's statement came a day after chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte criticised Serbia-Montenegro over its lack of co-operation with the ICTY. 
On Tuesday, she told the UN Security Council that at least 15 war crimes indictees, including Mladic, spent most of their time in Serbia-Montenegro, which she said had become a "safe haven for fugitives".
"I am even reluctant now to pass any information on the fugitives to Serbian authorities, because the last time I gave precise information regarding a high-level fugitive charged with the Srebrenica genocide, I was told by the Serbian authorities that, due to the political circumstances, it was not opportune to arrest him. 
I learned that he has disappeared since then," the prosecutor said.
The international community has said that full co-operation with the UN court, including the arrest of Mladic and other war crimes fugitives, is a key requirement for Serbia-Montenegro's accession to the EU and NATO.
EU and US officials welcomed Tadic's victory over the ultranationalist candidate of the Serbian Radical Party, Tomislav Nikolic, in Sunday's presidential run-off as a sign that the majority of Serbs had chosen the path of Euro-Atlantic integration. 
But they also called for quick action to capture wanted war crimes suspects.
Officials in Serbia-Montenegro said Tadic's election, which ended a period of two years in which Serbia been without a president, opened the doors for full co-operation with the ICTY.
"With the election of Serbia's president, the Serbia-Montenegro union is finally ready to show that it accepts its international obligations," Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic told reporters on Wednesday. 
He asserted that four Serbian generals indicted by the UN court could be extradited soon. 
But he insisted Mladic is no longer hiding in Serbia. 
"We have to offer enough proof that he is not here so that the international community will lessen its pressure on us."
