28/06/2004
(Office of the High Representative -- 24/06/04 - 28/06/04; Stars and Stripes - 28/06/04; AP, Reuters, FENA, Radio B92 - 27/06/04; RFE/RL, BBC - 25/06/04)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) will not be invited to join NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme during the Alliance's two-day summit, which opened in Istanbul on Monday (28 June). 
BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic says this is due to the country's failure to meet some of NATO's requirements for admission.
"We will have to wait for another opportunity," Radovanovic said Sunday in Istanbul. 
One of the key requirements still unmet, he said, is the merging of the armies of the country's two entities -- Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska (RS) -- into a single multiethnic force.
In addition, NATO officials have stressed RS's lack of full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
Senior diplomats, including NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, warned that the country would not be invited to join the programme in the event of continued failure to hand over war crimes indictees. 
The PfP programme is considered a first step towards eventual full membership in the Alliance.
RS is the only former Yugoslav territory that has not captured a single war criminal indicted by the ICTY for atrocities that took place during the 1992-1995 war. 
Former Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic are among the top three indictees wanted by the court. 
Both have been in hiding since 1996.
This spring, Bosnian Serb police made their first serious attempt to capture Karadzic, but failed.
Last month, RS President Dragan Cavic said Bosnian Serb authorities have the political will to bring indictees to justice and promised concrete results before the Istanbul summit.
At the end of a two-day session in Sarajevo, the steering board of the Peace Implementation Council said in a statement on Friday that BiH had failed to meet "a key condition for participation in PfP, namely co-operation with the ICTY". 
It criticised RS in particular for not having tracked down and apprehended even one indictee over the past nine years, stressing that Cavic's statement must be followed by deeds.
RS "is failing to carry out a key obligation under Dayton and international law, for which the relevant individuals and institutions must be held accountable", the statement added.
The steering board also voiced support for changes the top international envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, could make to BiH's security structures, to ensure the country fulfils its international obligations and to hold those obstructing the process accountable politically.
"I will consider all the possible measures and take corresponding decisions very soon after we have received a reply from Istanbul," local media quoted Ashdown as saying. 
It is unacceptable that the country be held hostage by some people in RS, he added.
On Saturday and Sunday, Bosnian Serb special police searched for two war crimes indictees, Savo Todovic and Stojan Zupljanin, but located neither of them.
In other news, NATO decided in Istanbul on steps to terminate SFOR by the end of this year and hand over its responsibilities to an EU-led force. 
The Alliance would then set up a 200-strong team, based in Sarajevo, to help BiH implement defence reforms and to monitor its progress in arresting war crimes indictees.
