25/06/2004
(The Guardian - 25/06/04;
NATO, Reuters, AP, VOA, Kathimerini, Macedonian Press Agency - 24/06/04)
Responding to a Greek request, NATO has agreed to provide security assistance during the Summer Olympics and the Paralympic Games, which Athens will host in August and September of this year.
NATO issued a statement Thursday (24 June), specifying the package of measures approved by its chief decision-making body, the North Atlantic Council, a day earlier.
The Alliance's support will be in the areas of airspace and maritime surveillance, response to potential attacks with weapons of mass destruction, intelligence sharing and civil emergency planning.
Flying mainly from bases in Germany and Italy, up to four NATO AWACS surveillance aircrafts will patrol Greek airspace around the clock, according to Reuters.
In addition, seven planes will assist the Greeks in patrolling the airspace over the Aegean Sea.
NATO also is reportedly offering an eight-ship fleet to assist in maritime surveillance in Aegean and Ionian international waters, while Greek military vessels patrol national waters.
Furthermore, a unit of about 100 Czech chemical and biological alert troops from NATO's recently established battalion for defence against weapons of mass destruction are to be deployed on the ground.
The unit will reportedly remain for two months.
"It will be sitting there because whenever there is an emergency you can't wait for a train or an aircraft taking hours to get the people in," NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said Thursday.
All NATO personnel involved in the Olympic security programme will operate under Greek command.
This year's Summer Olympics will be the first after the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States.
Days after the Madrid bombings in March, the Greek government asked NATO to support its security efforts.
A 1 billion-euro budget underpins Greece's comprehensive security plan, which includes the deployment of up to 70,000 military, police and coastguard personnel to protect athletes and visitors.
A seven-nation advisory group, including Britain and the United States, is also assisting the organisers in ensuring the security of the Games, which open on 13 August.
Meanwhile, a two-day Olympic crisis management security exercise begins Friday, with top military and law enforcement authorities participating.
Security experts from the seven countries in the advisory group will observe the exercise.
In other news, the Greek Parliament passed a new anti-terrorism law on Thursday, establishing a legal framework for EU-wide investigations and providing for speedier extradition of terror suspects to other countries in the 25-member bloc.
It also extends the statute of limitations for terrorism-related crimes from 20 to 30 years.
