01/07/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 01/07/04
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) top international official sacked 60 Bosnian Serb officials Wednesday (30 June) for not co-operating with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague and costing BiH its invitation to move closer to NATO. 
The move was applauded in Sarajevo as a long-overdue house cleaning.
Among those sacked by international community High Representative Paddy Ashdown were Republika Srpska (RS) Parliament Speaker Dragan Kalinic and RS Interior Ministry head Zoran Djeric.
"The RS has been in the grip of a small band of corrupt politicians and criminals for too long," Ashdown said Wednesday. 
"We have to get rid of the cancer of obstructionism and corruption in the RS structures, and nothing less than major surgery will do."
The sackings were prompted by BiH's failure to secure an invitation to NATO's Partnership for Peace programme earlier this week at the Alliance's summit in Istanbul. 
Though military reforms to place the country's formerly warring Croat, Muslim and Serb militaries under a single command were on track, NATO warned for months that an invitation would depend on BiH's ability to turn over people indicted for war crimes by The Hague tribunal.
Among the more than dozen tribunal fugitives thought to be on RS territory is the tribunal's most-wanted indictee, former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic. 
He is thought to be eluding capture by moving around the mountains of eastern BiH.
To strike at the heart of the financial network thought to be keeping Karadzic on the move, Ashdown froze about 60 municipal bank accounts belonging to the Serb Democratic Party, which Karadzic founded in 1990. 
Ashdown also authorised an audit of a Sokolac-based forestry company thought to be financing support netwroks for war crimes indictees.
As the arrest of war crimes suspects has depended on efforts by RS police -- limited to one failed raid in April and another last week -- Ashdown announced that police reform would include giving more power to the state-level police structures.
"Our priority will be to ensure that the law-abiding citizens of this country get a police force that is structured in order to serve their interests, not the interests of a corrupt few," Ashdown said.
Senad Slatina, an analyst with the Brussels-based International Crisis Group in Sarajevo, said the measures were long overdue and would be effective, especially once the command responsibility over the police is shifted from the hands of the entities to those of the state
EU External Relations Commissioner Chris Patten and the UN's chief war crimes prosecutor, Carla del Ponte, both expressed support for the sanctions imposed by Ashdown.
On Wednesday, the RS government convened an emergency session to discuss the removal of Djeric and Industry Minister Milan Bogicevic, whose name was also on the list of dismissals. 
RS Prime Minister Dragan Mikerevic stressed that Banja Luka is committed to implementing the Dayton Peace Accord and the reform process.
