30/06/2004
(AP, Reuters - 29/06/04;
AP, Reuters, AFP - 28/06/04)
UNMIK has suspended a decision by Kosovo's telecommunications regulator to award the contract for the province's second cellular phone network to a local bidder.
Western and local officials have voiced concerns that the process might not have been carried out fairly and professionally.
Kosovo's acting UN administrator, Charles Brayshaw, requested in a letter to the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA) that all actions related to the tender be suspended, UNMIK spokeswoman Mechtilde Henneke said Tuesday (29 June).
The process "will be reviewed to make sure all the rules have been obeyed", she told Reuters.
The TRA announced Monday that the contract would be awarded to Mobikos, a local firm owned by Kosovo Albanian businessman Ekrem Luka.
Mobikos participated in the tender together with a Slovenian mobile phone company, Mobitel.
The decision came less than three months after the opening of the tender in early April.
An AFP report Monday suggested that Mobikos's bid had been accepted ahead of those submitted by other competitors -- including Kosovo provider IPKO, which submitted its bid in co-operation with US-based Western Wireless International, Sweden's Tele2 and the Norwegian-Albanian company Albacell.
Anton Berisha, the head of the TRA board, said Mobikos had submitted the strongest bid, praising what he described as a "clear business plan and a detailed technical plan".
But the board's decision aroused suspicions of possible wrongdoing and corruption on the part of the regulator, and was met with swift reactions from Western diplomats and Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Rexhepi.
The chief of the US office in Pristina, Marcie B. Ries, questioned the speed with which the decision was taken and called for a careful review of the process.
"Potential investors will want to know this process was conducted in a professional and transparent fashion," Ries said.
"We are concerned for example, whether there was sufficient time for a comprehensive review of the thousands of pages of technical documentation submitted only in English."
British diplomats in Kosovo cautioned that the lack of transparency in such deals would affect the province's prospects of attracting foreign investments.
Contesting TRA's decision, Rexhepi wrote to Brayshaw on Monday, asking him to use his powers to suspend the board's decision until all "allegations of misconduct and corruption" have been ruled out.
"Allegations of corruption are circulating, whereas the independence of the TRA Board ...
seems to be seriously questioned," the letter was quoted as saying.
Kosovo currently has one cell phone operator, under a deal between Kosovo Post Telecom and Alcatel, a company based in France.
