29/06/2004
(Various sources -- 28/06/04 - 29/06/04)
NATO said Monday (28 June) it would terminate its peacekeeping mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) by the end of 2004, and welcomed the EU's readiness to take over the operation.
"As the security situation in BiH has evolved positively, we have decided to conclude the Alliance's successful SFOR operation by the end of this year," NATO leaders said in a communique issued at the end of the first session of their two-day summit in Istanbul.
Six days after the signing of the Dayton Peace Accords in Paris on 14 December 1995, NATO deployed a 60,000-strong Implementation Force (IFOR) in BiH, operating under a one-year UN mandate. 
A year later it was transformed into SFOR, tasked with stabilising peace in the country. 
Over the years, the number of NATO troops on the ground has gradually been reduced. 
As of June, it stood at about 7,000.
The EU, whose interest in taking over peacekeeping in BiH from NATO dates back to late 2002, is expected to deploy a 7,000-strong force -- its most ambitious military project so far. 
That will likely happen in December. 
The operation will be based on the "Berlin Plus" arrangements agreed on with NATO and will take place in close consultation with the Alliance.
Like SFOR, the EU-led force (EUFOR) is expected to operate under a UN mandate. 
In addition, it will be under the political control and strategic direction of the EU Political and Security Committee. 
Brussels is expected to adopt a decision on the operation shortly, the EU said Monday.
"We welcome the decision of the EU to mount a new operation in BiH, and look forward to continued co-operation," NATO leaders said in their summit communiqué Monday.
"Having been present at the creation and launching of IFOR in December 1995, I fully share the sense of satisfaction and achievement in bringing the NATO operation in BiH to an end," EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said Monday. 
NATO, he added, should be proud of its decisive contribution to stabilising the Balkans, one which has allowed "the process of reconciliation, reconstruction and return to move forward".
With the peace implementation and stabilisation tasks gradually giving ground to European integration, the objective now is "to put BiH irreversibly on the track towards EU membership," Solana said.
Stressing that its "long-term political commitment" to BiH remains unchanged, NATO confirmed Monday that it would retain a residual presence in the country to assist authorities in defence reform, counterterrorism and the hunt for war crimes suspects, and would share intelligence with EUFOR.
Welcoming NATO's decision, the international community's top envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, said SFOR "has completed its mission to help stabilise BiH" following the 1992-1995 war. 
"This is a remarkable achievement," he said, adding that EUFOR would work closely with NATO and the NATO presence that will remain in BiH.
Residents of BiH also welcomed Monday's announcement, saying it was a sign that their country is returning to normalcy.
