18/09/2007
EU External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner met with Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov on Monday (September 17th) and was awarded a Stara Planina medal -- the highest state order -- for her assistance in getting Bulgarian medics jailed in Libya to return home.
Ferrero-Waldner was also declared an honorary citizen of Sofia.
Bulgarian Defence Minister Veselin Bliznakov arrived on Monday (September 17th) in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where he will visit Bulgarian troops deployed there.
Bliznakov is heading a delegation composed of Parliamentary Defence Committee Chairman Angel Naydenov, Chief of General Staff of Bulgarian Armed Forces General Zlatan Stoykov, Deputy Defence Minister Spas Panchev and Commander of Bulgarian Land Forces Major General Ivan Dobrev.
Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku met on Wednesday (September 12th) with his Albanian counterpart, Sali Berisha, in Tirana.
Ceku called on the EU to prevent certain member states from dictating the bloc's policy on Kosovo status.
Berisha reiterated Albania's support for Kosovo's independence and urged the international community to accelerate the process.
The US embassy in Sarajevo confirmed on Wednesday (September 12th) that Charles English will be the new US ambassador to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He assumes the post this month.
US President George W. Bush also nominated Daniel V. Speckhard as the next US ambassador to Athens, succeeding Charles Ries.
Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos reiterated his country's support for Macedonia's NATO and EU bids during a meeting with Macedonian counterpart Antonio Milososki on Tuesday (September 11th) in Madrid.
Moratinos expressed hope Macedonia would be invited to join NATO at its April 2008 summit in Bucharest.
Sri Lankan Prime Minister Ratnasiri Wickramanayaka was in Zagreb last week for talks with his Croatian counterpart, Ivo Sanader.
The focus was on strengthening bilateral co-operation, and on a joint shipbuilding and marine project.
Wickramanayaka also met with President Stipe Mesic and Foreign Affairs Minister Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic.
(Various sources 11/09/07-18/09/07)
