21/06/2004
(BNN, Novinite, Mediafax, Mediapool, BTA, Bulgarian Government - 20/06/04;
Romanian Government - 19/06/04;
Sofia Echo - 18/06/04;
Dnevnik - 17/06/04)
A bridge linking the Romanian town of Calafat with Bulgaria's Vidin will be fully operational in 2008, according to Bulgarian Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg and his Romanian counterpart, Adrian Nastase.
It will be the second bridge to connect the two countries via the Danube River.
The two leaders attended a ceremony Sunday (20 June) marking the 50th anniversary of the opening of the first bridge, on 20 June 1954.
Joining the port cities of Ruse in Bulgaria and Giurgiu in Romania, it was completed in two years and three months.
At the time of its construction, the 2.2km structure was one of the longest bridges in Europe.
Meeting at the bridge's mid-point, the prime ministers said that while the facility once commemorated Communist-era "friendship", it now symbolises the two countries' common path to eventual EU membership.
After the ceremony, Saxe-Coburg and Nastase flew to Calafat, where Romanian Minister of Transport, Construction and Tourism Miron Tudor Mitrea made a short presentation regarding the new bridge project.
Nastase voiced confidence that the project would be completed by 2008.
Saxe-Coburg said he hoped it could be finalised even earlier.
The overall cost of the project, according to the Bulgarian News Network, is 230m euros.
Romania has approved 48.2m euros for construction, while Bulgaria has agreed to provide 62m euros.
The EU and other West European donors will finance the rest.
Last week, Bulgaria said it would sign an agreement with Germany's Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau on a 20m-euro credit for the construction of the Vidin-Calafat bridge.
One-tenth of the financing will come in the form of grant money.
Kreditanstalt has already provided a 470,000-euro loan for some of the technical studies relating to the project.
Fifteen companies from Bulgaria and from EU member states have submitted bids for the design and construction of the project, according to Bulgarian media.
Up to eight companies will be short-listed and invited to submit their offers.
Prior to the actual start of construction next year, other procedures will be initiated for the selection of a construction supervisor and a reviewer, as well as for choosing a contractor to build the adjoining infrastructure on Bulgaria's territory.
The selection procedure for the design and construction contractor is open to companies based in any of the EU member states, as well as in Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey.
