24/06/2004
(OSCE, VOA, AFP, Washington File, BNN, Novinite - 23/06/04)
Participants in an annual OSCE security conference have urged member nations to focus on the increased risk of non-conventional threats, as they continue to address practical issues in the fight against global terrorism.
Opening the organisation's two-day Annual Security Review Conference in Vienna on Wednesday (23 June), OSCE Chairman-in-Office Solomon Passy -- who is also Bulgaria's foreign minister -- noted the body's progress in improving air travel safety and the security of borders and passports.
"But let us challenge ourselves even further by admitting that putting into practice our current commitments might not be enough," Passy said.
"In view of recent research indicating the increased risk of asymmetric and non-conventional threats, we should devote more attention to the danger posed by chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials."
Addressing about 350 political and military experts attending the Vienna forum, Passy stressed the need for OSCE countries to tighten the security at sites storing conventional explosives, so that they do not end up in terrorists' hands.
"Other areas we need to build on include the security of containers, in which around 90 per cent of the world's goods are shipped, protecting our energy infrastructure from possible attack and countering the use of the Internet by terrorists as a tool for communications and propaganda," he said.
Deputy US Homeland Security Secretary Admiral James Loy voiced similar concerns, warning that in recent years there have been "too many incidents of radiological materials finding their way .
outside the normal control mechanisms of nations".
As a means to improve the security of shipments, Loy proposed that OSCE states standardise the development of electronic seals that protect container cargo from tampering and develop a uniform system for exchanging customs data in a regularised format.
Another measure he proposed was to incorporate interoperable biometric indicators on passports and visas while developing a set of international standards for capturing, analysing, storing, and protecting biometric data.
While noting "conventional attacks are more likely at the moment," EU Counterterrorism Co-ordinator Gijs de Vries cautioned OSCE countries to be prepared for attacks involving weapons of mass destruction.
He agreed on the urgent need to introduce biometric passports.
Loy said future efforts in the fight against terrorism would require the "integration of both people and technology -- integration that makes us smarter, more sophisticated, and more secure."
