28/06/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 28/06/04
Serbia's new president will be the leader of the pro-reform Democratic Party, Boris Tadic.
According to unofficial results from the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy, he won 1,706,000 votes (53.7 per cent) in Sunday's (27 June) run-off, while his rival, far-right Serbian Radical Party candidate Tomislav Nikolic, won 1,431,000 votes, or 45 per cent.
During his campaign, Tadic advocated co-operation with the West, a peaceful solution to the Kosovo problem, the continuation of reforms, and EU accession in as short a time as possible.
Analysts have described his victory as pointing the way towards a future in Europe for Serbia.
The election outcome is expected to help Serbia continue its journey towards association with the EU, the Partnership for Peace programme, and other European and NATO organisations.
"This country is not abandoning European integration processes and regional and security integration," said Tadic, after the election results were announced.
EU representatives welcomed the news.
The head of the EU mission in Belgrade, Geoffrey Barrett, said the Union is "very satisfied" with the election of Tadic.
"This is a very good result for Serbia and for democracy in Serbia, which will help clear up the political scene.
We in the EU are very, very pleased with this result," Barrett said.
"The EU is determined to clearly support the reform process in Serbia and its association with Europe," said Christina Gallac, a spokeswoman for EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, who leads the Democratic Party of Serbia, agreed to back Tadic despite major differences between their parties.
In return, Tadic pledged not to undermine the minority cabinet that Kostunica leads, and said he would aid the prime minister's efforts towards adopting a new Serbian Constitution.
Serbia will now have a head of state, for the first time since President Milan Milutinovic's term ended in 2002.
Presidential elections were held three times, but each failed due to low turnout.
This year, the Serbian government abolished the turnout requirement.
The presidential mandate in Serbia lasts five years.
