21/06/2004
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 21/06/04
With an eye to its long-term aspiration of joining NATO, Serbia-Montenegro is in the process of streamlining its navy. 
One of the key steps being undertaken is the sale of outdated vessels, armaments and military equipment.
According to Nebojsa Sandic, who heads the public procurement administration at the defence ministry, the navy has concluded a $5m contract with a foreign buyer concerning the sale of five Osa-1 rocket ships and two Rubez mobile anti-ship rocket systems.
Two Soviet-type Koni frigates -- built for the Yugoslav National Army in 1980 and 1982 at the Ukranian shipyard of Zelenodolsk -- are to be sold in the near future, along with two small-size P-911 and P-912-class Tisa submarines, built during the 1980s at the Split shipyard. 
In addition, there are plans to sell 36 military planes and helicopters.
Such sales bring both direct and indirect benefits, Sandic said. 
Purchasers frequently decide to repair their newly-bought vessels at local sites, creating jobs and profits. 
At the same time, given the worldwide concern over proliferation, safeguards have been put in place to prevent ships, weapons or equipment from being sold to a country under UN sanction, or from reaching the black market.
Counter-admiral Slobodan Rajicevic, chief of the sailors' administration within the naval sector, believes Serbia-Montenegro should take advantage of the opportunity to eliminate its fleet of large submarines, which have not been active since 1994. 
Under the navy's development plan, only vessels that that country needs and can financially sustain should be kept. 
For the most part, that means fast, mobile ships -- such as Kotor frigates, 401-type rocket gunboats, auxilliary ships and small submarines.
The navy's operational requirements are changing, Rajicevic said, reflecting Serbia-Montenegro's goal of becoming a part of integrated security activities in the Adriatic-Ionian region.
In general, reforms are proceeding at a fast clip. 
In late May, a group of 25 foreign military attaches -- including representatives from EU member countries and the United States, as well as from Russia, China, and other nations -- visited the Navy Corpus in Tivat. 
They expressed surprise at the accomplishments which the Serbia-Montenegro Navy has been able to achieve in a comparatively short time period, boosting operational efficiency,
At the beginning of June, the naval forces of Serbia-Montenegro and Italy held a joint exercise in the international waters of the Adriatic. 
In addition, Serbia-Montenegro will soon sign agreements with neighboring countries on search and rescue operations. 
Officials say both developments reflect the country's desire to become a key contributor to regional stability and security.
