25/06/2004
By Vahit Bora for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 25/06/04
As Istanbul prepares to host the 3,000 participants and 3,500 journalists who will attend the NATO summit beginning Monday (28 June), maximum efforts are being focused on security measures.
About 30,000 security personnel will be on duty during the two-day event, including sea and air units.
The area around summit venues will be closed to traffic.
Security personnel will have the right to ask those who live and work in the area to show documents indicating their address.
Police have already checked the identities of nearly 300,000 people who live near the congress centres.
Flights will be banned over Istanbul, and an AWACS aircraft will patrol the skies during the summit.
Measures also have been taken to ensure naval security.
Transit passages through the Istanbul Strait will be limited to passenger vessels and war ships.
Oil and gas tankers, as well as vessels carrying explosives or flammable cargo, will not be allowed through.
Sea barriers will be placed around the Dolmabahce and Ciragan palaces, where NATO participants will stay.
Turkish and US security forces will co-operate to ensure the security of the US delegation, comprising about 1,000.
Police have equipped 500 new vehicles, including armored vehicles, for use by the delegations.
Turk Telekom and Nortel Networks Netas are supervising communication preparations for the summit.
A wireless Internet access (Wi-Fi) network is in place, and a special high-capacity switchboard will be set up near the Lutfi Kirdar Convention and Exhibition Centre and Military Museum.
ISDN-BA technology infrastructure, which will enable wireless phone videoconferencing for the Wi-Fi network, will also be installed in conference rooms and accommodations.
Turk Telekom satellite systems will be in use for press communications throughout the summit.
The new cable and wireless broadband Internet network at Swisshotel, where many conferences will be held and many guests will stay, was implemented with state-of-the-art broadband technology.
In a service implemented for the first time in Turkey, Wireless Local Area Network and metro Ethernet technology -- allowing broadband Internet access through fiber cables -- have been combined.
Organisers say 2,000 telephone lines, 200 plasma televisions, 140 televisions and 500 computers will be available for the journalists covering the event.
Two digital voice and translation systems will be equipped during the summit.
Municipality workers have been working on the roads and sidewalks around the hotels and congress centres.
According to officials, 250 cars, 150 minibuses and 100 buses will be used for transportation.
Health centres will be set up at the venue of the summit and hotels where the delegates will stay.
Sixty ambulances, one helicopter and 700 health personnel will be available in case of emergency throughout the summit.
