28/06/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 28/06/04
Croatia's military reforms and its participation in NATO activities are a clear sign of the country's determination to join NATO, according to a high-level Alliance official.
"I am impressed with the seriousness with which the Croatian armed forces are conducting the Strategic Review of Defence. 
Your political leadership has opted for your country's integration in NATO, and what you have done as part of the Membership Action Plan and other Alliance instruments shows that you are on the right path," said Federico Yaniz, deputy director of NATO's Directorate for Co-operation and Regional Security, during a trip to Croatia. 
He also stressed the importance of Croatia's participation in the peace mission in Afghanistan.
"NATO is the biggest defence alliance in the world," Yaniz noted. 
"As its principal objective it continues to develop the structure of joint defence, but is at the same time establishing stability in the Atlantic region and beyond it."
While in Zagreb, the NATO official visited the defence ministry, meeting with Chief of the Supreme Headquarters of the Croatian Army General Josip Lucic and Deputy Minister for Defence Policy Jelena Grcic Polic. 
Yaniz received detailed information about the steps Croatia has taken to reform its defence system, as well as plans for the future.
NATO experts have given the country military advice on boosting operational readiness, improving training and education in the armed forces, and other topics. 
According to Deputy Chief of the Supreme Headquarters General Slavko Baric, the year 2004 is considered crucial in planning Croatia's integration into NATO.
"This year we want to make the lowest number of mistakes in planning documents and thereby join and accept the rules which are in effect in NATO," Baric said. 
Emphasising the special significance of dialogue with representatives of the Alliance, he said that discussions with NATO representatives always raise important issues and uncover obstacles to defence reform, which he described as a complex process.
