22/06/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 22/06/04
After last month's visit by a Serbian delegation to Zagreb, it appears that a further strengthening of relations between Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro is under way. 
Serbia-Montenegrin Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic said that co-operation between the two countries will soon become concrete.
As a starting point, the most frequently mentioned issue is exchange of experiences in military reform, which Croatia has already undertaken. 
Serbia-Montenegro can also benefit from Croatia's experience in fulfilling the conditions for membership in NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme.
"Serbia-Montenegro and Croatia both have as an objective entry into NATO. 
However before that happens, it is necessary to fulfil all the conditions for entry into PfP," Davinic said.
Davinic spoke at an international seminar organised by the Regional Aid Centre for Verification, Implementation and Arms Control. 
His address was focused on the reform of the Serbia-Montenegro Army and its influence on regional co-operation in strengthening peace and stability.
The army is currently working on strengthening ties with all of the armies in neighbouring countries, including the army of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
According to BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic, Southeast Europe is no longer threatened by conflicts. 
However, the region faces a new threat: terrorism. 
Military representatives from all the Southeast European countries have agreed that fighting this threat requires mutual co-operation, and cannot be done in isolation.
"This is precisely the way in which we are carrying out internal reform of the army, in order to fit into the network of security in Europe in which Serbia-Montenegro and BiH will play a part, as the only countries which are not yet members of the PfP, but which contribute with concrete actions in the same way as members of the partnership," Davinic said.
He acknowledged NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer's statement that Serbia-Montenegro and BiH will not be able to enter the PfP as long as Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic remain at large. 
He added, however, that there are widespread hopes that this problem will be resolved in the near future.
