17/06/2004
By Ovidiu Barbulescu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 17/06/04
Under pressure from the EU, Romania has passed a legislative package on child protection and international adoption. 
The Chamber of Deputies approved the bill Tuesday (15 June), and President Ion Iliescu is expected to sign it into law.
The legislation drastically limits the adoption of Romanian children by foreign citizens, stipulating that children may only be adopted abroad by second-degree relatives or grandparents. 
Parents who take money or other goods in exchange for giving up a child could now face up to seven years in prison. 
The bill also prohibits children younger than two years old from being placed in orphanages.
Over the past years, the rapporteur for Romania in the European Parliament, Baroness Emma Nicholson, has campaigned for such restrictions, arguing that the country's adoption system is rife with corruption and baby trafficking. 
In some cases, poverty-stricken families have been known to sell their babies for money.
The Romanian government had adopted a moratorium on international adoptions, but it was breached this year when 105 children were granted to Italian families. 
Romanian authorities said legal procedures forced them to approve the adoptions. 
But Nicholson reacted furiously, and even recommended delaying Romania's negotiations on EU accession.
As a result, a commission of independent experts was established in Brussels to formulate its recommendations on draft legislation. 
Romanian Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana said the government had agreed to follow the recommendations, and that the European Commission would have the final word on Romania's adoption policy.
But debate on the legislation was postponed several times because of pressure from families living abroad who want to adopt. 
The most intensive lobbying to drop the bill came from American families, with the support of the US Embassy in Bucharest.
"The bill will basically annul international adoptions as an alternative to ensuring a future to Romania's abandoned children. 
We are not convinced that Romania, by means of local resources, has the capacity to absorb the present large number of abandoned and orphaned children, apart from placing them on a long term in childcare institutions, which obviously does not benefit the children," the embassy said in a press release.
According to parliamentary deputy Minodora Cliveti, however, the bill brings Romania's legislation in line with provisions of The Hague Convention, to which Romania is a signatory. 
"Indeed, there have been a lot of Romanian children adopted outside the country, and one of the accession criteria refers to a fair regulation of inter-country adoptions. 
This way, Romania will take more care of its orphans or abandoned children," Cliveti said.
International adoptions in Romania soared when widely broadcast television footage showed children living in squalid conditions in orphanages. 
Communist strongman Nicolae Ceaucescu had banned birth control and abortion.
About 30,000 children have been adopted since 1989. 
The country's state institutions are currently home to about 40,000 orphaned and abandoned children.
