23/06/2004
(Rompres - 22/06/04; Reuters, Mediafax, Rompres, Novinite, RFE/RL - 21/06/04; AFP - 18/06/04; EUobserver - 16/06/04)
Describing Romania's prospects for joining the EU in 2007 as realistic, EU Enlargement Commissioner Guenter Verheugen has said sustainable progress in several key areas would be critical for meeting that target.
"Romania is in a decisive phase -- it may be hard but it's possible," Reuters quoted Verheugen as saying Monday (21 June) at a press conference in Cluj.
On Friday, the EU confirmed its commitment to admitting Bulgaria and Romania together in 2007, although the two countries are at different stages of their accession preparations. 
Bulgaria concluded its entry talks with Brussels last week. 
Romania, which has yet to close seven of the 31 negotiating chapters, aims to complete the talks by the end of this year.
To receive a positive assessment from the European Commission (EC) this autumn, Verheugen said, Romanian authorities must demonstrate zero tolerance for corruption, and intensify reforms of the country's judiciary and public administration, as well as economic reforms.
"These four themes will play a very important role in our country report in October, which will be the basis of whether it will be possible to wrap up talks in 2004 or not," the commissioner said.
Verheugen, who arrived in Cluj to inspect EU-funded projects, placed special emphasis on the need to fight corruption, calling for "visible results in criminal investigations at all levels".
At the same time, he described political and economic stability and an independent judiciary as key elements for investors, who want to be sure that their investments are safe. 
Previous EC reports had indicated that "there were still problems", Verheugen noted.
In its regular report last year, the EC stopped short of formally recognising Romania as a functioning market economy -- a key requirement for membership in the 25-member club.
The commissioner expressed optimism that such recognition could come this year. 
"The country report is not on the table yet, but I can see it as a positive one. 
The answer to the question whether Romania may obtain a statute of market economy could be yes," Verheugen said.
Before closing its accession talks with Brussels, Romania will likely be asked to accept -- as Bulgaria did last week -- a new "safeguard clause" involving a tougher monitoring system before accession. 
The clause allows for delaying a country's EU entry by one year if it fails to meet commitments made during negotiations.
Last week, Romanian Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana said the safeguard mechanisms would eliminate some concerns about the candidate countries' readiness to join the Union. 
He also suggested the clause could serve as "a sort of guarantee that we shall be able to close the negotiations in 2004".
