23/06/2004
(Beta, AP, VOA, UPI, Focus, Koha Ditore, Epoka, Bota Sot, Zeri, Kosova Sot - 22/06/04;
NATO - 17/06/04)
The problem of Kosovo's final status can only be resolved through the joint efforts of all concerned, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said in remarks quoted Tuesday (22 June) by Kosovo dailies.
Kosovo Albanians and Serbs must work together with Belgrade, NATO, the EU and other players in the international community to reach a solution, de Hoop Scheffer said, noting that the issue cannot be considered "an isolated process".
The situation in the province remains volatile, he added, stressing the need for continued engagement by the international community.
"NATO and KFOR are guarantees that security and safety will be maintained in Kosovo," the Serbian news agency Beta quoted de Hoop Scheffer as saying.
"But in mid-March we saw just how unstable the situation there really is.
And just a week or two ago we witnessed, when a Kosovo Serb boy was killed, to what degree the situation there continues to be fragile."
On Friday, NATO and EU officials held a high level meeting in Brussels.
The Balkans and the situation in Kosovo were among the items on the agenda, said de Hoop Scheffer, who recently suggested the two organisations develop a joint strategy for the province.
After Friday's meeting, de Hoop Scheffer welcomed the appointment of Danish veteran diplomat Soren Jessen-Petersen as the new head of UNMIK, describing the move as "a clear signal of the commitment of the international community to provide a better future for everyone in the province".
He called on leaders in Pristina and Belgrade to work closely with Jessen-Petersen to achieve the standards set by the UN.
The UN has said those standards, covering eight areas, are a precondition for starting talks on Kosovo's final status.
A review of the progress made in implementing them is expected in mid-2005.
Echoing de Hoop Scheffer's pledge of a continuing NATO commitment to Kosovo, KFOR Commander General Holger Kammerhoff said Monday that peacekeepers would "respond to any kind of renewed violence".
During a press conference Monday, he said there would be no reductions in the 36,000-strong force.
He also stressed that if Kosovo seeks integration into Euro-Atlantic structures, it should make sure there are no new outbursts of violence and discrimination.
In related news, Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Rexhepi pledged Tuesday that Kosovo Serb houses destroyed during the mid-March violence would be repaired by early November.
In addition to homes, he said, the restoration of religious buildings would start soon.
