15/06/2004
(AP, AFP, RFE/RL, Anadolu Agency, Cyprus News Agency, UN News Centre, Organisation of the Islamic Conference - 14/06/04)
Voicing confidence that democracy is inevitable in the Middle East, Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer has urged Muslim nations to pursue reforms and to consider the future of the Islamic world.
"We are experiencing a moment when the winds of change are strong ...
No country can disassociate itself from this atmosphere of change," Sezer said, opening a three-day ministerial meeting of the 57-nation Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in Istanbul on Monday (14 June).
About 2,300 delegates, representatives of observer countries and international bodies, and journalists, are attending the 31st session of the OIC foreign ministers.
Iraq, fighting international terrorism, the status of the Turkish-run part of Cyprus within the organisation and many other issues of regional and international concern are on the agenda.
The Istanbul forum is expected to adopt 54 resolutions.
A special message from UN Secretary General Kofi Annan was read by his special envoy to Iraq, Lahdar Brahimi.
In it, Annan urged the OIC to support Iraq's interim government, as it is in the interest of all to help the country overcome its many challenges.
He also called for a comprehensive settlement to the Middle East crisis and that members press Sudan to halt attacks in the country's Darfur region.
The OIC "welcomes ...
the declaration of the formation of the interim government in Iraq as a beginning to end the occupation," the AP quoted a draft resolution circulated among delegates Monday.
The document would also call on member states to provide their full support and the assistance the Iraqi people will need to rebuild their country.
"Our top priority should be to take immediate and effective initiatives to support the Iraqi people so that the transfer of power and sovereignty to the Iraqi interim government in about two weeks' time can secure, for the Iraqi people, tight, full, and true control over their territories, just like any independent, sovereign state -- without equivocation or ambiguity," OIC Secretary General Abdelouahed Belkeziz said in his address.
"We should also underline the necessity for the UN to play a fundamental and pivotal role in leading Iraq towards the restoration of its full rights."
Speaking on condition of anonymity, a minister has told AFP that the final documents of the conference are expected to urge OIC members to fight international terrorism and to call for a UN conference on the issue.
For Turkey, two topics on the conference agenda are of particular importance.
One is the election of a new secretary general.
Ankara has nominated Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu as its candidate for the post.
Malaysia and Bangladesh have also proposed nominees.
The other important issue is the status of northern Cyprus, both within the OIC and internationally.
Turkey is the only country that recognises the "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus", and it hopes to see the OIC take steps to end the republic's isolation.
Ankara would like to see northern Cyprus's observer status within the OIC upgraded.
Belkeziz said Monday that the outcome of the April referendum on Annan's plan to reunite the island aligned the Turkish Cypriots with international legitimacy and paved the way for an end to their isolation.
