22/06/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 22/06/04
While four police directed traffic, about 20 officials and journalists peered over a rusty guardrail on the side of the two-lane road that winds towards Bratunac, in eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Below, half a dozen men were digging in the muddy ground of the roadside ravine with pickaxes and spades.
Workers said they expect to find about 15 bodies here in the reddish mud -- bodies of civilians killed during the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, in which Bosnian Serb forces killed up to 8,000 Muslim men and boys after over-running what had been a UN-declared "safe area".
This grave is one of 32 that the Republika Srpska (RS) authorities acknowledged recently, following pressure from the international community.
At the same time, authorities acknowledged in a report, released on 11 June, that Serb military and police had "liquidated" Muslims and committed other large-scale human rights violations after taking the area in July 1995.
Such acknowledgements, after nine years of RS authorities feigning ignorance, are a watershed, said Gordon Bacon, head of the International Commission for Missing Persons, which identifies victims by matching DNA samples from bodies found in mass graves to blood samples from surviving relatives.
"This shows that there is information there, and it's been there a long time," he said.
"But instead of looking at the negatives -- they should have given it to us earlier, let's look at the positives -- they have given it now."
This was a primary grave, but officials say that the majority of the graves are so-called secondary and tertiary graves -- where the initial site was dug up and reburied in secret, second and third locations.
Until recently, the Federation Missing Persons Commission had received grave information only from survivors or from the UN war crimes tribunal.
"Without that information, we either wouldn't know the locations or it couldn't be confirmed," said Amor Masovic, chairman of the commission.
"In some cases, we know the location, but when information comes from another source, then we can think of it as a place we can send our teams to do our work.
Without that information, my commission couldn't work."
It is hoped that the new grave locations will mean that the fate of those still missing since the massacre will finally be known.
About 4,500 have been exhumed, and 1,373 have been identified.
About 1,000 of the identified have been buried at a memorial site outside of Srebrenica.
Gravesites like this are also considered crime scenes.
After the exhumation, bodies will be autopsied.
After they're identified, war crimes cases can be prosecuted locally under the "Rules of the Road", in which The Hague war crimes tribunal approves evidence gathered by local prosecutors before the prosecutors can issue warrants and take the cases to court.
"Using these bodies we'll be able to determine what happened," said Tuzla prosecutor Emir Ibrahimovic.
"That will be our proof of a crime, because when we confirm the identity, we can find an acquaintance or family member who knows when was the last time that person was seen."
