16/06/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 16/06/04
Last month the Serbian Parliament requested a review of the police campaign that followed the March 2003 assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
Members of a parliamentary subcommittee in charge of analysing the campaign will be taking a closer look at the number of those arrested, indicted and sentenced.
They will also investigate how many phones were tapped, who issued the requests for phone tapping, and how many of those whose phones were tapped were later indicted.
Special attention is being given to events that took place in the village of Meljak, near Belgrade.
It is there that Dusan Spasojevic and Mile Lukovic, accused of organising the assassination, were killed.
According to Miroslav Milosevic, who heads the interior ministry's public security sector, the regional public prosecutor in Belgrade has sent the ministry a letter requesting details of the Meljak police action.
Interior Minister Dragan Jocic told members of the parliamentary subcommittee that the procedure for use of firearms had not been observed during the arrest operation.
Although his predecessor, Dusan Mihajlovic, filed the required report on the use of firearms, members of the ministry deviated from the established procedure during the state of emergency, Jocic said.
For his part, Mihajlovic dismissed the parliamentary subcommittee's review as showmanship, and accused the government of attempting to disqualify the police campaign.
He said the report he submitted answers all the questions currently being raised.
Instead of reviewing the campaign, parliament should stand behind it, Mihajlovic said, adding that its work is not finished.
However, Institute for Criminological Investigation director Dobrivoje Radovanovic said there are reasons to believe the report may have distorted facts.
"I think that the pressure of politics is also considerable here.
When it is known that prosecutors in this country are politically active, or are people appointed by the government, or are members of political parties, then it can hardly be said that there is not political influence here," Radovanovic said in a statement reported by Radio B92.
In related news, the chief suspect in the Djindjic assassination told a Belgrade court on Tuesday (15 June) that he was shocked to hear about the prime minister's murder.
Milorad "Legija" Lukovic said he briefly went into hiding after discovering he had been named as the prime suspect, but returned home afterwards and spent the next 14 months watching TV.
Lukovic denied that he ever left Serbia during this period.
He has also been charged in connection with the 2000 abduction and murder of former Serbian President Ivan Stambolic.
