14/06/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 14/06/04
Buoyed by an unexpectedly strong second-place finish in Sunday's (13 June) presidential vote in Serbia, Democratic Party candidate Boris Tadic has called for the reformist bloc to unite behind him in the run-off, two weeks from now.
He will face Tomislav Nikolic of the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party -- whose leader, Vojislav Seselj, is currently on trial in The Hague.
"This is the time to mobilise all democratic forces of this country," Tadic said, pledging to "secure political stability, economic prosperity and a European future".
Preliminary results from the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy indicate that Nikolic won 30.1 per cent of the vote, or 940,000 votes, Tadic took 27.3 per cent, or 850,000 votes, while millionaire Bogoljub Karic finished third with 16.74 per cent.
Ruling coalition candidate Dragan Marsicanin pulled in only 12.69 per cent.
The remaining 11 candidates each won less than five per cent.
Turnout was 3.1 million, or 47.7 per cent.
Analysts predict Tadic would likely pick up the lion's share of support from the defeated candidates.
"I would be more nervous if I were Nikolic's campaign manager than Tadic's," one European envoy told Reuters.
"Tadic is a rising star.
It looks better than we expected."
Reuters also quotes pollster Srbobran Brankovic as saying Tadic's showing had put a "strong wind in his sails" and boosted his chances.
A split among Serbia's reformists aided Nikolic's first-place finish.
They were unable to find a common candidate who would have almost certainly won more votes than him.
The Serbian Radical Party is still led by people who participated in government during the rule of Slobodan Milosevic.
Diplomats have warned that an ultranationalist victory could harm ties with the West and affect foreign investment.
During the campaign, Nikolic toned down his rhetoric, promising that he is ready to co-operate with all the world's major states.
He even visited Belgrade's mosque.
But he continues to say he will not hand over war crimes indictees to The Hague tribunal -- a key precondition for closer links to the EU.
Marsicanin's fourth-place finish, meanwhile, dealt a serious blow to the ruling coalition led by conservative Vojislav Kostunica.
Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, who heads ruling coalition partner G-17 Plus, predicted the minority government may not last.
"We are disappointed with these results.
There are only two possibilities ...
there will either be a government reshuffle or new elections," Labus said, adding that his party could not participate in a coalition whose presidential candidate received less than 14 per cent of the vote.
Tadic said he will hold talks with the leaders of several parties in a bid to unite them around a single platform focusing on stability, economic recovery, and membership in the EU.
The outcome of the run-off, analysts say, could depend heavily on whether he is successful.
Gaining the support of Karic, the third-place finisher, could also be key.
A huge majority of Serbs voted for closer ties with Europe, Tadic said, cautioning that the battle was not yet won.
"I ran for president to stop the radicalisation of Serbia.
I do believe (it) was a very dangerous trend," he told reporters.
"This radicalisation was stopped today, but not completely."
