14/06/2004
(The Guardian, Office of the High Representative - 14/06/04;
FENA, VOA - 13/06/04;
Reuters, Radio B92, CNN, The New York Times - 12/06/04)
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte has voiced confidence that Radovan Karadzic will soon be handed over to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The former Bosnian Serb leader, who tops The Hague-based tribunal's list of most wanted war crimes suspects, has been on the run since 1996.
"We have good reasons to believe that Radovan Karadzic will be extradited by 29 June," del Ponte told the Swiss news agency ATS late on Friday (11 June).
In 1995, the ICTY issued a joint indictment against Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, charging them with war crimes for their alleged roles in various atrocities during the 1992-1995 war in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Both have been accused of genocide, including for the 1995 Srebrenica massacre.
Karadzic went into hiding in 1996 and has managed to evade justice despite numerous SFOR attempts to capture him.
BiH is hoping to get an invitation to join NATO's Partnership for Peace programme during the Alliance's summit in Istanbul later this month, but has been warned that a decision to that effect may be delayed.
During del Ponte's visit to BiH less than two weeks ago, RS President Dragan Cavic promised that Bosnian Serb authorities would step up their efforts to detain indictees, suggesting there would be concrete results before the end of June.
Del Ponte's statement on Friday came hours after RS authorities admitted in a report for the first time that Bosnian Serb security forces killed up to 8,000 Muslim boys and men in Srebrenica in 1995.
A seven-member commission, including one international and one Bosnian Muslim member, wrote the report.
Welcoming the RS government's official acknowledgement of the crimes, High Representative Paddy Ashdown said in a letter to the EU and NATO that the move signals "a growing willingness to face up to the issue of responsibility for Srebrenica, and to achieve justice for the victims".
But he also warned RS authorities that there is much more they must do to improve their co-operation with the ICTY.
