18/06/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 18/06/04
After numerous modifications, a new energy law ending Serbia's three-year ban on gasoline imports is ready to for parliament.
Among other changes, the measure would introduce a license for entrepreneurs in the energy sector, especially those involved in the refining and sale of oil derivatives.
Although the import ban would be lifted, some restrictions will remain.
Only companies that own gasoline stations will be allowed to import.
Prior to the ban, all companies registered for import-export activities had the right to import gasoline.
"The basic elements of a system for getting a license depend, before all else, on the infrastructure the companies possess, with the investment cycle also being a very vital element for any firm that wishes to become an importer of crude oil derivatives on our market," Assistant Minister of Mining and Energy Slobodan Sokolovic said, outlining the proposed changes.
The Energy Council of the Chamber of Commerce of Serbia has welcomed the new legislation, saying it will finally establish price competition among gasoline companies.
"It is true that all international companies are present in Serbia in gasoline retail, however, in terms of supplying retail outlets, wholesaling and supply of crude oil, thus far this market has not been open to the extent that it could be, with a view to increasing competition," said the Council's Ljubinko Savic.
According to analysts, it is almost certain that the right to import gasoline will soon be given to Russia's Lukoil, Austria's OMV, Greece's Helenikpetroleum, the multinational chain Avia and Serbia's Nafta AD.
Before 2001, the import and domestic sale of gasoline was one of the most profitable businesses in Serbia.
Then the Energy Decree was adopted, allowing the import of crude oil but not of finished derivatives.
At the time, the government said such a decree was necessary to prevent the smuggling of gasoline, which it said was damaging Serbia's gasoline industry.
