15/06/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 15/06/04
Under new rules adopted by parliament, Macedonia's local elections on 17 October will be considered valid if one-third of voters in each municipality take part. 
The election campaign will span 20 days and bilingual voting will be guaranteed in those municipalities where ethnic communities are represented by more than 20 per cent.
The minimum turnout has been lowered, and a mayoral candidate can now win in the first round as long as one third of the respective municipality turns out to vote. 
If that does not happen, the top two first-round candidates will face each other in a run-off. 
The period of campaigning has also been shortened from 30 to 20 days.
According to Justice Minister Ixhet Memeti, the measures are a European-style solution aimed at making it likelier that mayoral elections are decided during the first round.
The amendments to the local election laws stipulate that women should make up 30 per cent of the upper part of the lists of councilors. 
This provision provoked debate, with the opposition VMRO-DPMNE arguing that it was unnecessary.
"Representation of women by 30 per cent in the upper or lower parts of the lists of councilors should not be regulated by law," said party member Gjorgi Trendafilov. 
"Parties should regulate this in their statutes."
Opposition MPs also opposed lowering the minimum turnout requirement. 
They say the move is designed to force elections to succeed in conditions where citizens are indifferent about casting their ballots.
"Given the bad economic situation in Macedonia, that will reach a climax in autumn," said Koce Trajanovski, co-ordinator of the VMRO-DPMNE parliamentary group. 
"I think it is the main motivation for shortening the threshold."
However, the ruling Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) argues that such a solution is in line with the international standards. 
The turnout threshold does not prevent citizens from turning out to vote, said SDSM parliamentarian Karolina Ristova. 
Another SDSM member, Boris Kondarko, dismissed the opposition's charges.
"Everybody tries to get as many votes as possible in an election," says Kondarko, "so it is completely legitimate and democratic for the one who wins more votes to win an election. 
In this way turnout is stimulated because everybody vies for better election results."
