14/06/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 14/06/04
Albanians spend about 212m euros annually on tobacco, and the country has one of the highest percentages of smokers in Europe.
Albanian Minister of Health Leonard Solis presented these figures at the UN's "World No Tobacco Day" on 31 May.
Solis said smoking is on the rise, especially among females ages 13 to 15.
"During the past years we have noticed a general increment of smokers among our population.
In the 1990s, the level of tobacco consumption was only 20 per cent, while at the moment, Albania is listed as the second country among other European states in terms of the high level of smokers," Solis said.
He urged better legislation to help reduce tobacco consumption and its impact on people's health.
Officials with the Albanian Public Health Institute are waiting for the government to pass a bill, to restrict smoking in public places.
According to statistics, more than 60 per cent of the Albanian population smoke.
Of that figure, 17 per cent are children ages 13 to 15.
A study by the Albanian Ministry of Health, the WHO and an American research centre in Atlanta includes interviews with pupils in elementary school and the early grades of high school.
Authorities said the results were "alarming".
The study found that children smoke even when aware of the risks, at first imitating adults and later continuing to consume tobacco.
Most want to quit, but find it difficult to overcome the habit.
An anti-smoking campaign with the slogan "Quit Smoking and Win" drew considerable interest in Albania.
Participants in the campaign had the chance to sign up for an international lottery in Helsinki, Finland, which offers different prizes.
Studies have shown that every year in Europe nearly 1.2 million people die due to the effects of long-term smoking.
Of this number, 700,000 are in countries from Central and Eastern Europe, where tobacco consumption is high.
The WHO organised "World No Tobacco Day" with the aim of emphasising connections between smoking and poverty.
The UN organisation says that people from the poorest countries of the world are the most likely to be exposed to smoking and to suffer from diseases caused by smoking.
"Poor people spend more money for tobacco than on fulfilling other needs like food, medical care or education," concluded a report issued by WHO.
