21/08/2007
Turkey responded sharply to remarks by the newly appointed Cypriot foreign minister, Erato Kozakou Marcoullis, who said the key to the Cyprus issue is in the hands of the Turkish military and not the country's political leaders.
In a statement, the Turkish Foreign Ministry said Marcoullis did not have the right to "state opinions and make evaluations" about domestic issues in Turkey, nor to criticise the Turkish armed forces.
For her part, Marcoullis said she would "continue to speak the language of truth" regarding the issue.
The head of the OSCE mission to Macedonia, Ambassador Giorgio Radicati, met on Tuesday (August 14th) with the country's local self-government minister, Abdiraman Memeti.
He pledged continued OSCE support for the decentralisation process.
Germany's ambassador to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Michael Schmunk, said the most important objective in constitutional reform should be the creation of one nation.
All citizens should identify with BiH regardless of where they live, he said.
Other goals include establishing a country that fits into the EU and making the state more efficient, Schmunk added.
The new US ambassador to Serbia, Cameron Munter, took up his duties on Wednesday (August 15th).
"Our mission is to work towards a Serbia that is prosperous, secure, democratic and fully integrated within Euro-Atlantic institutions," Munter said.
"We are committed to helping Serbia become a part of a Europe whole, free and at peace."
Alexandra Papadopoulos is the new Greek ambassador to Macedonia.
She presented her credentials to Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki on Wednesday (August 15th).
She replaces Dora Grosomanidou, who was recalled to Athens after telling the Financial Times that Greece "has to face the new reality" regarding its name dispute with Macedonia.
Croatian Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor met on Friday (August 10th) with retired Catholic Archbishop of Washington, Cardinal Thedore McCarrick.
They discussed the situation of Croats living in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Kosor said Croatia supports the political system in BiH and the recognition of three constituent peoples.
McCarrick is scheduled to pay a visit to BiH, where he will meet local, state and religious officials.
(Various sources – 14/08/07-21/08/07)
