10/06/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 10/06/04
Nikola Radovanovic is the first Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) defence minister to have visited NATO headquarters in Brussels. 
He made two visits to the Alliance's headquarters last month, seeking to strengthen his country's bid to join NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme.
Radovanovic made a speech to the North Atlantic Council (NAC), and later expressed optimism concerning his discussions with NATO officials.
"I am satisfied . 
we had talks with officials that are the most important for NATO, PfP and transfer of authority for the peace stabilisation mission in BiH from NATO to the EU," Radavanovic said. 
"The officials commended our current defence reform. 
They expressed particular satisfaction with the fact that some parts of the reform are being fulfilled on a higher level and better than expected."
He cautioned, however, that arresting war crimes indictee Radovan Karadzic remains the major precondition for PfP membership.
Soon after Radovanovic's talks in Brussels, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and the NAC ambassadors visited Sarajevo. 
They stressed that the likelihood of a positive decision on BiH membership in the PfP at this month's NATO summit in Istanbul are "almost none" as long as the Bosnian Serb war leader remains at large. 
However, de Hoop Scheffer also used the opportunity to commend BiH for the progress made in defence reform.
The reform is one of the technical preconditions for PfP membership. 
Under the Dayton Peace Agreement signed in 1995, BiH's two entities -- the Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska -- each have their own armed forces and ministries of defence. 
As a result of implementing defence reforms, a joint, state-level defence ministry has been established, and the BiH armed forces have a joint staff and operational command.
On Wednesday, the BiH presidency approved the appointments of three generals who will hold key positions in the BiH armed forces. 
Sifet Podzic has been appointed head of the joint staff, Slavko Puljic as deputy head of the joint operational staff and Vlado Dzoic as head of the operational command of the BiH military. 
All three recently passed SFOR's vetting procedure and have been approved by the BiH Parliament.
