08/06/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 08/06/04
NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer visited the Adriatic Charter countries -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- last month as part of a Balkan tour ahead of the upcoming NATO summit in Istanbul.
In Tirana, he called on Albania to boost the implementation of reforms, a crucial requirement for integration into Euro-Atlantic structures.
"The key elements for this [integration] are the reforms in the defence field and in what I want to call the values of the society," de Hoop Scheffer told reporters after talks with Albanian President Alfred Moisiu and Prime Minister Fatos Nano.
He said the Albanian government is committed to the reform process and considers the ongoing fight against organised crime and corruption very important.
"The government understood the comments of the NATO Secretary General," Nano said after the meeting.
"The Istanbul summit will recognise the progress and the aim to enlarge the Alliance in the future with countries from the Balkans."
Moisiu praised NATO's presence in Southeast Europe, emphasising its role in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and Macedonia.
De Hoop Scheffer said Albania has made progress in reforming its military, saying, "Albania's aim for NATO integration is legitimate and needs to be supported." He commended Albania's participation in peacekeeping operations, which he described as "a huge responsibility".
During a meeting with Defence Minister Pandeli Majko, de Hoop Scheffer said he appreciated the military's co-operation with Euro-Atlantic structures.
Majko, meanwhile, confirmed that Albania will be an active member of the Partnership for Peace initiative.
"The participation of the Albanian military in operations led by NATO will have a priority in the future," he said.
De Hoop Scheffer urged the Adriatic Charter members to work together.
"I would like to encourage Albania, Croatia and Macedonia to co-operate with each other, not only for NATO integration but also for improving the stability and security in the region," he said.
