04/06/2004
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 04/06/04
On Sunday (6 June), Romanians will go to the polls to elect mayors as well as local and county councillors. 
This year, every major political party is offering high-profile candidates, a clear sign that interest in these once-neglected elections has soared.
Senators and deputies from the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the opposition have hit the campaign trail. 
Even cabinet members, including the interior and external affairs ministers, are at work trying to convince voters that they can fix the potholes, round up the country's stray dogs, and upgrade old and inefficient heating systems.
"Controlling some continuously increasing financial and political resources is the main reason" for the surge of interest, says Cristian Parvulescu, president of the Pro-Democratic Association.
Since the country hopes to enter the EU in 2007, authorities must meet requirements from Brussels concerning, among other things, financial decentralisation. 
The process, already under way, will be accelerated next year. 
At that time, 50 per cent of funds from the revenue tax will remain within local communities, according to Finance Ministry State Secretary Gheorghe Gherghina. 
Currently, the entire amount goes to the central state budget.
In Bucharest, the changes will double the municipal council's budget, while other cities' budgets will increase by at least 25 per cent. 
Even in small towns and rural areas, decentralisation will bring more money for local projects. 
So far this year, the revenue tax collected in Romania has totalled about 600m euros.
Authorities announced similar decisions could be implemented soon regarding the VAT and excise taxes. 
"These changes will allow us to make budgetary prognosis for longer periods and to take responsibility for bigger infrastructure investments," says Cristian Anghel, the mayor of Baia Mare, a city in northwest Romania.
Brussels is providing additional funds. 
EU-financed pre-accession and the post-accession programmes financed by the EU, such as ISPA, SAPARD and PHARE, will bring local communities about 300m euros this year.
Another advantage for the new local authorities is the possibility of getting loans, directly from banks or through municipal bonds. 
Continued upgrades to Romania's financial rating have made it easier for local councils to borrow money from the external markets.
Last but not least, those controlling the local administration will be able to exercise influence on the parliamentary and presidential elections in November.
More than 3,100 mayors, 34,000 local councillors and 1,400 county councillors will be elected Monday by about 16 million voters. 
Opinion polls show that PSD is the front-runner, followed by the National Liberal Party, the Democratic Party, the Greater Romania Party, the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians and the Humanistic Party.
