09/06/2004
(EurActiv - 09/06/04; BBC, Reuters, BNN, Novinite, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 08/06/04; EUobserver - 07/06/04)
Bulgaria could complete its accession talks within weeks and is on track to meet its January 2007 entry target, EU Enlargement Commissioner Guenter Verheugen said Tuesday (8 June).
"Preparations are far from being complete, but everything is on track," Verheugen said at a press conference in Sofia, wrapping up a two-day visit. 
"Everyone can be assured Bulgaria will be a full, equal and responsible member of the EU by January 2007."
Last week, Bulgaria provisionally closed the Agriculture, Regional Policy and Co-ordination, and Financial and Budgetary Provisions negotiating chapters. 
The Competition and Miscellaneous chapters are the only ones left on the agenda.
On Tuesday, the European Commission (EC) issued a common position on the Competition chapter, giving the green light for its provisional closure. 
The Miscellaneous chapter covers issues such as the Schengen Agreement and cash flow provisions.
Both are likely to be closed during the EU foreign ministers' meeting in Luxembourg on 15 June, according to Brussels officials.
While commending Bulgaria for its progress in entry talks, Verheugen urged the country to work harder against organised crime and corruption, which he said keep foreign investors away and impede economic development.
"I have spoken with many potential investors and some of these investors are hesitant ... 
to do business in Bulgaria because they feel that the fight against corruption and crime could be more convincing," he said.
Urging the Bulgarian government to stay firm on the course of reform, Verheugen emphasised the need for improvements in the judiciary and public administration.
In October, the EC is expected to issue a progress report, its final position on Bulgaria's readiness to enter the EU on 1 January 2007.
A favourable assessment would open the door for signing the accession treaty in the spring of 2005. 
It would then have to be ratified by all EU member states. 
Verheugen anticipates no problems in the process, as none of the 25 member countries has expressed any objections to Bulgaria's accession.
The EU wants Bulgaria to join the Union with Romania, which is slightly behind in its entry negotiations.
"Romania should not be afraid of being left behind," Verheugen said. 
"We want to keep Bulgaria and Romania together in this process and I believe this is possible." The entry of the two Balkan countries will mark the completion of the fifth EU enlargement.
On Tuesday, Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov awarded Verheugen the country's highest order -- the Stara Planina (Balkan Range), First Class -- for his co-operation and exceptional contribution to the successful completion of Bulgaria's EU accession negotiations.
"Looking back at the negotiations, we can see why Mr Verheugen is known as 'Mr Enlargement': it was in his time that the negotiations began, it is thanks to his important efforts that we have got such a good schedule of negotiations, and finally, with his decisive support we are on the way to completing them," the BBC quoted Parvanov as saying.
