10/06/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 10/06/04
The military manoeuvres carried out by the armies of Serbia-Montenegro and Romania on 29 May were the first the Serbia-Montenegro Army has carried out with a NATO member.
Belgrade authorities said the exercise, conducted according to NATO standards, was part of preparations for potential admission to NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme.
The manoeuvres took place at the Djerdap steam power plant, on the Serbian-Romanian border.
The armies' task was to join forces in preventing the incursion of terrorist units.
Around 1,350 soldiers and policemen, 300 non-combat and 30 combat vehicles, as well as several airplanes, helicopters and ships were involved in the exercise.
The defence ministers of Serbia-Montenegro and Romania said they were satisfied with the results and with the co-operation between the two armies.
According to Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic, the goal of the exercise -- fighting terrorists -- is in line with the new Serbia-Montenegro defence strategy.
That strategy was put in place on 26 May, when the Supreme Defence Council adopted a document outlining basic defence policy.
According to Davinic, the document states that world or regional wars no longer threaten Serbia-Montenegro, and that the main security issue facing the country is terrorism.
All the neighbouring countries with which Serbia-Montenegro waged war in the 1990s are now defined as friendly countries, with which co-operation should be improved.
Davinic added that since Romania was admitted to NATO in April, it could potentially help Serbia-Montenegro in joining the PfP.
Serbia-Montenegro Army Chief of Staff Branko Krga said that the joint military exercise was not an expression of militarism, but rather aimed to preserve peace in the region.
He said the participation of the Serbia-Montenegro Army and police forces was part of the country's defence reform efforts and in line with its goal of accessing European and NATO integration processes.
Specifically, the exercise reflects Serbia-Montenegro's desire to join PfP and eventually NATO, Davinic said.
Serbia-Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina are the only two European countries that are not involved in a European or NATO integration process.
Romanian Defence Minister Ioan Mircea Pascu said he expected military co-operation between the two countries to continue and develop further.
