07/06/2004
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 07/06/04
There was no cause for celebration on Sunday (6 June) at the headquarters of the Social Democrat Party (PSD) in Bucharest. 
PSD candidate, Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana, won half as many votes as his opponent, incumbent Bucharest Mayor Traian Basescu. 
Geoana, one of the most popular Romanian politicians, had launched a battle hoping to defeat the "trouble-making" Basescu, leader of the opposition Democrat Party.
Basescu was nominated on behalf of an alliance established with the liberals. 
According to exit polls, he won 60 per cent of the votes, while Geoana took 29 per cent. 
The liberal democrat opposition, Justice and Truth, won four of the six district administrations in Bucharest, according to polls, but some may require a second round of voting.
Basescu said that the preliminary results show "the alliance's great potential of winning the general elections in November". 
Alliance co-president Theodor Stolojan, a candidate in the presidential elections, demanded that the government "co-operate with the City Hall of Bucharest".
For the ruling party, the results could be a worrisome sign of things to come. 
Despite an aggressive and expensive campaign, the PSD failed in its attempt to take control of the big cities.
"I am a bit disappointed, but not discouraged," said Geoana on Sunday evening. 
He announced Monday that he would return to his office as minister of foreign affairs. 
Prime Minister Adrian Nastase promised that the government would support the newly elected local authorities.
In Cluj, meanwhile, the PSD candidate was another popular member of the government, Domestic Affairs Minister Ioan Rus. 
Supported by the Hungarian minority party, he took 39 per cent of the votes. 
The Justice and Truth candidate, Emil Boc, was right behind with 37 per cent. 
The candidate of the nationalist party, incumbent Mayor Gheorghe Funar, did poorly, winning only 20 per cent. 
Funar will not join the second round to be held in two weeks. 
Many analysts expect his supporters will now back Boc.
In Timisoara, Mayor Gheorghe Ciuhandu of the Christian Democrats won the first round with 67 per cent. 
The ruling party kept its mandates in Iassy and Constanta.
Monday morning, the preliminary results were not presented as scheduled. 
Estimates show that the Socialists won most of the rural mandates. 
These areas are still under control of the old structures, and the independent mass media has little access.
Sunday's elections were also a disappointment for the Christian Democrats. 
Except for the Timosoara mayoral vote, the party -- which has been out of parliament since 2000 -- had results ranging from 1 per cent to 2 per cent.
"The Romanian political scope is not complete," said Jonathan Scheele, the representative of the European Commission in Bucharest. 
He described the absence of the Christian Democrats from parliament as "very unusual".
