03/06/2004
By Valentin Nesovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 03/06/04
The Macedonian Parliament voted in a new government Wednesday (2 June) that will be led by the outgoing interior minister, Hari Kostov. 
After three days of intense debate, 68 deputies backed Kostov and 12 voted against him. 
The post of prime minister was left vacant in March, following Branko Crvenkovski's victory in the presidential elections.
An economist and former banker, Kostov is not a member of any political party, though he is seen as close to Crvenkovski's Social Democrats. 
Except for appointing Siljan Avramovski to succeed him as interior minister, Kostov has made no changes in the composition of the cabinet.
In his inaugural address, he outlined the government's priorities: full implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, judicial reform, decentralisation of authority, intensifying the fight against organised crime, and attracting foreign investments. 
More generally, he said, the government is committed to reforms that will lead Macedonia towards joining Euro-Atlantic structures.
"One cannot expect spectacular results in the short term," Kostov said, referring to the economy. 
"It is implementation of political and economic reforms introduced by the government that can integrate Macedonia into the European family and NATO."
He also announced that a new law on territorial division and a set of laws on decentralisation -- the final obligation of the Ohrid Agreement -- would be submitted this month. 
A judicial reform strategy would be in operation within three months, he added. 
Pledging to step up anti-corruption efforts, Kostov said that officials would be held accountable if they break the law or fail to perform their duties honestly and responsibly.
Kostov is expected to revive and develop the economy and the country's industrial sector. 
Priorities include concluding a reform arrangement with the IMF and creating more favourable conditions for foreign investors, he said.
Macedonia is returning to a normal course, Kostov said, adding that citizens are concerned primarily with economic issues and living standards.
