03/06/2004
(UN, Reuters, UPI, Cyprus News Agency, Anadolu Agency, Macedonian Press Agency - 02/06/04)
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan recommended Wednesday (2 June) a six-month extension of the UN peacekeeping force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), whose mandate expires this month.
The UN chief also pledged to review the mission's mandate within three months and propose any necessary adjustments or restructuring.
Created under a UN Security Council resolution in March 1964, UNFICYP monitors the buffer zone between the Turkish Cypriot north and the Greek Cypriot south, and is charged with maintaining the ceasefire on the divided island.
It is also tasked with restoring normal conditions and humanitarian functions, including travel from one side to the other.
While noting that during the past six months the situation along the buffer zone has been generally stable, with people from both sides continuing to pass regularly through the crossing points, the UN chief said he believes UNFICYP is still needed.
"I remain convinced that, in the absence of a comprehensive settlement, the presence of UNFICYP on the island continues to be necessary for the maintenance of the ceasefire," Annan said in a report to the Security Council.
Months of UN-sponsored negotiations based on Annan's reunification plan for Cyprus ended in failure on 24 April, when Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected the blueprint, while the majority of Turkish Cypriots approved it.
As a result, only the Greek Cypriot south joined the EU on 1 May.
In a separate report on his mission of good offices in Cyprus, also released Wednesday, Annan said that while the Greek Cypriot "no" vote had grounded his plan, it remained the only foreseeable basis for resolving the situation.
A solution, the UN chief said, "obviously requires more than a comprehensive and carefully balanced peace plan, it also needs bold and determined political leadership on both sides in the island, as well as in Greece and Turkey, all in place at the same time, ready to negotiate with determination and to convince their people of the need to compromise".
Praising the Turkish Cypriots and Turkey for backing the reunification plan, Annan called for an end to the isolation of the north.
"I would hope the members of the Council can give a strong lead to all states to co-operate both bilaterally and in international bodies to eliminate unnecessary restrictions and barriers that have the effect of isolating the Turkish Cypriots and impeding their development," Reuters quoted the UN chief as saying.
But he ruled out any moves towards the recognition or assisting the secession of the Turkish Cypriot state, saying that it would run counter to Security Council resolutions.
Currently, only Turkey recognises the so-called "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus".
Annan was particularly critical of Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos, who in a broadcast speech on 7 April called for a rejection of the plan.
"I do not believe the speech accurately reflected the contents of the plan on a range of issues.
Nor do I accept the argument in the speech, repeated thereafter, that when the plan was finalised, Turkey's concerns were satisfied and Greek Cypriot concerns largely ignored," the Cyprus News Agency quoted Annan's report as reading.
Acknowledging that the recent failure of long efforts to reach a settlement has become "a source of sadness and confusion", Annan said he believes Cypriots would make further efforts towards a solution.
"I am confident they will continue these efforts.
Indeed, they must.
The prospects for the reunification of their country now rest primarily in their hands," Annan said.
