01/06/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 01/06/04
Although the arrest of the prime suspect in the murder of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic had threatened to eclipse the 13 June election, public attention has once again turned to the presidential candidates.
The minimum required turnout of 50 per cent has been abolished, and Serbia should now finally elect a president, after three failed attempts.
The new leader of the Democratic Party, Boris Tadic, launched his campaign in the southern Serbian town of Prokuplje, Djindjic's birthplace.
Before a group of 3,000 supporters, Tadic said Serbia needs policies that bring peace and security to everyone, and that the problems of Serbs in Kosovo must be addressed as soon as possible.
Polls show that support for Tadic is slowly increasing.
Dragan Marsicanin, meanwhile, resigned as economy minister to run as the candidate of the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS).
"Voters will realise the importance of a democratic option which supports the establishment of law in the state.
We are trying to explain our policies which remain unchanged, policies which remain between all extremes, the fact that we are located in the complete and total centre and between all radical political options," Marsicanin said as he launched his campaign.
Many analysts, however, have questioned Marsicanin's decision to run.
They argue that unlike Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, who leads the DSS, Marsicanin does not enjoy substantial voter support.
The candidate of the Serbian Radical Party, Tomislav Nikolic, began his campaign in Novi Sad, vowing to topple the current government.
Meanwhile, Socialist Party of Serbia candidate Ivica Dacic launched his presidential bid with a visit to the village of Mirosina, near Nis.
One of Serbia's wealthiest citizens, Bogoljub Karic, is also in the race.
Representing the citizens' group "Putting Serbia to Work", Karic is wooing the Roma population.
In addition to eliminating the voter turnout threshold, the upcoming election will introduce another significant change.
For the first time, the right to vote will be extended to Serbian citizens living abroad.
