01/06/2004
(Office of the High Representative - 01/06/04; Reuters, Fena - 31/05/04)
Assuring UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte of their political will to co-operate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Bosnian Serb authorities have promised to step up efforts to arrest war crimes indictees.
Dragan Cavic, the president of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS), said concrete results would be seen before the end of June.
"[We have] entered a serious phase of tracking and detaining war crimes suspects," Cavic told reporters after a meeting between RS officials and del Ponte in Banja Luka on Monday (31 May). 
"We can no longer continue jeopardising the vital functions of RS and its position by not fulfilling the commitments that come from the law on co-operation with The Hague tribunal."
The international community has frequently criticised RS for having failed to arrest a single war crimes suspect since the end of the 1992-1995 war.
Cavic's statement came less than a month before NATO's summit in Istanbul, where BiH is hoping to be invited to join the Alliance's Partnership for Peace programme.
But NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer has warned that the invitation might be postponed.
"It's difficult to predict, but ... 
at this moment the odds are not in favour of a decision at Istanbul," the NATO chief told reporters, after talks with BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic in Sarajevo last week.
According to NATO sources, the issue of war crimes suspects is the main reason for the uncertainty.
At a joint press conference with del Ponte, Cavic said RS and its institutions must demonstrate their readiness to co-operate with the tribunal by capturing indicted war crimes suspects.
"I know there is distrust about whether our intentions are genuine but in less than a month we can convince the international community there is operational readiness in RS for co-operation with The Hague tribunal," Cavic pledged, adding that the "overall matter of war crimes must exit the sphere of politics".
Del Ponte said that if the political will demonstrated by RS officials she met with Monday is applied by all government institutions, then there would be improvements in all aspects of co-operation with the ICTY.
"Now I'm expecting results. 
Co-operation with the RS in the past year was so difficult, so difficult that we even identified the RS as a safe haven for fugitives," the UN prosecutor said, voicing hope that top war crimes indictee Radovan Karadzic would be arrested soon.
Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, have been on the run since 1996.
During her visit to Banja Luka, del Ponte met also with RS Prime Minister Dragan Mikerevic, Vice President Ivan Tomljenovic, RS National Assembly Speaker Dragan Kalinic, Interior Minister Zoran Deric, Justice Minister Suad Filipovic and Defence Minister Milovan Stankovic. 
BiH Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic attended some of the meetings.
As part of her four-day trip to the Balkans, del Ponte also plans to visit Croatia.
