02/06/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 02/06/04
Tour operators in Albania have joined together in an effort to put the country on the list of destinations for foreign tourists. 
The promotional activity was organised in Tirana in mid-May and was attended by hotel and tourism industry representatives, as well as by foreign citizens and diplomats residing in Albania.
"The reason for the international tourists to come and visit Albania is that it is a new and interesting destination offering a lot of historical attractions, a beautiful landscape, a Mediterranean climate, and a rich and tasty cuisine," reads an advertisement prepared for the campaign. 
To illustrate what Albania offers, a photo exhibition was shown and live music was played.
The travel agencies also organised well-priced tours for foreigners in the main Albanian cities -- Tirana, Shkodra, Durres, Berat, Vlora, Saranda, Butrint and Gjirokastra.
Nearly 37 tour operators, hotels and travel agencies from all over Albania introduced their travel packages to about 300 foreign tourists. 
Organisers also used the opportunity to exchange information about the services they offer. 
Participants discussed the main challenges facing Albanian tourism: improving the country's image, boosting marketing and promotion, developing infrastructure, securing investments and building co-operation.
The Enterprise Development and Export Markets initiated the event, with support from USAID.
Tourism in Albania is still in its infancy. 
For decades, the country was ruled by a communist regime that did not allow the industry to become established. 
However, Albania offers a wealth of attractions, including sandy white Mediterranean beaches, rocky mountains, fertile plains, lakes, natural monuments, and remote, pristine areas. 
Ruins and archaeological treasures reflect a rich history dating back to the Illyrians. 
The country's name, "Shqiperia" in Albanian, means Land of Eagles.
According to Albanian Tourism Minister Bakshim Fino, a high-level delegation from Greece is expected to visit Tirana as part of the push to develop the tourism industry. 
Greek Tourism Minister Dimitrios Avramopoulos will lead the group.
"It is a good sign of strengthened Albania-Greek relations in the field of tourism," Fino says.
