02/06/2004
(Standartnews, Sega, Online.bg - 02/06/04; Reuters, BNN, Novinite, Mediapool, Dnevnik, BNT, bTV, Makfax, Ministry of Interior - 01/06/04)
Bulgaria has busted a major international counterfeiting ring, the country's interior ministry said Tuesday (1 June), announcing a large-scale police action targeting counterfeiters and distributors of fake documents and money. 
A total of 13 people have been detained so far. 
Police have seized large quantities of forged documents and counterfeit notes worth thousands of euros, preventing them from being smuggled into EU countries.
"This is one of the largest gangs operating in Europe," said Bulgarian Interior Ministry Chief Secretary General Boyko Borissov, who is in charge of the operation. 
He held a press conference Tuesday in Plovdiv.
About 360 police officers are involved in the ongoing operation, which is being conducted in co-operation with Europol and the US Secret Service and is being monitored by Bulgarian Prosecutor General Nikola Filchev.
During searches of at least 47 sites in Sofia, Plovdiv, Pazardjik, Stara Zagora and Haskovo, police seized 55,000 euros in counterfeit notes of 50,100, 200 and 500 euros.
The notes, particularly the 200 and 500-euro denominations, were of such a high quality that no banknote detector would recognise them as fake, Borissov said.
Police also confiscated fake Thomas Cook travel cheques and eurocheques, passports and IDs, visas for the United States, Greece, Canada and other countries, computers and software disks. 
In one of the locations police found drugs.
Ten of the suspects were arrested in Plovdiv, Bulgaria's second largest city. 
Three others were arrested in Sofia. 
During questioning, two of the detainees reportedly made full confessions, providing details about the counterfeiting and smuggling schemes employed by the gang.
Officials are promising more arrests, including some in other European countries, where the network has been distributing the fake money.
"There will be a follow-up in Europe over the next few days," said Europol official Maurizio Varanese.
The operation is the first in which a ring of counterfeiters and smugglers has been busted, rather than individual criminals and illegal printing shops, according to Plovdiv Appellate Prosecutor Rosen Dimov.
It is also the most massive operation of this kind conducted in Bulgaria to date, according to Interior Minister Georgi Petkanov, who believes it has dealt a serious blow to counterfeiters.
In the last year alone, Bulgaria has busted at least 14 illegal mints. 
The country, which hopes to join the EU in 2007, has pledged to step up measures against counterfeiters, said to be flooding Europe with bogus money.
A secret service representative noted Tuesday that as a result of the efficient work of the Bulgarian police, the country has been taken off the US blacklist of countries exporting counterfeit money.
