16/10/2007
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski met on Thursday (October 11th) with the Macedonian contingent that is participating in the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan.
The visit was on the occasion of Macedonia's Day of National Rebellion.
This is the third Macedonian contingent in the ISAF tasked with protection of the force's headquarters in Kabul.
Hungarian President Laszlo Solyom arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Monday (October 15th) for a two-day visit.
He met with presidency members Zeljko Komsic, Nebojsa Radmanovic and Haris Silajdzic, and with Council of Ministers Chairman Nikola Spiric.
"We are not happy that the law on police reform has not been adopted in BiH and that this will partially halt the possibility of meeting criteria for signing the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, but we in Hungary are confident, despite certain delays, that all processes in BiH will continue in the planned direction," Solyom said.
Croatian Defence Minister Berislav Roncevic and his Montenegrin counterpart, Boro Vucinic, signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Saturday (October 13th).
It provides for sharing experience in the organisation and management of national defence, training of military and civil personnel, and other areas.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Foreign Minister Sven Alkalaj left Monday (October 15th) for an official visit to Israel at the invitation of his Israeli counterpart, Tzipi Livni.
He will meet with President Shimon Peres and Minister of Agriculture Shalom Simchon.
Macedonian Parliament Speaker Ljubisa Georgievski paid a several-day visit to Serbia starting Thursday (October 11th), at the invitation of his Serbian counterpart, Oliver Dulic.
He met with President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
OSCE Secretary-General Marc Perrin de Brichambaut visited Belgrade on Thursday (October 11th).
He met with Serbian President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic and the president of the National Council for Co-operation with the ICTY, Rasim Ljajic.
Germany will continue to support Montenegro on its road to the EU, German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said on Tuesday (October 9th) after a meeting with his Montenegrin counterpart, Milan Rocen, in Berlin.
Steinmeier encouraged Montenegro to continue reforms, noting the rapid growth and progress in the country's economic development.
(Various sources 09/10/07-16/10/07)
