12/06/2006
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times – 12/06/06
Tackling the issues of constitutional reform, ICTY co-operation and police reform are imperatives for Bosnia and Herzegovina's future progress, says the top international envoy in the country, High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling, in an interview with Southeast European Times correspondent Antonio Prlenda.
Southeast European Times:
Is the fulfillment of constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) a precondition for the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) process with the EU?
High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling:
There is broad popular and political agreement that BiH needs constitutional reform in order to have more functional state structures -- the present system duplicates resources, is unnecessarily expensive and is markedly inefficient.
In the first instance, constitutional reform will help the government structure to serve citizens more efficiently.
It will also give the authorities the capacity they need in order to meet the requirements of EU integration.
Constitutional reform is not an SAA requirement as such, but it is imperative if BiH is to move further along the road of EU integration after completing the SAA negotiations -- hopefully by the end of this year -- and it is imperative if BiH is to have the kind of functional and efficient government structure that is the European norm and that most of its citizens want.
SETimes:
Do you believe that use of the Bonn Powers will be enough to press politicians in the Republika Srpska (RS) for ultimate co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)?
Schwarz-Schilling:
Co-operation with the ICTY is a sine qua non of progress in the Western Balkans.
The EU has been absolutely clear that failure to co-operate with the ICTY will be taken as clear grounds for suspending the integration process -- as we have seen in the case of Serbia.
It is essential that we do not view the ICTY process as a question of compulsion -- it is a matter of justice, of law, of establishing the truth through judicial process.
Increasingly, I believe, RS politicians understand this.
I have made it clear that ICTY co-operation is an area where I reserve the right to use the Bonn Powers, and I will do so wherever and whenever I believe this to be necessary.
SETimes:
What if the representatives of the RS request independence?
Schwarz-Schilling:
RS is an integral part of BiH, a fact enshrined in the Dayton Agreement signed by its neighboring countries and guaranteed by the international community.
SETimes:
Do you find that prompt and efficient implementation of police reform is possible in an election year in BiH?
Schwarz-Schilling:
With every single reform we have to ask the basic question -- who does this benefit?
Well, there is absolutely no mystery as to who will benefit from police reform -- honest, law-abiding citizens who are fed up with corruption and crime and who want to travel visa-free to Europe and elsewhere.
And who will benefit if police reform is not implemented?
Corrupt politicians, compromised police officers, and criminals.
I served for 26 years in the German Parliament.
I fought countless elections, and I fought them successfully.
I cannot see that politicians in BiH can possibly lose support by proposing to voters the introduction of a system that will make their police more politically independent, more efficient and more accountable to the communities they serve.
And as I said in my speech to the BiH Parliament on 24 May -- be under no illusions:
Rejecting broadcasting reform or police reform will stop progress towards Europe.
Elections or no elections, this is not a good time to go slowly on reforms or to test the EU's patience.
SETimes:
How can the Free Trade Zone in the Western Balkans help BiH improve its competitiveness in the free market?
Schwarz-Schilling:
The free trade process has begun to create a recognisable economic community in Southeast Europe.
BiH is in the heart of a regional market of 55 million people -- that market is poised for take-off, and BiH can be a part of a new wave of prosperity.
We have already seen considerable progress in upgrading the business environment here -- investment is up;
interest rates are down;
following the successful introduction of VAT government revenue is up;
BiH still enjoys among the lowest inflation rates in the region -- and in mid-May, Moody's Investor Service upgraded the country's credit rating from B3 to B2 -- so we are becoming much more competitive.
Regional free trade is not about imposing a liberal trade regime on Southeast Europe;
it is about responding to the possibilities created by the successful liberalisation of domestic markets.
The BiH market is starting to respond positively to years of reform.
One of the things we have to do now is "re-brand" the country and persuade international investors that the economic and physical wasteland of a decade ago has been transformed into a viable commercial environment.
We are now beginning to do this.
BiH long ago ceased to be a byword for mayhem, and is increasingly being seen as a model of postwar recovery.
I believe that we have the capability of competing successfully with our neighbours in a vibrant regional market, and of going even further to become a competitive player in the global economy.
SETimes:
The local public in BiH criticised [former High Representative] Lord Paddy Ashdown for his co-operation with ruling nationalist parties in BiH.
What will be your practice?
Schwarz-Schilling:
Each of my predecessors was working in a different time, with different circumstances and different challenges.
Now we have reached a new phase of transition and ownership.
My job today, as high representative and EU special representative, must reflect this.
I made it clear on the day that I took up my duties that I have come to assist, advise and advocate.
I have kept that promise.
I will not take decisions for those who do not have the courage to take them;
I will not intervene every time the authorities fail to take up their responsibilities;
I will not do the jobs that the institutions and elected leaders of this country must do.
I should add that, while I will urge BiH politicians to do what their voters want them to do and start delivering reforms that will improve people's lives, I will also continue to urge the international community to recognise the huge progress that BiH has made.
This is a different country even from five years ago -- what it needs and deserves is the confidence of the international community;
it needs, and justifies on strict commercial criteria, investment;
it needs and deserves visa facilitation.
I will use my office whenever and wherever possible to advance the interests of this country in international circles.
