15/01/2008
Czech Republic Foreign Minister Karel Schwarzenberg told Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci during a meeting in Pristina on Monday (January 14th) that his country will "react to the declaration of Kosovo's independence in harmony with the other EU states".
Additionally, Schwarzenberg emphasised the importance of the EU's plan to send 1,800 civilian officials to Kosovo to replace the KFOR mission and said the Czech Republic will participate in the EU mission as it did with KFOR.
The foreign minister also met with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi and UNMIK deputy head Larry Rossin.
Italy does not have a policy for expelling illegal immigrants or immigrants suspected of criminal activities, Italian Foreign Minister Massimo d'Alema said on Wednesday (January 9th) during a meeting with his Romanian counterpart, Adrian Cioroianu in Bucharest.
The two officials signed a common declaration of co-operation between the countries, updating their April 1997 strategic partnership.
Russian President Vladimir Putin will visit Bulgaria on Thursday (January 17th) and Friday.
A series of important economic agreements are to be signed, including a contract to set up a company to build the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan arrived in Spain on Sunday (January 13th) for an official visit at the invitation of his Spanish counterpart, Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero.
Erdogan is to take part in the first Alliance of Civilisations forum on Tuesday and Wednesday.
More than 350 guests from 70 countries are expected to attend, including UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic was in Berlin on Thursday (January 10th) for talks with his German counterpart, Frank-Walter Steinmeier.
They agreed that quick signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between Serbia and the EU would be in everyone's best interest.
Steinmeier, however, stressed that endorsement of the accord depends on full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague.
Republika Srpska (RS) Parliament Speaker Igor Radojicic and his Serbian counterpart, Oliver Dulic, signed a parliamentary co-operation agreement on Wednesday (January 9th).
It covers co-operation in 13 areas, including education, pension insurance reform, economic affairs and European integration.
(Various sources--08/01/08-15/01/08)
