13/03/2006
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 13/03/2006
The fall of communism in Eastern Europe, followed by the dismantling of the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance in 1991, brought economic chaos and a collapse of trade flows for the countries in the former Soviet bloc.
By the mid-1990s, an increasing number of those countries had embarked on a transition from central planning to market systems, undertaking reforms aimed at facilitating their reintegration into the global economy.
Since 1995, trade in the post-communist East European economies, including the former Soviet Union, has grown at a faster pace than any other region in the world, says a World Bank report, noting that exports have tripled and imports have increased two and one-half times over that period.
One of the main findings of the study, released on 31 January, is that most of the countries in that region are better integrated into the global economy today than at any other time since the Russian Revolution.
The 440-page report, "From Disintegration to Reintegration:
Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union in International Trade", analyses trade developments in 27 transition countries since the collapse of communism.
The region includes eight new EU member states (the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia), seven Southeast European (SEE) countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Romania and Serbia Montenegro -- and the 12-nation Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
All these countries, except BiH, Serbia-Montenegro and eight of the CIS nations, are now members of the WTO.
Most of these countries are benefiting from their reintegration into the world trading system, say the authors of the report, while cautioning that national governments should step up domestic reforms to take full advantage of greater liberalisation.
Another key finding of the study is that the different nature and pace of reforms implemented by countries in the region has led to a sharp split.
"There is an emerging bipolarity in the region," Harry Broadman, World Bank Economic Advisor and the report's lead author, said as the study was released.
"One group tends toward trade with the advanced countries of Western Europe and enjoys relatively high incomes.
The other group is considerably poorer and is tending to pull back towards a Russia-centric sphere.
Most of its economies are still dominated by commodity trade, and they risk missing out on participating in the modern international division of labour."
The first group largely comprises the eight new EU member nations (EU-8) and the second those in the CIS.
Most of the seven SEE countries are viewed as being somewhere in between these two blocs, while aligning themselves with the former.
This situation is illustrated by the global pattern of merchandise export penetration for the SEE countries between 1993 and 2003.
The SEE exported more to the then 15-nation EU market than it did to the region's market.
As in the case of the CIS, however, the share of exports from the SEE countries to the Latin America and Caribbean markets increased substantially.
During the same 10-year period, SEE export shares in North America (the United States, Canada, and Mexico), South Asia and East Asia declined.
As for intraregional merchandise exports, the 1993-2003 period marked a major shift for the SEE countries -- a significant decline in their exports to the CIS and an increase in exports sold in the EU-8 countries.
In terms of the global pattern of merchandise import sourcing for the SEE countries, the group again falls somewhere in between the EU-8 and the CIS blocs.
The largest shares of global imports destined for the SEE countries were accounted for by EU-15 producers.
As for intraregional merchandise imports, the situation again changed significantly for the SEE economies between 1993 and 2003.
While in the earlier stage, most of their intraregional imports originated in the EU-8 market, by the end of the 10-year period, the SEE market itself had become the primary source.
Meanwhile, the share of SEE intraregional imports purchased from the CIS declined.
"Indeed, while the overall group of SEE countries is increasingly gravitating toward the Euro-centric pole, in fact they are doing so at different rates," the report says.
"Consequently, at this point, along some dimensions the SEE countries form a 'middle ground' between the two poles."
For example, Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania have adopted liberal trade policies, but have lagged behind in encouraging greater competition in domestic markets, strengthening governance and implementing other trade-related structural reforms.
The growth in their imports and exports has not been matched by an equally strong increase in productivity and national incomes, the World Bank experts note.
Other SEE countries, such as BiH, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro, still exhibit trade patterns more along the lines of CIS economies, they add.
According to the study, specific reform measures can stop and possibly reverse the two-bloc division of the region.
"Virtually all the countries in the Region still need to pursue further trade policy reforms, such as reducing tariffs, lowering disincentives to export, pursuing WTO accession, and rationalising the myriad of existing regional trade agreements," said Broadman.
"But the bigger and largely unfinished trade agenda concerns behind-the-border reforms.
Success here means unleashing domestic businesses to compete with one another, instituting strong incentives for governance, enhancing trade facilitation infrastructure, and opening up services to international trade and investment."
The trade policy measures the SEE governments need to implement in the short term, according to the Bank experts, include binding all tariffs at applied levels and eliminating remaining non-tariff barriers, as well as policies that create anti-export bias.
Other recommended actions, which need to be supported by donor technical assistance, are rationalisation, consolidation and modernisation of the existing 29 bilateral free trade agreements, as well as strengthening of regional co-operation in the area of trade and transport facilitation.
On the domestic front, the SEE governments are urged to implement a number of reforms, such as increasing the removal of economic and policy barriers to entry and exit;
strengthening competition policy agencies' competencies and resources;
ensuring that public procurement is transparent and open to foreign competition;
and improving judicial and legal institutions' capacity to protect property rights and enhance public administration reform to reduce corruption.
