15/02/2008
The Turkish government decided to open former oil fields in eastern Anatolia that were closed years ago due to high costs of extraction.
The decision was prompted by soaring oil prices in world markets.
Turkey can currently meet only 10% of its oil demand through local production and meets the rest of its consumption needs through imports worth around 27 billion euros annually.
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci asked Kosovo Auditor General Linda Casella to start an investigation into management of 100m euros by the three largest Kosovo companies -- Kosovo Energy Corporation, Post Telecom of Kosovo and Pristina International Airport.
Casella met with Thaci on Monday (February 11th), briefing him about public sector corruption.
Hotel owners in Croatia are asking that value added tax (VAT) rates on overnight stays be reduced from 10% to 6%, the Croatian Hotels' Association said on Tuesday (February 12th).
The hoteliers believe they are losing business because of comparatively high VAT rates.
Albania's Ministry of Economy and AlbInvest agency held a forum aimed at supporting business in the country on Tuesday (February 12th).
Representatives of the ministry, AlbInvest and international institutions participated in the event.
Bulgarian Euroins Insurance Group, a member of the Eurohold Bulgaria holding, became the first Bulgarian company to enter Macedonia's insurance market through the acquisition of 83% of Macedonia's Macosped Osiguranje in a deal worth 7m euros.
Macosped Osiguranje's name will be changed to Euroins Macedonia after the deal is final.
Central bank governors from Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria and Cyprus gathered in Thessaloniki on Monday (February 11th) to sign a memorandum of understanding on co-operation in the control of the banking sector in Southeast Europe.
The document aims to strengthen the capacities of the central financial institutions' supervisory activities in the region.
(Various sources – 08/02/08-15/02/08)
