18/12/2007
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis arrived in Moscow for a three-day visit on Monday (December 17th) in an effort to boost energy and military co-operation between the two countries.
Karamanlis' itinerary includes a meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Among other topics, they are expected to discuss Greece's plans to purchase 400 Russian tanks.
Turkey's President Abdullah Gul completed a visit to Kazakhstan on Saturday (December 15th).
Gul -- who visited Almaty to take part in the country's independence day celebrations -- met with his counterpart, Nursultan Nazarbayev, and expressed Turkey's interest in selling rocket air defence systems to Kazakhstan.
Russian President Vladimir Putin will travel to Bulgaria for an official visit on January 18th, Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin confirmed on Sunday (December 16th).
Talks are expected to focus on two main areas -- Kosovo's status and economic relations, including bilateral projects such as the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline and the construction of a second nuclear power plant near the Romanian border.
Romania's Supreme Defence Council is expected to convene Tuesday (December 18th) to discuss diplomatic relations with Moldova after the country declared two Romanian diplomats persona non grata and expelled them.
Official sources quoted by the Mediafax news agency on Sunday said Moldova accused the Romanians -- who returned to Romania on Thursday -- of actions incompatible with their diplomatic posts.
High Representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Miroslav Lajcak held a series of meetings with Serbian officials on Friday (December 14th), who assured him of the country's commitment to respecting the Dayton Peace Accord and the territorial integrity of BiH.
At a meeting with Serbian President Boris Tadic and Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic in Belgrade, Lajcak noted the progress BiH leaders had reached in their joint EU aspirations.
Kuwaiti Sheikh Nasser Al-Mohammad arrived on Wednesday (December 12th) for a three-day official visit to Albania.
At a meeting with Prime Minister Sali Berisha, al-Mohammad expressed Kuwait's interest in investing in Albanian infrastructure and tourism, and the two leaders signed six agreements on co-operation related to tourism, the economy and culture.
Turkey and Jordan are examples of the stability and the modernisation of the Middle East, Turkish President Abdullah Gul said on December 11th after meeting visiting Jordanian King Abdullah II.
Gul also announced that the countries have agreed to develop a joint political consultation mechanism to boost relations, co-operation and dialogue.
(Various sources 11/12/07-18/12/07)
