10/07/2007
US Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Daniel Fried said Sunday (July 8th) in Podgorica that Kosovo's independence is inevitable. 
Fried met with Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic and asserted to him that the US firmly supports all integration efforts of Montenegro, adding it is clear the country belongs to the EU family. 
Fried moved on to Prisitna later Sunday.
***
Macedonia's Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki departed on Monday (July 9th) on a working visit to the United States. 
Milososki is expected to have meetings with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, US National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley, Deputy Secretary of Defence Gordon R. 
England, and US parliamentarians and NGO representatives. 
Issues related to bilateral ties, Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic integration bid, the fight against international terrorism and the Kosovo status issue will dominate the agenda.
***
UNDP Associate Administrator Ad Melkert arrived Sunday (July 8th) on a two-day visit to Kosovo. 
He visited several UNDP beneficiaries and met with President Fatmir Sejdiu, Kosovo Assembly President Kole Berisha and Prime Minister Agim Ceku.
***
Bulgaria's Defence Minister Vesselin Bliznakov and his Serbian counterpart, Dragan Sutanovac, signed an agreement on bilateral military co-operation during Sutanovac's visit to Sofia on Monday (July 9th). 
Bliznakov reaffirmed his country's support for Serbia's active involvement in the NATO Partnership for Peace programme.
***
Croatian President Stjepan Mesic departed on three-day visit to Kazakhstan on Thursday (July 5th), at the invitation of Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev. 
Talks focused on possibilities for strengthening economic co-operation, and Nazarbayev expressed his country's readiness to export oil to Croatia and Western Europe. 
The two countries sealed an agreement on co-operation in the fight against organized crime, illegal drug trafficking, terrorism and other types of crime.
***
Montenegrin Minister of Foreign Affairs Milan Rocen was in Brussels on Friday (July 6th) where he signed an agreement with the European Commission (EC) on the settlement of the privileges and immunity of the EC delegation in Montenegro. 
The document was signed by EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and EC Commissioner for External Relations Benita Ferrero-Waldner. 
The agreement is a prerequisite to open the EC delegation office in Montenegro.
***
Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov and his German counterpart Horst Koehler voiced their hopes for a fast and positive settlement of the case of six Bulgarian medics who are on death row in Libya, in Sofia on July 3rd. 
The two met following Koehler's arrival on an official visit to Bulgaria, as part of his Balkan tour.
(Various sources 03/07/07-10/07/07)
