12/09/2007
Greece beat Croatia, 81-78 in the Group E qualifying round of the European Basketball Championships at Madrid Arena in Madrid, on Sunday (September 9th).
The game ended with Greece's Vassilis Spanoulis' three-pointer at the buzzer to clinch the win.
Spain and Russia lead Group E with seven points each, while Greece and Croatia have six each.
Israel and Portugal have five apiece.
A two-day conference of Southeast Europe's culture ministers opened on Monday (September 10th) in the Croatian town of Zadar.
The fourth edition of the gathering is being held under the theme of "A Bridge Towards a Shared Future".
The ministers will discuss projects for protection of Southeast Europe's cultural heritage.
The 11th Scene on Crossroad theatre festival opened in Plovdiv, Bulgaria, on Monday (September 10th).
The 13-day event, founded by Culture Minister Stafan Danailov, is expected to draw more than 100 actors and musicians.
The festival programme includes 23 theatre performances, book presentations and a theoretical conference on Bulgarian dramaturgy.
"The Hunting Party", starring Richard Gere and Terrence Howard, opens in theatres Friday (September 14th).
The film, based loosely on a true incident, tells the story of three journalists who travel to Bosnia and Herzegovina in an effort to root out fugitive war crimes indictee Radovan Karadzic.
Greek director Nikos Panagiotopoulos and co-screenwriter Michel Fais launched the filming of their new movie "Athens-Istanbul" on Sunday (September 9th) at the Apollon Theatre in Athens.
The film tells the story of a musician, a woman and a middle-aged man who travel together to Istanbul.
The cast includes Greek actors Dimitris Poulikakos, Alexia Kaltsiki and Lefteris Voyiatzis
The Risto Siskov Chamber Theatre Festival in Strumica, Macedonia, closes on Wednesday (September 12th).
The event included plays produced by theatres from Macedonia, Montenegro, Greece, Albania, Bulgaria, Russia, as well as one French-Croatian co-production.
About 40 domestic and foreign actors are competing for the actors' award.
Seven feature-length films by Turkish filmmaker Zeki Demirkubuz will be screened at New York's Walter Reade Movie Theater as part of a series jointly hosted by the Film Society of Lincoln Centre this month.
Demirkubuz, who is expected to attend the event, was chosen because he, "together with Nuri Bilge Ceylan, Yesim Ustaoglu and a handful of others, has been leading a revolution in Turkish cinema for the past decade", organisers said.
(Various sources -- 05/09/07-12/09/07)
