11/09/2007
Bulgaria's Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev left on Monday (September 10th) for a six-day official visit to India, the first by a Bulgarian prime minister to an Asian country since 1974.
The trip aims to revitalise bilateral economic ties.
Stanishev will also express Bulgaria's support for India's bid for a permanent seat on an expanded UN Security Council.
Romanian Justice Minister Tudor Chiuariu and US Ambassador to Romania Nicholas Taubman sealed a new extradition treaty on Monday (September 10th).
It replaces an earlier treaty signed in 1923 and amended in 1936.
The new agreement introduces simpler and more efficient extradition procedures.
Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik paid his first visit to the Vatican.
He was received by the Secretary for Relations with States, Archbishop Dominique Mamberti.
Talks focused on the political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, relations between the RS and the Catholic Church, the refugee return process and the Kosovo status issue.
Mongolian Defence Minister Mishig Sonompil arrived on Sunday (September 9th) for a five-day visit to Bulgaria at the invitation of his counterpart, Veselin Bliznakov.
On Monday, the two ministers signed an agreement on military co-operation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina Foreign Minister Sven Alkalaj was in Skopje on Thursday (September 6th) for talks with Macedonian leaders.
The two sides agreed on steps to boost bilateral co-operation, with a focus on the economy and EU-NATO integration.
Serbian Local Self-Government and Public Administration Minister Milan Markovic was in Strasbourg on Thursday (September 6th) to give Council of Europe (CoE) Secretary-General Terry Davis the ratification instruments for Serbia's accession to the European Charter of Local Self-Government.
The document has been approved by 27 of the EU's member states and 43 of the CoE's 47 member states.
Hungarian President Laszlo Solyom and his Croatian and Serbian counterparts, Stipe Mesic and Boris Tadic, held an informal meeting on Tuesday (September 4th) in Dunav-Drava National Park.
The focus was on joint efforts to prevent natural disasters.
The chairman of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Council of Ministers, Nikola Spiric, arrived on Monday (September 10th) for a two-day visit to Hungary.
He will meet with President Laszlo Solyom, Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany and Parliament Speaker Katalin Szili.
(Various sources 04/09/07-11/09/07)
