14/12/2007
US automobile parts maker Johnson Controls opened a plant in Macedonia on Wednesday (December 12th) .The facility, in the Bunardzic free economic zone near Skopje, will initially employ 150 people and produce car parts sold on the German and French markets.
Istanbul will become an international financial centre with planned investments of $2 billion in the next three years, the head of the Managing Board of the Turkish Banks Association, Ersin Ozince, said on Tuesday (December 11th).
The investment is the first stage of a programme implemented with the support of Turkish banks and in co-operation with the IMF.
Investors placed more than 1.5 billion euros in subscription orders as part of the Initial Public Offering (IPO) of Romania's Transgaz Medias, according to data published on Monday (December 10th).
The IPO became the largest subscription in the history of the Bucharest Stock Exchange with an offer 23.5 times more than the subscripted initial value.
The EBRD announced on Monday (December 10th) it would lend 4m euros to Kosovo's NGO Enterprise Programme to finance micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises.
The project would help local entrepreneurs finance new or expand existing businesses.
Croatian pipeline operator Janaf intends to invest a total of 15m euros in a new natural gas pipeline in 2009, which should detour the current pipeline near Krcki Most.
The project has been launched amid growing security and environmental concerns.
The EBRD announced its plans to invest more than 20m euros in 2008 in the Albanian energy and infrastructure projects and the private sector.
The bank will finance a new energy efficiency fund aimed at restricting waste in the electricity distribution system.
Serbia's air carrier Jat Airways and Montenegro's Montenegro Airlines agreed to co-operate under the Open Sky Agreement.
The agreement allows all EU airlines to travel without limits to all airports in the EU, as long as the flights are announced ahead of time.
(Various sources – 07/12/07-14/12/07)
