10/10/2007
By Sami Neza for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 10/10/07
In a move sure to re-ignite political controversy, Albanian President Bamir Topi said late last month that he has asked the country's general prosecutor, Theodhori Sollaku, to resign.
"I have asked Sollaku to be part of [reforming the judiciary], and that he should be the first to give a public signal," Topi said on state television.
Under the constitution, there are no limits to the general prosecutor's term in office.
This makes the job different from all other constitutional positions in Albania.
Sollaku, who was appointed in early 2002, already has indicated that he does not plan to step down.
He has been a major subject of contention for some time now.
A parliamentary committee launched an investigation into his assets, as well as into cases that may have been improperly closed by his office.
Last December, the Constitutional Court ruled that Sollaku violated the constitution.
He has been accused not only of abusing his office, but of links to organised crime.
The opposition, however, says he is being targeted in a political witchhunt.
Former President Alfred Moisiu refused to sign a decree removing him from office.
The controversy played a major role in negotiations to choose a successor to Moisiu when his mandate ended.
While trying to conclude a deal with the opposition, Prime Minister Sali Berisha insisted that Sollaku's term be limited to five years.
The opposition balked, and the deal fell through.
The new request from Topi has already been dismissed by opposition lawmakers.
"We will call on [Topi], to distance himself from his ex-party, to emerge as the president of all Albanians and not to try to usurp the General Prosecutor's Office, which is working on some big abuse files," said Dritan Prifti, a senior official of the Socialist Movement for Integration, in response to Topi's request.
Another opposition official, Arben Isaraj, blasted the president's move as harmful to the judicial reform process, which is being spearheaded by a roundtable of the parliamentary parties.
During a meeting with lawyers and judges last week, however, Topi kept up the pressure.
"The investigative activity of the prosecutor's office is apathetic," he insisted.
"The proportion between the cases started by them and the cases started by the police is highly in favour of the police."
Meanwhile, the daily Standard published a dossier listing offences the prosecutor’s office has allegedly committed.
The list, prepared by the head of the justice ministry's inspection group, Fitim Hoxhati, includes trade in stolen automobiles and involvement in drug trafficking.
The Albanian public has a negative overall perception of the judicial system, with a particularly dim view of the prosecutor's office.
A poll by the Citizen's Advocacy Office carried out among lawyers and judges suggests 60% of them view the judiciary as corrupt.
