06/07/2007
Bosnia and Herzegovina attracted more than 1.2 billion euros in Foreign Direct Investment during the first half of this year, Foreign Investment Promotion Agency head Haris Basic told Dnevni Avaz on Wednesday (July 4th). 
Serbia accounted for half that amount, due to Telekom Srbija's 646m-euro purchase of Telecom Srpske. 
Austria was the second largest investor, with 174m euros, followed by Croatia with 106m euros.
***
US carmaker Ford Motor Company has submitted a bid for a former Daewoo plant in Craiova, the Romanian Privatisation Agency announced on Thursday (July 5th). 
Approximately 4,000 workers are employed at the plant, which can produce up to 200,000 cars and 300,000 engines per year. 
The Romanian government bought the company from Daewoo's creditors for $61m last year. 
General Motors and a Russian firm also indicated interest in the plant but did not submit bids.
***
The Albanian government approved the Austrian energy company EVN's project to build three hydropower plants in the Balkan country. 
The three stations, due to be built on the Devoll River, will have a total capacity of 400 megawatts. 
The project is expected to cost between 700m and 1 billion euros.
***
The World Bank agreed to loan Croatia 50m euros to help implement the Revenue Administration Modernisation Project. 
The loan will support tax administration reforms, improve state claims collection, boost the qualifications of personnel, and provide additional training and consultation with external experts.
***
Montenegro's privatisation commission adopted the privatisation plan for 2007. 
According to the document, partly cited in Vijesti newspaper, no sale of state assets is expected for the power utility EPCG, the Podgorica Airport or the winemaker Plantaze Podgorica. 
The Luka Bar seaport, Montenegro Airlines and two tourism companies will be privatised only after the implementation of restructuring programmes, which are to be drafted.
***
The Kosovo Ministry of Trade and Industry and Raiffeisen Bank signed an accord providing for co-operation and joint support for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SME) in the province. 
The ministry held a regional conference on SME development as part of its efforts to support the sector, open new industrial areas and boost employment.
(Various sources – 29/06/07-06/07/07)
