03/07/2007
Vatican Secretary for Relations with States Archbishop Dominique Mamberti is on an official visit to Skopje through Tuesday (July 3rd). 
Archbishop Mamberti met with Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki on Monday, and affirmed the Vatican's support for Macedonia's EU membership bid. 
He also met with President Branko Crvenkovski, Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and Parliament Speaker Ljubisa Georgievski.
***
A Macedonian government delegation, led by Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, arrived in Italy on Monday (July 2nd), as part of the campaign "Team Macedonia". 
The group aims to promote the country as a favourable investment spot. 
Over the next five to six months, officials plan to visit a number of EU countries, as well as the United States, Australia and Israel, to present Macedonia's investment possibilities.
***
Montenegro and Austria sealed two co-operation agreements during a visit by Montenegrin Foreign Minister Milan Rocen to Vienna on Monday (July 2nd). 
The documents were signed during a meeting between Rocen and Austrian counterpart Ursula Plassnik. 
One of the accords envisions Austria financing construction of a railway link between Kotor and Lovcen, and the other one provides for bilateral economic collaboration. 
Plassnik reiterated her country's support for Montenegro's EU integration bid and said she expects the country to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Union in September.
***
Romania's Prime Minister Calin Popescu-Tariceanu and Moldovan counterpart Vasile Tarlev discussed ways to boost bilateral ties during Tariceanu's official visit to Chisinau on Friday (June 29th). 
The talks, described as "friendly" and "constructive", focused on improving bilateral co-operation and Moldovia's EU integration. 
The visit marked the first visit by a Romanian prime minister since 1999.
***
Greek and Cypriot culture ministers, Evangelos Voulgarakis and Akis Kleanthous, met in Athens on Monday (July 2nd) and sealed a memorandum on cultural co-operation for 2007-2009. 
They also discussed protection of cultural heritage and cultural diplomacy as a means of boosting international co-operation.
***
Croatian President Stipe Mesic arrived in Cyprus on Thursday (June 28th) where he met with counterpart Tassos Papadopoulos and Foreign Minister Yiorgos Lillikas. 
Talks focused on Croatia's Euro-Atlantic integration bid, stalled efforts to reunify Cyprus and regional issues, including Kosovo's future status.
***
The presidents of Bulgaria, Romania and Serbia -- Georgi Parvanov, Traian Basescu and Boris Tadic, respectively -- attended the main part of the trilateral military drill "Danube Guard 07", in the common border area of the Danube River on Wednesday (June 27th). 
A simulated anti-terror operation involving troops from the three countries was conducted. 
At a joint news conference afterwards, the presidents stressed that the exercise, the first of its kind, was successful and proved that regional security is a priority for the three states.
***
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Prime Monister Nikola Spiric and visiting Estonian counterpart Andrus Ansip agreed in Sarajevo on June 26th to step up economic co-operation and to seal a number of accords to regulate investments, railway and river transport and double taxation avoidance. 
Spiric and Ansip also discussed BiH's Euro-Atlantic integration aspirations.
(Various sources 26/06/07-03/07/07)
