03/04/2006
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 03/04/06
In his most recent State of the Union address, US President George W. Bush touched on competitiveness challenges, voicing concern that the United States risks falling behind in science and technology.
For citizens in the EU, this "wake-up call" may have seemed surprising:
from a European perspective, the United States appears to be ahead.
A 2005 report from Conference Board, a high-profile business organisation, showed that productivity growth in the 15 "old EU" member states was 0.5 per cent, as against 1.8 per cent in the United States (and 1.9 per cent in Japan).
For the period 1995-2005, annual growth in national output for every hour worked in the EU-15 averaged 1.4 per cent, compared with 2.4 per cent in the United States.
Likewise, data compiled by the European Commission (EC) in Brussels also suggest the EU lags behind the United States in key areas.
Research and Development (R&D), for instance, represented only 1.93 per cent of the bloc's GDP in 2003, as opposed to 2.58 per cent in the United States and 3.15 per cent in Japan.
True, there is a broad variety in performance across the EU, with the Nordic countries overtaking the United States in terms of amounts invested in R&D.
For Sweden, Finland and Denmark these figures are above 3 per cent.
However, the stark truth is that the heavyweights of the EU do not spend nearly as much in this area as the EC thinks would be adequate -- namely, 3 per cent of GDP.
The ambitious EC blueprint known as the Lisbon Agenda was formulated with an eye to the performance of US companies and the excellence of the American way of blending academic research with high-tech and industrial pursuits.
For instance, the EC proposed setting up a European Institute of Technology, modeled after MIT.
The idea was criticised as being a "top-down" approach, sucking money and resources from the alternative option of supporting high level research through a European Research Council.
Indeed, controversies have often arisen over specific measures aimed at implementing the Agenda, and much remains in the hands of European national governments.
However, it is clear that the United States represents a kind of benchmark for policymakers, and it is also clear that the EU has been sluggish in achieving its goals in terms of competitiveness.
The bottom line is that the bloc faces a growing challenge.
The success of the EU's Nordic fringe has been due not only to major R&D efforts undertaken both by governments and private companies, but also results from flexible product and labour market, as well as a clever overhaul of welfare networks.
The newer EU member countries seem to fare comparatively well in terms of productivity growth;
the 2005 report of the Conference Board indicates an increase of over 6 per cent in these economies, which have capitalized on their catching up potential.
Arguably, however, just catching up isn't enough.
Over the longer run, demographics and an expected sharp rise in wages (according to the Balassa-Samuelson effect) will diminish the growth differential sharply, unless appropriate policies are put into effect.
If we are comparing the EU and the United States, then, Bush's concerns might strike some as unjustified.
However, there is another factor to be considered:
Asia.
China, India and other Asian economies are increasingly a source of competitive pressures in the global economy.
These economies are absorbing advanced technologies at a rapid pace and excel in innovation -- India's remarkable engineering institutes, like those in Bangalore, can match the best in the Western world.
Scientists from Asian nations are becoming an ever more noticeable presence in top scientific journals, illustrating the region's potential to shape the research agenda of the future.
When we introduce Asia into the picture, we can see that the United States and the EU both face competitiveness challenges, although the nature of those challenges is somewhat different.
For the United States, they appear to be mainly related to global strategic interests, which in turn are affected by the emergence of new global powers.
For the EU, they involve worsening demographics and the crises of the welfare state, together with insufficient resources devoted to R&D and the difficulties in managing complexity.
There is a common denominator, however:
both the United States and the EU will face increasingly stiff competition from Asian economies.
A couple decades ago, global competition was defined in a triangular formation:
US-EU-Japan.
The picture today cannot be seen so simply.
The evolving global economy brings with it new major competitors and achange of competitive hierarchies.
Unless governments and companies are clairvoyant and adjust to trends by investing more in R&D and education, painful corrections will likely be in store.
Those who believe that only non-zero games prevail in the world economy do need a "wake up call" to reality.
The dramatic changes under way open up the possibility for co-operative relationships, but also for emerging tensions.
Consider, for instance, the growing need for energy and basic commodities in Asia, with China and India as the prime consumers, the unsolved geopolitical crises in various parts of the world (in the Middle East in particular), nuclear proliferation, and the visible and hidden aspects of the struggle against terrorism.
An array of developing trends points the way to a highly uncertain world ahead.
