28/02/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 28/02/05
NATO's open-door policy, outlined at the Istanbul Summit and confirmed numerous times by top-level officials, has buoyed expectations among countries in the Adriatic Group -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- that they will be able to join the Alliance in the near future.
Macedonia is pressing ahead with defence reform, one of the major criteria for membership, and the country has received praise for its role in the global coalition against terror.
But how realistic are Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski's pledges to lead Macedonia into NATO by 2006?
The outlook, most analysts agree, depends on a number of factors.
In his first address to the Macedonian Parliament after becoming prime minister, Buckovski pledged that his successor at the defence ministry, Jovan Manasijevski, would bring the Macedonian Army (ARM) into further compatibility with NATO standards and interoperability, continuing the sizeable changes which have already been made over the past two years.
During that time, the number of active military personnel has been reduced from 20,000 to the present 8,500 troops.
According to Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski, who is also army commander-in-chief, professionalisation of the ARM will be complete by the end of 2007, and possibly even as early as mid-2006, if additional resources are found.
As part of the reform, army units have been restructured and divided in keeping with the organisational structure of armies of the NATO members.
Following suggestions from NATO experts, the ARM has been reoriented towards maintaining light special purpose units, and the equipment has been streamlined in order to create a small, mobile and well-armed military force.
The ARM has deployed peacekeeping contingents in the ISAF mission in Afghanistan and Iraqi Freedom in Iraq.
The Macedonian units have won praise for their role in these missions -- a fact which, authorities say, testifies to the success of the reform process.
"I have just returned from Iraq where the [Macedonian] troops are standing shoulder by shoulder with the US and coalition forces in order to assist in creating a free Iraq," US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said on a visit to Macedonia in September 2004.
"This morning, the [defence] minister and I had the privilege to give awards to three Macedonian soldiers who helped in rescuing lives of Americans in Iraq."
Rumsfeld added that the United States supports Macedonian sovereignty and territorial integrity, its reform process and its vision of becoming a part of NATO.
NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer made a similar assessment during a meeting with Buckovski in October 2004.
"Macedonian soldiers, under the NATO banner and shoulder by shoulder with other army members of the NATO members and partners, show high results and are an exemplary in the anti-terror coalition," he said.
"You can count on my complete engagement and strong involvement in relation to what we see as the only future of the Republic of Macedonia, and that is Euro-Atlantic integration," de Hoop Scheffer added.
The defence ministry, as part of its programme for integrated border management, has transferred control of three of the country's four borderlines to the border police.
As of May 2005, that force will also take over security of the border with Serbia-Montenegro, according to the ministry.
The ARM has already disposed of tanks donated by the Bulgarian Army as well as two Sukhoi aircraft.
Changes have also been made in the planning and usage of the budget, which is now mainly going towards army modernisation.
The defence ministry has eliminated non-essential or redundant functions such as military health institutions, restaurants and other service facilities.
Is this enough?
On a few occasions, NATO officials have pointed out that defence reform is not the only criterion.
NATO membership requires stable political conditions, the rule of democracy and the rule of law.
One of the most important tasks is judicial reform.
Macedonian politicians acknowledge that major challenges remain.
"If defence reforms go on well, we have to complete reforms in the judiciary and meet the political criteria as well," Buckovski has said, promising this will happen during this year.
The country's political parties unanimously agree that joining NATO is a strategic priority.
Public opinion also strongly favours it.
The latest poll results, released on the defence ministry's Web site, indicate that 64 per cent of Macedonians support membership, 15 per cent have no position on the issue, and only 20 per cent oppose joining the Alliance.
But will Macedonia receive an invitation in 2006, as Buckovski anticipates?
Certainly the political and security situation in the Balkans makes an acceleration of the integration process desirable.
This year could, among other things, see the start of negotiations on Kosovo's final status.
The Kosovo situation, in turn, has implications for Macedonia's security.
Many analysts believe any potential turbulence would be cushioned by a speedy track towards NATO membership.
While some sources -- for instance, a report published in January by the daily Utrinski Vesnik -- suggest that a NATO invitation could come even earlier than 2006, government sources tell Southeast European Times that such expectations are overly optimistic.
What is more likely, they say, that the next NATO summit will deliver a strong message confirming that Macedonia is on the path towards entry in 2006
