31/10/2008
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) government on Wednesday (October 29th) chose Turkish Airlines as the preferred bidder for the entity's flag carrier, BH Airlines. 
Transport and Communications Minister Nail Seckanovic said the government will now start direct talks with the investor on contract details. 
The FBiH government is looking for a strategic partner to invest 49% in BH Airlines.
***
Standard and Poor's (SP) dropped Croatia's credit standing from stable to negative. 
High internal debt was the main reason, especially in household debt and non-financial corporations. 
SP also lowered Romania's long- and short-term foreign currency sovereign credit ratings from BBB with a negative outlook to BB+. 
SP also warned of potential downgrades for Bulgaria.
***
The Croatian oil company INA is the top company in Southeast Europe, according to a recent report by Roland Berger Strategy Consultants, which includes 100 regional firms from Romania, Slovenia, Croatia, Bulgaria, Serbia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Moldova, Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Each of the top five companies process oil and gas.
***
Albanian Minister of Economy, Trade and Energy Genc Ruli said on Wednesday (October 29th) his country is not isolated from the global market and will suffer some impact from the global financial crisis. 
The crisis is expected to affect Albania's exports, foreign investment in the country and remittances from the diaspora, estimated at up to 800m euros annually.
***
The First World Economic Forum (WEF) on Europe and Central Asia opened on Thursday (October 30th) in Istanbul and runs through Saturday. 
This is the first regional WEF session since the global financial crisis began. 
A total of nine heads of state and government, 21 ministers and over 40 other public figures are attending the meeting.
***
The main Greek opposition party PASOK on Wednesday (October 29th) unveiled a set of five proposals aimed at cushioning the real economy (i.e., production and employment) and small and medium-sized enterprises from the current global credit crisis. 
The five-point plan calls for the state to buy a limited number of bank shares, establish supervision of banks and set up a funding mechanism for very small, small and medium-sized enterprises.
(Various sources – 24/10/08 - 31/10/08)
