26/09/2008
Telekom Slovenija seeks to expand its presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and is ready to bid in the tender of BH Telecom -- BiH's main telecom operator -- Telekom Slovenija CEO Bojan Dremelj said on Wednesday (September 24th).
Dremelj said Telekom Slovenija now enjoys a 30% share of the BiH broadband communications market and would further increase it through an 8m-euro investment in wireless networks in 2009.
Automobile Dacia SA, the Romanian unit of French carmaker Renault, will present its Logan MCV at the Paris Motor Show in October, Dacia General Manager Francois Fourmont announced on Wednesday (September 24th).
More information on the Logan MCV's price and intended markets will follow the Paris show, Fourmont said.
Turkey's TAV and Macedonia signed a concession agreement on the Macedonian airports.
TAV chief executive Sani Sener and Macedonian Transport Minister Mile Janakieski were the signatories on Wednesday (September 24th).
The investment amounts to 200m euros, said Janakieski.
The agreement envisions upgrading and modernising the airports over 20 years.
The Bulgarian construction company Trace Group Hold has opened an office in Russia.
The company plans to bid for infrastructure projects related to the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi.
The European Commission (EC) agreed to help Albania's ministry of economy, trade and energy implement institutional and legal reforms to protect consumers and upgrade the movement of goods to and from EU countries.
The EU will assist the accreditation and standardisation agency and the consumer protection office through two projects worth 1.7m euros.
Kosovo will privatise its national telecom company (PTK) and power company (KEK) by the end of 2009, Finance Minister Ahmet Shala said on Wednesday (September 24th).
Shala also confirmed that the government aims to complete a concession deal for the Pristina airport by next summer.
The unemployment rate in Croatia eased by 0.1 percentage point month-on-month to 12.3% in August, according to preliminary figures released by the statistical bureau Monday (September 22nd).
The year-on-year decline was 1.8 percentage points, confirming the gradual improvement of the labour market.
(Various sources – 19/09/08-26/09/08)
