29/10/2008
Serbian tennis star Ana Ivanovic won the Generali Ladies tournament, defeating Russia's Vera Zvonareva on Sunday (October 26th) in Linz, Austria, and scoring her first victory in almost four months.
Earlier in the year, Ivanovic won the French Open.
FIFA's executive committee rejected Kosovo's application for membership in the football organisation, local media reported on Saturday (October 25th).
According to the official decision, FIFA rejected Kosovo because it is not a member of the UN and enjoys diplomatic recognition by only 51 of the 192 UN members.
UN membership is one of the rules of the organisation.
Kosovo's capital will host the Fourth Pristina Jazz Festival from November 1st to November 10th.
Artists from the region, the rest of Europe and the United States will take part in the event.
Serbia and Croatia's national football teams for boys under 17 qualified for the UEFA European Under-17 Championship, which will be held next summer in Germany.
Croatia won 3-0 against Moldova, and Serbia beat Sweden 2-0, taking the top two positions in group 6.
UEFA announced their slots on Saturday (October 25th).
Croatian actress Natasa Dorcic and Serbian actor Nikola Kojo won the top prizes at the 33rd Mojkovac Film Autumn film festival for leading roles in the movies "I Have to Sleep, My Angel " and "The Fourth Man".
The event, held in Montenegro, closed on Sunday (October 26th).
US baritone Michael Anthony McGee is the winner of the 9th Marie Kraja International Festival of Operatic Singers, which took place from Thursday (October 23rd) to Saturday (October 25th) in Tirana.
McGee's performance at Albania's biggest opera competition was his first in Europe.
A total of 16 singers competed.
Bulgaria's national badminton team won the Balkans Championship in Bucharest on Saturday (October 25th).
Bulgaria won the final 3:1 against Romania.
In the semifinal, the Bulgarian team ousted Greece 3:0.
Turkey took third place.
Turkish swimmer Cenk Devrim Ulusoy set a new world free diving record on Sunday (October 26th).
Ulusoy dived 83m in the waters off the Turkish resort town of Kemer, breaking the previous record of 80m.
He stayed underwater for 2 minutes 24 seconds.
(Various sources -- 22/10/08-29/10/08)
