29/08/2008
Renault presented its new Symbol model, designed by engineers from Romania, France and Turkey, at the Moscow Auto Show on Tuesday (August 26th).
Renault assembled the car in Turkey because of the country's proximity to markets in Central Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
The Albanian Energy Corporation (KESH) obtained approval of a 40m-euro loan from a private bank.
The money will pay for energy imports.
The government served as a guarantor for the loan, since KESH had trouble repaying earlier loans.
The French wind power producer Perfect Wind will invest 210m euros in a 150MW wind power station in Turkey, the company said in a statement.
Perfect Wind, owned by Spain's Iberdrola, plans to invest about 1.5 billion euros in Turkey's renewable energy sector in the next five years.
The German electronics chain Media Markt opened its biggest store in Turkey on Thursday (August 28th) at the Ankara Forum shopping mall.
This is Media Markt's sixth store in Turkey in a year, Mustafa Altindag, MediaSaturn Holding director responsible for operations in Turkey, said at a press conference.
The new store offers more than 70,000 products.
Media Markt is Europe's largest electronics retailer.
Turkey inaugurated its Chamber of Commerce in Pristina on Monday (August 25th).
Present at the ceremony was Turkish State Minister Said Yazicioglu, who said the office will help boost economic relations between the two countries and attract Turkish businesses to Kosovo.
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski on Wednesday (August 27th) laid the cornerstone of a new shopping mall in Skopje that the British consortium Equest Properties will build.
Investors are sinking 45m euros into the project, which is expected to create around 500 jobs.
Construction will require two years.
Pepsi bought a Serbian snack manufacturer, Marbo Produkt, according to reports by Beta and B92 on Wednesday (August 27th).
They say Marbo now belongs to Pepsi Investments, a Pepsi subsidiary with headquarters in The Netherlands.
Marbo has over 1,000 employees in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(Various sources – 22/08/08 - 29/08/08)
