28/10/2008
German Defence Minister Franz Josef Jung launched a tour of the Balkans on Monday (October 27th) to visit troops deployed in Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci met with him in Pristina on Monday. 
On Tuesday, Jung was travelling to Sarajevo for talks with High Representative Miroslav Lajcak.
***
Newly-appointed Kosovo Ambassador to the United States Avni Spahiu arrived in Washington on Sunday (October 26th). 
"We will be the voice of the government and the people of Kosovo to the American government and people," Spahiu said.
***
Albanian President Bamir Topi on Thursday (October 23rd) met with Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan to discuss bilateral relations. 
Topi thanked Turkey for its support of Albania's NATO integration process. 
Babacan promised new investments by Turkish companies in the country and praised Albania for boosting stability in the region. 
Babacan came to Tirana to attend the 19th conference of foreign ministers of the Black Sea Economic Co-operation (BSEC) member states. 
These include Turkey, Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece, Georgia, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Serbia and Ukraine.
***
The tone of the European Commission's (EC) first progress report on Serbia will be positive, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Delic said on Wednesday (October 22nd). 
In Brussels, Delic met with senior EC officials, including EC Director for the Western Balkans Pierre Mirel. 
Publication of the report, the first on Serbia since it signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement, with the EU, will occur on November 6th.
***
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat met on Wednesday (October 22nd) to continue negotiations on governance and power sharing. 
UN Special Representative Taye-Brook Zerihoun expressed optimism about the talks, saying the process was "going well".
***
Turkish President Abdullah Gul voiced support for Ukraine's bid to join NATO at a joint press conference with Ukrainian counterpart Viktor Yushchenko on Monday (October 27th). 
They met during Yushchenko's official visit to Ankara. 
Gul noted bilateral relations have improved significantly. 
Yushchenko said his country may exempt certain groups of Turkish nationals, including journalists, students and businessmen, from visas. 
Ukraine hopes to enjoy a free trade agreement with Turkey someday, he added.
***
A delegation from the Belgian parliament visiting Pristina on Monday (October 27th) pledged support for Kosovo. 
"Belgium is a strong ally of Kosovo and will continue to [lobby for it]," Parliament Speaker Herman Van Rompuy said, adding that Belgium will retain its KFOR presence in the country.
(Various sources 21/10/08-28/10/08)
