05/06/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/06/06
Facing pressure and lobbying from the countries of the Western Balkans, the EU has started taking modest steps toward easing the visa regime for citizens of those countries. 
Businessmen and students have been the first to benefit. 
At the same time, however, the EU recently decided to lift the price of an entry visa -- from 35 euros to 60 euros. 
That has led some to question the EU's sincerity about making its borders more open to people from the region.
The new price will become effective as of 1 January 2007 and will apply to transit visas and stays of up to three months in the EU countries, excluding Great Britain and Ireland, which set their own prices. 
Three member states -- Greece, Hungary and Sweden -- opposed the price hike, warning it will lead to negative consequences. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has also come out against it. 
The increase, he says, sends a contradictory message at a time when negotiations on the visa regime are under way.
The initiative for this decision came from France, which argues that the current price cannot cover the cost of introducing biometric technology, such as digital fingerprints.
"The EU wants biometric visas, which is why the price will have to be a little higher," says EU Judiciary and Internal Affairs Commissioner Franco Frattini. 
At his urging, however, the EU decided to exempt children under the age of six, students, teachers and researchers from the price rise.
Some Western Balkan countries, such as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro, will still be able to secure lower visa prices if they close readmission treaties with the EU. 
Croatian citizens are exempt as they can already travel to the EU without visas, except for Ireland and the United Kingdom.
Before the EU's decision, the Western Balkan countries sought to gain visa benefits for their citizens. 
In the process, they have formed some unexpected coalitions. 
Recently, for example, representatives of the Catholic, Jewish, Muslim and Orthodox faiths in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have mounted a joint effort to convince Brussels of the need for greater travel opportunities for BiH citizens, especially youth.
"Our young people need to travel abroad, to learn from others in order to come back and rebuild our country and region," said Metropolitan Nikolaj, the bishop of the Serbian Orthodox Church in BiH, after visiting several EU institutions in what Catholic cardinal Vinko Puljic describes as a "lobbying campaign".
Meanwhile, Jakob Finci, head of BiH's Jewish community, has also urged the EU to help the country get on the "only road possible, that of European integration" by easing restrictions.
At the hearing in the European Parliament, young people from BiH and Serbia- Montenegro read out to MPs and EU officials selections from a literary competition titled "Best Stories from the Visa Queues". 
The competition was organised by the Citizens' Pact for South Eastern Europe, an NGO based in Novi Sad.
Perhaps even more remarkably, the cause has brought together Serbian and Albanian experts. 
Together, they have published a study titled "A Joint European Vision: Free Movement for Goods and People in Kosovo and Serbia".
The study, co-sponsored by the European Movement in Serbia and the Kosovo Institute for Policy Research and Development, focuses primarily on bringing down administrative barriers to the movement of goods and people between Serbia and the UN-administered province of Kosovo. 
However, it also touches on the problem of the Schengen visa regime -- a problem which affects people living in both places.
A recent public opinion poll in Serbia has shown that 70 per cent of students have never traveled abroad. 
This is thought to be largely due to tightly restricted access to Schengen visas. 
Citizens of Macedonia, meanwhile, pay some 10m euros yearly in Schengen fees, according to the government.
Schengen refers to the agreement signed by 26 European states on a common border and visa regime. 
No Western Balkan country is party to the agreement.
In its recent communication on the subject, the European Commission (EC) suggested that while lifting the requirements altogether remains a long-term goal, visa issuance should be simplified in the meantime. 
Acknowledging that visa liberalisation is an important issue, Brussels also insists that progress is tied to the course of reform in the Balkans, including strengthening of the rule of law; combating organised crime, corruption, and illegal migration; and the upgrading of administrative capacity related to border controls and document security.
It was within this context that the EC began exploratory talks on visa facilitation with Macedonia on 28 March. 
The commission hopes to present the EU Council of Ministers with draft negotiation mandates for the countries of the Western Balkans during 2006.
On April 26, the Serbia-Montenegro authorities launched preliminary negotiations with EU representatives on visa benefits. 
Both sides agreed that the EC should issue a mandate by July for talks with Belgrade. 
Vladimir Ljubojevic, a member of the Serbia-Montenegro delegation, said European Commission officials envisage "moderate" changes that would make travel easier for people visiting relatives in the EU, as well as students, businesspeople, government officials, athletes, artists, and anyone involved in a business requiring travel to the EU. 
Once an agreement is concluded, it would take effect on 1 January 2008. 
It is not yet clear how the imminent break-up of the Serbia-Montenegro state union affects this scenario.
