25/06/2008
Turkey advanced to the semifinals at the Euro 2008 football championship after a dramatic match against Croatia on Friday (June 20th).
Turkey tied the score with just seconds left in the match’s 119th minute and a penalty shootout determined the winner.
Turkey scored three times in the shootout, while Croatia scored only once.
Turkey lost to Germany in the semi-final match on Wednesday, 3-2.
The city of Saranda, Albania, inaugurated a National Centre for Restoration of Albanian Archaeology on Monday (June 23rd).
Saranda is one of the Albanian districts richest in archaeological relics.
The centre, comprised of 25 experts, envisions implementing a new way of restoring the nation's archaeological heritage.
The legendary British band The Police held a concert in Belgrade on Tuesday (June 24th).
The opening act was the Counting Crows.
The concert is part of the Police world tour, which started last year and was the best-selling and most profitable tour by any music group in 2007.
Serbia's Ana Ivanovic began Wimbledon on Monday (June 23rd) beating Rosanna de los Rios of Paraguay 6-1, 6-2.
Novak Djokovic, Serbia's top male player, also advanced, beating Germany's Michael Berrer 7-5, 2-6, 6-3, 6-0.
Twenty-two short and feature-length movies from Kosovo and Albania will screen at the Genoa Film Festival from Monday (June 30th) to July 6th in Genoa, Italy.
The films are part of an Albanian-language movie series called "Beyond the Border".
The town of Paphos, Cyprus, will host the 10th edition of the two-day Paphos Aphrodite Festival that begins on Sunday (June 29th).
A performance of Puccini's "Madame Butterfly" will mark this year's anniversary.
The festival will take place at the Paphos Castle.
Sibenik, Croatia, is hosting the 48th edition of the International Children's Festival through July 5th.
The event brings together participants from Great Britain, Japan, Italy, Poland, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovenia, Russia, Albania, Spain and Macedonia in drama, music and dancing.
(Various sources – 18/06/08-25/06/08)
