25/03/2008
Turkey's Prime Minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, kicked off a tour of Southeast European countries on Monday (March 24th). 
His trip began with a visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina's capital, Sarajevo. 
On Wednesday, he will visit Tirana, followed by Sofia and Kurdzhali in Bulgaria on Thursday and Friday.
***
Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov began a four-day official visit to Israel and the Palestinian Authority on Monday (March 24th), at the invitation of presidents Shimon Peres and Mahmoud Abbas. 
In Israel, Parvanov will hold talks with Parliament Speaker Dalia Itzik, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, as well as with opposition leader Benjamin Netanyahu. 
In the Palestinian Authority, Parvanov will sign a programme for co-operation in the fields of education, science and culture. 
He will also attend the opening of a Bulgarian representation in Ramala and will meet members of the Association for Palestinian-Bulgarian friendship.
***
Serbia and Iraq have sealed a $235m arms export deal, Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac confirmed on Monday (March 24th). 
He declined to give more information, but media reports said it involves the sale of assault rifles, machine guns, anti-tank munitions and an array of explosives. 
Sutanovac added the implementation of the contract would depend on Iraq's political situation. 
"We expect that the money will be deposited and that we will show that despite challenges, the country is stable and the Serbian military industry has the capacity to produce what has been agreed upon," he said. 
He then left for Algeria in a bid to find new clients for the defence industry.
***
UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura arrived on an official visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina on Monday (March 24th). 
He first met with Council of Ministers Chairman Nikola Spiric and granted him an official certificate marking the inclusion of Visegrad's Mehmed Pase Sokolovic bridge on the UNESCO World Heritage List. 
On Tuesday, he meets with representatives of the BiH parliament.
(Various sources – 18/03/08-25/03/08)
