27/05/2008
Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic met with his Turkish counterpart, Ali Babacan, in Ankara on Friday (May 23rd).
They discussed the Mediterranean Union project and reviewed the progress of EU accession talks both Croatia and Turkey started in 2005.
At a joint press conference after the meeting, Babacan said Turkey has a positive perception of the Mediterranean Union but still has not finalised its assessment of the issue.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Presidency Chairman Haris Silajdzic wrapped up a visit to the United States on Monday (May 26th).
He attended the 13th meeting of the Congress of North American Bosniaks on Friday in St. Louis and met with representatives of various US industries, including tourism, in Washington.
Greek Chief of General Staff Lieutenant General Dimitrios Grapsas left on Sunday (May 25th) for an official visit to Turkey, at the invitation of Turkish counterpart Yasar Buyukanit.
Grapsas aims to review outstanding issues and strengthen bilateral co-operation in the defence sector.
Pope Benedict XVI met with a group of bishops from Albania on Friday (May 23rd) at the Vatican.
He urged them to continue to strive for unity within the Albanian Catholic Church.
Bulgarian Economy and Energy Minister Petar Dimitrov and German Ambassador to Bulgaria Michael Geier signed the last in a series of agreements on technical co-operation between the two countries Monday (May 26th).
The agreement envisions a German 4m-euro grant to boost the Bulgarian economy and employment, professional training, meteorological study and development in the Rhodope Mountains.
Greek Deputy Foreign Minister Theodoros Kassimis continued a tour of several Greek-speaking villages in southern Italy at the weekend, meeting with local authorities and residents.
"We must build closer and more creative bonds to enable us to help young people to preserve their roots and to come closer to Greece," Kassimis said.
Austrian President Heinz Fischer met with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan at Ciragan Palace in Istanbul on Thursday (May 22nd).
Fischer also visited the Fener Greek Orthodox Patriarchate and attended a Turkish-Austrian Business Council meeting.
(Various sources 20/05/08 - 27/05/08)
