24/06/2008
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic met with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn on Monday (June 23rd) in Brussels.
He also conferred with European Parliament President Hans Poettering.
Djukanovic received an invitation to visit EU headquarters after the European Council praised Montenegro for progress towards EU membership.
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin was in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Monday (June 23rd) for a one-day official visit.
Kalfin met with the members of the BiH presidency, Prime Minister Nikola Spiric and Foreign Minister Sven Alkalaj.
Kalfin also visited Camp Butmir near Sarajevo and spoke with the Bulgarian contingent.
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders will meet in July to assess the progress of preparatory talks on reunifying their divided island.
The summit will occur on July 1st, UN envoy to Cyprus Taye-Brook Zerihoun said on Friday (June 20th).
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat will discuss sensitive issues such as sovereignty, property, territorial issues and security.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic wrapped up a three-day visit to Jordan on Thursday (June 19th).
Mesic held talks with King Abdullah II, Arab League Secretary General Amr Moussa and representatives of the Jordanian business community to discuss the possibility of expanding trade and tourism co-operation.
Albanian President Bamir Topi met with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) presidency member Haris Silajdzic in Tirana on Tuesday (June 17th) and confirmed the status of bilateral relations.
"Albania, Kosovo, BiH and other countries in the region should distance themselves from retrospective scenarios and ethnic division and instead create a climate of intensive co-operation," Topi said.
Silajdzic, who was on a two-day visit to Albania, expressed BiH's interest in solid ties with Albania and in contributing to regional stability.
Relations between Montenegro and Croatia have improved significantly, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said on Tuesday (June 17th) after a meeting with Montenegrin Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic in Zagreb.
Sanader warned that their countries' common interests required the development of good neighbourly relations.
Krivokapic praised both Croatian and Montenegrin progress towards EU membership.
Cypriot Foreign Minister Markos Kyprianou and his Spanish counterpart, Miguel Angel Moratinos, discussed bilateral co-operation and reunification efforts in Cyprus during a meeting Monday (June 23rd) in Nicosia.
Moratinos proposed a memorandum of understanding to enhance co-operation and dialogue between their two countries.
Kyprianou briefed him on the latest developments regarding the Cypriot issue.
They also discussed ratifying the Lisbon Treaty.
(Various sources 17/06/08-24/06/08)
