25/07/2008
The Turkish energy company Calik Enerji won a tender by Turkmenistan's energy ministry for construction of a natural-gas power plant.
The facility, with the capacity of 254MW, will be situated in the province of Balkhanabad.
Construction begins in August, with completion of the 137m-euro project scheduled for March 2010.
Cyprus' state-owned telecom CYTA will invest about 50m euros to expand its activities in Greece, the company announced on Friday (July 18th).
The telecom serves 13 northern Greece municipalities, covering 1 million people.
CYTA plans to start developing new services in Greece this October.
Albania's tourist agencies warned that the tourist industry remains largely unregulated.
Tour operators complained that neglected infrastructure and poor promotion render the Albanian market uncompetitive.
Only 36 of 627 hotels have licences, while there are another 908 accommodation units on the Albanian coast.
Serbia's largest company, Delta Maxi, purchased the Albanian Euromax supermarket chain.
Delta Maxi intends to build its own facilities in Albania, besides buying existing companies.
Serbia and Macedonia were Kosovo's main trade partners in 2007, according to a Kosovo Central Bank report, covered by local media on Sunday (July 20th).
The Central European Free Trade Agreement states that Macedonia, Serbia and Albania received 38.9% of Kosovo's total exports and 41.3% of its imports.
Standard & Poor's (S&P) has maintained its negative outlook on Serbia's sovereign ratings despite the arrest of former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
S&P remains cautious because of the new government's fiscal policies.
The new government still lacks policies to reduce inflation, leading to further appreciation of the effective exchange rate.
The World Bank will lend Macedonia 70m euros for infrastructure projects.
Repayment will occur over the next 20 years with a five-year gratis period, Finance Minister Trajko Slavevski announced on Monday (July 21st).
Macedonia will also receive 50m euros from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to boost regional and local roads, starting this autumn.
(Various sources – 18/07/08-25/07/08)
