23/05/2008
The Croatian government is ready to restructure six state-owned shipbuilding plants, Deputy Prime Minister and Economy Minister Damir Polancec announced on Tuesday (May 20th).
Four plants -- Brodosplit, Brodotrogir, Kraljevica and Uljanik -- will undergo privatisation this summer, with the goal to privatise all six by the first quarter of 2009.
The tenders' commission with the Albanian Ministry of Energy announced on Tuesday (May 20th) that four foreign companies are bidding for the local ARMO oil refinery.
Offers range from 10m to 129m euros, with the highest from Final Refinery Associates of Texas, Inc.
The Albanian government signed contracts for the construction of five new hydropower plants across the country, with a total capacity of 10 MW, on May 15th.
The government also decided that private firms will run three existing hydropower plants.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)'s governors approved on Tuesday (May 20th) a proposal for Turkey's membership by October.
Final approval is expected in two to three months.
In less than a week, Turkey became a member of two regional development banks, the EBRD and the African Development Bank (AFDB).
Turkey won approval as the 25th non-African member of the AFDB last week
A total of 11 candidates have submitted letters of intent for a fourth mobile phone licence, the Bulgarian telecom regulator announced on Wednesday (May 21st).
The three mobile phone operators -- Mobiltel, Globul and Vivatel -- have expressed their intention to bid.
Turkcell, Turkey's largest mobile phone operator, is also a candidate.
Allianz Insurance is negotiating with the Serbian government to enter that country's market by acquiring a local company.
The plans are part of the group's expansion strategy in the region, Vice President Klaus Junker announced on Wednesday (May 21st).
The German company, which is already present in most Western Balkan countries, also intends to expand into <b>Bosnia and Herzegovina</b>.
Unemployment in Croatia dropped to 13.9% in April, a third consecutive monthly decrease.
The rate is now two percentage points lower than that of April 2007.
(Various sources – 16/05/08-23/05/08)
