29/01/2007
By Georgi Mitev-Santek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 29/01/07
Institutional weaknesses, widespread corruption and unreliable legal systems remain pervasive problems among EU candidate countries in the Balkans, even as regional economies move closer to the bloc's standards.
This was one of the key findings of the European Commission's 2006 progress report.
While SEE countries are becoming better places to trade and invest, the failure to address political and administrative shortcomings remains a hindrance to further progress towards accession.
In terms of constitutional issues, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) was found to have the worst problems.
Parliament's failure to adopt crucial reforms represents, as the EC put it, a missed opportunity to "take a first step towards a more democratic and efficient state".
Other countries in the region face a variety of political conundrums.
Turkey, for example, is still grappling with the issue of civilian control over the military.
Croatia and the province of Kosovo have not yet created adequate conditions for a sustainable return of refugees.
In Macedonia, a lack of constructive dialogue among political parties has hampered the decentralization process and impeded proper functioning of institutions.
Problems with co-operation between the government and opposition have led to recurring political impasses in Albania.
Serbia, meanwhile, is faulted for its "nonconstructive" approaches regarding Kosovo and co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
Promoting rule of law and the improving the judicial system remain issues of concern throughout the region.
Every country, without exception, needs to significantly upgrade its institutions.
Serbia's new constitution blurs the independence of the judiciary.
Kosovo has made little progress in civil and criminal justice.
Turkey's penal code includes clauses effectively restricting freedom of speech.
BiH has four separate jurisdictions and a high rate of reversal of judgments in major criminal cases.
Macedonia's judicial system shows "the same serious shortcomings as in previous years", affecting both its independence and its efficiency.
Ethnic issues are still very present in Croatia, BiH and Kosovo, the EC found.
Discrimination remains widespread.
Little progress has been made in preventing the separation of children in schools along ethnic lines.
The level of corruption remains high among SEE countries.
Even when regulations are in place, they are not being adequately implemented.
To do so requires additional capacity and political will.
Kosovo has made little progress, while Serbia needs to step up efforts.
Albania and Montenegro have both shown an increase in official willingness to address the problem, but words must be backed by action.
In practice, according to the EC, many weaknesses are still apparent.
Some progress has been made in fighting organised crime and improving the administration of customs, competition, standardisation and statistics.
However, Kosovo is located on a heroin trafficking route and consumption continues to increase.
Organised crime remains a source of serious concern in Montenegro also.
Apart from the problems of transit, the country faces also an internal problem of rising drug addiction, with serious social, health and security consequences.
Although critical of progress in the political arena, the EC report had plenty of good news when it comes to regional economies.
Although the pace of economic reform has varied from country to country, the overall trend is the same.
Macroeconomic stability is being maintained, along with growth and low inflation.
BiH successfully introduced a Value Added Tax.
Albania has dismantled market barriers.
Montenegro and Serbia have achieved high levels of foreign direct investment, and Turkey has made significant advances in internal market reforms.
Only Kosovo has yet to show real progress, but this is not surprising, given its unresolved status.
Economic reform there naturally hinges on settling the province's political future.
Although the economic picture for the region is generally positive, here too trouble areas cannot be overlooked.
Though macroeconomic stability has been established, it could potentially be undermined by external debt, fragile fiscal positions, large grey economies and high levels of unemployment.
Financial and labour markets still do not function properly and the informal economy tends to subvert the official one.
Governments, too, have yet to mount an effective fight against money laundering.
Albania exports remain weak.
BiH, Montenegro and Serbia have trade and current account imbalances that need to be tackled.
Strong fiscal adjustment is needed, plus accelerated corporate restructuring and public sector privatisation.
Serbia should implement bankruptcy procedures, Macedonia and Kosovo establish firmer legal guarantees of property rights, and Croatia speed up structural reforms.
Along with the political and administrative adjustments, these financial and economic improvements are also vital for accession prospects.
Without them, the EU will remain close only geographically.
