23/09/2008
Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan and US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice met on Monday (September 22nd) on the sidelines of the 63rd session of the UN General Assembly.
Babacan briefed Rice on the Turkish proposal to create a Caucasus Stability Pact.
They also discussed co-operation in the fight against the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party, as well as the historic September 6th visit to Armenia by Babacan and Turkish President Abdullah Gul.
On Friday, Babacan will meet with his Armenian and Azerbaijani counterparts, Edward Nalbandian and Elmar Mamedyarov, in a bid to settle differences.
Serbian President Boris Tadic arrived in New York on Sunday (September 21st) to attend the 63rd session of the UN General Assembly, which opened September 16th.
He will be asking the UN to support Serbia's efforts to contest Kosovo's independence at the International Court of Justice.
A meeting Friday (September 19th) between Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and her Macedonian counterpart, Antonio Milososki, ended with an agreement to resume the name talks between the two countries under the auspices of the UN.
The meeting took place in Paris, on the sidelines of an EU-Central Asia forum.
Croatian Parliament Speaker Luka Bebic thanked Latvia on Monday (September 22nd) for backing Croatia's NATO integration.
Speaking to reporters after talks in Riga with his Latvian counterpart, Gundar Daudze, Bebic noted that Latvia was one of the first countries to ratify the protocol on Croatia's accession to NATO.
He expressed hope that other Alliance members would do the same.
Turkish State Minister Mehmet Simsek left for Paris on Sunday (September 21st) for a series of meetings aimed at boosting French investment in Turkey.
On Monday, Simsek and his delegation met with representatives of French satellite operator Eutelsat and the European Space Agency.
On Tuesday, Simsek spoke at the Paris Chamber of Trade and Industry.
Russian Minister of Extraordinary Situations Sergey Shoigu arrived in Belgrade on Sunday (September 21st) to inspect the work of Russian experts who are clearing the Nis airport of mines.
During his visit, Shoigu met with Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic, Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic and Economy Minister Mladjan Dinkic.
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis met on Friday (September 19th) with visiting Danish counterpart Anders Fogh Rasmussen.
They discussed energy, climate change and issues related to the EU.
Austrian diplomat Werner Almhofer is the new head of the OSCE mission in Kosovo, succeeding Switzerland's Tim Guldimann.
Almhofer, 48, has been Austria's ambassador to Bosnia and Herzegovina since 2005.
(Various sources -- 16/09/08-23/09/08)
