21/10/2008
Turkish Energy Minister Hilmi Guler attended the inauguration ceremony of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) developed by the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN). 
The ceremony was held in Geneva on Monday (October 20th), although the LHC began operating in September. 
Turkey was present as an observer country. 
In September, CERN launched a successful experiment to recreate conditions in the universe shortly after the "Big Bang". 
The organisation used the LHC -- a gigantic particle accelerator -- to conduct the experiment.
***
Kosovo's first diplomatic envoys left on Sunday (October 19th) for their missions, heading for Albania, Austria, Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Switzerland, Turkey and the United States. 
The ten charge d'affaires will effectively work as Pristina's ambassadors in some of the countries that have recognised Kosovo's independence. 
President Fatmir Sejdiu approved their appointments in September.
***
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci took part in an annual peace conference organised by the Crans Montana Forum in Rome on Monday (October 20th). 
Thaci did not address the meeting, but met with representatives of countries that have not recognised Kosovo, including member states of the Islamic Conference and other African and European countries.
***
A future solution to the Cyprus issue should guarantee political equality for the Turkish and Greek communities on the island, Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat said on Thursday (October 16th). 
"We want a settlement to guarantee that Turkish Cypriots will not face danger again," Talat said. 
He stressed the face-to-face reunification talks with Cypriot President Demetris Christofias have so far yielded a number of results regarding the proposed federal state in Cyprus. 
Continuing Turkey's role as a guarantor state is of crucial importance for Turkish Cypriots, who do not trust guarantees from the EU and a number of other international institutions, Talat noted.
***
Cypriot presidential adviser George Iacovou and his Turkish Cypriot counterpart, Ozdil Nami, met on Thursday (October 16th) to exchange views on the issues of governance and power sharing in the future Cypriot federation. 
They were laying the groundwork for the next meeting between Christofias and Talat. 
Currently, the two leaders are discussing the executive authority issue within the governance chapter, Iacovou said.
***
US Ambassador to Albania John Withers on Thursday (October 16th) called on parliament and the government to stop pressuring the chief prosecutor's office and allow it to do its work. 
"I call on these institutions to review actions that violate the prosecution's and justice system's independence," Withers said. 
He was reacting to the government's decision to probe the legality of a prosecutor's investigation into Bosnian businessman Damir Fazlic. 
He is accused of illegal financial activity and improper business relations with government officials, including Prime Minister Sali Berisha.
(Various sources 14/10/08-21/10/08)
