22/10/2008
More than 60 foreign musicians took part in this year's 27th edition of the Skopje Jazz Festival, which opened on Friday (October 17th).
The five-day festival included performances of bossa nova, modern Norwegian jazz, American jazz and other genres.
It ended on Tuesday with a concert by French drummer Manu Katche, US experimental jazzman Henry Threadgill, Justin Adams and Juldeh Camara.
Former National Basketball Association star Vlade Divac has become an adviser to the Serbian government.
The retired Los Angeles Laker and Sacramento Kings centre will be in charge of humanitarian and sports issues.
He will work with Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic.
A museum dedicated to Mother Teresa opened in her hometown of Shkodra, Albania, on Sunday (October 19th).
The museum is housed in her former home, which the International Centre for the Peace of Nations reconstructed.
It displays her photos, documents and personal objects.
A recently discovered golden treasure dating back to the Bronze Age is on display at the National Historical Museum in Sofia as of Monday (October 20th).
Excavations of a burial mound in the municipality of Harmanli, Bulgaria, uncovered a golden necklace made of 320 beads, as well as two golden utensils, a golden plate, a silver plate and a bronze knife.
The film Boogie by Romanian director Radu Muntean won the Zicherman Family Foundation award for best screenplay at the 16th Hamptons International Film Festival in New York state.
The festival, which mainly supports independent films, took place from October 15th to Sunday (October 19th).
The 45th Golden Orange Film Festival, Turkey's biggest cinema event, took place in Antalya from Friday (October 17th) to Sunday.
The Market -- a Tale of Trade, directed by Ben Hopkins, won the festival's Best Film Award.
The event hosted celebrities such as Bo Derek, Mickey Rourke, Adrien Brody and Kevin Spacey.
Bulgaria's Petar Stoychev won the FINA Open Water Swimming Grand Prix for the eighth consecutive year, the website of the International Swimming Federation announced.
In the last event of the season, held in Sumidero, Mexico, the Bulgarian champion did not finish the 15km-race, but he had accumulated enough points (126 total) to win.
(Various sources – 15/10/08-22/10/08)
