20/10/2008
German author Johann Gunther promoted his latest book, Digital Natives and Digital Immigrants, in Pristina on Thursday (October 16th).
At the event, Gunther said new technologies enjoy a warmer reception in developing countries.
The book presents Gunther's lab work on telecommunications technology and is translated in Albanian.
The US Export Control and Related Border Security Assistance programme donated nuclear detection equipment worth over 294,000 euros to Albania's customs and border police.
Officers will use the equipment at Albanian ports of entry to prevent smuggling of nuclear material or dual-use technologies.
The hi-tech Athens Digital Week exhibition took place in the Greek capital from October 13th to Sunday (October 20th).
Participants presented the latest technological improvements in telecommunications, video games, digital music and robotics.
Sixty-six Romanian students competing on 22 teams participated in the Romanian round of the 33rd International Collegiate Programming Contest.
The regional competition took place from Thursday (October 16th) to Sunday at the Polytechnic University of Bucharest.
Only 100 teams will enter the final in April 2009 in Stockholm.
A new centre for laser therapy and dermatological and plastic surgery opened on Wednesday (October 15th) at the Sofia Military Medical Academy.
The academy's dermatology and allergy department will administer the centre.
It has two new operating rooms for plastic surgery with electrical and water installations that are unique in Europe, said Stoyan Tonev, the head of the academy.
Archaeologists unearthed the remains of a church and an antique tomb from the first century AD in Zasad, near Trebinje, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
They discovered the fragments of an amphora from the first century, ceramics and other remains.
The 6th International Symposium of Coloproctology opened in Belgrade on Thursday (October 16th).
More than 500 local and foreign specialists gathered in Serbia's capital to exchange experiences in methods of treating colon cancer and the early diagnostics and prevention of the disease.
The event wrapped up on Saturday.
(Various sources – 13/10/08-20/10/08)
