18/06/2008
The Croatian football team triumphed in Group B of the Euro 2008 tournament, beating Poland 1-0 on Monday (June 16th) after earlier wins against Austria and Germany. 
The Croatian team will travel to Vienna for a quarterfinal match against Turkey, which moved on to the next round after defeating the Czechs 3-2. 
Romania lost to the Netherlands on Tuesday . 
Greece fell out of contention after losing to Russia.
***
Pristina will be one of 100 cities around the world celebrating Music Day, organised for the first time in Kosovo by municipal authorities in co-operation with the French Embassy. 
On Saturday (June 21st) performers will play several musical genres in different locations in Pristina, including classics, children's music and alternative music. 
The KFOR orchestra will march in a parade.
***
The second international "Kratkofil" short-film festival opened in Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina, on Thursday (June 12th). 
The four-day forum featured 50 films from four continents, and offered a special programme on Polish cinematography, including films by directors Roman Polanski and Krzysztof Kieslowski.
***
A European Commission fund will allocate 3m euros to the rehabilitation of Albanian urban centres with historic and cultural heritage. 
Twelve cities have applied to be part of the "Sustainable and Integrated Development of Historical and Cultural Heritage of Albania" project, but only four cities will receive the funding.
***
Bulgarian animator Milen Vitanov won a special jury award at the International Animated Film Festival held in France from June 8th to Friday (June 13th). 
Vitanov won for his movie "My Happy End". 
"She Who Measures" by Veljko Popovic and "Morana" by Simon Bogojevic Narath, both from Croatia, also received awards.
***
Kotor, Montenegro, on Saturday (June 14th) and Sunday hosted the seventh edition of the Mediterranean festival of films on the underwater world, the Sub-Aqua Fest. 
The event screened 14 movies from 12 European countries. 
The movie "One for All" by Spanish director Leandra Blanka won the main prize.
(Various sources – 11/06/08-18/06/08)
