14/03/2008
Romania's defence ministry and Lockheed Martin signed a 78.3m-euro contract for co-production of 17 multi-mission surveillance radar systems.
Lockheed Martin will build the radar components and sub-assemblies for the 17 systems, while UTI Systems will provide additional components and work on radar integration and testing.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's largest pharmaceutical company, Bosnalijek, posted a 3.8m-euro profit in 2007, a decline of 3.4% year-on-year, Investitor.ba said on Monday (March 10th).
Total revenues grew by 4% year-on-year last year to 45m euros.
Bosnalijek controls about 23% of the domestic pharmaceutical market.
Standard & Poor's has revised its rating outlook on Serbia from stable to negative, the company announced on Tuesday (March 11th).
The revision was triggered by the increased political instability and uncertainty following the collapse of the government.
The Office of the Auditor General for Kosovo on Monday (March 10th) stated the results of the inspection of several institutions relating to the 2006 budget.
The report finds that while abuse in public procurement, poor tax collection and control mechanisms remain serious problems, the government and Kosovo Trust Agency were the "top violators" of the budget.
Albanian Minister of Economy, Trade and Energy Genc Ruli announced on Wednesday (March 12th) that the state-owned oil refining and trading company, ARMO, will be offered for sale in June, as part of the government's privatisation programme.
Currently, 15 foreign companies have expressed interest in acquiring ARMO.
International rating agency Moody's on Wednesday (March 12th) assigned Montenegro a Ba2 issuer rating for foreign currency debt, while the country ceiling for long-term foreign currency debt is Baa1.
The outlook is stable.
This is the first time Moody's assigned ratings to Montenegro.
The World Bank has granted a 3.2m-euro loan to Croatia as part of its Global Environment Fund.
The funds will be used to finance a pollution protection project for agriculture in eastern Croatia.
(Various sources – 07/03/08-14/03/08)
