15/07/2008
Greek Cypriot President Demetris Christofias attended the Union for the Mediterranean founding summit in Paris Sunday (July 13th), where he met with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. 
Ban assured Christofias of the UN's interest in a rapid resolution of the Cyprus issue, and the two agreed on the importance of launching direct reunification talks between the Greek Cypriot  and Turkish Cypriot communities. 
Ban also met with Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat in Berlin on Tuesday, in an effort to boost the reunification process ahead of the two leaders' meeting on July 25th.
***
Albania signed a memorandum to join EUFOR's peacekeeping operations in Chad. 
The agreement was finalised on Sunday (July 13th) in Paris during a meeting between Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana. 
Albania will send 62 peacekeepers to Chad.
***
Cypriot Foreign Minister Markos Kyprianou met with Prefect of Thessaloniki Panayiotis Psomiades on Thursday (July 10th) as part of a three-day visit to northern Greece. 
Kyprianou and Psomiades discussed the Cypriot issue and relations with Turkey.
***
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic met with his visiting Slovak counterpart, Jan Kubis, on July 8th. 
They discussed bilateral ties, with particular focus on economic co-operation. 
Jeremic then travelled to Montenegro to meet with President Filip Vujanovic, Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, Foreign Minister Milan Rocen and Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic.
***
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Foreign Minister Sven Alkalaj announced on July 8th that BiH intends to open embassies in six countries, including Albania, during a meeting with Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli. 
Alkalaj said that BiH is doing everything possible to liberalise its visa regime for the citizens of Albania. 
Topalli said that establishing diplomatic representations in Sarajevo and Tirana is of major importance.
***
Bulgarian and Montenegrin officials met last week in Podgorica for bilateral political consultations on security issues. 
The Bulgarian delegation's leader was the director of the NATO and International Security Directorate, Petyo Petev, while the Montenegrin delegation included Deputy Foreign Minister Dragana Radulovic and Deputy Minister of Economic Development Nada Medenica. 
The consultations were in line with a 2007 memorandum for co-operation between Bulgaria and Montenegro on Podgorica's Euro-Atlantic integration.
(Various sources 08/07/08-15/07/08)
