17/10/2008
Representatives of the former Yugoslav states attended a two-day international stock exchange conference Wednesday (October 15th) and Thursday in Vienna.
The conference brought together regional stock exchange delegates from Macedonia, Serbia, Slovenia, Republika Srpska, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia.
The conference aimed to acquaint the biggest securities issuers in the region with their capital markets and to attract international investors.
The EU will invest 4m euros in a solar energy project in northern Cyprus.
It is expected to produce over 1.5m kWh of electricity each year.
The project will receive funding under the EU's Financial Aid Regulation for the Turkish Cypriot community.
Energy experts are currently trying to determine the best location for the new plant.
Romania will introduce a 50,000-euro state guarantee for all private deposits in local banks, Mugur Isarescu, the governor of the National Bank of Romania, said on Wednesday (October 15th).
The bank deposit guarantee will be raised from the current 20,000 euros in response to the global financial crisis.
Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev officially opened the renovated Unit 3 at the Maritza Iztok 2 thermal power plant on October 13th.
The station's Unit 4 will start working by the end of 2008 after renovations, if it stays on schedule.
The two units together will provide an additional 350 MW to the country's power network, said Stanishev.
Turkish flag carrier Turkish Airlines launched a tender to buy 105 planes, including options for 30, by 2023, the company announced on Wednesday (October 15th).
The company said it invited Boeing and Airbus to bid.
In July, unemployment in Greece dropped to 7%, compared to 7.8% in July of last year, according to data announced on October 13th by the National Statistical Service.
Unemployment has declined steadily since 2004.
Republika Srpska postal service operator Poste Srpske announced on October 10th that it will establish its own bank and has filed a request with the RS Banking Agency.
The bank should start commercial operations next year.
The project envisions that Poste Srpske will retain majority ownership for at least five years while offering a minority stake to the public.
(Various sources – 10/10/08-17/10/08)
