12/03/2008
Croatia's  Blanka Vlasic won the world champion title in indoor high jump at the 12th IAAF Championship in Valencia on Sunday (March 9th).
She posted a jump of 203cm.
Last year, she won the gold in the outdoor high jump world championships in Osaka.
The nine-day Thessaloniki Documentary Festival opened on Friday (March 7th) in Thessaloniki, Greece.
The festival, which is titled "Images of the 21st Century", is celebrating its 10th anniversary and will screen documentaries from around the world.
Greece bid farewell to winter on Sunday (March 9th) with carnivals and traditional rituals throughout the country.
The annual festival in Patras drew about 40,000 people into the streets.
Macedonia's first international pantomime festival opened in Skopje on Monday (March 10th), featuring performers from Bulgaria, Romania, Japan and the United States.
Event organisers say there are only 20 such festivals in the world.
The drama "Yumurta" (Egg) by Turkish director Semih Kaplanoglu won the best movie award at the 13th annual Nuremberg Turkish-German Film Festival on Sunday (March 9th).
"Yumurta's" Nejat Isler won the best actor award at the festival, which ran from February 28th to Sunday.
The 12th annual Sofia Film Fest, Bulgaria's biggest cinema event, began on Thursday (March 6th) and will include about 100 feature films, 20 documentaries and 60 short movies.
The festival, which closes on Sunday (March 16th), focuses on Balkan cinema.
Jelena Tomasevic will represent Serbia, which is hosting the Eurovision song contest, with her song "Oro" at the competition in May.
Tomasevic won the final in the Bevizija 2008 contest on Monday (March 10th).
Last year, Serbian Marija Serifovic's "Molitva" (Prayer) won the Eurovision contest in Helsinki.
Kosovo artists held a number of events Thursday (March 6th) to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the death of national hero Adem Jashari.
The Kosovo Art Gallery, Kosovo Ballet and Kosovo Centre for Children Theatre hosted activities to mark the event.
(Various sources – 05/03/08-12/03/08)
