14/04/2008
Scientists from the University of Thessaly, Greece, are preparing a blood test for early diagnoses of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases.
Research is also being carried out by the US company Power 3 Medical Products.
If successful, the test will be launched this year under the name NuroPro, first in Greece and later in the US and other countries.
Skopje's St. Cyril and Methodius University has signed an agreement for co-operation with the pharmaceutical company Alkaloid.
Under its terms, Alkaloid employees will participate in different joint scientific groups at the university for research, technology exchange and continued education of students regarding the needs of the pharmaceutical industry.
Albanian internet provider Abbisnet has doubled its international capacity, enabling it to resolve recent problems involving low internet transfer.
Abbisnet activated a link this month with a <b>Montenegrin</b> telecom and will soon reach an agreement with <b>Kosovo</b> to avoid network problems caused by heavy internet traffic.
The radio and the internet are the two most reliable sources of information in Greece, according to a recent study by the Greek Communications Institute, presented on Wednesday (April 9th) at an open forum dubbed "Mass Media -- Ethics, Profit and Power".
Although television news remains the most popular, its quality is widely perceived as low, the study revealed.
The IT and communications market in Romania reached 5.12 billion euros in 2007 and is expected to exceed 7 billion euros in 2008, Communications and Information Technology Minister Karoly Borbely announced.
According to Borbely, the market accounted for 7% of GDP last year and is estimated to reach or even surpass 10% of GDP this year.
Serbia's IT market value reached 460m euros last year, a 37% increase from 2006, according to a report by Mineco on April 4th.
IT equipment accounted for 69% of the total IT market turnover.
IT investments per person in Serbia were 62 euros last year.
Mineco added that investments in the IT sector are projected to reach 500m euros this year.
(Various sources – 07/04/08-14/04/08)
