12/08/2008
China is interested in further strengthening its ties with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), especially in trade, Chinese President Hu Jintao said on Saturday (August 9th) after a meeting with his BiH counterpart, Haris Silajdzic.
Albania and China have good relations and their bilateral co-operation should continue, Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha said after a meeting with his Chinese counterpart, Wen Jiabao, on Sunday (August 10th).
Berisha invited Wen to visit Albania.
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias on Monday (August 11th) met his Chinese counterpart, Hu Jintao, in Beijing to discuss bilateral relations and closer co-operation.
Hu said his country is willing to enhance high-level exchanges, expand co-operation in various fields and enforce co-ordination with Cyprus within the UN and the Asia Europe Meeting (ASEM).
Albania is committed to its role as a factor for peace and stability in the region, Foreign Minister Lulzim Basha said on Monday (August 11th) after meeting with Jason P. Hyland, director of the US State Department Office for Central and Southern Europe.
They discussed Kosovo and emphasised the prospect of EU entry as a factor for regional stability.
Basha thanked Hyland for Washington's support of Albania's NATO accession process.
Bulgarian Justice Minister Miglena Tacheva and German counterpart Brigitte Zypries signed a treaty for judicial collaboration between the two countries.
The declaration renewed and supplemented an agreement signed on August 5th 1999.
China will invest in research and development in Montenegro, Chinese President Hu Jintao said on Thursday (August 7th) during a meeting with Montenegrin counterpart Filip Vujanovic in Beijing.
Chinese companies have plans to invest in infrastructure projects in Montenegro, as well as in energy and tourism, Hu said.
Serbia will never recognise Kosovo's independence and will continue to search for a compromise solution through legal means, Serbian President Boris Tadic said on Friday (August 8th) during a meeting with US President George W. Bush in Beijing.
They met during a dinner to mark the opening of the Olympic Games.
Tadic also met with French counterpart Nicolas Sarkozy and discussed prospects for the ratification of Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU.
During a meeting Thursday (August 7th) with Chinese Communist Party representatives, Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha asked Beijing to reconsider its position and to recognise Kosovo's independence.
Berisha said this would help the Balkans move beyond the past.
Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad held talks with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on August 5th.
They discussed the Middle East peace process, the situation in Iraq and bilateral ties.
Assad was spending his holiday at the Turkish resort of Bodrum.
(Various sources 05/08/08 - 12/08/08)
