30/04/2007
By Aydin Ileri for Southeast European Times – 30/04/07
Turkey's new social security reform package, introduced in July 2004, has been eliciting criticism from civil society organizations and academicians for a number of reasons.
One objection is that the proposed reforms do not meet EU standards, despite claims to the contrary by Labour and Social Security Minister Murat Basesgioglu.
In 2005, Basesgioglu pledged that his ministry was "seeking a reform package that is in accordance with the European Social Model".
The European Social Model does not consist of a common set of regulations imposed on member states by the EU institutions.
It dates back to 2000, when the members of the EU organised a meeting in Lisbon in order to devise an action and development plan for the future of the Union.
They agreed to co-ordinate their social policies through a governing process, called the Open Method of Co-ordination, which is based on voluntary participation, and norms and principles of the best practices among the member states.
Because the process is open-ended, voluntary and flexible, it can be hard to pin down whether or not the proposals put forward by the Turkish government do in fact meet the criteria.
However, critics argue that the preparation of the reform package was characterised by limited stakeholder dialogue and inadequate co-operation with the government.
This led to an undemocratic policy formation process which is ill-suited for the European social model, and which discriminates against the vulnerable segments of the society, they insist.
The package proposed by Basesgioglu contains several elements.
A General Health Insurance plan would be based on contributions by beneficiaries, in the form of monthly premiums.
Social Assistance Payments would be distributed to vulnerable segments of the population.
A Single Pension System is designed to prevent duplicate payments distributed by different social security organizations.
The entire system would be administered by a single social security organisation, in co-operation with sub-branches that are responsible for the distribution of benefits.
According to Ahmet Aksu, chairman of the Memur-Sen Labour Union, "the reform package proposes significant reductions in the monthly payments made to the vulnerable segments of the society.
Specifically, the youth, elderly, and widows, will be perversely affected."
"This situation may lead to inequalities and chaos in the county," he warned.
Civic organisations note that the public expenditures of EU member states are increasing, in terms of their share in the national budget and GDP.
Among the EU 25 (all the members except newcomers Bulgaria and Romania), the share earmarked for public expenditures is almost 20% of the GDP and 40% of the budget.
Among the ten members that joined in May 2004, it amounts to 17% of GDP and 37% of the budget.
By contrast, the Turkish government allocated only 4.5% of GDP, or 13.8% of the budget, to financing the social security system in 2004.
The reform package proposes to further reduce this contribution.
The government's main aim is "eliminating financial problems rather than solving the social security system’s fundamental problems," argues Gazi University's Kadir Arici.
Erinc Yeldan, one of the most prolific academicians in Turkey, agrees with Arici.
The reform package, he says, is best understood in the context of the IMF's "concern for financial stability".
In December 2006, meanwhile, Turkey's constitutional court ruled that some of the provisions of the social security legislation were in violation of the Turkish constitution, specifically those addressing the rights of public servants.
Labour leaders welcomed the decision.
Bircan Akyildiz, the chairman of Kamu-Sen, the Confederation of Public Servants' Unions, said it was a "justification" of their concerns.
Ismail Hakki Tombul, the chairman of KESK, the Confederation of Public Workers' Unions, went even farther.
In his view, the court "should have overturned the legislation in its entirety".
In response, Basesgioglu said his ministry "respects the ruling" and will now decide how to move forward.
The government insists it is working to build a social consensus, which is one of the indicators monitored by the EU.
The reform package, Basesgioglu told a recent conference in Ankara, "is a crucial topic that will affect the future of Turkey throughout the next 25 to 30 years".
He said his ministry will not "insist on a single solution and rush into passing the legislation" without taking into consideration the concerns of other stakeholders.
Until the constitutional court handed down its ruling, social security reform was to be launched in January 2007.
It has now been postponed until 2008.
The labour ministry will "take the ruling into consideration, seek the broadest consensus possible, and work on the legislation until then", Basesgioglu said.
At the moment, the Turkish Parliament is occupied with the upcoming presidential elections, scheduled for early May, followed by the national elections expected in November.
The latter could conceivably be bumped up to an earlier date.
With attention and energy focused on politics for the next several months, social security reform is expected to be delayed.
