26/02/2007
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 26/02/07
I was traveling to Riga, Latvia, last October to attend a conference on renewable energy. 
I applied for a visa at the Latvian Embassy in Rome. 
My transit was in Prague, where I had several hours to wait until I boarded a plane to Riga. 
I did not bother to ask for a visa to enter the Czech Republic -- long procedures and high fees would have been too much for my busy days as a journalist -- so I decided to stay in the transit area of the Prague airport.
A friend of mine, living in Prague, insisted that we see each other. 
I asked: "How?"
He came to the airport and we had a "meeting" -- like the kind in movies from the communist era, when people could meet only from afar, across borderlines. 
I remained within the limits of the airport and my friend remained within the official territory of the Czech Republic. 
It was a strange experience for both of us. 
Still, such meetings do happen in Eastern Europe in the 21st century.
A shared experience in the Balkans: visa frustration
My experience is not unique. 
One just has to take a look at the queues in front of foreign embassies in every Balkan capital. 
Then again, standing in a queue is just the start of a long and laborious process of getting an application and, finally, a visa. 
A frustrating experience at best.
During an EU summit at the Porto Carras, Greece, in 2003, the heads of states and governments of the EU and Balkan countries took on the task of liberalising the EU's visa regime for citizens of the Balkans.
However, since then, little practical progress has been made for people from the region.
Despite talks on easing the visa regime for several categories of people, the actual changes have yet to take effect.
The long wait is due to the need for Balkan countries to comply with EU conditions, such as strengthening the rule of law, combating organised crime, corruption and illegal migration, strengthening the administrative capacity of border authorities and ensuring document security.
A first "Balkan Schengen"?
For a moment, let us forget the frustration of the Balkans over obtaining a Schengen visa to European countries. 
The visa issue is in fact more complicated. 
Here's why.
As an Albanian passport holder, I need a visa even to enter the countries within the Balkan region. 
At one time, I paid 70 euros to obtain a visa for Serbia, which was approved with multiple entries. 
For entrance to Macedonia, one can obtain a visa at the border pass, but not when flying into Skopje airport -- for this, one should first obtain a visa through the Macedonian Embassy. 
For Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), I also need a visa. 
I will not even go into the process involved for entering Croatia, let alone new EU members Bulgaria and Romania.
Meanwhile, citizens of BiH and Serbia wishing to travel to Albania have to apply for a visa at the Albanian Embassy. 
Citizens of Macedonia can get it at the border. 
Bulgarians and Croats need no visa, but must pay a border tax.
As these complications suggest, while Southeast European countries are anxious for the EU to liberalise its visa regime, they have yet to secure the free movement of people even within the region. 
The post-communist transition is over. 
The conflicts of the 1990s are mostly resolved. 
Perhaps, some analysts suggest, the time has come to consider establishing a "Balkan Schengen".
"The existing Schengen visa system that applies in the EU is a good example and may be taken as a model for a free cross border movement, systematic border control and visa asylum and immigration issues in the Balkan countries," says Irena Gluhak, in a report published by the Political Science Research Center in Zagreb.
According to the study, the Balkan countries should not simply try to imitate the EU's experience, but rather use it as a reference point while creating their own security model. 
In any case, Schengen provides a successful example of how mobility can be achieved while at the same time maintaining security.
Uncertainty in Europe
During an interview, I asked EU Ambassador to Skopje Erwan Fouere if he had heard that now famous joke told in the region -- when the Balkan countries enter the EU, the existing members will leave and impose new visa regimes on what remains of the bloc. 
He replied that the visa issue is indeed a real frustration not only in the Balkans, but also for EU countries, and a problem that must be resolved.
"We also have to bear in mind the concerns of the EU member states which say that if the visa regime was not present, the risk of criminals freely moving is high," Fouere said. 
"But I think the actual visa regime causes much trouble for the ordinary citizens, because criminals that we want to prevent from traveling will always find [one] way or another to escape from the rules."
Finally entering the Czech Republic
Before leaving Latvia, with several hours of transit in Prague again on my way back and with mixed feelings from my cross-border meeting with my friend, I decided to call the Czech Republic's embassy in Riga to ask for a transit visa. 
I was surprised when the consular official said to me: "Sir, as a holder of an Albanian passport, you can enter the Czech Republic without a visa, as you already have a visa for Latvia. 
The same applies if you have a visa to enter any member state."
The decision was put into practice several months ago. 
My country's government, though, had yet to inform the people still queuing in front of the embassies. 
The Albanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs had not managed to update its website, with its long list of embassies and instructions directing Albanians where to apply.
Entering Prague was quite a relief as I finally met with my friend and had a normal chat over a couple of drinks. 
During that time, I refused to think about my visa troubles and which embassy my travels would take me to next.
