08/07/2008
French President Nicolas Sarkozy and Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev signed an agreement on strategic partnership Friday (July 4th) in Paris.
The document contains a road map for bilateral relations in all fields and earmarks deepening of military co-operation, especially in naval matters.
Bulgaria reportedly agreed to buy two French corvettes, one of which will be built at the Black Sea port of Varna.
Turkish President Abdullah Gul and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev held their first bilateral meeting on Saturday (July 5th) in the Kazakh capital of Astana.
They discussed prospects for bilateral co-operation in investments and tourism, as well as joint ventures on major infrastructure projects.
The chairmen of the chambers of the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) state-level parliament and the parliaments of the Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska (RS) will meet on Wednesday (July 10th) to align the legislative agenda related to the implementation of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement.
Croatian President Stjepan Mesic arrives today (July 8th) on an official visit to Montenegro following an invitation from his Montenegrin counterpart, Filip Vujanovic.
The two leaders will also meet Montenegrin Parliamentary Speaker Ranko Krivokapic and Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic.
Discussions will focus on bilateral issues, problems in the region and EU integration.
Greek President Karolos Papoulias and Austrian Chancellor Alfred Gusenbauer favoured Croatia's EU integration process on Thursday (July 3rd) during a meeting in Vienna.
Austria and Greece want to see Croatia in the EU as soon as possible, Gusenbauer's foreign policy adviser, Bernhard Wrabetz, said.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov met with Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan in Istanbul on July 2nd.
The two discussed the talks between Syria and Israel mediated by Turkey.
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice is expected to visit Bulgaria at the end of July as part of her European tour, Bulgarian Foreign Ministry spokesman Dimitar Tzenchev said on July 2nd.
Rice will receive Bulgaria's highest national medal for helping obtain the freedom of Bulgarian medics imprisoned in Libya, he said.
Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni arrived Monday (July 7th) on an official visit to Ljubljana following an invitation from his Slovenian counterpart, Dimitrij Rupel.
Hyseni and Rupel will discuss planned Slovenian aid to Kosovo.
Irish Ambassador to Bosnia and Herzegovina Patrick A. McCabe said on July 1st that the EU does not accept an approach to European integration that involves sub-state elements.
He was reacting to recent comments by Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, who said that the RS could attain EU membership faster than BiH could.
(Various sources 01/07/08-08/07/08)
