10/10/2008
The Bucharest Stock Exchange suspended trading on Wednesday (October 8th) following massive losses as a repercussion of the world financial crisis.
The Istanbul Stock Exchange composite index plummeted to 29,096.18 points on Wednesday, but stocks recovered and reached 29,900 points.
The Cypriot political leadership discussed an emergency action plan Tuesday to tackle the current global credit crisis.
Serbia's Central Bank said the country's banking sector remains stable due to a restrictive fiscal policy, and urged the public not to panic.
The Greek government announced it would pass new legislation guaranteeing deposits up to 100,000 euros for a three-year period.
Greece opened its first biogas plant in Kavala on October 4th.
The new plant will produce biogas and organic fertiliser through a state-of-the-art integrated animal waste management system.
The Kavala-based company KREKA S.A built the model unit, worth 3.5m euros.
The company and the ministry of economy and finance co-financed it.
The Romanian government decided on Wednesday (October 8th) to establish a national energy company, which should group nearly 50% of the country's power production.
The new company, named Electrica, will have a total capacity of 10,000 MW, said Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu.
Turkey will invest 230m euros in Croatia's Zadar port, Kemal Ozgen, chairman of the Antalya Chamber of Commerce and Industry (ATSO), announced on Wednesday (October 8th).
The new Zadar seaport will open in 2011.
Kosovo has increasing unemployment, slow economic growth, a high trade deficit and growing inflation, says a report by the Institution for Development Research Riinvest published on October 6th.
The report claims bad governance is perpetuating old socio-economic trends.
The World Bank approved a new partnership strategy for Croatia, extending over the next four years, from 2009 to 2012.
The Bank says the strategy incorporates a budget of 1.319 billion euros to be disseminated through direct loans, in technical and analytical support.
The initiative aims to boost Croatia's EU accession process, speed up its convergence process and foster fiscal, social and ecological sustainability.
(Various sources – 03/10/08-10/10/08)
