08/04/2008
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) House of Representatives Speaker Milorad Zivkovic and his deputy, Niko Lozancic, arrived on Monday (April 7th) in Macedonia for a two-day visit.
They met with Parliament Speaker Ljubisa Georgievski, Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, and President Branko Crvenkovic.
They will also meet Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki and members of parliament.
Turkish President Abdullah Gul stressed full EU membership for Turkey during his first-ever meeting with French counterpart Nicolas Sarkozy last week in Bucharest during the NATO summit.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan, Gul, and Sarkozy also discussed bilateral relations and NATO agenda topics.
European Commission (EC) Director for the Western Balkans Pierre Mirel was in Belgrade on Friday (April 4th), where he attended the signing of an agreement on a 165m-euro package of EU financial aid to Serbia.
Mirel met with Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic and said that if Serbia fulfils technical requirements, the EU could abolish the visa regime for Serbians in the first half of 2009.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic met on Friday (April 4th) with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in New York.
Ban confirmed that the UN will investigate the events in Mitrovica on March 17th, when UNMIK and KFOR stormed a courthouse that Serbs had seized.
Ban also expressed his concern over Serbian plans for May 11th elections in Kosovo.
Jeremic described the announcement of a UN investigation into the March 17th incident the most important result of their meeting.
Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis met with UN Senior Envoy Lynn Pascoe on Monday (April 7th) as part of Pascoe's tour of Cyprus, Greece, and Turkey.
He travels to Ankara on Tuesday for talks on Cyprus, having met both leaders of both communities on Cyprus last week.
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivailo Kalfin left for a two-day visit to Athens on Sunday (April 6th).
His schedule included talks with Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis.
Bulgarian Labour and Social Policy Minister Emiliya Maslarova left for Vietnam on Sunday (April 6th).
During her visit, she is to sign a memorandum on bilateral co-operation in labour, social insurance, and social security and meet with Labour Minister Nguen Thi Kim Ngan, Prime Minister Fu Chong, parliament's Social Issues Committee, and the president of the Association for Providing Labourers.
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Montenegro have formally established diplomatic relations.
UAE Permanent Representative to the UN Ahmed Abdul Rahman Al Jaramain and Montenegrin Permanent Representative Nebojsa Kaludjerovic signed a declaration on Friday (April 4th) asserting their governments' desire to strengthen friendly relations and co-operation.
(Various sources -- 01/04/08-08/04/08)
