26/03/2007
By Robert C Austin for Southeast European Times – 26/03/07
At the end of March the Kosovo question seems set to move finally to the agenda of the UN Security Council. 
Months of UN-sponsored direct talks between Belgrade and Pristina have yielded little, and the UN's special envoy, former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, has declared them over.
Although some differences on technical issues may have been narrowed, the two sides still remain too far apart for serious talks about Kosovo's future. 
The ball is now in the court of the international community. 
It can accept, amend or reject Ahtisaari's plan, which paves the way for a monitored form of independence for the province.
Russia, which has been arguing that any resolution on Kosovo must be acceptable to Belgrade as well as Pristina, presents the most serious potential obstacle to endorsement of the Ahtisaari plan. 
However, its message has been hard to pin down. 
While sharply criticising the Finnish envoy and even calling for his replacement, Moscow has stopped short of a making a clear threat to use its Security Council veto. 
Meanwhile, it continues to insist on a negotiated solution, though it does not specify how this could be achieved, given the deeply entrenched stances put forward by each side. 
Serbia says it cannot accept any plan that makes Kosovo independent, while for Pristina the question of gaining sovereignty is non-negotiable.
At this point, most Albanians in Kosovo accept what Ahtisaari has to say. 
There is a small minority that insists he did not go far enough, and there have been demonstrations in Kosovo that ended with violence. 
Those opposed to the Ahtisaari proposal are in the minority -- most understand that the tempered form of independence for Kosovo is acceptable, especially if it means a prolonged NATO presence. 
This alone is an achievement. 
After all, Kosovo has been under international tutelage for almost eight years.
The original agreement, UNSC 1244, suggested that a referendum take place after three years, while the UN was given the authority over Kosovo's eventual fate. 
The three-year milestone passed long ago, leaving the province in limbo. 
The costs for a people trying to move on from a post-conflict situation have been enormous. 
Although status was initially tied to the realization of UN-set standards, these are hard to achieve in a climate of economic disarray. 
A functioning economy, meanwhile, is hard to build when the political situation is nebulous. 
For these and other reasons, the UN finally concluded last year that the status quo could not be maintained.
A close reading of the Ahtisaari proposal shows that Albanian side would receive most of what it was looking for. 
The demands of Serb and other minorities for autonomy, protection of rights and an enhanced political role are largely met. 
By contrast, almost no concessions were made to the Serbian government. 
Yes, Belgrade would retain the right to stay engaged in Kosovo, but they would lose effective control of what was formerly a part of Serbia's territory.
The blame for this ultimately resides with Slobodan Milosevic, whose policies sowed a legacy of polarization and distrust. 
Many would argue that Belgrade's current calls for "broad autonomy" are coming a decade too late. 
With few exceptions, the international community has viewed the status process mainly as a way to solve Kosovo's problems, not those of Serbia. 
It has been largely taken for granted that the blueprint should reflect the position of the ethnic Albanian majority -- though with substantive guarantees meant to ensure that another purely Albanian state did not emerge in the Balkans.
Should the Ahtisaari plan win Security Council endorsement and go into effect, what will be the benchmarks for success? 
Certainly minority rights will be one area of key concern. 
The plan sets forth strict rules intended to maintain Kosovo's multiethnic character. 
To be fair to the Kosovo government, the leadership in Pristina has shown that it understands this. 
At least on paper, it has made commitments that at times outdo even those proposed by Ahtisaari. 
Few EU states could point to the kind of initiatives that Kosovo is offering the Roma community, for example. 
Even before the UN envoy put forward his plan, leaders such as the Ora party's Veton Surroi were already charting the way ahead for reaching out to Kosovo's minorities.
Even if the Security Council makes adjustments to the Ahtisaari plan, it will be crucial to retain the provisions meant to guarantee diversity. 
Those provisions would give minorities a pivotal -- even decisive -- role in any future government. 
One can easily discern aspects of the Dayton and Ohrid settlements. 
The process of decentralisation gives maximum power to areas where Serbs are the majority. 
Along the lines of the Badinter principle, Ahtisaari even suggests that certain laws only be enacted with the approval of the majority of non-Albanian representatives in the Kosovo Assembly. 
Gains in language, cultural rights, education and access to media also meet and exceed international standards.
In essence, the Ahtisaari proposal offers a uniquely asymmetric state that is totally decentralised. 
Ensuring the functionality of such a state will by no means be easy. 
However, this option appears to be the only one that does not pose an immediate danger to regional stability. 
Ignoring the Kosovo Albanians' aspirations for independence, for instance, would almost certainly fuel extremism and even outright rejection of the international community, as well as the institutions it has strived to create. 
By contrast, failure to put in place adequate measures to protect minorities could quickly lead to a humanitarian crisis. 
In devising his blueprint, the former Finnish president has sought to chart a moderate, pragmatic course, one that attempts to establish the conditions needed to tackle the concrete problems facing this troubled part of the Balkans.
Robert C. 
Austin teaches the history and politics of Southeastern Europe at the Munk Centre for International Studies, University of Toronto.
