06/08/2008
Montenegro is hosting Live Fest, bringing together stars such as Lenny Kravitz, Dino Merlin, Zdravko Colic and Goran Bregovic from Tuesday (August 5th) to Thursday.
Vukic Raspopovic, director of the festival, said around 100,000 people are expected to attend the event.
Serbia won two gold medals at the 35th European Junior Swimming Championship, which was held in Belgrade from July 28th to Sunday (August 3rd).
Ivan Lendjer won the gold in the 17-to-18-year-old boys' 100m butterfly.
Caba Siladji captured the gold in the 17-to-18-year-old boys' 100m breaststroke.
The Serbian village of Guca will host a competition of self-taught trumpet players from Wednesday (August 6th) to Sunday.
The contest, whose winner will receive the Golden Trumpet award, will also feature exhibitions, sporting events, a traditional wedding parade and a variety of local foods.
Kosovo's ministry of culture, youth and sports will receive an extra 2.3m euros after a review of the country's budget.
The ministry plans to use the supplementary funding to continue archaeological excavations, conservation and restoration of museums.
Mersad Berber, Safet Zec, Jirzi Andrle and other artists will participate in this year's International Biennial Exhibition of Portrait Drawings and graphics from August 25th to October 25th in the International Portrait Gallery of Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
More than 200 artists from 50 countries in Europe, Asia, Africa, the United States and Australia are expected to participate in the event.
The Alfios River Music and Eco Festival featuring popular Greek singers will be held in southern Greece from Wednesday (August 6th) to Sunday.
The festival promotes a system of volunteers dedicated to the rescue, protection and eco-development of the river basin and the management of water resources.
The fifth edition of the Anonimul International Independent Film Festival will open on August 11th in Sfantu Gheorghe, Romania.
The festival will include separate contests for full-length and short films.
This year, the short-film section includes over 300 animated and feature films from more than 40 countries, as well as 26 Romanian short films.
The long-film section will feature nine films.
(Various sources – 30/07/08-06/08/08)
