22/01/2007
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 22/01/07
Labour markets in the new EU member countries can puzzle an outsider. 
Whether the unemployment rate is low (around 5.5%, as in Romania), or high (above 15%, as in Poland), sectoral labour shortages are being felt throughout the economy. 
And consequences can be quite severe.
How is it that shortages can coexist with surpluses -- unemployment -- so visibly in market economies? 
A historical look at the economic policies of transition economies might help untangle this paradox.
For many years, the rise of wages in transition economies was influenced by a key provision in the agreements signed by governments with the IMF. 
Specifically, public sector wages were not supposed to grow by more than a certain rate annually. 
The rate determined how many people had to be laid off in order to raise salaries for public sector employees. 
Clearly, a trade-off was at work here.
The provision operated also as a benchmark for collective bargaining sessions between firm owners and workers in the private sector. 
The root issues were fear of large budget deficits and the need to combat inflation and unsustainable external deficits. 
In recent years, however, the situation has evolved markedly.
In Romania, two major features of the economy explain wage dynamics. 
One is the share of the private sector in GDP formation, amounting to over two-thirds. 
This presumably diminishes the leverage that public sector pay has on the functioning of the overall labour market. 
Now that Romania has joined the EU, it may be that the dominant social model in the bloc -- where trade unions are more powerful than, say, in the United States -- will have a strong influence.
A second feature is massive migration. 
According to some estimates, more then two million Romanians work abroad, mostly in EU member countries. 
This migration explains why the unemployment rate is so low in Romania, even though industrial restructuring is taking its toll. 
There are cities and areas in Romania where unemployment is almost nil, and employers have a very hard time filling available positions.
Upward pressure on wages is an unavoidable effect of the steadily falling unemployment rate. 
Labour shortages are intense in certain sectors such as construction. 
Bechtel, a leading American firm and a major contractor in Romania, recently complained about such shortages. 
And this case is not unique.
The fact that migration reduces the overall unemployment rate and puts upward pressure on the average wage level is not surprising. 
But there's more to the story. 
In transition economies, a phenomenon tends to occur which is, ironically enough, reminiscent of the command system: simultaneous shortages and surpluses. 
A leading Hungarian economist, Janos Kornai, wrote a groundbreaking book explaining how the command system is inherently prone to this problem, because of its inability to allocate resources efficiently or achieve price equilibrium in market economies the coexistence of large shortages and surpluses should not be the rule of the game; rather, it indicates market rigidity due to various factor.
One cause, much debated in the literature and verified in practice, is the capture of jobs by insiders. 
This causes some people -- as the French call them, "les exclus" -- to remain outside the labour market circuit. 
Higher unemployment can also arise because of powerful shocks, such as sharp rises in the price of energy. 
The oil crisis of the 1970s, for instance, engendered "stagflation" in western economies.
It is noteworthy that surpluses and shortages can co-exist at largely different rates of unemployment. 
Unlike Romania, Poland has a high unemployment rate. 
Yet construction companies in Poland, as in Romania, complain about the lack of skilled workers. 
For the period 2007-2013, the Polish transportation ministry has allocated around $38 billion in the sector. 
But many worry that the lack of manpower could severely delay this ambitious construction programme. 
This, in turn, would slow down the pace of modernizing hard infrastructure.
An uninformed observer might see no cause for worry. 
In the long run, after all, aren't markets supposed to allocate resources where they are mostly needed? 
In fact, the reality is more complicated. 
People do not acquire new skills easily or readily.
In reality, things are more complicated since people cannot acquire new skills and know-how easily, rapidly. 
Even when the market demands such skills, there can be a lag time before the labour force is able to provide them. 
The difficulty of adjustment is a common denominator in many transition economies.
Western countries have their own forms of inertia. 
In old EU member countries, for instance, the opposition between insiders and outsiders has prompted an intense debate. 
"The global middle asks for reassurance," writes Harvard economist and former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers. 
He was referring to the anguish experienced by wage earners in affluent economies under the pressure of Asian competition. 
The inference is pretty clear: those who have jobs will do whatever they can in order to keep them, even if it impedes the smooth functioning of markets.
In Eastern Europe, upward pressure on wages will likely continue in the years to come. 
Indeed, wages may well grow more rapidly than forecast because of the impact of intense migration. 
The rise in wages would be felt in both the private and public sector too. 
Should that happen, unintended negative effects could emerge. 
Rising wages, if unaccompanied by adequate productivity gains, will cause inflation to creep up again and lead to larger, menacing, external deficits.
Meanwhile, for the first time, Eastern European labour markets are beginning to exert pressure to admit immigrant workers. 
Rising labour scarcity is being seen in various fields, in conjunction with considerably superior GDP growth rates (as compared to Old Europe). 
It is perhaps not coincidental, then, that Poland and the Baltic countries have opened their markets to Bulgarian and Romanian workers, without any restrictions.
