05/08/2008
Croatian President Stipe Mesic arrived on Saturday (August 2nd) on an official visit to Mongolia following an invitation from Mongolian counterpart, Nambaryn Enkhbayar. 
They discussed bilateral relations, especially economic. 
Mesic will also meet with Prime Minister Sanjaagiin Bayar and Parliament Speaker Danzangiin Lundeejantsan. 
He will then travel to China's northeastern province of Liaoning on Thursday and will be in Beijing to attend Friday's opening of the Summer Olympics.
***
Bahrain's King Hamad bin Isa Al-Khalifa wraps up a two-day visit to Turkey on Tuesday (August 5th). 
The first head of state from Bahrain to visit Turkey, he met with President Abdullah Gul and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Monday, signing a joint declaration on bilateral co-operation. 
He meets Chief of the General Staff General Yasar Buyukanit on Tuesday.
***
Greek Culture Minister Mihalis Liapis arrived in Beijing on Friday (August 1st) to attend sporting and cultural events celebrating the Cultural Year of Greece in China and the opening ceremony of the Summer Olympics. 
On Thursday, he meets with Liu Qi, head of the organising committee for the Games.
***
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic arrived on Monday (August 4th) for an official visit to Egypt, to meet with counterpart Ahmed Aboul Gheit and other senior officials. 
At a recent ministerial conference of the Nonaligned Movement in Teheran, Jeremic called on the organisation's members to support Serbia's request for the International Court of Justice to determine whether Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence complied with international law.
***
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan meets on Tuesday (August 5th) with Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad at the Aegean resort of Bodrum in southern Turkey, government officials announced. 
The two are expected to discuss the Turkish-mediated indirect Syria-Israel peace talks and Iran's nuclear programme. 
After his meeting with Assad, Erdogan heads to the province of Antalya, which suffered a major wildfire.
(Various sources 29/07/08 - 05/08/08)
