06/06/2008
The Croatian national air carrier, Croatia Airlines, said on Wednesday (June 4th) that it will start regular flights between Zagreb and Pristina as of June 16th. 
According to its website, flights between Zagreb and Kosovo's capital will take place three times a week on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. 
The company said the new route would better connect Kosovo with the region.
***
The World Bank approved a 8.3m-euro loan to improve secondary and local roads in Albania, an Albanian newspaper reported on Wednesday (June 4th). 
The project also aims to improve basic services and retail centers in the rural regions. 
The total cost of the project, to be implemented by the Albanian Fund for Development, is 25.8m euros.
***
Kosovo will request financial assistance worth 1.4 billion euros through projects that it will present at the July 11th Kosovo Donors' Conference in Brussels, Economy and Finance Minister Ahmet Shala said on Wednesday (June 4th). 
Shala presented Kosovo's midterm budget and investment framework to the foreign ambassadors in Pristina.
***
Bulgarian tobacco producer Pazardzik BT will buy the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) government's 67% stake in the Mostar tobacco factory, the FBiH Privatisation Agency announced on Tuesday (June 3rd). 
Executives will sign the contract in 15 days. 
The agency said that the Bulgarian investor has committed to pay 100,000 euros for the stake, invest an additional 3.5m euros and keep all 122 employees.
***
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic opened on Tuesday (June 3rd) in London the Montenegro Investment Forum, which the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is hosting. 
Event planners are seeking financing for the construction of the 280km Bar-Boljare highway to the Serbian border.
***
The Portuguese energy firm Martifer said on May 29th that it plans to start the construction of three wind power projects in Romania in September through its subsidiary Eviva Energy. 
The plants will have a combined 50MW capacity. 
The company's plans in Romania are to own wind power parks with a total installed capacity of 400MW by 2012, which would mean investing around 600m euros.
(Various sources – 30/05/08-06/06/08)
