03/03/2008
USAID Mission Director to Albania Edward T. Landau and Albanian Health Minister Nard Ndoka signed an agreement February 22nd on a three-year project designed to improve healthcare in local hospitals.
Among other things, a national electronic health information system will be established under the project, which is slated to cost around 3.6m euros.
Parts of the Greek coastline may sink due to rising Aegean Sea levels, according to a university study published in the Eleftherotypia newspaper.
According to the forecasts, in the best case scenario only 22 sq miles of the coastal area will be affected, while at worst 97.7 sq miles in the Thessaloniki coastal area will become submerged.
The rising sea levels are being attributed to climate change.
Canada donated new equipment worth 124,000 euros to the Sonata paediatrics hospital in Salata, Croatia.
The funds were raised through the Terry Fox Run, which is organised in cities all over the world to benefit cancer research.
A pilot project for the creation of a business-incubator was launched on Wednesday (February 27th) in Tetovo, Macedonia.
The goal of the project, developed jointly by the University of Southeast Europe in Tetovo and the Open Society Institute foundation, is to attract young computer and telecommunications specialists and to improve Macedonia's competitiveness on the local and global market.
New traffic-monitoring cameras will be installed across Cyprus to improve vehicle flow, the ministry of transport announced on Thursday (February 28th).
The government will invite tenders for the new system soon.
It is expected to cost around 15m euros.
A workshop titled "Development of BiH IT Society -- Missed Opportunities" was held on Thursday (February 28th) in Sarajevo.
The event was organised by the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Association of Information Technologies (BAIT).
Chairman Brano Vujicic noted that in 2003, there were about 200 IT firms in BiH, compared to 2,000 now.
(Various sources – 25/02/08-03/03/08)
