02/09/2008
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis and Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis were in Brussels on Monday (September 1st) to participate in the EU summit on the Caucasus crisis and possible repercussions.
Greece wants "territorial integrity and the independence of countries", foreign ministry spokesman George Koumoutsakos said.
He noted that Athens, in supporting this framework, did not recognise Kosovo or the regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
The national foreign policy council at the foreign ministry will discuss the Caucasus crisis on Thursday.
Romanian President Traian Basescu said on Monday (September 1st) that his country will not call for sanctions against Moscow.
Basescu, who was heading for the EU summit on the Caucasus crisis, said "sanctions would only freeze the current situation and provide new grounds for tensions".
He said he would call on the EU to demand Russian compliance with the Istanbul Accord on the withdrawal of troops from the breakaway regions of Transdniester and South Ossetia.
Macedonian Defence Minister Miroslav Stojanovski and his Serbian counterpart, Zdravko Ponos, met in Belgrade on Friday (August 29th), vowing to continue efforts to further develop bilateral defence co-operation.
The two officials discussed specific directions for future co-operation and their countries' joint participation in military missions and co-operation in human resources.
Stojanovski voiced Macedonia's readiness to share its 13-year experience in preparations to join NATO and the Partnership for Peace programme.
Praising the good co-operation between the two armies, Serbia's Ponos expressed hope that in the future, there will be no political obstacles to bilateral military co-operation.
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha met with Icelandic Prime Minister Geir Haarde in Tirana last week and signed an agreement on visa liberalisation.
"We welcome Iceland's readiness to sign the NATO protocol for Albania's membership, as well as its contribution for stability in the region," Berisha said after the meeting.
Haarde also met with President Bamir Topi and confirmed Iceland's desire to strengthen bilateral ties and to help Albania in its Euro-Atlantic integration process.
Albania will soon open its embassy in Brazil and will have representation there at the highest diplomatic level, Prime Minister Sali Berisha told a cabinet meeting Wednesday (August 27th).
Berisha called Brazil "a great and important country" and noted that opening an embassy is the next logical step after the removal of the visa regime with Brazil.
The two countries reached that decision after a recent meeting between Berisha and Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva on the sidelines of the Beijing Olympics.
(Various sources 26/08/08-02/09/08)
