04/04/2008
Tirana International Airport has signed a deal for a 22m-euro loan with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to build a new passenger terminal.
The airport aims to increase its capacity to 1.5 million passengers a year with the intended investment.
IMF mission in Albania head Gervin Bell said on Tuesday (April 1st) that the fastest solution to the current power crisis in Albania is the privatisation of the Power Corporation.
Bell warned that the power crisis has developed into a financial crisis, which is a burden on the state budget.
The national budgets of Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Turkey and Ukraine will allocate funds for the construction of a 7,000km-long highway, connecting the eight members of the Black Sea Economic Co-operation Organisation.
The EU and other institutions will help finance the project.
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu told British counterpart Gordon Brown on Wednesday (April 2nd) that Romania wants to attract UK investors to its energy and banking sectors.
The two leaders met on the sidelines of the NATO summit in Bucharest.
The modernisation of Montenegro's electricity infrastructure will cost around 250m euros, CEO of the country's power utility EPCG Srdjan Kovacevic said at a meeting on Wednesday (April 2nd).
Kovacevic explained that the figure excludes the cost of building new facilities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) GDP growth slowed to 6% in 2007, down from 6.7% the previous year, according to the preliminary data published in the latest bulletin of BiH Central Bank.
The nominal GDP produced by the economy last year amounted to 10.6 billion euros, up from 9.7 billion euros in 2006.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) plans to invest between 220m and 260m euros in Serbia this year, according to Hildegard Gacek, chief of the EBRD's office in Serbia.
Around 40m euros would be channelled into the financial sector, she added in an interview with Bankar magazine on Thursday (April 3rd).
(Various sources – 28/03/08 - 04/04/08)
