01/04/2008
UN Undersecretary General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe was in Cyprus on Monday (March 31st) for talks with Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders.
Following separate discussions with Greek Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat, Pascoe said he is "always optimistic" about ending the decades-long division of the island.
He declined to elaborate.
Great Britain supports Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU accession and urges lawmakers in the country to take all necessary steps, the leader of a British parliamentary delegation said on Monday (March 31st) during a visit to BiH.
The EU has set clear entry rules and BiH should focus on meeting them, John Austin added.
During their four-day visit, the British MPs are meeting with leaders at both the state and entity levels.
Anti-corruption efforts in Bulgaria must be stepped up, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso warned on Friday (March 28th).
He was on a four-day official visit.
While acknowledging judicial reforms and new legislation, Barroso said corruption cases were often subject to lengthy delays.
The EC will increasingly expect convictions, rather than only arrests and extended investigations, he said.
Swiss Foreign Minister Micheline Calmy-Rey said her country would continue to support the stabilisation and reconstruction process in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
She was in Sarajevo on Thursday (March 27th) for talks with BiH counterpart Sven Alkalaj.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his Bulgarian counterpart, Sergey Stanishev, vowed to boost bilateral co-operation.
Meeting in Sofia on Thursday (March 27th), the prime ministers reviewed some major joint economic projects and inaugurated a Bulgarian-Turkish Business forum.
Turkey will strongly support Albania's efforts to join NATO at the Alliance's summit in Bucharest, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said on Wednesday (March 26th) during visit to Tirana.
He met with his Albanian counterpart, Sali Berisha.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski hosted visiting Estonian Prime Minister Andrus Ansip on Wednesday (March 26th).
They agreed that Tallinn and Skopje have good political relations and a common interest in the further development of economic co-operation.
Ansip expressed strong interest in Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic integration and said that his country, as an EU member, is ready to provide help.
(Various sources – 26/03/08 - 01/04/08)
