23/04/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/04/07
Serbian authorities have launched a diplomatic effort aimed at scuttling the Kosovo status plan put forward by UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari. 
Appealing to several undecided nations, Belgrade hopes to gain support on the Union Security Council as it pushes for further talks and a new negotiator.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and President Boris Tadic continue to say that a sovereign Kosovo is unacceptable. 
They have dismissed Ahtisaari's plan – which would pave the way for Kosovo independence under the supervision of the international community. 
The Albanian side, meanwhile, has okayed it.
Belgrade's most visible ally has been Russia, which maintains that resolution of the Kosovo issue should not be rushed and that any solution must be acceptable to both sides. 
Moscow's stance has given Serbia the time and opportunity to try and rally additional support.
Vuk Jeremic, an adviser to Tadic, says the diplomatic action will be focused primarily on those UN Security Council member states that have voiced uncertainty. 
Kostunica adviser Vladeta Jankovic names, in particular, Slovakia and Indonesia, adding that Belgrade "should also count on" Congo, Ghana and South Africa. 
Last week, Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic flew to Pretoria to lobby officials there, including President Thabo Mbeki.
Political analysts give varied assessments of the prospects. 
According to Dusan Janjic, the April 3rd Security Council session has left Serbia with "more time and room to make new moves, in order for Serbia to strengthen its state and national presence in Kosovo and the Serbs' position in the province".
But another commenter, Nenad Djurdjevic, thinks Belgrade will be able to launch new negotiations only if it offers some new concrete strategy for Kosovo -- one that would also be acceptable to the international community.
Former Serbian Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic, now a Stability Pact official, told the Tanjug news agency that Belgrade could call for "the continuation of negotiations with a deadline", with partitioning of the province as the goal.
According to him, the negotiations would last three to six months. 
In co-operation with Pristina and the Contact Group, the authority of a Serb entity in northern Kosovo would be established, and that entity would then declare independence. 
After that, Belgrade would consent to the independence of the remaining part of Kosovo from Serbia.
However, the Contact Group has consistently said that partitioning Kosovo is not an option, and Pristina has rejected the idea as well. 
In any case, analysts say, such a proposal could bring additional troubles for Belgrade. 
Riza Halimi, a representative of the ethnic Albanians living in southern Serbia and the only Albanian representative in the Serbian Parliament, said on April 3rd that her constituency could demand that their region be joined with Kosovo, if the province is divided.
Albanians make up the majority in the Presevo and Bujanovac municipalities, near the border with Kosovo. 
In a referendum held in 1992, the Albanians from those municipalities said they wished to be joined with Kosovo and called their territory eastern Kosovo.
Neither the Serbian government nor the international community recognised the referendum as valid. 
Currently, Belgrade officials are trying to involve the Albanians from the two municipalities in Serbia's political life.
Political life, however, is overshadowed by Kosovo. 
More than 12 weeks have passed since the general elections, and the country still does not have a new government. 
The democratic bloc is not only fragmented and seemingly unable to reach a coalition agreement, but faces strong pressure from the ultranationalist Radicals. 
The latter have made it clear that they plan to capitalize fully on any perceived weakness with regards to Kosovo.
Radical leader Tomislav Nikolic boasts of his party's intention to mount "another October 5th" over Kosovo. 
That was the date when hundreds of thousands of demonstrators stormed state institutions and toppled Slobodan Milosevic's regime -- of which the Radicals were part.
"We [the Radicals] say yes, we are capable," Nikolic says. 
"No one will stay at home when the Kosovo issue is resolved."
The Radicals, whose leader, Vojislav Seselj, is awaiting trial before The Hague tribunal, are the single strongest party in Serbia, with around one million votes won in the January 21st general election. 
Since then, the democratic parties' failure to strike a deal appears to have bolstered the ultranationalists. 
Pollsters, such as Vinko Djuric of the Ipres agency, say the democratic parties stand to lose ground should a new vote take place. 
Some warn the Radicals could even gain enough votes to take power.
Faced with the threat from the right, the democratic parties have had little choice but to take a hard-line stance on the province's future. 
Kostunica's words of March 27th, delivered on national television, were strident. 
"A Russian veto in the Security Council of Ahtisaari's plan for tearing Serbia apart, for the ruthless rearrangement of our state borders, and Russia's veto of the brutal stealing of 15% of Serbian territory is in the deepest sense historic for Serbia and its people," he said.
That attitude sparked fierce criticism from the coalition gathered around Cedomir Jovanovic's Liberal Democrats, the only party in the Serbian Parliament advocating the idea of Belgrade's accepting Kosovo’s potential independence. 
One of the coalition leaders, Milan Protic, accused Kostunica of turning Serbia into "a Russian colony and drawing it away from Euro-Atlantic integration".
The Serbian Constitution stipulates that a new government must be formed by May 15th, when the three-month deadline expires. 
If no agreement is reached, Serbs will again have to go the polls. 
Tadic has said coalition negotiations would intensify starting this month, though he was unable to shed much light on the prospects. 
Serbian politics is shackled to the Kosovo issue, while the Kosovo issue is tangled up complexities that arise, in part, from Serbian politics. 
The result, in both cases: delay.
