30/03/2009
Companies offering IT equipment and services presented their wares at the IT fair in Pristina from Wednesday (March 25th) to Friday.
This was the sixth IT fair in Kosovo organised by the Ministry of Transport, Post and Telecommunications.
Turkey is conducting its first underwater archaeological study off the coast of Izmir province in the Aegean, Professor Hayat Erkanal of Ankara University told the Anadolu news agency on March 20th.
The diving-trained archaeological team, headed by Erkanal, is carrying out excavations in Limantepe, a submerged settlement near Urla.
Romanian police arrested a hacker suspected of breaking into Pentagon systems and planting malware, the news web site Ziare reported on March 20th.
Eduard Lucian Mandru, a student from the town of Iasi, allegedly broke into the US Department of Defence's systems under the nickname "Wolfenstein" in 2006.
Medical authorities in Greece are on high alert over the appearance of a dangerous mosquito species, the Asian Tiger, SKAI reported on March 20th.
The insect is a vector of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, a disease fatal to humans.
Authorities are identifying possible breeding grounds of the deadly mosquito.
Albanian doctors performed the first full kidney transplant in their country on Thursday (March 26th) at the Hospital University Centre in Tirana.
The 20-year-old patient received his mother's kidney.
Italian experts assisted in the surgery.
Scientists think that a fossil discovered near Zajecar, Serbia, might be the tooth of a deinothere, a prehistoric relative of the elephant.
Excavators also found fragments of a bone.
Experts at the Natural Science Museum in Belgrade will examine the fossil to confirm if it is part of a prehistoric animal.
The administrative council at Ljubljana University decided on Wednesday (March 25th) to grant scholarships to some students at St. Kliment Ohridski University in Bitola, Macedonia.
The money will come from a scholarship fund for universities in Southeast Europe.
The Croatian Technology Institute is financing the development of the first Croatian robotic system.
The project, launched in collaboration with the University of Zagreb's department of engineering and shipbuilding, began last May.
The robot needs only to be connected to computers that will control it.
(Various sources – 23/03/09-30/03/09)
