31/03/2009
Serbian President Boris Tadic was in Bucharest on Friday (March 27th) to meet with Romanian counterpart Traian Basescu. 
During talks, Tadic said that the recognition of Kosovo's independence might create a precedent for future trouble in the Balkans. 
He also said the Western Balkans' and Serbia's membership in the EU is of strategic importance for the region and Europe as a whole. 
Basescu said Romania supports prompt ratification of Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU.
***
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic was in Vienna on Monday (March 30th) meeting with Austrian counterpart Michael Spindelegger. 
Jeremic reiterated that the process of European integration of the Western Balkans must continue in spite of the global economic crisis, as it is in the interest of peace, stability and prosperity not only in the region but also for Europe as a whole.
***
The presidents of Afghanistan and Pakistan will hold talks in Ankara Wednesday (April 1st) in a third Turkish-sponsored meeting on combating terrorism, Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan said. 
Conferring Wednesday are Afghan President Hamid Karzai, Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari and Turkish President Abdullah Gul. 
The foreign ministers, army chiefs and heads of intelligence agencies of the three countries are also expected to participate in the meeting.
***
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha met with US Ambassador to Tirana John Withers on March 25th to give assurances that he will work hard to ensure democratic elections in June. 
They also discussed Albania's expected membership in NATO. 
Berisha described Tirana's accession to the Alliance as the biggest event in its foreign policy and security history since its independence.
***
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina agreed on March 24th to liberalise movement of citizens and goods. 
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and Bosnian counterpart Nikola Spiric signed the related agreement in Sarajevo. 
The accord aims to increase trade and boost tourism between the two countries. 
Both prime ministers promised to open embassies in each other's country.
(Various sources 24/03/09-31/03/09)
