29/05/2009
The city of Ohrid <b>Macedonia</b> hosted a Turkish-Macedonian business forum Tuesday (May 26th) following a Macedonian government initiative.
Over 100 Turkish businessmen and industrialists attended.
Turkish Minister of Trade and Industry Zafer Caglayan was part of the delegation, and Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski was among other senior officials and local entrepreneurs.
Turkey's state-run research company TPAO and Brazil's oil company Petrobras signed a 575m euro investment agreement May 22nd to explore oil resources in the Black Sea.
Oil production will most likely launch in the next few years, Turkish President Abdullah Gul said at a press conference in Ankara, after talks with Brazilian counterpart Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva.
Cypriot Finance Minister Charilaos Stavrakis and visiting Syrian Minister of Economy and Trade Amer Syrin signed a protocol on May 21st to strengthen bilateral economic co-operation.
The signing followed the 6th session of the Cypriot-Syrian Intergovernmental Commission on Economic, Scientific, Technological and Industrial Co-operation, held in Nicosia.
The 34th edition of the Cyprus International Exhibition in Nicosia began on Sunday (May 24th).
Over 150 exhibitors from Cyprus, as well as 20 foreign countries, including Greece and Romania, showcased their products and services.
Turkey's Is Bankasi has been named Europe's best sponsor in an international competition, the bank said on Saturday (May 23rd).
Is Bankasi received the top prize in the Superior Achievement in Branding and Reputation Awards (SABRE) 2009 for its support of the Turkish Chess Federation.
The awards ceremony took place in Stockholm on May 21st.
The SABRE Awards, Europe's top awards for the public relations industry, are presented annually.
Serbian national air carrier JAT will change names and enlarge its air fleet in 2010, CEO Sasa Vlaisavljevic said on Wednesday (May 27th).
He added that the new names being considered are Air Serbia, Serbian Airways or Serbian Airlines.
Estimated rebranding costs will reach approximately 250,000 euros.
(Various sources – 22/05/09-29/05/09)
