26/11/2008
Serbian tennis star Ana Ivanovic, UNICEF's national ambassador to Serbia, has launched the organisation's Christmas campaign in her home country.
Serbian basketball legend Aleksandar Djordjevic is also supporting the cause.
All funds raised through the sale of UNICEF teddy bears, greeting cards and toys will fund UNICEF programmes in Serbia.
Over There, by Iranian director Abdolreza Kahani, won the Golden Alexander award at the 49th Thessaloniki International Film Festival on Sunday (November 23rd) in Greece.
The Silver Alexander award went to Romania's Adrian Sitaru for Hooked.
Conservators recently restored an ancient Mithraic temple and opened it to visitors in the town of Doliche in Turkey's southeastern province of Gaziantep.
The temple is dedicated to the Mysteries of Mithras, a religion popular among the military in the Roman Empire.
The restoration is part of a project aiming to turn Doliche into an open-air museum.
German artist Gert Hof is planning to recreate the Colossus of Rhodes, one of the world's seven ancient wonders, in the harbour area of Greece's Rhodes Island.
The new Colossus will be taller and bigger than the original.
Hof plans to erect it at the original spot, an outer pier in the harbour where it will be visible to passing ships.
He intends to dedicate it to world peace and to cast it from melted-down weapons gathered worldwide.
The project is expected to cost up to 200m euros.
Romania won the Carpathian Women's Handball Cup in the town of Cluj-Napoca on Sunday (November 23rd).
The team defeated Germany 32-30 and took the title by amassing six points in three matches.
Ukraine and Germany finished second with four points each, while Croatia failed to gain any points.
Judges named Romanian Luminita Hutupan the best goalkeeper of the competition.
The 11th Tirana Book Fair took place between November 14th and November 19th.
Publishing houses from Albania dominated the event.
Fair participants sold more than 150,000 books.
Two Italian writers, Alberto Bevilaqua and Rafaele Nigro, were among the fair's special guests.
The sixth edition of the Skena Up International Students Film and Theatre Festival is occurring in Pristina through Thursday (November 27th).
Festival organisers will present a total of 92 short movies and ten plays during the event's seven days, including the film In Line, produced by Caffi Reto.
Serbia's national football team won a resounding 6-1 victory against Bulgaria in Belgrade on November 19th.
Striker Savo Milosevic scored two goals in his farewell match with the national team.
The veteran could have scored even more goals but missed two penalty shots
(Various sources 19/11/08-26/11/08)
