30/12/2008
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said on Friday (December 26th) that his country favours a unified Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
During a one-day visit to Sarajevo, the minister told BiH state TV he expects a solution to the crisis in BiH, since political forces that favour compromise and agreement are gaining strength.
He met with his Bosnian counterpart, Sven Alkalaj.
Serbian President Boris Tadic said on Friday (December 26th) that Belgrade will closely monitor the work of the EU's EULEX mission in Kosovo to make sure it carries out its mandate properly.
Serbia's institutions would be at EULEX's disposal in the coming period, which he said could be extremely important for the effectiveness of the EU mission's work in Kosovo.
"EULEX is a technical mission, and, therefore, it should be status-neutral," he stressed.
"The status of Kosovo can be defined only by the UN Security Council, and no mission in the country has the power to determine it," Tadic said.
Czech President Vaclav Klaus pledged his country's support for Albania's efforts to join the EU and NATO at a meeting with Albanian counterpart Bamir Topi on Saturday (December 27th).
Topi was on a one-day visit to the Czech Republic.
Last week, Klaus signed the protocol for Albania's accession to NATO.
Ratification by all member states will allow Albania, along with Croatia, to join the Alliance at its next summit in April 2009.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic and visiting Macedonian counterpart Nikola Gruevski said they were satisfied Thursday (December 25th) with the "excellent co-operation" between their countries.
Djukanovic expressed gratitude to Macedonia for supporting Montenegro's efforts to join the EU and NATO.
He vowed to back Macedonia's NATO bid, saying Skopje has met all membership standards.
Slovenian President Danilo Turk urged Serbia on December 24th to accelerate its progress towards EU membership.
He stressed the "great importance" of war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic's arrest and extradition to The Hague tribunal.
"At this point, the question of Mladic is very important [for Serbia's EU aspirations]," Turk said in an interview with the Belgrade daily Vecernje Novosti.
Asked whether it is possible to unblock the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between Serbia and the EU without Mladic's extradition, Turk said he did not wish to encourage any false hopes.
(Various sources 23/12/08 - 30/12/08)
