27/01/2009
Turkey and Iraq will continue to co-operate in the fight against the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) under "various forms", Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan and Iraqi counterpart Hoshyar Zebari said, after a meeting in Ankara on Friday (January 23rd).
Babacan said Ankara wants concrete action by both the Iraqi central government and the regional Kurdish administration to eradicate the PKK's hideouts in northern Iraq.
Zebari announced that Turkey, the United States and Iraq will set up a joint centre in northern Iraq to tackle the PKK issue.
Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac is making an official visit to the United Kingdom, the defence ministry announced.
Sutanovac met with British counterpart John Hutton on Monday (January 26th).
The two officials planned to sign a defence co-operation agreement and to discuss ways to boost military co-operation.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski had an audience with Pope Benedict XVI on Friday (January 23rd).
The pope voiced hope for an eventual resolution of the Skopje-Athens name dispute that is blocking Macedonia's NATO membership bid.
He also stressed Vatican support for the Macedonian model of multi-ethnic and multi-confessional tolerance.
"As such, Macedonia can be a model not only for regional countries but also for the broader European region," Benedict XVI said.
Crvenkovski also met with Italian counterpart Giorgio Napolitano and Vatican Secretary of State Tarcisio Bertone.
Albanian Minister of Integration Majlinda Bregu received assurances in Prague on Thursday (January 22nd) that the Czech Republic supports Albania's integration and will closely monitor the EU integration process of Western Balkan countries.
The Czech Republic assumed the rotating EU presidency earlier this month.
Bregu expressed Albania's commitment to implement reforms and boost efforts to meet EU requirements.
Serbia's EU integration was a major topic of discussion between French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner and Serbian counterpart Vuk Jeremic in Paris on Thursday (January 22nd).
Paris supports Serbia's EU accession, Kouchner said afterward, underlining that Belgrade should continue its co-operation with The Hague war crimes tribunal to fulfil its goal.
Jeremic said Serbia's EU integration is moving more slowly than he wished but expressed hope for progress this year.
US Ambassador to Albania John Withers promised on Monday (January 26th) his country will continue to support the democratisation of Albania's institutions.
At a meeting with President Bamir Topi, Withers stressed that free and fair parliamentary elections in June are key to the country's NATO membership.
Topi said Tirana is grateful to the United States for supporting Albania's democratisation and integration processes.
Withers also told a conference on US foreign policy in Tirana that new President Barack Obama will be "a good friend of Albania".
The ambassador described the invitation to NATO membership received by Albania as the high point of the countries' bilateral co-operation.
(Various sources -- 20/01/09-27/01/09)
