24/03/2009
Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan and his visiting Serbian counterpart, Vuk Jeremic, said on Friday (March 20th) that both countries are determined to enhance bilateral relations despite their disagreement on Kosovo. 
"Our differing positions on Kosovo should not prevent us from boosting our partnership," Babacan told a joint press conference with Jeremic after their meeting in Ankara. 
He pledged his country's full support for Belgrade's EU integration process. 
Jeremic said both Serbia and Turkey are key countries for maintaining peace and stability in the Balkans. 
Jeremic also met with President Abdullah Gul.
***
Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki began a four-day visit to Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia on Monday (March 23rd). 
During the visit, Milososki will meet with local leaders to discuss opportunities to further develop bilateral relations and deepen co-operation. 
He will especially focus on opportunities to support Macedonia's EU and NATO bids. 
The current situation in Macedonia, the presidential and local elections in the country and the overall situation in Southeast Europe will also be on the agenda.
***
Turkish President Abdullah Gul will travel to Brussels on Thursday (March 26th) to discuss how to accelerate Turkey's accession negotiations with the EU, government sources said on Friday. 
During his two-day trip, Gul is expected to meet with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso. 
Accompanying Gul will be Foreign Minister Ali Babacan and Turkey's new chief EU negotiator, Egemen Bagis.
***
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic met with Greek Deputy Foreign Minister Militiades Varvitsiotis, who was on a three-day official visit to Belgrade last week. 
The two diplomats discussed bilateral relations, the situation in the Balkans, Serbia's progress towards EU membership and developments in Kosovo.
***
Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli met with Czech Foreign Minister Karl Schwarzenberg, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, on March 17th in Brussels. 
The two officials reaffirmed Albania's campaign for EU candidate status and liberalisation of the visa regime for Albania as top priorities on the EU-Albanian agenda. 
In Tirana on March 17th, Albanian Foreign Minister Lulzim Basha and Czech Deputy Foreign Minister Tomas Pojar agreed to co-ordinate efforts to support Albania's EU bid.
(Various sources 17/03/09-24/03/09)
