23/06/2009
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader made an official visit to Montenegro on Monday (June 22nd), where he met with counterpart Milo Djukanovic, Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic and President Filip Vujanovic.
Discussions focused on bilateral relations, the situation in the region and European and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Sanader also met with representatives of the Croatian community in Montenegro.
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias said Turkey's EU accession process will be jeopardised if the country does not meet its obligations towards the EU and the Republic of Cyprus.
Christofias, on a visit to Greece Sunday (June 21st), said Turkey and Turkish Cypriots must demonstrate understanding and good will in the ongoing reunification talks, to resolve the Cyprus problem.
Turkish President Abdullah Gul launched a week-long visit to China on Tuesday (June 23rd), to raise the level of strategic and economic co-operation between the two countries.
Gul is expected to meet with Chinese counterpart Hu Jintao and participate in a Beijing business forum.
High Representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina Valentin Inzko and Hague war crimes tribunal President Patrick Robinson said BiH's co-operation with the tribunal would not be complete as long as war crimes indictees Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic are at large.
On June 16th, Inzko assured Robinson, who was in Sarajevo, that one of the priorities of the Office of the High Representative is to dismantle the fugitives' support network.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic and Albanian counterpart Sali Berisha opened a new crossing at their countries' border Friday (June 19th).
The new Murriqan-Sukobina crossing point was financed by the EU.
It is a part of a larger programme to open a total of 12 crossings at the Albanian-Montenegrin border.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic and Chinese counterpart Hu Jintao agreed to further enhance bilateral economic co-operation amid the global crisis on Saturday (June 20th).
The two presidents signed several agreements on economic co-operation on the sidelines of a Chinese-Croatian trade and business forum in Zagreb.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan is expected to travel to Tirana on June 25th at the invitation of his Albanian counterpart, Sali Berisha.
In Albania, Erdogan will attend the inauguration of the Rreshen-Kalimash segment of the Durres-Kukes Highway, which is currently under construction.
He is also scheduled to meet President Bamir Topi and Tirana Mayor Edi Rama.
Serbian President Boris Tadic said during talks with Bosnian Serb leaders in Banja Luka on Monday (June 22nd) that Serbia supports BiH's integrity and sovereignty.
Concerning High Representative Valentin Inzko's decision to annul a resolution passed by Republika Srpska's (RS) parliament on the transfer of power to BiH, Tadic said the situation should be resolved via dialogue.
"Anyone who wants stability of the Western Balkans, and consequently also of Bosnia, wants to avoid situations in which legitimate decisions of people's representatives are being annulled," said Tadic.
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu received a letter from French President Nicolas Sarkozy, local media reported Tuesday (June 23rd).
The letter was handed to Sejdiu by French Ambassador to Pristina Dolphin Borione.
"Nearly a year and a half after Kosovo achieved independence, your country has been able to affirm itself in the international stage and the irreversibility of the existence of your country is something which is acknowledged by all," said Sarkozy.
He also praised Kosovo's respect for European values.
