19/02/2007
(EurActiv, Nine o'clock - 26/01/07;
World Bank, AP, AFP, Dnevnik, Sofia News Agency - 25/01/07)
After a further pickup in 2006, economic growth in most of the EU's ten former communist states is likely to slow down this year, the World Bank said in a new report, released on January 25th.
Part of a regular quarterly series, the 54-page paper covers the eight Central and East European countries that entered the EU in 2004 -- the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia -- as well as Bulgaria and Romania, which joined the club on January 1st this year.
Within this region, referred to as EU8+2, the Baltic states witnessed the strongest growth in 2006, with annual rates forecast at 11% in both Latvia and Estonia, and 7.8% in Lithuania, just the same as in Slovakia.
Romania's annual GDP growth was forecast at 7.0% and Bulgaria's at 6.0%, the same as that of the Czech Republic.
However, the Bank experts predict that growth will likely ease across most of the EU8+2 region this year due to a slowdown in growth in the eurozone -- the major market for EU newcomers – and because output is moving closer to potential.
They also warned about a tendency towards higher inflation in most of the ten countries.
"While inflation remains well under control in Poland and the Czech Republic, other countries are struggling," the report said.
"In the Baltic countries and to some degree Bulgaria and Romania, strong wage and credit growth are leading to overheating and significant inflationary pressures."
The highest inflation rate during 2006 (an estimated 7.4%) was in Bulgaria, though the figure is expected to drop to 4.0% this year.
The estimated level of inflation in Romania for both 2007 and last year is set at 5.0%, above the forecast rates for six of the other countries in the region.
"[This year] will bring another round of regulated price increases for most EU8+2 countries, with the impact on inflation likely to be most pronounced in Hungary, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Lithuania and Romania," World Bank lead economist Thomas Blatt Laursen, the report's primary author, said.
"At the same time, the recent sharp decline in oil prices could help dampen inflationary pressures in 2007."
In 2006, current account deficits generally increased across the region, reaching "very worrisome" levels in some of the countries, such as Bulgaria, where it was an estimated 14.1% of GDP.
Latvia was close behind with its current account deficit at 14% of GDP, followed by Estonia with 12.4%.
Strong credit growth to the private sector was one of the factors that helped Romania's deficit to soar to 10.5% of GDP.
In Bulgaria's case, the high current account deficit is fully covered by the foreign direct investments (FDI) the country attracted last year, when their level reached 14.8% of GDP, the highest within the EU8+2 region.
Romania's FDI inflow was 7.2% of GDP in 2006.
"The situation seems to be less sound in Romania where FDI inflows reflect to some extent privatisation receipts [as suggested by a significant increase in reserves] which are likely to decline in the years to come, possibly resulting in increased vulnerability," the report said.
"Moreover the banking sector seems to play much more important role in financing the current account deficit than in Bulgaria."
The prospects of joining the EU served as a strong impetus for the implementation of reforms in Bulgaria and Romania, the Bank experts noted, stressing, however, that the process of integration was far from over.
"The unfinished reform agenda remains large and the structural adjustment of the two countries needs to continue," they said.
The GDP per capita of Bulgaria and Romania are the lowest in the bloc, with only slightly above one third of the other 25 EU member states.
Although they are steadily making progress, the gap between the level of incomes, competitiveness and living standards in the two Black Sea nations and the rest of the countries in the club remains large, the report said.
Trade liberalisation has facilitated the two Black Sea countries' integration into the EU single market, so that today, 56% of Bulgaria's and over 65% of Romania's trade is with the EU.
To be able to sustain their current high growth rates, the two countries must address some major and persistent rigidities in the structures of their economies.
With labour participation and employment standing at 55.8% in Bulgaria and at 57.6% in Romania, the two countries are well below the 65.2% level within the group of the 15 nations that comprised the EU until its big-bang enlargement in 2004.
"The share of the agricultural sector remains unsustainably high, accounting for 8-11% of GDP and 25-32% employment," the Bank said.
"Disparities between the urban and the large rural sectors, as well as between regions, are widening.
Around 40% of Romania's and 30% of Bulgaria's population lives in the rural area.
Poverty remains high and the pickup in economic activity has failed to filter through to important social categories."
In addition to the estimated up to 1 million Bulgarians and up to 2 million Romanians already working abroad, the two countries' entry into the EU is likely to see more jobseekers leave, opening a wider gap between supply and demand on their labour markets.
According to the Bank, shortages of both unskilled (construction, tourism and agricultural workers) as well as skilled (IT specialists, doctors, nurses, engineers) labour are already becoming increasingly visible in Bulgaria and Romania.
The Bank urges the EU's two newest members to "invest more, and more effectively, in building, maintaining and protecting their human capital pool in a fiscally sustainable manner" and to pay greater attention to their education, health and social protection systems.
