25/05/2009
Science and Technology:
Macedonia, Croatia, sign co-operation in health care
Macedonian Health Minister Bujar Osmani and Bozidar Vidic, director of the Croatian company C&T, signed an agreement for the development of Macedonia's integrated health care information system software, MIA reported on May 15th.
The 2.94m-euro system has a two-year implementation deadline.
Osmani said the agreement launches the IT process in the country's public health care system, which aims to integrate all public health institutions in a central database.
Urosevac, Kosovo, is the first town in the country to get a free wireless internet public zone.
It was achieved through a project by the NGO Initiative for Progress, which promotes improving the quality of education in Kosovo with the support of the Norwegian Embassy.
The zone was inaugurated on May 17th at a ceremony attended by Education Minister Enver Hoxha.
The Chinese telecommunications network solutions provider Huawei announced on Wednesday (May 20th) plans to establish a new research and development centre in Istanbul.
The company said it has already started feasibility research for the new centre.
Huawei is the solution partner of Turkey's mobile operators Turkcell, Vodafone and Avea to build their 3G networks.
Students from Kosovo will take part in the 17th International Environmental Olympics under way in Istanbul from Sunday (May 24th) to Wednesday.
Kosovo's students will take part in the event alongside their counterparts from 41 other countries, including Germany, the US, Russia, and <b>Romania</b>.
Romanian archaeologists discovered a Roman palace with well-preserved structures in Caras-Severin County, Agerpres reported on May 15th.
Experts believe the complex was built in 101 AD, during the time of the first two-year Dacian-Roman War, before the Roman conquest of Dacia.
Ericsson Turkey and Netron Technology Company announced the establishment of an Ericsson Telecommunications Academy in Istanbul, the daily Hurriyet reported on Monday (May18th).
Ericsson Turkey's Vice-President Serdar Sanon said the two firms invested approximately 3.6m euros in the project.
An Albanian-American underwater archaeology team discovered an ancient shipwreck in the Ionian Sea off the city of Saranda, local media reported on May 15th.
The ship dates back to the third or fourth centuries BC, and is one of the oldest archaeological discoveries in the Mediterranean.
(Various sources – 18/05/09-25/05/09)
