21/04/2009
Slovenian Foreign Minister Samuel Zbogar arrived on Monday (April 20th) for a two-day official visit to Kosovo.
He will meet with President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi and Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni.
The two countries are expected to sign an agreement for bilateral co-operation.
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha will make an official visit to Prague on April 28th, Albanian Integration Minister Majlinda Bregu said on Friday (April 17th).
The purpose of the visit will be to submit Albania's EU membership application and a letter describing the reforms the country has undertaken and plans to carry out to meet Union requirements.
"Albania as a NATO member has progressed in reforms, and it has pledged to hold free and just elections, which are necessary conditions for EU admission," Bregu said.
Albania and Croatia became NATO members earlier this month.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic was in Brussels on Monday (April 20th) to hold talks with EU security chief Javier Solana and Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn.
The main topics of discussion were Serbia's EU integration and the liberalisation of the visa regime.
Before the meetings, Jeremic said he expects Serbs to gain admission to the white Schengen list by the end of the year.
Armenian Foreign Minister Edward Nalbandian said on Thursday (April 16th) that Armenia and Turkey are close to an agreement to open their border and establish diplomatic relations.
Nalbandian discussed the process of normalisation with Turkish counterpart Ali Babacan on the sidelines of a meeting of foreign ministers of the Black Sea Economic Co-operation (BSEC) nations in Yerevan.
Kosovo's independence has brought peace, stability and a European perspective to the Balkan region, Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and Slovenian President Danilo Turk said on Thursday (April 16th) after a meeting in Ljubljana.
Apart from the Kosovo issue, the two leaders discussed bilateral relations and economic co-operation.
Thaci stressed Kosovo is working to establish an attractive environment for foreign investment, especially for Slovenian companies.
Turkey is firmly committed to enacting reforms necessary for its EU accession despite opposition by some of the strongest members of the bloc, Foreign Minister Ali Babacan said on April 15th.
"The Turkish people want these reforms," Babacan told a press conference with Austrian counterpart Michael Spindelegger in Vienna.
Spindelegger said Austria intends to hold a referendum on Turkey's possible EU membership.
(Various sources 14/04/09-21/04/09)
