22/05/2009
Bucharest is hosting the South-East European Financial Forum from Tuesday (May 19th) to Friday, Agerpres reported.
More than 250 politicians, members of the business community and banking executives are discussing ways to reduce red tape and speed up the absorption of EU structural funds.
Participants are also reviewing measures to boost banking, insurance, security and tourism amid the global economic crisis.
The EBRD announced it will secure loans to modernise the Croatian ports of Sibenik and Gruz, the finance ministry announced on Sunday (May 17th).
The state will be a guarantor for both loans.
Sibenik requested financing for an infrastructure rehabilitation project worth 12m euros, while Gruz applied for a loan to finance the rehabilitation of its berthing area, estimated at 8m euros.
The EBRD pledged to significantly boost financing for the region to limit the effects of the global economic crisis and the liquidity crunch.
Venice hosted an Italian-Macedonian business forum Monday (May 18th) that brought together companies in the energy renewal and energy efficiency sectors.
More than 400 companies participated.
The credit-rating agency Standard and Poor's on May 14th confirmed Romania's foreign currency sovereign credit rating at BB+ after the country negotiated an aid package worth 20 billion euros with the IMF, Agerpres reported.
Romania's economy continues to face macroeconomic risks due to falling demand in foreign markets and limited foreign credit lines, the agency said.
The Greek government presented a 1.3-billion-euro plan Wednesday (May 20th) to help small businesses cope with the impact of the global economic crisis.
The aid package is aimed at supporting about 17,000 small businesses in manufacturing, tourism and other industries.
The European Commission's office in Pristina and the Kosovo government signed a financial agreement Wednesday (May 20th) worth 60m euros to support the country's socio-economic development.
The EU will disburse the funds under its Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance, designed to aid aspiring members.
(Various sources – 15/05/09-22/05/09)
