21/01/2009
Orthodox Christians in Macedonia observed the Epiphany on Monday (January 19th) with traditional celebrations to mark the baptism of Jesus Christ by John the Baptist.
Young men nationwide swim in the wintry rivers to catch the cross that priests throw in as a symbol of the union of the people's faith with Christ.
According to traditional beliefs, the person who catches the cross will be happy, healthy and rich all year.
Young Romanian climber Crina Popescu, 14, conquered Aconcagua (elevation, 6,962m), the highest peak outside Asia, Agerpres reported on Friday (January 16th).
Popescu became the youngest climber to scale the mountain on the border between Argentina and Chile, taking the difficult route, the Polish Glacier.
Romanian tennis player Andrei Pavel announced the end of his sports career, Mediafax reported on Tuesday (January 20th).
Pavel abandoned an Australian Open match against Andy Murray because of severe back pain.
The 35-year-old player described the injury as the main reason for his retirement.
The national theatres of Albania and Kosovo and the Albanian Theatre in Skopje signed a memorandum of extended co-operation on January 15th.
The agreement will mean stepped up official communication, exchange of values and organisation of joint productions among the three institutions.
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and Culture Minister Elizabeta Kanceska-Milevska attended the presentation Sunday (January 18th) of the first four sculptures placed in the centre of Skopje by the culture ministry.
The project will present 36 works by 26 modern Macedonian artists in the capital.
Serbian Culture Minister Nebojsa Bradic and Indian Ambassador to Serbia Ajay Swarup signed a three-year agreement Monday (January 19th) on cultural co-operation.
The programme covers co-operation in all fields, including institutions, music, publishing, and news agencies.
Seven cities in Croatia are hosting the Men's World Handball Championship from January 16th to February 1st.
A new stadium in Zagreb opened specifically for the event and can seat about 16,000 fans.
Other cities to host matches of the 24 teams are Zadar, Split, Osijek, Varazdin, Porec and Pula.
(Various sources – 14/01/09-21/01/09)
