22/12/2008
Vodafone chose China's Huawei Technologies to supply infrastructure equipment for the global mobile phone operator's planned 3G network in Turkey, the company said on December 12th.
The operator signed a five-year agreement with Huawei.
Earlier, Vodafone, Turkcell and Avea won high-speed third-generation mobile phone network licences in Turkey.
Romania became an official candidate for membership in the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva after obtaining approval by the CERN board, Mediafax reported on December 12th.
The country can become a full CERN member after a five-year monitoring period, following an assessment of its contribution to CERN projects.
Cypriot students rank 22nd in mathematics and 33rd in science among students from 60 countries, according to the 2007 Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study.
Announcing the results on December 13th was Constantinos Papanastasiou, associate professor at the University of Cyprus.
The Romanian Stock Exchange (BVB) launched new internet and mobile internet services on Tuesday (December 16th).
The new products include a free website, which will also offer a version easily accessible on mobile phones, and a pilot programme with new internet services.
The pilot programme will run in the first quarter of 2009, after which the BVB will propose fees for various types of users.
Authorities in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) invited two Greek universities, the Athens University of Economics and Business and the University of Piraeus, to organise local postgraduate courses in finance and business administration, the daily Kathimerini reported.
The initiative will allow Greek universities to help the UAE strengthen its international financial position.
Montenegro banned access to social networking websites such as Facebook and YouTube in all state institutions on Thursday (December 18th).
The office responsible for maintaining the government's IT network said staff at government offices and parliament will not be able to view these sites during work hours.
The Centre for Space Research at Sofia University in Bulgaria announced on December 12th that Harvard's Minor Planet Centre acknowledged its discovery of a new asteroid in the Taurus constellation.
It is 2km in diameter and has the temporary name 2008 WN96.
(Various sources – 15/12/08-22/12/08)
