24/02/2009
Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis is on an official visit to the United States, where she will meet with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in Washington on Wednesday (February 25th). 
The two are expected to discuss the Cyprus problem and Greece's relations with Turkey, as well as the latest developments in the Balkans and Caucasus. 
Later, Bakoyannis will address the UN Security Council on the priorities of the current Greek presidency of the OSCE.
***
A two-day conference of the Adriatic Charter -- which includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Montenegro -- opened in Tirana on Monday (February 23rd). 
Participants are discussing Euro-Atlantic integration and security challenges in the Western Balkans.
***
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias arrived in Belgrade on Monday (February 23rd) for a two-day working visit. 
He first met with Serbian Foreign Minister Mirko Cvetkovic, who thanked him for Cypriot support of Serbia's EU integration. 
Cvetkovic also affirmed Serbian support for Cyprus's efforts to solve its long-standing division. 
Christofias and Serbian counterpart Boris Tadic will discuss ways to boost economic co-operation. 
On Tuesday, the two presidents officially inaugurate the new Cypriot Embassy in Belgrade.
***
Serbian Prime Minister Vuk Jeremic and Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov signed a bilateral agreement Friday (February 20th) for a visa-free regime between the two countries. 
It will allow citizens of each country to travel visa-free to the other for up to 30 days. 
In Moscow, Jeremic said the two countries would soon sign an agreement on cultural co-operation and would organise days honouring each other's culture.
***
Jason Hyland, director of the US State Department Office of South Central European Affairs, on Friday (February 20th) praised Albania's contribution to maintaining stability and peace in the Balkans. 
Hyland met with Albanian Foreign Minister Lulzim Basha in Tirana. 
US Ambassador to Tirana John Withers also attended the meeting. 
Basha thanked Hyland for Washington's support of Albania's accession to NATO. 
The officials also discussed issues related to regional co-operation, Kosovo and the Euro-Atlantic perspective of the Western Balkan countries.
***
Slovenia supports Macedonia in its Euro-Atlantic integration process, Slovenian President Danilo Turk said on February 17th, after meeting in Skopje with Macedonian counterpart Branko Crvenkovski. 
Turk said that Slovenia fully supports Macedonia's accession to the EU and NATO. 
The two presidents agreed that Slovenian investment in Macedonia is growing but still falls below its potential.
(Various sources -- 17/02/09 - 24/02/09)
