23/02/2009
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)'s mobile telephone penetration rate has reached 86%, according to data by the local telecom regulator, RAK.
BH Telecom reported 1.4 million mobile subscribers;
RS's mobile carrier, Mtel, had 1.11 million clients;
and Eronet of HT Mostar had 660,000 clients.
New combined diagnostic equipment, which will for the first time give Bulgarian doctors and patients access to the latest research methods for diagnosing cardiac, neurological and oncological diseases, went into service at the Central Nuclear Medicine Laboratory of Alexandrovska Hospital in Sofia.
The equipment halves the time for diagnosing a problem and is the first hybrid single-photon-emission computed tomography/computed tomography (SPECT/CT) system in Bulgaria.
The civil engineering faculty at the University of Skopje hosted the promotion of the second series of textbooks -- numbering 14 in all -- translated into Macedonian as part of a government project to translate 500 expert books used by top EU and US universities.
The first 13 books translated by the project were political science texts.
Officials released them last month.
They anticipate completion of the translation project in 2010.
Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University will install the biggest telescope in the country at its observatory in Canakkale, Turkey, observatory director Osman Demircan announced on Friday (February 20th).
The university ordered a telescope with a 122cm radius worth 458,000 euros from a German manufacturer.
Demircan said the new equipment will significantly improve astrophysics studies in the country.
A team of Turkish scientists headed by Professor Tayfun Uzbay of the Gulhane Military Medical Academy made a new medical discovery, the daily Cumhuriyet reported last week.
The researchers found that excessive secretion of agmatine, an endogenous neuromodulator present in the brain and spinal cord, may cause schizophrenia.
Scientists say the discovery will open a new road in diagnosis and treatment of the mental disorder.
Romanian telecom operator RomTelecom will start providing internet protocol television (IPTV) after selecting the equipment supplier for the project, the company said.
IPTV offers a wider range of TV channels than that available by cable or satellite, as well as superior image and sound quality.
Currently, the only Romanian operator to offer IPTV is iNES Group, which introduced the service in 2006.
Cyprus will make the switch to digital television by 2010, the European Commission said.
The full worldwide transition from analogue to digital TV will occur by 2012.
Digital terrestrial TV transmissions have already debuted in 21 EU member states.
(Various sources -- 16/02/09-23/02/09)
