20/05/2009
Romania's Bran Castle officially became the private property of Dominic Habsburg on Monday (May 18th), Romanian media reported.
For the last three years, the culture ministry managed the building.
The new owner, a New York architect and nephew of Romania's last king, announced he will significantly restore the castle and reopen it to the public on June 1st as a private museum.
The tourism ministry urges promotion of the castle as an important attraction.
The 37th International Istanbul Music Festival will take place from June 5th through the end of the month.
The event will feature world-renowned musicians such as Anne-Sophie Mutter, Sir Andre Previn, Lynn Harrell, Rolando Villazon, Ann Hallenberg, Elizabeth Watts, the Jacques Loussier Trio, Daniel Barenboim and the Italian La Scala Philharmonic Orchestra.
The festival is organised by the Istanbul Culture and Art Foundation.
Cyprus and Greece signed an agreement for co-operation in sports, education, common research, national programmes, specialised training of high-performance athletes and participation of Cypriot and Greek athletes in games organised in both countries, CNA reported on Monday (May 18th).
They signed the accord in Nicosia.
Kosovo's contemporary and classical music festival, ReMusica, opens in Pristina on Thursday (May 21st).
The festival, which ends May 28th, will also feature performances by artists from France, the Netherlands, Spain, Albania and Bulgaria.
Croatia's national men's team won the Mitropacup 2009 chess championship held from May 9th to Sunday (May 17th) in Slovenia.
In the women's competition, the title went to the Slovenians.
Italian grandmaster Fabiano Caruana, 16, won the title for best player in the event.
Mirsad Jonuz was tapped on Saturday (May 16th) to coach Macedonia's national football team for the rest of the World Cup qualifiers.
He was the only candidate to accept a short-term appointment.
The previous coach, Slovenian Srecko Katanec, quit after Macedonia lost 4-0 to the Netherlands last month.
(Various sources – 13/05/09-20/05/09)
