20/03/2009
The US carmaker Ford will start building advanced, low-capacity car engines in Craiova, Romania, starting late next year, the company announced on Monday (March 16th).
Ford will invest about 1.2 billion euros in the project.
Transit Connect will be Ford's first model produced in Craiova.
The company has already asked the European Investment Bank for a 600m-euro loan for the project.
Greece launched a new 146m-euro oil exploration project in the northern Kavala Gulf, Development Minister Costis Hatzidakis said on March 14th.
The project aims to exploit fossil fuel deposits in the North Prinos zone.
Kavala Oil and Energiaki S.A.
are conducting the research.
Turkey will join the Financial Stability Forum, Economy Minister Mehmet Simsek said on Sunday (March 15th).
The forum consists of major national financial authorities:
finance ministries, central banks and international financial bodies.
It was founded in 1999 to promote international financial stability.
The World Bank allocated an additional 3.7m euros to finance Albania's Social Services Delivery Project on Tuesday (March 17th).
The additional funds will support the administrative reform of the Albanian pension system and help raise public awareness.
Slovenian businesses will increase their presence in Kosovo, the head of the Slovenian Economic Chamber, Samo Hribar Milic, said on Tuesday (March 17th) at a meeting with the head of the Kosovo Chamber of Commerce, Besim Beqai.
The Croatian consortium of Konstruktor inzenjering, Institut Gradevinarstva Hrvatske and Tehnika ranked first in the tender for construction of the Bar-Boljare highway, the <b>Montenegrin</b> government announced on Wednesday (March 18th).
The 30-year concession envisions design, financing, construction, operation and maintenance of one or more highway sections.
Serbia's Trajal, a Krusevac-based tyre-maker, will dismiss approximately 400 workers to reduce personnel to 2,042 people, the company's trade union chairman, Milosav Vukojicic, announced on Wednesday (March 18th).
Three Trajal units halted production in the first quarter this year for lack of raw materials.
The fiscal situation in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) is worse than that in Republika Srpska says IMF Mission Chief for BiH Costas Christou.
Speaking on Monday (March 16th), he blamed lack of privatisation revenues since 2007 and excessive social spending commitments made during the 2006 political campaign.
(Various sources – 13/03/09-20/03/09)
