19/05/2009
Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic arrived on Monday (May 18th) in Serbia, where he met with President Boris Tadic.
This is the first official visit by a senior Montenegrin official to Belgrade since October 2008, when Montenegro recognised Kosovo's independence.
Tadic said Serbia is interested in investing in the Montenegrin economy, particularly in light of energy sector privatisation.
US Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg reassured Montenegrin authorities on Sunday (May 17th) of Washington's support for the country's Euro-Atlantic integration.
For the past 20 years, Montenegro has been an important source of stability in the region, Steinberg said during a visit to Podgorica, where he met with President Filip Vujanovic, Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, Foreign Minister Milan Rocen and Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic.
Steinberg also visited Macedonia and Greece.
France should play a more active role in helping end the name dispute between Macedonia and Greece, Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said on Friday (May 15th) after talks with French President Nicolas Sarkozy in Paris.
Sarkozy has pledged his readiness to help speed Macedonia's EU and NATO accession.
He said France would work to help lift Schengen visa requirements on Macedonians.
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat met on Thursday (May 14th) to discuss the opening of a new crossing point between the island's Turkish and Greek parts.
The new checkpoint will be in the village of Limnitis.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan urged France and Germany on Thursday (May 14th) not to modify the criteria for Turkey's EU accession, arguing "rules cannot be changed in mid-match." Erdogan's comments followed a meeting in Ankara with Polish counterpart Donald Tusk, who expressed support for admitting Turkey to the Union.
Outgoing NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said on Thursday (May 14th) that it is extremely important that Macedonia and Greece reach a compromise in their long-standing dispute.
After meeting with de Hoop Scheffer in Athens, Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis said she wants to see Greece's neighbours in the ranks of the Alliance but stressed it it essential to settle the disagreement over Macedonia's name first.
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski visited Brussels on Thursday (May 14th).
Ivanov met with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, Belgian Prime Minister Herman van Rompuy and Belgian Senate President Armand De Decker.
Solana said it is highly possible that Macedonia will start negotiations for EU membership this year.
On Wednesday, Gruevski brifed EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn on Skopje's priorities -- the launch of EU membership negotiations, visa liberalisation and decentralisation of the governing of funds under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance.
(Various sources -- 12/05/09 - 19/05/09)
