19/01/2009
Prominent Turkologist Irene Melikoff died at the age of 91 in France, Turkish media reported on January 12th.
Melikoff was one of the world's best-known researchers of Turkish studies.
Turkish President Abdullah Gul expressed his condolences in a written statement.
"Irene Melikoff, who received many awards for her contribution to improving [the] Turkish language and culture, will always be remembered with respect and will continue to live through her rich work," Gul said.
US business school Franklin University announced on Thursday (January 15th) that it is launching a master's of business and administration programme at the University St. Kliment Ohridski-Bitola in Bitola, Macedonia.
Franklin and St. Kliment-Ohridski professors will teach the classes in English.
The first internet search engine targeting Islamic users began operation in Turkey.
www.muslimangoogle.com uses results from the world's biggest search engine, Google, but filters them according to Islamic religious standards.
The site filters some expressions, such as "sex" and "porn", blocking users from obtaining any results if they launch a search with those words.
Cyprus ranked first in the world in 2008 in the number of kidney transplants relative to its population, George Kyriakides, director of the Paraskevaidion Surgical and Transplant Centre, said on January 12th.
In 2008, the centre performed 58 kidney transplants, the biggest number worldwide in proportion to a nation's population.
In the past 22 years, there were a total of 824 such transplants in the country.
About 600 patients are receiving treatment on a systematic basis, Kyriakides added.
Kosovo's Cadastral Agency launched an e-database project on Thursday (January 15th).
The e-cadastre will provide information on all types of property and related legislation -- land, buildings, property rights and property values -- all of which will be available for public use.
The project will undergo testing in two municipalities by June.
Officials expect it to cover the rest of the country by the end of the year.
(Various sources -- 12/01/09-19/01/09)
