17/03/2009
The two Cypriot communities need to reach a lasting settlement of the Cyprus question, UN special envoy for Cyprus Alexander Downer said on Friday (March 13th), after a meeting with Cypriot President Demetris Christofias.
Downer noted he remains "cautiously optimistic" about the peace process, adding the ongoing talks need "both momentum and patience".
Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat has suggested the talks need to conclude by early 2010, but Christofias has rejected any deadlines to avoid rushing a deal.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic thanked Romanian counterpart Cristian Diaconescu on Thursday (March 12th) for Bucharest's support of Belgrade's EU bid and for its pro-Serbian stance on Kosovo.
The two diplomats met in the Romanian capital, where they discussed Serbia's EU aspirations and the Kosovo issue.
Diaconescu reassured Jeremic of Romania's ongoing support for Serbia and noted the traditionally good relations between their countries.
Jeremic also met with Senate Speaker Mircea Geoana.
Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic said on Friday (March 13th) his country would continue to harmonise its laws with those of the EU in order to join the bloc in two years.
After a meeting with Hungarian counterpart Kinga Goncz in Zagreb, Jandrokovic reiterated the ongoing border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia should not affect Zagreb's EU bid.
Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi arrived in Montenegro on Monday (March 16th) at the invitation of counterpart Milo Djukanovic.
Berlusconi met with President Filip Vujanovic and spoke to a group of Italian-language students at Niksic University's philology faculty.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic made an official visit to the Vatican on Monday (March 16th), where he met with Undersecretary of State Leonardo Sandri, as well as with the president of the Political Council for Promoting Christian Unity, Walter Kasper.
During his visit to Strasbourg, France, last week, Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni asked European Parliament (EP) members to lobby for recognition of Kosovo's independence.
He met with Jacek Saryusz-Wolski, head of the EP's committee on external affairs.
Hyseini discussed general developments in Kosovo but emphasised Kosovo's security and economy, the country's recognition process, relations with neighbours, the EULEX deployment and Kosovo's European perspectives.
Albanian President Bamir Topi called on Italy to liberalise its border regime with Albania at a meeting with Italian Economic Development Minister Claudio Scajola on Tuesday (March 10th) in Tirana.
They discussed economic co-operation, including the construction of the Pan-European Transport Corridor VIII and its importance for the region.
Topi stressed Italy remains a geo-strategic partner and an important investor in Albania.
(Various sources 10/03/09-17/03/09)
