15/06/2009
University of Athens hosted a three-day international scientific symposium titled Earth Observation Services for Monitoring the Environment and Protecting the General Public from June 8th to Wednesday (June 10th), the ANA-MPA news agency reported. 
A total of 14 countries participated in the event which was co-organised by the Athens National Observatory and the Group on Earth Observations. 
The attendants discussed Earth observation and environmental protection.
***
Cyprus submitted an application to become a full member of the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) on June 3rd, the daily Financial Mirror reported. 
A special working group will examine the country's application and the evaluation process is expected to last about six months. 
If the recommendation is positive, Cyprus will obtain candidate country status from one to five years.
***
Romanians will benefit from free wireless access to internet at some 345 new hotspots across the country by the end of August, Prime Minister Emil Boc said on June 5th at the inauguration of the first free Wi-Fi access point in Bucharest. 
The free Wi-Fi access points will be installed in parks, student camps and city centres.
***
Mobile phone tapping with the use of spy-phone software is on the rise in Romania and Greece, Mediafax reported on June 7th. 
Other countries with the same trend are Italy, Spain, France and Germany. 
This new generation of user-friendly spy-phone software has become widely available in the last year and allows wireless transfers of wiretapping programs to any mobile phone.
***
A national satellite digital registration of Kosovo shows about 570,000 constructed objects on its territory, media reported on Wednesday (June 10th). 
The Public Administration Ministry presented the complete database covering the whole territory of Kosovo, which was recorded earlier this year and in the end of 2008.
***
Serbian molecular biology student Mirko Djordjevic won the best science communicator award on June 6th at this year's FameLab TV competition in Great Britain. 
Djordjevic, 23, was first in the competition of ten young European scientists. 
His project was on the implementation of molecular methods in the research of sexual selection of weevils.
(Various sources – 08/06/09-15/06/09)
