13/11/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Santek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/11/06
Held back by undeveloped institutions, inefficient markets and inadequate investment in higher education, most Balkan economies are lagging behind in terms of global competitiveness, according to an annual report by the World Economic Forum (WEF).
The Global Competitiveness Index 2006 assesses the economic conditions in 125 countries around the world.
It aims to shed light on the key factors that drive economic growth and to help explain why some countries are more successful than others in boosting income levels and opportunity.
In this year's index, Switzerland ranks first, while the United States has dropped from first to sixth.
Angola is at the bottom of the list, preceded by Burundi, Chad, Timor-Leste and Mozambique.
Among countries in the Balkans, the most competitive are Slovenia (33rd) and Greece (47th).
The greatest progress since last year was made by Croatia, which jumped 12 places to 51st on the list, and by Turkey, which rose from 71st last year to 59th in 2006.
Bulgaria, meanwhile, paid dearly for its hesitation in reforms, dropping 11 places to 72nd.
The SEE region's poorest performers continue to be Albania (98th) and Bosnia and Herzegovina (89th).
Both made only incremental progress since the 2005 index.
The now-defunct state union of Serbia-Montenegro, meanwhile, fell two notches to 87th.
Macedonia dropped five places to 80th.
What can countries do to become more competitive?
The answer does not depend on any one factor alone, the WEF's report suggests.
Top-ranked Switzerland, for instance, boasts not only a sophisticated business culture, but a high capacity for innovation and a commitment to research and development.
Institutions are transparent and accountable, the judicial system is efficient, and rule of law is prevalent.
Among the better performing countries, positive factors work together to reinforce competitiveness.
For example, Nordic countries have exercised fiscal restraint, which leads to surpluses that can then be invested in education and research.
These countries show that "transparent institutions and excellent macroeconomic management, coupled with world class educational attainment and a focus on technology and innovation are a successful strategy for maintaining competitiveness in small, highly developed economies," writes Augusto Lopez-Claros, chief economist and director of the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Network.
By contrast, many countries in the Balkans are caught in a vicious cycle of factors that drain competitiveness.
Without education and technology, they cannot move forward.
But without more funds flowing in, governments cannot invest enough in education and technology.
As Miroslav Zdravkovic of the Belgrade Economics Institute points out, Scandinavian countries have per capita GDPs that are tenfold of what they are in the Balkans.
Thus, they also have money available for reinvestment.
The situation is slowly changing in SEE, Zdravkovic says.
A country's overall ranking on the Global Competitiveness Index is a holistic representation of its performance across multiple criteria, grouped by the WEF into nine "pillars".
These are:
institutions, infrastructure, macro-economy, health and primary education, higher education and training, market efficiency, technological readiness, business sophistication and innovation.
Transition countries such as those in the Balkans frequently show uneven results across the nine pillars, with strengths in one area but serious failings in others.
For example, in terms of macroeconomic management, Macedonia (ranked 30th in this parameter) and Bulgaria (35th) have done well, while Greece's performance (102nd) was abysmal, and Turkey's (111th) even worse.
While Albania trails in many indicators -- including higher education (92nd) and infrastructure (121nd) -- it ranks comparatively highly in health and primary education (34th).
Fifteen years after the end of communism, institutions remain a particular weak spot for SEE countries.
Many are at the bottom of the list, including Romania (87th) and Bulgaria (109th), which are due to accede to the EU on 1 January 2007.
Cyprus (35th), Greece (41st) and Turkey (51st) are the region's strongest performers here.
Successful policymaking may hinge on understanding how multiple factors interrelate -- in ways positive or negative -- and being able to identify which ones are most crucial at a particular stage of development, the report suggests.
Fiscal caution, for instance, may be important nearly everywhere, but it is especially so for countries with long track records of budgetary instability.
Mismanagement of public finances can be especially harmful in environments where growth depends on creating a more attractive business climate.
"The most competitive economies in the world will typically be those where concerted efforts have been made to frame policies in a comprehensive way, that is, those which recognise the importance of a broad array of factors, their interconnection, and the need to address the underlying weaknesses they reveal in a proactive way," the report's authors conclude.
