27/06/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia - 27/06/05
Democratic change has allowed most Southeast European (SEE) countries to make progress in recent years in the development of professional independent media, a new study indicates.
But fully sustainable media have not been achieved in any of the countries, according to the Media Sustainability Index (MSI) 2004.
Released by the International Research and Exchanges Board (IREX) on 16 June, the report provides a qualitative and quantitative analysis of media development in 20 countries in Southeast Europe and Eurasia from 2001 to 2004.
It was prepared in co-operation with USAID.
It is the only study that critically examines the entire media sector in each of the surveyed countries against their achievement of five complex objectives:
free speech, professional standards of quality, plurality of news sources, business sustainability and supporting institutions.
Using detailed input from local and international media professionals, the report provides country-by-country rankings on the basis of scores from 0 to 4 for each of between seven and nine indicators for each objective.
The averages of all the indicators are then averaged to obtain a single, overall score for each objective.
Objective scores are averaged to provide an overall score for the country.
Countries with an overall score in the range of 0-1 are considered "unsustainable, anti-free press".
They do not meet, or only minimally meet, the objectives.
A score of 1-2 is given to countries described as an "unsustainable mixed system", while those with overall scores in the range of 2-3 fall in the "near sustainability" group.
Countries scoring between 3 and 4 points are considered "sustainable".
The average scorings of all SEE countries for all objectives are in the range 2-3 points, placing them in the "near sustainability" group.
According to the definition IREX has given for countries in this category, they "have progressed in meeting multiple objectives, with legal norms, professionalism and the business environment there supportive of independent media.
Advances have survived changes in government and have been codified in law and practice.
However, more time may be needed to ensure that change is enduring and that increased professionalism and the media business environment are sustainable".
With an average scoring for all objectives of 2.82, Croatia ranks first among the 20 countries in 2004, but has backslidden by 0.01 index points compared to the previous year.
Bulgaria and Macedonia follow with 2.56 and 2.53, respectively.
With 2.02, Albania has the lowest scoring of all SEE countries, but ranks better than 10 former Soviet republics, including Russia and the Ukraine.
"Trends charted from 2001 to 2004 highlight the positive effects of democratic change that have the potential to advance media freedoms throughout the region," IREX said in a press statement announcing the report's release.
"Other trends reveal the damaging results of self-censorship and political pressure as independent media in Central Asia struggle to grow at the same rate as those in Southeast Europe."
In terms of individual objectives, Croatia also ranks first in free speech, plurality of news sources and business management, while Bulgaria takes the top place in professional journalism and supporting institutions.
With a score of 2.02, however, it ranks only 10th in terms of free speech and is 7th in respect to plurality of news sources.
Of the 20 countries surveyed, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Montenegro have boosted their average scores the most since 2001.
Serbia has also seen a substantial improvement, from 1.86 in 2001 to 2.46 in 2004, although the latest result shows some regression since the previous year, when it rated 2.52.
Romania is the only SEE country whose scores have worsened since 2001, dropping 5.6 per cent.
The most significant negative changes were in the areas of professional journalism, plurality of news sources and business management.
"The negative trends identified by the MSI panel in 2002 and 2003 continued through 2004," the report says about Romania.
"Particularly acute is the reduced plurality of media available to Romanians.
The country made some progress in establishing the legal norms of free speech by changing the penal code as it relates to libel and slander.
But the MSI panel noted that independent media receive government subsidies through advertising paid from the state budget under contracts that are awarded arbitrarily," the report adds, voicing concern also about other negative practices in the country, such as "self-censorship, partisanship in the state media and the lack of transparency in media ownership".
Romania is not an isolated case, however.
Self-censorship and politicised media coverage serve as persistent obstacles to development in almost all of the countries reviewed, IREX said.
"One of the most pervasive negative trends facing media in the countries reviewed is the weak judicial sector and grievous shortcomings in effectively implementing legislation designed, at least in theory, to protect free speech and regulate media fairly and transparently," the report noted.
Although many of the countries have adopted good laws, they have largely failed to put them into practice.
"In fact, the average score for this specific category is 1.94, indicating the unsustainable implementation of media laws in 2004," the study added, stressing that problems in implementing free-speech legislation existed in one form or another in all countries except Croatia.
"As the dramatic events in Georgia and Ukraine have shown, there is a strong correlation between free media and democratic government, IREX President Mark Pomar noted in the report."The MSI is a unique tool that analyses the state of independent media and, in the process, develops important indicators of political change."
IREX is an international non-profit organisation, based in Washington, which specialises in education, independent media, Internet development, and civil society programmes.
Founded in 1968, it currently implements 40 programmes in over 50 countries with offices in 17 countries across Europe, Eurasia, the Middle East, North Africa and the United State
