18/02/2009
Turkish and Greek swimmers took part in a traditional winter swimming festival in Datca, Mugla province, Turkey, on Saturday (February 14th), in a bid to boost relations between the two neighbours.
Ten Greek and 20 Turkish swimmers competed this year in two races, one 1.5km and the other 5km.
Greece's Acropolis Museum will open to the public on June 20th, Culture Minister Antonis Samaras announced on Friday (February 13th).
The museum, designed by US architect Bernard Tschumi in co-operation with Greece's Michalis Photiadis, stands at the foot of the Parthenon.
The museum will display all the surviving Acropolis sculptures.
A Turkish court sentenced the director of a state museum and nine members of his staff for stealing some of the ancient treasures of King Croesus, the legendary Lydian monarch, media reported on Friday (February 13th).
The suspects stole a coin and a gold brooch in the shape of a winged sea horse from their own museum in Usak.
Museum director Kazim Akbiyiklioglu received a sentence of 13 years in prison on charges of theft and embezzlement.
The Albanian authorities inaugurated a new Archaeology Rescue Agency in Tirana on Monday (February 16th).
The agency is designed to be one of the most important in the country's tourism ministry and will co-ordinate efforts to preserve Albania's archaeological heritage.
A series of concerts and cultural events marked Kosovo's independence anniversary on Tuesday (February 17th).
The Romanian pop music group Morandi will perform in Pristina on Friday to help mark the event.
Three other indoor and outdoor concerts will take place in Pristina.
Novi Sad, Serbia, hosted the first edition of the Love Fest music festival to mark St. Valentine's Day on Friday (February 13th) and Saturday.
About 2,000 people gathered on the first night.
Proceeds from the festival went to local hospitals.
Niksic, Montenegro, opened the week-long International Actors' Festival on Monday (February 16th).
Seven plays from Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro will compete for the festival's top prize.
(Various sources 11/02/09-18/02/09)
