15/12/2008
The Hague war crimes tribunal launched its new internet site on Wednesday (December 10th).
The site, www.icty.org, includes information about the institution's history, achievements and current activities, as well as an interactive map showing atrocities in the former Yugoslavia.
A group of Albanian hackers staged attacks on several Serbian websites, including the site of the Nikola Tesla Airport in Belgrade and the serbiancafe.com web portal, on December 8th.
Instead of the normal contents, the websites showed pro-Kosovo messages and Albanian symbols.
One out of three Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) citizens over the age 15 uses the internet, according to a survey by the GfK BiH agency, published on December 8th.
It found the web is most popular among young people aged between 15 and 24, with 72% using it.
The Federation of BiH has more internet users than Republika Srpska -- 37% and 24% respectively.
The most visited websites, according to the survey, are Facebook and YouTube.
The Italian government granted 500,000 euros for a new bio-tech laboratory at the State University in Tetovo, Macedonia, on Wednesday (December 10th).
The laboratory will be used to research the quality of food and drinking water.
Cyprus and the United Kingdom signed a memorandum of understanding in scientific research and development on December 8th.
The document envisions setting up a joint Cypriot-British committee to define co-operation between academic institutions from the two countries, promote contacts among researchers and exchange information, and implement joint scientific programmes.
The National Hellenic Research Foundation a digital recreation of the royal palace of King Philip II of Macedon.
The two-storey palace lies in the Aiges archaeological site in north-central Greece, near Vergina, in what was then the ancient kingdom of Macedonia.
The Turkish Petroleum Corporation (TPAO) reached an agreement with the Norwegian firm Wavefield Inseis on Tuesday (December 9th) regarding the collection of 3D seismic data in the Black Sea and 2D seismic data in both the Mediterranean and Black Seas.
The information will be used to assess oil and gas potential.
(Various sources—08/12/08-15/12/08)
