12/11/2008
US actor James Belushi visited Albania, his parents' country of origin.
Belushi was a special guest at a Tirana gala performance by prominent Albanian artists on Tuesday (November 11th).
A day earlier, Belushi visited a primary school in Tirana and enjoyed a welcome by officials in the Albanian capital.
The Technopolis exhibition centre in Athens hosted the Platmorma Video 8 International Digital Film Festival from Friday (November 7th) to Monday.
The festival's agenda included screenings of 11 fictional, experimental and animated films with a focus on Israeli cinema.
Israeli actress Esti Zakhem was the special guest.
The Travelling Library initiative started on Sunday (November 9th), in Sofia as a part of Bulgaria's Big Read campaign.
The initiative will reach other Bulgarian cities through November 17th.
The campaign by Bulgarian National Television encourages readers to select their favourite novel, which officials will announce on March 15th 2009.
Sharon Pollock, Canadian playwright, arrived in Kosovo on Monday (November 10th).
Pollock will hold a workshop for young local playwrights.
On Monday, she gave a presentation on her work, Canada's theatre and dramaturgy.
The 17th International Ethnological Film Festival began at the Ethnographical Museum in Belgrade on Monday (November 10th).
A total of 39 movies from Serbia, Romania, Macedonia, Spain, Italy and other countries are competing for first prize.
The event closes Sunday.
Serbian tennis star Ana Ivanovic received the special ACES Award of the Women's Tennis Association at a ceremony in Doha, Qatar, on Friday (November 7th).
The award goes every year to the female athlete who made the biggest contribution to the development and promotion of tennis.
The Village East Theatre in New York will host the first Macedonian Film Festival in the United States, organised by the Macedonian Film Fund in co-operation with the International Film Circuit from November 20th to 23rd.
The event will feature the Oscar-nominated movie Before the Rain by director Milco Mancevski and I Am from Titov Veles, Macedonia's candidate for 2009 Best Foreign-Language Film Oscar.
(Various sources – 05/11/08-12/11/08)
