13/03/2009
The Albanian Police Academy will undergo reconstruction and restructuring through a European Commission (EC) project worth 1.5m euros.
At the project's inaugural ceremony on Wednesday (March 11th), EC Ambassador to Tirana Helmuth Lohan said that "improving working conditions will increase the productivity of the police and will help them do a better job".
Interior Minister Bujar Nishani thanked the EC for the assistance and investment, adding that the police could not meet the new challenges without specialised training.
Greece reached an agreement to sell its national air carrier, Olympic Airlines, to the Marfin Investment Group, Development Minister Costas Hadzidakis announced on March 6th.
Marfin submitted a 45.7m-euro bid in September 2008 to acquire Olympic's flight operations.
The group offered another 16.7m euros for the airline's technical base.
On Tuesday (March 10th), the European Commission gave a green light to the deal.
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha discussed the construction of a gas plant worth an estimated 2 billion euros with authorities in Qatar on Wednesday (March 11th).
Berisha announced that completion of the Seman project -- one of the biggest energy projects in the region -- would occur soon.
Turkey's first high-speed train made its maiden journey from Ankara to the province of Eskisehir.
The railway is the first phase of a larger project to connect Ankara and Istanbul, launched in 2003.
The high-speed train reduced the 180-minute travel time between Ankara and Eskisehir to 70 minutes.
The Cypriot ministry of commerce, industry and tourism and the Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry prepared a business plan to attract investment and tourists amid the global financial crisis, Cypriot media reported on Tuesday (March 10th).
The plan aims to promote Cyprus as a regional service centre.
Albania's Trade and Industry Chamber and Montenegro's Chamber of Commerce agreed on Wednesday (March 11th) to work together for the liberalisation of the market in order to address the global economic crisis.
Albanian Chamber head Gjoke Uldedaj said both chambers would work to create a favourable climate for free trade in accordance with the region's fragile economic state.
(Various sources – 06/03/09-13/03/09)
