16/12/2008
Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev arrived on Sunday (December 14th) in Skopje for an official visit, marking the 15th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties with Macedonia. 
Meeting with leaders, he urged the country to reach a settlement with Greece over their long-standing name dispute.
***
Albania has made significant progress in the past three years and has entered a new stage in its EU integration process, Dirk Lange, head of the unit for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina in the European Commission (EC) Directorate General for Enlargement, said on Thursday (December 11th). 
Lange met with Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli during his last visit to Tirana before his mandate ends. 
Topalli thanked him for the EC's support and promised that Albania would continue pro-EU reforms.
***
Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli met on Sunday (December 14th) with a Czech parliamentary delegation for talks on EU and NATO integration and other issues. 
The delegation was in Tirana to attend a conference on children, organised jointly by the Albanian parliament and UNICEF. 
The Czech Republic takes over the EU's rotating presidency in January.
***
Hungarian President Laszlo Solyom pledged support for Macedonia's EU and NATO integration and said his country would not allow the imposition of additional conditions for the EU visa liberalisation process. 
At a joint press conference Thursday (December 11th) after meeting with visiting Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski, Solyom said he hoped the visa liberalisation regime will be implemented in 2009 under the Czech or the Swedish EU presidencies, as Skopje has met all technical conditions.
***
US Defence Secretary Robert Gates and his deputy Gordon England expressed their full support for Albania on Wednesday (December 10th). 
At a meeting in Washington with visiting Albanian Defence Minister Gazmend Oketa, the two officials pledged that positive co-operation with Tirana will continue in the future. 
Gates and England said they are observing the process of ratification of protocols that will see Albania join NATO at the Alliance's next summit in April 2009.
***
Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat arrived in Brussels on Tuesday (December 9th) for talks on the EU's commitment to ease the Turkish Cypriot community's isolation. 
He met with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn.
(Various sources 09/12/08-16/12/08)
