14/04/2009
Albania and Macedonia agreed on Friday (April 10th) to improve transport and communication links between the two countries.
At a meeting in Ohrid, Albanian Transport Minister Sokol Olldashi and Macedonian counterpart Mile Janakieski said there are ongoing preparations to build an expressway between Skopje and Tirana.
Janakieski remarked Macedonia is also planning to construct 56km of railway by 2010 to connect its network with Albania.
Greece hopes new Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov will work on resolving the two countries' long-running name dispute, Greek Foreign Ministry spokesman Giorgos Koumoutsakos said on Thursday (April 9th).
Athens believes the April 5th Macedonian presidential run-off was "a step towards European election norms", he said.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel expressed support for Croatia's EU accession after meeting with Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader in Berlin on April 8th.
Merkel called for a speedy solution to Slovenia's blockade of Croatia's EU accession talks and pledged Germany's readiness to back Croatia.
A delegation headed by Macedonian Defence Minister Zoran Konjanovski began an official visit to Montenegro on Monday (April 13th), at the invitation of Montenegrin Defence Minister Boro Vucinic.
Konjanovski is also scheduled to meet with President Filip Vujanovic.
Topics are expected to include co-operation and mutual trust between Skopje and Podgorica, as well as possible ways to deepen bilateral defence relations.
<b>Greek</b> Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and Turkish counterpart Ali Babacan held an informal meeting April 6th on the sidelines of the 2nd annual forum of the UN-led Alliance of Civilisations in Istanbul, media reported on Tuesday.
The two ministers discussed bilateral relations, ongoing efforts to reunify the divided island of <b>Cyprus</b>, and Greece and Turkey's role in the process as guarantor countries.
Serbian President Boris Tadic said on April 7th that his country should become a member of the EU family, stressing its political and economic progress over the past decade.
"Serbia is no longer what it used to be in the 1990s -- the problem of the Western Balkans," Tadic said at a joint press conference with Austrian Chancellor Werner Faymann.
Faymann reiterated Austria's support for closer relations between Serbia and the EU.
(Various sources -- 07/04/09-14/04/09)
