13/04/2009
The Banja Luka Clinical Centre in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) carried out the first cochlear implant in the country by using the latest technique, called VERIA.
Surgeons introduced the classical method five years ago and have restored the hearing of 22 patients, mostly children.
The world's leading cardiologists arrived in Belgrade on April 5th to take part in the Fifth Belgrade Summit of Interventional Cardiologists.
The cardiologists performed 45 heart surgeries as part of the event, which Serbian President Boris Tadic sponsored.
The conference ended on Wednesday (April 8th).
Serbia and China signed an agreement on co-operation in science and technology on April 7th.
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Science and Technological Development Bozidar Djelic did the honours during his visit to Beijing.
The Romanian company MB Telecom SRL won the 37th International Exhibition of Inventions of Geneva grand prize on April 4th.
Roboscan 1 M, an advanced system for gamma ray scanning of trucks, won unanimously.
Nearly 700 inventors from 45 countries participated in the fair.
A Turkish team of high school students won the jury's special award at the FIRST Robotics Competition, co-sponsored by Microsoft, NASA and Boeing.
It was held in the US city of Seattle, the Anadolu news agency reported on April 6th.
Istanbul's Darussafaka High School sent one of only two foreign teams.
In all, 64 schools competed in the event.
Greek archaeologists have completed the first phase of a 3m-euro project to restore the royal palace of King Philip II of Macedon at the archaeological site of Vergina in northern Greece, the ANA-MPA news agency reported on April 5th.
The team presented its findings at a conference on archaeological excavations held in Thessaloniki.
Hackers broke into the computers of several embassies in Cyprus, the daily Philelefteros reported on April 3rd, citing Canadian computer security experts.
Researchers from the Munk Centre for International Studies in Toronto uncovered a vast electronic spying operation that infiltrated computers and stole documents from government and private offices around the world, including in Cyprus.
(Various sources – 06/04/09-13/04/09)
