13/01/2009
Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan left on Monday (January 12th) for an official visit to Kosovo where he is discussing bilateral relations and the situation in the Balkans with senior officials.
On Sunday, Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni described Turkey as Kosovo's strategic partner.
"We expect that our relations with Turkey will further improve," he told the Anadolu news agency.
Hyseni said he and Babacan will discuss an agreement to lift visa requirements between the two countries, before Babacan travels on to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Serbian President Boris Tadic and visiting Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos discussed Belgrade's EU prospects at a meeting Sunday (January 11th).
Tadic thanked Moratinos for Spain's continuous support of Serbia's EU bid.
Moratinos also met with Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic and attended an ambassadorial conference in Belgrade.
Speaking at the conference, Moratinos praised Serbia's constructive approach to problems on its agenda.
Romanian President Traian Basescu and Prime Minister Emil Boc left on Monday (January 12th) for Brussels to meet with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso.
On the agenda are talks on the global economic crisis, energy security and the transit of natural gas to Europe.
Turkey can play an important role in preventing tragedies on the Gaza Strip, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said on Thursday (January 8th) in Ankara, where he met with President Abdullah Gul and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Solana said that both the EU and Turkey want to see a cease-fire in Gaza and added that the purpose of his visit was to study opportunities for preventing a crisis in the Middle East.
"We had a useful meeting in Ankara," Solana said.
Albanian President Bamir Topi wrapped up a two-day official visit to Kosovo on Friday (January 9th).
He met with President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi, KFOR Commander Giuseppe Emilio Gay and other senior officials.
This was Topi's second visit to Kosovo since he became president.
German Bundestag President Norbert Lammert said that Germany's support for Kosovo, especially in upholding its independence, will continue.
Lammert visited Pristina on Wednesday (January 7th) where he denied that the recent arrest of three Germans for their alleged bombing of an EU office in Kosovo had damaged bilateral relations.
After meeting with President Fatmir Sejdiu, Lammert said his visit conveyed Germany's interest in political, economic and social developments in Kosovo.
(Various sources 06/01/09 - 13/01/09)
