10/03/2009
Spain will not change its position of refusing to recognise Kosovo's independence, according to the country's prime minister, Jose Luis Zapatero. 
His statement came Monday (March 9th) at a meeting with visiting Serbian President Boris Tadic. 
Zapatero also said Spain would do everything it could to support Serbia's bid to join the EU. 
During their talks, the two leaders discussed bilateral relations, military co-operation and security. 
On Tuesday, the Serbian and Spanish defence ministers signed a defence co-operation agreement.
***
The Republic of Palau has recognised the independence of Kosovo, becoming the 56th nation to do so. 
"We share your enthusiasm, because we too became an independent and sovereign state in 1994 and we joined the United Nations as the youngest member," Palau President Johnson Toribiong wrote to Kosovo counterpart Fatmir Sejdiu. 
Palau consists of 260 small islands in the Pacific Ocean and has a population of 22,000.
***
Macedonian Defence Minister Zoran Konjanovski arrived Monday (March 9th) on a one-day official visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
His agenda included talks with EUFOR commander Major General Stefano Castagnotto, NATO commander Brigadier General Sabato Errico and BiH Defence Minister Selmo Cikotic. 
Konjanovski will also visit the medical team of the defence ministry and the ALTEA mission in BiH.
***
Albanian Justice Minister Enkelejd Alibeaj and Italian counterpart Angelino Alfano met in Rome on Sunday (March 8th) to discuss the planned extradition of prisoners to Albania. 
About 50 prisoners are expected to undergo transfer to Albanian prisons, the ministers announced. 
They also agreed to step up cross-border co-operation against organised crime. 
"We are in the stage of turning our countries into an area without borders to guarantee security for Albanian and Italian citizens," Alibeaj said.
***
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and Slovenian counterpart Borut Pahor signed a memorandum of understanding Friday (March 6th) on technical support in EU affairs. 
They signed the document during a visit by Pahor to Serbia, his first to the country since taking office.
***
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu met with US Ambassador to the UN Susan Rice during a visit to the United States last week. 
He informed Rice about developments in Kosovo during its first year of independence and the efforts that Pristina is making to secure more international recognitions. 
Sejdiu also met with ambassadors of countries that haven't recognised Kosovo, including Qatar, Ghana, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan and Egypt.
(Various sources -- 03/03/09-10/03/09)
