11/05/2009
The fourth edition of the International Science Film Festival opened in Athens on May 4th. 
The first part of the festival is this month, while the second part will take place in October. 
The festival features over 170 films from various countries and scientific fields. 
The themes include the Mayan and Aztec civilisations, robots and dinosaurs, ants and somnambulists, travels in Africa and the Antarctic, exploration of lost Atlantis and the Parthenon, and others.
***
Istanbul's Topkapi Museum, once an Ottoman palace, will be the first museum in Turkey to use hologram technology, the daily Hurriyet reported on May 4th. 
Topkapi will use the latest state-of-the-art equipment to display holographic janissaries -- the Ottoman sultan's personal guards -- who will walk up and down the halls of the museum's weapons section in period uniforms.
***
The Kosovo government signed an agreement with the local Post and Telecommunications (PTK) company on May 5th to provide 1,080 schools and university buildings with internet access. 
The government will sponsor the 80m-euro project, the largest of its kind undertaken by the PTK.
***
The new Sapte TV online television channel began operation in Romania on May 4th. 
The 24-hour channel's founders want to meet the growing demand for online information and entertainment. 
Channel content will include news, documentaries, talk shows, movies, fashion shows, book presentations, musical shows and programmes about the traditions, cultures and religions of ethnic minorities in Romania.
***
The first meeting of the South Eastern Europe European Research Area Net project (known as SEE-ERA.NET) occurred at Ss. 
Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje on May 5th. 
Implementing the project are 17 partners from agencies and ministries responsible for science and technology development in Western Balkan countries and EU member states. 
Its goal is to support the integration of the Western Balkans and their scientific institutes by boosting bilateral and regional co-operation.
(Various sources – 04/05/09-11/05/09)
