08/04/2009
A photography exhibition on Greek opera singer Maria Callas opened in Nicosia, Cyprus, in connection with a Cypriot-Greek memorandum of co-operation in culture.
Athens first displayed the photos, which highlight Callas's musical career, in 2007 to mark the 30th anniversary of her death.
Macedonian poet Nikola Madzirov won one of the most prominent German and European literature scholarships, the Tandem.
The prize will allow Madzirov to offer lectures in Macedonian, German and English in Berlin during May and June.
Madzirov is the first Macedonian to win the Tandem scholarship for authors from central and eastern Europe.
Greek gymnast Vlassis Maras won a gold medal in the high bar event at the European Gymnastics Championship in Milan on Sunday (April 5th).
Maras scored 15,375 points in the final.
He is the first athlete to win four gold medals in the high bar.
A 25-member painting crew from Romania and Greece will repaint the Eiffel Tower later this year, the AP reported on March 31st.
The Paris symbol undergoes repainting by hand every seven years.
The 4m-euro project should require 18 months.
Albanian weightlifter Romela Begaj won a bronze medal in the women's 58kg category at the European Weightlifting Championship on Sunday (April 5th) in Bucharest.
Begaj was first in the snatch lift but finished fourth in the clean and jerk.
The sixth Belgrade dance festival opened on April 2nd with a performance by the Monte Carlo ballet.
The event, which ends on April 15th, features performances by eight of the best ballet ensembles from around the world.
Split, Croatia, will host the 2010 Powerboat P1 World Championship.
The race will occur in conjunction with the Croatia Boat Show, which Split has hosted for the past 11 years.
Republika Srpska hosted the sixth international meeting of aphorists on Monday (April 6th).
The event, organised traditionally to mark April Fools' Day, brought together 16 satirists from the former Yugoslavia.
(Various sources – 01/04/09-08/04/09)
