08/05/2009
The EU's Economic and Financial Affairs Council on Tuesday (May 5th) approved a 5-billion-euro aid package for Romania to help tackle the effects of "a sharp drop in capital inflows resulting from the international financial crisis".
The aid is conditioned on several requirements such as implementation of judicial reform and convictions in significant corruption cases.
Turkish State Minister Zafer Caglayan inaugurated on Wednesday (May 6th) the international construction fair TURKEYBUILD 2009 in Istanbul.
Nearly 850 companies from 50 countries are attending this year's fair, which closes Sunday (May 10th).
TURKEYBUILD, held since 1978, is the biggest construction material and technology trade show in Turkey.
Greece's Public Power Corporation inaugurated on May 3rd a new power station and a wind farm in eastern Crete.
Development Minister Costis Hatzidakis said the new plant will significantly improve Crete's energy balance and its development prospects.
Albania secured a 250m-euro loan from Deutsche Bank and Greece's Alpha Bank to fund its investment programme, the finance ministry announced on Monday (May 4th).
The funds will finance the construction of a highway connecting Tirana with the northern town of Kukes and Kosovo.
The lenders will disburse the first tranche, 95m euros, by the end of May.
Fitch Ratings on April 30th affirmed Bulgaria's long-term foreign currency debt at BBB- and local currency debt at BBB.
The agency revised the outlook from stable to negative.
The primary reason for the negative rating is the unfavourable economic environment and the likelihood of a very sharp adjustment, given the country's large external exposure.
Macedonia registered deflation in April, according to the latest statistics published by the State Statistical Office on Monday (May 4th).
The cost of living, a key indicator of inflation, dropped by 0.5% in April from the same month last year, while the retail price index marked a 1% decline.
(Various sources – 01/05/09-08/05/09)
