09/03/2009
Bulgaria hosted its first "Facebook Developer Garage" on Saturday (March 7th).
The main goal of the forum was to present opportunities to develop Facebook applications.
Stellar Bulgaria organised the event.
Facebook's applications opened for development in May 2007 and currently involve around 660,000 developers and entrepreneurs in more than 180 countries.
The Montenegrin-based .ME Registry announced on March 3rd a partnership with Sedo to list 35 of the most desired .me domain names through an auction.
Bidding for the names, which include "add.me", "bet.me", "book.me" and "clean.me", will open on March 26th and end on April 2nd.
The Montenegrin government chose .ME Registry to operate the country's new .me domain name extension.
Large-scale archaeological excavations began in four ancient sites around Macedonia in early March, announced Pasko Kuzman, the head of the cultural heritage protection department at Macedonia's culture ministry.
The four sites are Herklea Lynkestis, Skopje Kale Fortress, Stobi and Isar.
The Internews web site in Macedonia honoured ten female leaders in software development and e-government initiatives on Friday (March 6th).
Awards went to employees of the Employment Service Agency, the Customs Administration, the Ministry of Transport and Communication and private companies working with software.
The southern Turkish city of Antalya hosted a meeting of the European Co-operation in Science and Technology (COST) chemistry and molecular science committee on March 2nd and 3rd.
A number of European scientists presented new projects in molecular sciences.
Turkey hosted the event as one of the founding members of COST.
An exhibit on water conservation designed by the American Museum of Natural History opened in Istanbul on Wednesday (March 4th).
The exhibition is a joint project of the UN Development Programme and Coca-Cola.
It will be on display until June 14th.
Turkish economist and politician Kemal Dervis became a member of the International Board of Overseers at one of Turkey's leading private universities, Sabanci University in Istanbul, local media reported on Thursday (March 5th).
Dervis recently stepped down as administrator of the UN Development Programme.
(Various sources – 02/03/09 - 09/03/09)
