15/01/2007
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 15/01/07
Food production and agriculture play an important role in Montenegro's economy, with the primary sector alone amounting to more than 10% of total GDP. 
However, a government analysis shows that Montenegrin agriculture is marked by relatively low price competitiveness -- many products are more expensive than their European counterparts. 
As Montenegro prepares itself for the European -- and ultimately the global -- marketplace, the problem will become more acute.
Shortly after Montenegro's split from the state union with Serbia, the government adopted a strategy for rural development and agriculture, with the goal of aligning policy, legislation and the institutional framework with the requirements of the EU's Common Agricultural Policy. 
Increasing competitiveness is one of the main goals.
In general, Montenegrin products can be classified into three groups. 
First are those that are costlier to produce than in most European countries, and are thus less competitive. 
This group includes potato, milk and dairy products, fruits, poultry and pork. 
Second are those which are comparatively low to produce, and thus more competitive. 
Tobacco and lamb are in this group. 
Finally, some products are in between -- or, in certain cases, the price level is hard to determine.
One area where Montenegrins have a distinct advantage is tomato production. 
The price of Montenegrin tomatoes is low compared to the EU, and even to countries such as Greece, Italy and Portugal, which have relatively favourable conditions. 
Over the long term, technological advancement, higher production and better organisation will be the keys to remaining competitive.
The cost of lamb production -- with the exception of veal -- has been dropping lately. 
Prices are especially low in comparison with Mediterranean countries with similar conditions -- Cyprus, France, Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain. 
France has a high consumption of lamb per person and relatively high costs of domestic production; thus Montenegro theoretically has good prospects for exporting lamb there.
However, the country is currently not in a position to turn these prospects into reality. 
Market infrastructure remains underdeveloped. 
Production is not well-organised, slaughterhouses do not comply with hygienic standards, and exporters lack sufficient international expertise. 
Paradoxically, even though lamb could be the most competitive industry in Montenegro, it is threatened by a recession. 
Instead of exporting their products to Europe, Montenegrins may well find themselves importing lamb from Australia and New Zealand. 
Substantial investment in this industry is needed before its potential -- which is considerable -- can be realised.
Tobacco is another industry where Montenegro is competitive. 
Prices are lower than in the EU, but the future of the sector is uncertain. 
Analyses have shown that tobacco production throughout Europe is struggling to compete with other parts of the world.
For a number of other industries -- where production costs either as much or more than in the EU -- the outlook is a subject of concern. 
For example, food grain production in Montenegro has been in a continual decline. 
The market is basically open and there is very little tariff protection. 
Without budgetary support to Montenegrin producers, this sector is will have trouble competing with counterparts in Europe.
The cost of fruit in Montenegro is high. 
The market is not yet affected by strong competition because of its underdeveloped trade. 
But that is bound to change in the future. 
Despite favourable natural resources and conditions, Montenegro will need a lot of investment in technology and organisation as well as in increases in production in order for this sector to become more competitive.
The cost of milk in Montenegro is slowly decreasing and approaching the average cost of milk in the EU member countries. 
At the same time, however, the quality of milk is lower. 
Small dairies will have difficulties in keeping up with high European hygienic standards, and thus export opportunities are limited. 
With the opening of the market and development of the trade between dairies, they will be hard pressed to stay in business. 
Survival depends on advancements in technology, structure and organisation.
In general, Montenegro has considerable production potential. 
Agricultural area in Montenegro covers 38% of the country's total surface area. 
Agricultural land resources stand at about 0.84 hectares per capita -- one of the highest figures in Europe.
However, grassland and pastures prevail, and are not being adequately exploited. 
Arable land, orchards and vineyards occupy only 12% of the total agricultural area. 
Moreover, traditional direct sales at vegetable markets continue to predominate, and the benefits of commercial market production have been largely overlooked.
Through its agriculture and rural development strategy -- prepared with technical assistance from the European Agency for Reconstruction -- the government hopes to overcome the disadvantage of small holder-dominated agriculture in order to compete with imports in an increasingly liberalised regional market, while at the same time meeting the EU's high food safety standards.
Doing so will ultimately be the key to ensuring competitive income opportunities for the rural population, thus stemming the trend towards rural depopulation in Montenegro.
