07/04/2009
EU foreign policy and security chief Javier Solana and Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci met in Brussels on Friday (April 3rd) to discuss the EULEX mission, the economic situation in Kosovo and the impact of the global economic crisis on its development.
The two officials also talked about reforms the EU wants Kosovo to implement.
US President Barack Obama met with Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis on Saturday (April 4th) on the sidelines of the NATO summit in Strasbourg.
The name dispute between Macedonia and Greece was one of their main topics of discussion.
They also talked about relations between Greece and Turkey and the Cypriot issue.
Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat met with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on Friday (April 3rd) in Paris.
Talat urged Ban to boost the UN's mediation activities aimed at reconciling the long-divided island this year.
Armenian Foreign Minister Edward Nalbandian is making a two-day visit to Turkey on Monday (April 6th) and Tuesday as part of the two countries' efforts to normalise relations.
Serbian President Boris Tadic met with Egyptian counterpart Hosni Mubarak in Cairo on Wednesday (April 1st).
During the meeting, Mubarak reiterated that Egypt will continue to deny recognition of Kosovo.
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader met on March 31st with High Representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Valentin Inzko in Mostar.
Sanader said they agreed that BiH should remain a united country in which the three entities enjoy equal rights and that BiH should join Euro-Atlantic institutions.
US President Barack Obama briefly met with Cypriot President Demetris Christofias on Sunday (April 5th) on the sidelines of the EU-US summit in Prague.
Christofias said they discussed efforts to unify the island and asked Obama to exert pressure on <b>Turkey</b> to remove its forces from the northern part of Cyprus.
Britain on Monday (April 6th) echoed US President Barack Obama's call for Turkey's full membership in the EU.
Michael Ellam, spokesman for Prime Minister Gordon Brown, said support for "Turkey's EU membership … has been a long-standing position of the British government".
Ellam's statement came a day after French President Nicolas Sarkozy said France "has not changed and will not change" its opposition to Turkish membership.
Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli met with Czech parliamentary constitutional and judicial affairs committee chairman Marek Benda on Monday (April 6th) in Tirana.
Benda said the Czech Republic in its role as current EU president will help Albanian authorities prepare the country's application for EU candidate status.
(Various sources 31/03/09-07/04/09)
