10/02/2009
Palestinian Authority President Mahmud Abbas met with his Turkish counterpart, Abdullah Gul, on Saturday (February 7th) in Ankara.
They discussed the need for reconciliation between Hamas and Fatah and for a Palestinian government of national unity.
"It is not possible to have two Palestinian states," Gul said.
Abbas called for immediate humanitarian aid to the people of the Gaza Strip.
Czech Foreign Minister Karel Schwarzenberg said he expects Albania and the other Western Balkan countries to integrate fully into the EU by 2014, Albanian media reported on Sunday (February 8th).
Schwarzenberg, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, met with Albanian counterpart Lulzim Basha during the 45th Security Conference held in Munich at the weekend.
British Minister of State for Europe Caroline Flint arrived on Sunday (February 8th) in Cyprus for a three-day official visit.
Flint will meet President Demetris Christofias, other Cypriot officials and Britain's envoys to Athens, Ankara and Nicosia.
Albania has received full support from the United States for its efforts to develop a democratic society, Prime Minister Sali Berisha said on Thursday (February 5th) after meeting with US Vice President Joseph Biden in Washington.
Biden promised his country's support for Albania's reforms in light of its bids to join NATO and the EU.
The chief prosecutor of The Hague war crimes tribunal, Serge Brammertz, was in Zagreb on Thursday (February 5th), where he met with Croatian authorities to discuss documents he seeks pertaining to former General Ante Gotovina's trial.
Brammertz expressed dissatisfaction Wednesday over Croatia's level of co-operation.
Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis on Monday (February 9th) urged Albania to step up efforts to ensure free and democratic elections in June in order to achieve its integration goals.
"Albania has made tangible progress over the past 18 years, but ...
judicial reforms and the election process must meet OSCE standards," she said.
Bakoyannis, current president of the OSCE, noted the organisation will monitor the implementation of Albania's new, much-criticised lustration law.
(Various sources -- 03/02/09-10/02/09)
