09/02/2009
An exhibition titled "The Canon of Milutin Milankovic" honouring the Serbian scientist opened at the Serbian Academy of Arts and Sciences. 
The exhibition marks the 130th anniversary of the birth of the civil engineer and geophysicist. 
He is most famous for his theory of ice ages, which relates variations of the Earth's orbit and long-term climate change and is known today as the Milankovic cycles.
***
Macedonia and Croatia signed an agreement on co-operation in science, technology and education on February 2nd. 
Signing it in Zagreb were Croatian Education Minister Dragan Primorac and Macedonian counterpart Pero Stojanovski. 
The programme aims to deepen co-operation in science and education and to boost experience exchanges and the decentralisation of education.
***
The US Trade and Development Agency awarded a grant to the Bulgarian State Agency for Information and Communication Technology on Thursday (February 5th). 
The funds will support the development of a national information and communication technology network in a study that will evaluate the economic and technical feasibility of the network's development.
***
Cyprus and the United States signed a co-operation agreement in science and technology, CNA reported on Thursday (February 5th). 
The agreement aims to promote co-operation in various fields and strengthen relations between the two countries' academic and scientific institutions. 
Cypriot Finance Minister Charilaos Stavrakis and US Ambassador to Cyprus Frank Urbancic signed the agreement.
***
Romania's National Communications Authority (ANC) announced on Thursday (February 5th) it would call a tender to acquire a web application, allowing clients of telecom operators to compare fees and conditions for use of internet, fixed and mobile phone services. 
The project costs an estimated 200,000 euros. 
The web site will be available by the end of 2009 or early 2010, the ANC said.
***
Google launched a new service that will translate from Albanian into several other languages through its Translate tool, Albanian media reported on February 2nd. 
Among the other new languages introduced by Google Translate are Turkish, Estonian, Galician, Hungarian, Maltese and Thai.
***
Greek cardiologist Helen Marcoyannopoulou-Fojas invented an apparatus, BPULS, which can detect cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), Business Mirror reported. 
The device permits early detection of arteriosclerosis and other CVDs, which could help decrease the CVD mortality rate.
(Various sources – 02/02/09-09/02/09)
