06/05/2009
Serbia's first ATP tennis tournament, the Serbia Open, started in Belgrade on Monday (May 4th). 
Serbia's Novak Djokovic makes his tournament debut on Wednesday evening against fellow countryman Janko Tipsarevic. 
Also competing this week are Viktor Stroicki, Radek Stepanek, Ivo Karlovic, Igor Andreev and Marcos Baghdatis. 
The tournament ends on Sunday.
***
Bosna 2009, the 39th edition of an international chess tournament hosted by Sarajevo, opens on Thursday (May 7th) and will last until May 18th. 
This year's event, organised by the Chess Club Bosna, will bring together grandmasters from Slovakia, China, Ukraine and India.
***
Croatia announced it will not take immediate measures against runner Vanja Perisic, who tested positive for an illegal substance at last year's Beijing Olympics. 
The results from her tests for the blood booster CERA became public earlier in the week. 
The Croatian Olympic Committee said it will decide on possible measures it may take after running additional tests on Perisic.
***
Pristina hosted the premiere of "The Silence of Lorna", a film starring Kosovo actress Arta Dobroshi, on Wednesday (May 6th). 
Directed by the Belgian duo Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne, "Silence" won Best Screenplay at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival.
***
"Faces without Masks 2009", an international theatre festival for amateur, alternative and experimental troupes, opened in Skopje on Tuesday (May 5th). 
The event, funded by the Macedonian culture ministry and the city of Skopje, ends on Sunday. 
The festival brings together artists from Macedonia, Bulgaria, Lithuania, Austria, Slovakia, Serbia, Germany and Romania.
***
Panathinaikos Athens was crowned European basketball champion after edging past last year's title holder, CSKA Moscow, 73-71, at the Euroleague final match in Berlin on Sunday (May 3rd). 
It is the fifth European title for Panathinaikos, which last claimed it in Athens in 2007, and coach Zeljko Obradovic's seventh.
***
Turkey and the EU launched a project to promote Turkish and European literature as part of a joint cultural programme, the Anadolu news agency reported on Monday (May 4th). 
The project, titled "European Literature in Turkey -- Turkish Literature in Europe", is co-sponsored by the Turkish foreign ministry, the Goethe Institute and the European Commission as part of the Culture Bridges Programme.
(Various sources – 29/04/09-06/05/09)
