06/03/2009
Southeast European (SEE) economies are experiencing the impact of the global financial crisis, experts from the Institute for International Economic Studies told Austria's Vienna-based Chamber of Commerce on Monday (March 2nd).
According to the experts, Croatia and Albania had the highest state debt by the end of 2008 with Croatia's reaching 54.5% and Albania's 53.5% of GDP.
The scientific director of the institute, Michael Landesmann, thinks the negative balance in Southeast Europe occurred after those countries lost access to the credits they used to finance excessive imports, as well as seeing a plunge in remittances from their diasporas and in Foreign Direct Investment.
Romania and Bulgaria decided to draft a joint agreement to build two new bridges over the Danube River, the Agerpres news agency reported on February 26th.
Romanian Transport Minister Radu Berceanu and Bulgarian counterpart Petar Mutafchiev discussed the project.
The two bridges will link Romania's Bechet and Bulgaria's Oreakhovo.
Italy's Costa Group announced on Monday (March 2nd) it had signed an agreement with the Izmir Chamber of Commerce to construct a port in Uckuyular, in Turkey's western province of Izmir, that will accommodate cruise ships.
The 75m-euro project will take 18 months to complete.
The Turkish Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association handed over the rotating presidency of the Union of Black Sea and Caspian Confederation of Enterprises (UBCCE) to Greece on Tuesday (March 3rd).
The Federation of Greek Enterprises will hold the presidency from 2009 to 2011.
At the UBCCE's general meeting, the organisation accepted four new members, brining the number to 17.
Albania and Macedonia have agreed to create a joint economic market by eliminating customs duties on each other as of May 2009.
Officials will sign the agreement shortly, Macedonian Economy Minister Fatmir Besim told a business forum in Tirana on Tuesday (March 3rd).
Trade between the two countries reached 104m euros in 2008.
Croatia and Hungary will connect their natural gas pipeline networks by the end of 2010 per an agreement signed on Tuesday (March 3rd) by Plinacro (Croatia) and Natural Gas Transmission (Hungary), part of the MOL Group.
The project will cost an estimated 395m euros.
It represents part of Zagreb's strategy to modernise and extend the domestic natural gas network.
(Various sources – 27/02/09-06/03/09)
