05/12/2008
European aircraft manufacturer Airbus and Turkish Airspace Industries (TAI) signed a 393m-euro agreement on Thursday (December 4th) under which TAI will produce parts for the A350 airliner.
This is the first big production programme for TAI in civil aviation, TAI Chief Executive Atalay Efeer said.
The Airbus A350 is a new mid-sized, long-range jet for which Airbus has booked 4,060 orders as of November.
The Pristina International Airport (PIA) received an operational licence from the Civil Aviation Authority of Kosovo on Monday (December 1st).
Prior to the issuance of this licence, Iceland's Administration of Civil Aviation monitored PIA operations.
The Serbian dinar hit an all-time low against the euro Tuesday (December 2nd) at 90.52 dinars to the euro, despite a 10m-euro intervention by the Central Bank.
The dinar faced strong depreciation pressures in the past two months after the global crisis led to capital outflows and panic withdrawals from local banks.
The Republika Srpska (RS) finance ministry agreed to cut the personal income tax from 10% to 8% in 2009, Finance Minister Aleksandar Dzombic said on Wednesday (December 3rd).
The changes require parliamentary approval by the RS ruling party, SNSD, which has a clear majority.
Dzombic explained the move aims to spare the business sector from pressure for pay increases and is the first concrete measure by the RS government to mitigate the effects of the global crisis.
Norway's Technor Energy Asa will invest about 200m euros in a hydropower project in Republika Srpska (RS), RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik announced on November 28th.
The company plans to build six hydro plants on the Bosna River, with a total capacity of 75 MW.
Construction will start in 2009.
For the second month, Romania ranked first in October in retail sales growth among the EU members, registering a 9.4% annual rise, the European statistical bureau Eurostat announced on Wednesday (December 3rd).
On a monthly basis, Romania recorded both the steepest decline (2.1%) and highest growth (2.6%), Eurostat reported.
The Albanian National Statistics Institute (INSTAT) said on Wednesday (December 3rd) that businesses in Albania operate on only 25% of the country's territory.
Companies in Albania tend to cluster in the cities of Lezha, Tirana and Vlora.
According to INSTAT, 50% of them operate in the district of Tirana and Durres.
(Various sources – 28/11/08-05/12/08)
