04/11/2008
The issue of Kosovo's status is closed and recognition of its independence by important countries is irreversible, Albanian President Bamir Topi said on Monday (November 3rd) after meeting with Kosovo counterpart Fatmir Sejdiu, who is making a three-day official visit. 
The leaders agreed to enhance bilateral co-operation in security, economy and education. 
Sejdiu thanked Albania for its role in the international recognition of Kosovo and for its support in establishing the new state. 
On Tuesday, Sejdiu will visit the northern town of Shkodra, which will name him an honourary citizen.
***
Czech President Vaclav Klaus is on a two-day working visit to Serbia beginning on Monday (November 3rd). 
He is meeting with President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic, Parliament Speaker Slavica Djukic-Dejanovic and Belgrade Mayor Dragan Dilas. 
On Tuesday, Klaus visits the autonomous region of Vojvodina.
***
Zagreb will host an informal meeting of the justice and interior ministers of countries from Southeast Europe, which EU representatives will also attend. 
Ministers from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia will gather on Thursday (November 6th) for a two-day meeting organised by EU presidency holder France and the European Commission. 
Participants will discuss issues related to cross-border crime, security and the fight against corruption. 
Also present will be French Interior Minister Michele Alliot-Marie, Justice Minister Rachida Dati, Immigration Minister Brice Hortefeux and EU Justice Commissioner Jacques Barrot.
***
Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik and Serbian President Boris Tadic met in Belgrade on Friday (October 31st) to discuss the situations in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
The meeting, held as part of regular discussions between the two leaders, focused on issues related to co-operation in the fields of energy and the economy, Tadic's press office announced.
***
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha met with Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Istanbul on Thursday (October 30th). 
Berisha told Erdogan that his government is working to improve the investment climate in Albania, noting that Turkish direct investments in Albania have reached 860m euros in recent years. 
Erdogan said his government has encouraged Turkish businesses to invest in Albania. 
He also reiterated Turkey's support for Albania's NATO membership.
(Various sources 28/10/08 - 04/11/08)
