05/01/2009
Greek researchers from the TEI Piraeus Research Centre developed artificial intelligence to calculate many heart attack risk factors, ANI reported on December 26th. 
The approach is called online analytical processing and allows physicians to provide patients with a personal risk assessment so as to lower their chances of suffering a heart attack. 
The researchers investigated patterns of cardiovascular risk factors by collecting data from almost 1,000 patients.
***
Cyprus's communications ministry and a satellite company finalised a deal to provide rural areas with broadband internet and digital television, the weekly Cyprus Mail reported on December 26th. 
Under the deal, Hellas Sat will provide cable services worth 4.3m euros.
***
Five scholars from Romania, Japan, Uzbekistan, Tatarstan and Turkmenistan received this year's Turkic World Turkish Language Honour Prize, the daily Zaman reported on December 26th. 
The Istanbul-based Foundation for Service to Turkish Culture awarded them the prize for their work on the Turkish language and their contributions to the development of Turkish culture.
***
Macedonian archaeologists uncovered the first traces of the ancient Macedonian language, palaeolinguist Dusko Aleksovski announced on December 29th. 
The scientists found a 4,000-year-old inscription written on the lid of a clay artefact discovered in central Macedonia.
***
Cyprus's daily Financial Mirror  started service on its free mobile platform Wednesday (December 31st), becoming the first newspaper in Cyprus to offer continuous coverage. 
The free English-language service does not require access codes, logins or passwords. 
Cell phone users with internet access can read the newspaper for free at mobile.financialmirror.com.
***
The Athens Academy of Sciences awarded a Cypriot archaeologist, Jacqueline Karageorghis, a prize for her recent book, Kypris the Aphrodite of Cyprus, Cypriot media reported on Wednesday (December 31st). 
Karageorghis's book explores the cult of the Great Goddess of Cyprus and spans the period from prehistory to the end of antiquity. 
She received her award on December 30th in Athens, at a ceremony attended by Greek President Karolos Papoulias.
***
Kosovo's Academy of Sciences and Arts elected Besim Boksi to its presidency on December 27th. 
Boksi is one of the country's leading scholars of Albanian and Balkan studies.
(Various sources – 29/12/08-05/01/09)
