03/11/2008
Archaeologists unearthed the ruins of a Neolithic house in Pella, Greece.
The rare find offers valuable information about daily life 6,000 years ago, the Greek culture ministry said, noting such information includes insights into the period's architecture.
A court in southeast Turkey on October 24th banned access to Blogger, the world's leading free blogging service.
Local media said officials gave no reason for the ban.
Internet users in Turkey who tried to enter the website found a message stating that the page was blocked following a ruling by the court in Diyarbakir.
The websites of Serbian tennis players Jelena Jankovic and Ana Ivanovic fell victim to Kosovo hackers on October 28th.
A page reading "Owned by Kosovo Hackers" took over the internet site of Jankovic, the world's No.
1 player.
Hackers also hit Ivanovic's page.
The Macedonian government will give out computer vouchers worth 200 euros each to fourth-year university students by November 15th, Information Minister Ivo Ivanovski announced.
All IT companies in the country are welcome to join the programme, Ivanovski added.
Last year, the "Macedonia -- Country of Computer Experts" project oversaw the distribution of 12,222 vouchers.
Croatia's CROZ d.o.o.
is the third fastest-growing technology company in Central Europe, according to a report by Deloitte Central Europe dubbed "Technology Fast 50" published on Thursday (October 23rd).
Polish companies hold the first two places.
<b>Romania's</b> AROBS Transilvania Software is fifth, while fellow Romanian company TeamNet International S.A.
ranks seventh.
Bulgaria's Universal K Ltd.
is 15th.
A Turkish engineer discovered a new mineral species in Antarctica and named it "Meridianiite".
Elif Genceli of the Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands found the new species in a pond on the Japanese island of Hokkaido and in an Antarctic glacier in 2007.
The International Mineralogical Association recorded the discovery.
About 55% of Bulgarians have internet access, according to data provided by internetworldstats.com.
This puts the country 15th among the EU's 27 member states and third among new EU member states, behind Slovenia (8th) and Estonia (11th).
Greece ranked last, with 35.3% of the population having internet access.
Germany donated funds to supply 14 Kosovo schools with computer labs.
German Deputy Ambassador to Pristina Eckart Blaurock and Kosovo Minister of Education, Science and Technology Enver Hoxhaj signed the related agreement on October 28th.
(Various sources – 27/10/08 - 03/11/08)
