01/04/2009
Serbia's national football team defeated Romania on Saturday (March 28th) in a match of World Cup Group 7 qualifiers.
Serbia scored a 3-2 victory, giving it first place in Group 7.
The presidents of the two countries, Romania's Traian Basescu and Serbia's Boris Tadic, attended the match in Constanta.
The 14th Vukovar Puppet Festival opened in Croatia on Monday (March 30th) with a performance of "Cats on Hot Split Roofs" by the Face-to-Face Puppet Theatre from Split.
Puppeteers from Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Hungary will give 104 performances.
The festival closes on Saturday (April 4th).
An international exhibition of miniatures called "Minimum-Maximum" opened in the Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), cultural centre.
The exhibition, which features more than 150 works dedicated to the region's communist past, will remain open until April 27th.
Fifty-two artists from BiH, Serbia and Montenegro created the works.
The 56th Belgrade Documentary and Short Film Festival began on Monday (March 30th).
The festival will screen a total of 39 documentaries and short films.
It also features a special programme -- Nova Svetlost [The New Light] -- that exhibits feature films shot using mobile phones and alternative film devices.
Pristina's Hammam, a cultural monument in Kosovo's capital, will be transformed into a multicultural centre, local media reported on Monday (March 30th).
The 15th-century Ottoman-era monument is undergoing the second stage of a restoration costing 350,000 euros, sponsored by the Pristina municipality and the culture ministry.
The Hammam will be open to visitors next year.
The 28th Istanbul International Film Festival kicks off on Friday (April 3rd) at the Istanbul Lutfi Kirdar Convention and Exhibition Centre, media reported.
A total of 200 films, 40 of them Turkish, will entertain festival-goers.
Presenters will announce awards at the event's gala ceremony on April 18th.
The historic Bran Castle in Romania should reopen to the public on May 18th after undergoing a reorganisation, the castle management announced on Friday (March 27th).
The public will have the opportunity to visit three distinctive sections of the Bran Museum Complex -- mediaeval customs, the ethnographic department and the castle itself, which workers are refurbishing.
(Various sources – 25/03/09-01/04/09)
