12/03/2007
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 12/03/07
Adoption of the common EU currency, the euro, is not a simple matter, as several new EU members have been finding out.
While Slovenia has adopted the euro, Lithuania has been asked by the European Commission in Brussels to wait.
At the same time, Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary have decided to extend the timetable for adoption.
Under its accession treaty, Romania is also supposed to join the eurozone.
Its convergence programme has set, as a strategic target, euro adoption and accession to the monetary union by 2012-2014.
Clearly stating this aim may be a means to achieve a more consistent economic policy in Romania.
However, there are difficulties involved in basing a comprehensive policy platform on an objective that is wrapped up in many technicalities.
Furthermore, the platform needs to be easily digestible for the public at large.
Taking a look at the actual functioning of the monetary union should provide some indication of the specific challenges ahead.
There are certain factors which, hypothetically at least, can enhance entry into the eurozone.
It is not necessarily the nominal convergence criteria (inflation, interest rate differentials, public debt, exchange rate volatility) that play the key role here.
More important are factors that make solid performance within the monetary union achievable.
These include flexibility in product/service markets and in markets for production factors (including labour), adequate prior reform of the welfare and pensions system (eliminating some of the expected additional burden on the public coffers in the future), and a tax policy focused on the mobility of production factors under single market conditions, including labour migration.
Such prerequisites are not easy to meet.
They imply a certain level of economic development that must in no way be accidental if euro adoption is to be successful.
After accession into the monetary union, the only macroeconomic instrument left to national policymakers, for adjustment purposes, is the public budget.
Unless domestic markets function properly, putting too heavy a burden on the public budget would have a boomerang effect.
Attempting to reduce excessive external deficits this way could make the economy stall and go into recession -- as shown by Portugal's experience.
Italy, too, offers an example of how tricky operating inside the monetary union can be unless markets adjust smoothly and rapidly.
Economic policy after accession has to deal with unavoidable and complicated tradeoffs, for which theory does not always provide clear solutions.
For example, major tradeoffs are entailed by the complete liberalisation of the capital account when domestic interest rates are still high (attracting hot money inflows).
Another example applies to emerging economies.
These need massive investment in infrastructure, as part of the overall effort at modernisation.
Such investment requires a significant growth in public and private expenditures which, unless accompanied by corresponding productivity gains, would create inflationary fits while enlarging foreign deficits.
Some analysts argue that the Maastricht criteria are less applicable to emerging economies that are growing quite rapidly.
This is not only because of the Balassa-Samuelson effect (entailing a sharp rise in the price of non-tradeables), but also because of possible conflicts between a considerably larger public budget (with expenditures that can rise by 4-5% of GDP due to post-accession requirements and the availability of EU funds) and the sustained disinflation that is required by accession into the monetary union.
The more complex and bigger an economy is, the more difficult it is to tackle macroeconomic trade-offs -- a lesson that has been learned the hard way in Prague, Budapest and Warsaw.
For Bulgaria and Romania, a further challenge looms -- namely, the upward pressure on wages caused by steady migration.
This may make it difficult to achieve an inflation rate of 2% on a durable basis.
There is another aspect of the monetary union's functioning which should provide food for thought.
Some countries behave, in effect, like freeloaders, counting on easy financing of their deficits without being able, seemingly, to put their public budgets in good order.
It is taboo in Brussels and Frankfurt to question the viability of the monetary union -- and this is understandable;
for the Euro is as much a political construct as an economic one.
Nevertheless, too many freeloaders could lead to a situation where the benefits of being in the eurozone could be outrun by costs.
A one-size-fits-all monetary policy would be increasingly unwelcome under such conditions.
In short, the debate on monetary union accession, even as it acknowledges that this target is set forth by the accession treaty of the new EU member countries, must address a wide range of issues and circumstances.
This debate needs to be accompanied by an analytical understanding of the unavoidable tradeoffs among key policy targets, within the framework of longer term economic policy planning and making.
Public policy will have to find a way to avoid sacrificing real convergence for the sake of expediting nominal convergence that, later on, turns out to be ephemeral.
The adoption of the Euro should not be seen as an ultimate target on its own, but rather as a means to diminish the economic divides that separate new EU entrants from the older, affluent members.
Euro adoption thus has to be formulated and made operational in realistic terms.
Countries from Southeast Europe should consider carefully the pros and the cons of rushing into euro adoption.
The functioning of a currency board regime may speak in favour of a quicker euro adoption, as would a heavy euroization of the economy, as is the case in Croatia.
The size of the economy is also in important element to consider, and most Balkan economies are quite small.
However, the decision hinges on many other factors -- not the least of which is, for most Balkan countries, gaining a clearer view of their prospects of entry into the EU.
