03/03/2009
German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Friday (February 27th) urged politicians in the Western Balkans to overcome their disagreements. 
She noted the problems between Serbia and Kosovo, the secessionist mood in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the name dispute between Greece and Macedonia and the border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia. 
"This situation is not in the spirit of the process of European integration, nor is it in the interests of the EU," Merkel said.
***
Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac and Greek counterpart Evangelos Meimarakis met on Thursday (February 26th) in Belgrade, where they discussed boosting military co-operation, which, they said, is key to the region's stability and safety. 
Meimarakis said Serbia should participate in all regional security initiatives. 
Sutanovac thanked his counterpart for backing Serbia's participation in international security initiatives and the NATO Partnership for Peace programme.
***
Peace, respect for human life and the principles of international law are the top priorities of the Greek presidency of the OSCE in 2009, Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis told members of the UN Security Council in New York on Friday (February 27th). 
In her speech, Bakoyannis underlined the need to strengthen the role of the OSCE in efforts to overcome crises, as well as its co-operation with international institutions such as the UN.
***
Turkish Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim and Iranian counterpart Hamed Behbahani met in Tehran on Sunday (March 1st). 
The two officials signed a memorandum of understanding that covers air, land and sea transportation between Turkey and Iran.
***
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha met with Chinese Assistant Foreign Minister Wu Hongbo in Tirana on February 25th to mark the 60th anniversary of diplomatic ties between the two countries. 
China is ready to strengthen political dialogue on all levels and expand pragmatic co-operation in economy and trade, Wu said.
***
US President Barack Obama's special envoy for the Middle East, George Mitchell, said on Thursday (February 26th) that Turkey is "a crucial ally" of the United States and an important factor for peace and security in the Middle East. 
Mitchell met with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, President Abdullah Gul and Foreign Minister Ali Babacan in Ankara. 
Erdogan reiterated Turkey's stance that an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement requires the participation of Hamas.
(Various sources -- 24/02/09-03/03/09)
