02/03/2009
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu became the first recipient of the Distinguished Global Leadership Award from Arizona State University (ASU) in Tempe on February 23rd.
Sejdiu, a former law professor who spent a semester in residence at ASU in 2003, received the award at a ceremony attended by more than 250 Albanian-Americans.
The citation praised him for enhancing international and intercultural understanding.
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski announced on February 21st that a five-department IT university would open in Ohrid in October.
Several US professors are working on the project.
Instruction will be in English, allowing students from throughout the region to enrol.
Kosovo has 150,000 users of illegal mobile networks, according to two licenced mobile operators, Vala and IPKO.
The two operators urged the Telecommunication Regulatory Authority on Tuesday (February 24th) to break up the illegal networks, as they cause 170m euros' worth of damage annually.
Professor Petar Atanasov of the Electronics Institute at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences became one of 15 winners of the education ministry's Pythagoras Award.
Atanasov received the award on Thursday (February 26th) for his achievements in nanotechnology and for 74 international publications.
The domain name Kosovo.com became available on February 19th in an online auction launched by Virtual Network.
Bidding closed on February 26th.
Kosovo.com was initially the web site of a political organisation called the <b>Serbian</b> Democratic Movement led by Kosovo Serb politician Momcilo Trajkovic.
Virtual Network bought the domain name in 2006.
Turkey's Scientific and Technological Research Council developed a new high-security cryptographic device called the Safe USB Storage Device, media reported on Tuesday (February 24th).
The device automatically erases all stored information in case of unauthorised access.
Users can access the information remotely even if they lose the device.
More than 88% of Greek adolescents use a computer regularly, the National Statistics Service said on February 20th.
Statistics show more than 71% of Greek teenagers access the internet on a daily basis.
An estimated 87% of adolescents use a mobile telephone.
The data are relevant for the first quarter of 2008.
(Various sources – 23/02/09-02/03/09)
