06/11/2006
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 06/11/06
Recent political developments in Hungary, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Poland have raised eyebrows among observers worldwide.
How can it be that after EU accession domestic politics in these countries has stumbled in such an alarming manner?
Instead of a consolidation of democratic politics, the post-accession period has seen fragmented, stalemated governments, coalitions formed by mismatched parties with incompatible philosophies, and in Hungary's case an eruption of political tensions into public anger.
The trend is puzzling to many.
It pays to remember, however, that these economies are part of the dynamic area of Europe, with annual economic growth rates that have been many times higher than those in the core of the EU (5-6% vs 1-2%).
Conventional wisdom, blending politics and economics, says that wherever economic growth is high, social stability and sound politics have a better chance of prevailing.
In the case of Central Europe, a logical inference would be that, owing to significant economic growth in this decade, a large part of the population would enjoy tangible economic fruits and, therefore, support the ruling coalitions.
EU accession was expected to buoy the foundations of these young liberal democracies.
And there is another factor to consider.
Unlike citizens in most of the EU-15 (Portugal and Spain are exceptions), people in the post-communist countries have lived through the command system.
One would expect them to be better able to detect fake democrats and cheap populism, be it on the right or the left.
Orderly democratic life would seem to be more alertly guarded in countries that endured so long without it.
In fact, there is an ongoing debate among economists about the fundamentals of economic growth, and about the relationship between democracy and prosperity.
Some argue that growth matters first and foremost, even when it incurs substantial inequities among social partners.
Another line of reasoning, however, argues that sustainable economic growth should not impair social cohesion, and that it has to be accompanied by adequate production of public goods.
Good practices in both the public and the private sector, as well as an effective fight against corruption, are key.
The experience of post-communist Mitteleuropa suggests that high growth rates, in and of themselves, are not enough to secure a sound social and political life.
Arguably, wherever in Central and Eastern Europe numerous citizens have lost out in the economic race or have found themselves marginalised (excluded from the fruits of economic growth), their frustration is likely to be captured by extremist parties and centrist parties lose political ground.
As for the buoying power of EU membership, this was in a sense more effective when the countries involved were hoping to get into the bloc.
That hope enabled politicians with differing ideological stances to rally citizens behind the banner of a "return to Europe".
More than a few of these citizens saw this "return" as an initiation into a Nirvana-like society, with immense economic benefits.
Now people have seen that nothing changed dramatically for the better after May 2004.
On the contrary, some additional pains have been brought about by the rigours of complying with the EU regulations.
A wake-up call was unavoidable.
It has been amplified by the revival of "economic patriotism" in the major EU member states, a force which seems to contradict the very principles with the bloc has been so earnest about imposing on would-be members.
In order to join the EU, Eastern European countries diligently observed the intellectual and operational matrix of the Union -- for instance, the total opening of markets, including those for financial services and public utilities.
In these sectors, Eastern Europeans have in fact been much more liberal that their western counterparts.
It is easy to comprehend the frustration in some political circles in central Europe when EU heavyweights preach what they do not practice.
Economic nationalism in the West thus spurs economic nationalism in the East.
Other issues add fuel to the fire -- for example, Poland's fear of Germany and Russia, both of which are working together in the very sensitive field of energy procurement.
The memory of the past is not necessarily an effective antidote to antiliberal sentiments.
People enjoy their political liberties and like to voice their satisfactions and frustrations, but it is all too easy to forget how things were when such liberties were non-existent and how that affected their lives.
Younger people who have no personal experience with communism do not know what it is like.
Their reference points are different.
In way that is not too dissimilar, some in the West are oblivious to the second world war and its atrocities, including the Holocaust.
Actual democracy and textbook democracy are two different things.
In practice, democracy means the functioning, for better or worse, of checks and balances.
The actual state of democracy hinges greatly on the morality and sense of accountability of political leaders, which can be dismaying under certain conditions.
It is for this reason that some talk about a democracy deficit in EU member countries and a shortage of responsible politicians, of true statesmanship.
More than a few myths and clichés are fading away in the "New Europe", and individual and group psychologies react one way or another.
Eastern European societies are much less prosperous than their western EU partners.
At the same time they are facing similar structural challenges:
aging, the crisis of the welfare system, identity-related confusion, and a rising pressure of immigration.
High economic growth is not a panacea.
It will not forestall a political reaction if governments prove incapable of dealing with the social challenges that accompany modernisation, against the background of globalisation.
There are no easy solutions, and national politicians will be severely tested in this respect in the years to come.
What they do will influence domestic politics and their countries' economies greatly.
Moreover, what is happening in Central Europe should sound warning bells when it comes to the Balkans.
SEE countries are also making the transition from communism, with all of the hopes and disappointments this entails.
Economic woes, including unemployment, are substantial.
"Enlargement fatigue" and other barriers have made the prospect of EU entry remote for some countries in the region.
They face the same pressures that have fostered instability in Central Europe, but with less of an anchor to keep them on a steady course.
