28/12/2009
Macedonian Information Society Minister Ivo Ivanovski and Skopje Mayor Koce Trajanovski gave away laptops to high school teachers on December 18th, marking the start of a national campaign to distribute a total of 22,000 laptops to teachers in secondary and elementary schools throughout the country.
The campaign wraps up next month.
Mobile termination fees and charges for internetwork mobile calls are highest in Bulgaria among all EU members, according to data published by the European Commission on Wednesday (December 23rd).
In EU countries with higher living standards, the same fees are over two times lower.
Even in Romania, which joined the EU together with Bulgaria in 2007, the charges are twice as low.
Bulgarian police will be able to track internet and GSM traffic under new amendments to the Law on Electronic Communications.
Parliament adopted the changes on Tuesday (December 22nd), despite criticism by civil rights activists.
Macedonian innovators Ivan Kungulovski and Ratko Joncevski received the annual "Patent of the Year" award on Wednesday (December 23rd) for a station for detoxification and decolorisation of industrial water waste by using granulated microorganisms.
President Gjorge Ivanov presented the prize.
The scientists previously won gold medals at the 61st iENA International Trade Show in Nuremberg, Germany.
A Croatian inventor claims to have designed and built the world's smallest violin.
The instrument measures 35x12x3 millimetres.
Vladimir Kulic, 67, has put the violin up for sale with an asking price of $1m.
Romania's Health Ministry initiated free vaccinations for young women between the ages of 12 and 24 against a virus that is linked to cervical cancer.
About 10,000 schoolgirls and 35,000 young women received the vaccine so far, the ministry announced.
The campaign will last until June 2010.
Dusan Mrdja, 33, from the Faculty of Sciences at the University of Novi Sad in Serbia received on Wednesday (December 23rd) the Zoran Djindjic award for his research on nuclear structure, nuclear spectroscopy and radioecology.
The award is given annually by the Executive Council of Vojvodina to prominent young scientists and researchers from the province.
(Various sources – 21/12/09-28/12/09)
