28/07/2009
Foreign Minister of Cyprus Markos Kyprianou was in Brussels on Monday (July 27th) and Tuesday to participate in the General Affairs and External Relations Council of the EU.
Discussions are expected to cover Cyprus' maritime and air space sovereign rights, among other topics.
Kyprianou will brief officials on his country's Exclusive Economic Zone and Turkey's recent decision to allow the Turkish Petroleum Corporation to conduct research for petroleum and natural gas in part of the region.
Greek President Karolos Papoulias received the Venizelos Award by the Pan Cretan Association of America, the organisation's top award, during the association's 41st convention in Irakleio, Crete on Saturday (July 25th).
Association President Manolis Velivassakis said the award was being presented to Papoulias in a gesture of appreciation for his contribution to the Ecumenical Hellenism.
Albania is boosting contacts with diplomats in Brussels in an effort to accelerate the country's EU integration bid, the Foreign Ministry announced on Saturday (July 25th).
Foreign Minister Lulzim Basha has communicated with Sweden's Foreign Minister Carl Bildt, whose country currently holds the EU presidency, as well as with Italian counterpart Franco Frattini, the statement added.
Career diplomat Igor Jovovic will be Montenegro's new ambassador to Serbia, the government confirmed on Saturday (July 25th).
His nomination has been presented and a regular procedure for his appointment will be launched soon.
Jovovic served as Montenegro's foreign minister between 1990 and 1998, and worked as former Yugoslavia's ambassador to Ethiopia.
He was also ambassador of Serbia and Montenegro to Finland and Estonia.
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and Macedonian counterpart Nikola Gruevski agreed on Wednesday (July 22nd) that European integration is the ultimate objective of the Western Balkan countries and they should work together to achieve that goal.
They also signed an economic co-operation agreement.
(Various sources – 21/07/09-28/07/09)
