27/10/2009
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and her Slovenian counterpart, Borut Pahor, met during a business forum Monday (October 26th) but did not reveal details of a draft arbitration agreement on the long-standing border dispute between their two countries. 
In early October, Croatia resumed its EU membership talks after Slovenia lifted its blockade to the negotiations, imposed because of the border dispute. 
The two neighbours have agreed to solve the issue through international arbitration.
***
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic kicked-off a two-day visit to Israel on Monday (October 26th), for talks with counterpart Eli Yishai, Minister of Public Security Yitzhak Aharonovitz and Police Director Dudi Cohen. 
An agreement on co-operation in the fight against crime will be signed on the sidelines of the visit.
***
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski is in Australia through Tuesday (October 27th). 
During his visit, Gruevski met with counterpart Kevin Rudd and signed an agreement on social security. 
Gruevski met on Sunday in Sydney with representatives of Macedonians living in Australia and urged them to unite on strategic national interests, including the name issue. 
There are about 85,000 Macedonians in Australia, according to a 2006 census.
***
Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini believes that the EU will lift visa requirements for Albania in 2010. 
"Albania has achieved progress on the visa issue," Frattini said after meeting with Albanian counterpart Ilir Meta in Rome on Wednesday (October 21st). 
Frattini said the process faces opposition from some EU members, but it has the support of most countries in the bloc. 
The two officials praised the level of relations between their countries and their co-operation in many fields.
***
Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki said on October 20th that while the long-standing name dispute with Greece is important, his country's EU integration should not become a hostage to bilateral issues. 
He vowed that Skopje will do its best to resolve the name issue. 
Milososki was in Strasbourg as part of preparations for taking over the presidency of the committee of ministers of the Council of Europe in May 2010.
***
Serbian President Boris Tadic and visiting Turkish counterpart Abdullah Gul agreed on Monday (October 26th) that relations between their countries are at a "strategic partnership level". 
Tadic stressed that differences over Kosovo's independence should not harm bilateral relations, adding the two countries support each other in their EU integration processes. 
Gul said Turkish companies are interested in investing in projects in Serbia, including Corridor 10. 
Five agreements were signed on the sidelines of Gul's visit to Belgrade.
***
Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk was in Athens on Friday (October 23rd), becoming the first foreign leader to pay a visit to Greece since the election of new Prime Minister George Papandreou in early October. 
Papandreou said after the meeting that he has accepted an invitation to visit Poland, accompanied by a delegation of business leaders, in an effort to boost bilateral economic ties and investment. 
Tusk expressed confidence that EU member states will successfully overcome the impacts of the world economic crisis through co-operation.
***
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan arrived in Pakistan on Saturday (October 24th) for a three-day official visit aimed at strengthening co-operation. 
Talks focused on a series of important bilateral, regional and international issues amid Turkey's efforts to play an important peace-making role in the region.
(Various sources – 20/10/09-27/10/09)
