24/08/2009
Serbia's population will decrease 20% by 2050, the latest statistical data showed according to media reports.
The country is in 4th place in Europe in terms of a demographic drop.
Serbia currently has a population of 7.3 million people.
Bulgarian archaeologist Diana Dimitrova and her team have discovered a unique golden wreath in an unmarked tomb in the village of Krushare.
The tomb will be named "Kitova mogila" in memory of one of Bulgaria's most prominent archaeologists and specialists in Thracian culture, Georgi Kitov, Dimitrova's husband.
Kitov died suddenly of a heart attack last September.
Plans to build a nanotechnology centre have been put on hold, Bulgarian Finance Minister Simeon Djankov said last week.
The project, sponsored by IBM, was approved by the government in May.
The 500 square metre centre was expected to open in 2010.
The 28th International Seminar on Albanian Language, Literature and Culture began on August 17th in the presence of about 100 Albanologists from all over the world.
Within the frameworks of the event, which ends on August 28th, participants will present papers, lectures and scientific work on Albanology conducted over the past year.
A final study on the construction of an observatory atop Grevena prefecture's Mount Orliakas in northwest Greece will be ready in October.
Construction is scheduled to start early next year.
The new observatory is expected to house three telescopes.
A new topographic map of Croatia -- on a 1:25,000 scale -- is expected to be completed in early 2010, Croatian daily Vjesnik reported last Wednesday (August 19th).
The project is worth 41m euros.
This will be the first such map since the country's independence in 1991.
The first summer school of Croatian language began in the central Dalmatian city of Zadar on August 10th.
The event, which ended Sunday (August 23rd), drew 23 students from ten European countries.
The organisers' aim was to promote Croatian culture and heritage through language to foreign students.
(Various sources – 17/08/09-24/08/09)
