24/11/2009
Ireland supports Macedonia's EU bid and will vote at the December summit in favour of starting EU accession talks with the country, Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said on Thursday (November 19th) after talks with Irish counterpart Brian Cowen and Irish President Mary McAleese in Dublin. 
During the meeting, Gruevski noted reforms Macedonia has implemented that resulted in a positive report from the European Commission and a recommendation for starting EU membership talks.
***
Serbian President Boris Tadic and Macedonian counterpart Gjorge Ivanov discussed on Thursday (November 19th) ways to strengthen bilateral relations and the situation in the region. 
Ivanov, along with other officials, attended the funeral for the head of the Serbian Orthodox Church Patriarch Pavle.
***
Croatian President Stipe Mesic arrived in Sarajevo on Thursday (November 19th) on his last visit to the country as the head of state. 
His term ends in February. 
After talks with <b>Bosnia and Herzgovina</b> (BiH) Presidency Chairman Zeljko Komsic and Presidency Member Haris Silajdzic, Mesic reiterated his country's support for BiH's Euro-Atlantic and European integration. 
He also met with High Representative Valentine Inzko.
***
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic and Greek Alternate Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas discussed on Wednesday (November 18th) the so-called Agenda 2014 -- Athens's initiative calling for the EU membership of Western Balkan countries by 2014. 
He stressed that the EU is the most successful peace model and it should contribute to peace and stability in the Balkans. 
Jeremic says Serbia has met all conditions to continue its path to EU integration.
***
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic and French officials signed agreements on police co-operation and on readmission in Paris on Wednesday (November 18th). 
Dacic said the agreement on police co-operation is of strategic importance for Serbia. 
French counterpart Brice Hortefeux praised it as evidence of friendly relations between the two countries at a moment when Serbia is moving closer to the EU.
***
FBI Director Robert Mueller met with Turkish officials in Ankara on Wednesday (November 18th) to discuss anti-terrorism co-operation and other law enforcement issues. 
Local media reported that talks also touched on the possible use of Turkey as a transit route for US troops who will be pulled out of Iraq. 
During his visit, Mueller had meetings with Deputy Prime Minister Cemil Cicek, Justice Minister Sadullah Ergin and police chief Oguz Kagan Koksal.
***
Great Britain urged Turkey on Monday (November 23rd) to keep its promise to the EU and open its ports and airports to Cypriot ships and aircraft, stressing that this would be an important step towards Ankara's EU integration. 
"I am urging the Turkish government to keep its commitments. 
We would like to see more deeds than words," UK Minister of State for Europe Chris Bryant said during a visit to Nicosia.
***
French Defence Minister Herve Morin proposed on Monday (November 23rd) that his country and Greece sign a defence and security agreement. 
Morin was in Athens for his first visit since the socialist PASOK party took the reins in October. 
The two countries have been in talks since the beginning of the year on Greece's purchase of six multi-mission European frigates and 15 Super Puma helicopters.
***
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and Greek counterpart George Papandreou will meet on Friday (November 27th) at a regional summit on the protection and viable development of the Prespes national park region. 
During sideline discussions, the two leaders will reportedly confer on the name dispute between their countries. 
Macedonia hopes to receive a starting date for its EU accession talks in December, but faces the possibility of a Greek veto.
(Various sources -- 17/11/09-24/11/09)
