09/04/2007
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 09/04/07
It has been half a century since Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the former West Germany signed a treaty establishing the European Economic Community (EEC).
Only 12 years had passed since the end of the Second World War, and the new union was to play a momentous role in economic reconstruction and preserving the peace.
In 1992, a considerably enlarged EEC became known as the European Union (EU) -- a shift indicative of the desire for political as well as economic integration.
Two successive waves of enlargement brought in several ex-members of the now defunct Soviet bloc, one former Yugoslav republic, and still-divided Cyprus.
Meanwhile, the hope of eventual entry has been a significant driving force in the effort to stabilize the Balkans.
The Union, in short, celebrates its anniversary at a time of vastly enhanced significance.
However, it is also a time of serious challenges that demand a new policy thrust.
The EU faces growing complexity, brought on in part by the successive rounds of enlargement.
Its social model appears to be in conflict with the need to make markets more flexible.
Globalization, the economic rise of Asia, and the emergence of new information and communication technologies have created intense pressure.
The entry of China and India on the relevant global markets has caused major shifts in competitive hierarchies and exerts a downward force on wages in affluent economies.
Managing increasing complexity means dealing with a number of thorny issues.
Should tax and fiscal policies be made more convergent, in order to prevent a "race to the bottom"?
When factors of production are increasingly mobile, who or what should be taxed?
How should the Union deal with economic nationalism?
Implementing the Lisbon Agenda requires major reforms in education, energy, R&D and agricultural policy, but how should these changes be brought about?
Variable geometry, a rising variety of socioeconomic conditions (with geographic positions leading to different neighborhood policy inclinations) and diverging views among member countries can bring policy co-ordination to a standstill.
In part because of global competition, the EU is under pressure to become more flexible, loosen its bureaucratic entanglements and reform the welfare state.
At the same time, market fundamentalism is on the retreat, and there is a strong impetus to bring social and environmental concerns into mainstream policymaking.
Meanwhile, failures in financial and other markets during the past decade have fueled a demand for more effective regulations.
It is not becoming any easier to balance these contradictory forces.
One key to doing so lies in education policy.
Placing more emphasis on such subjects as engineering, math, physics and computer science would help build a competitive edge based on technological advances, higher value-added products and services.
Attaining such an edge would relieve some of the pressures pushing against the European social model.
Certainly, continued efforts to streamline the welfare state will be needed.
But the difficulties involved should not be underestimated, as they involve a basic redefinition of the social contract.
Would wage earners accept a slower rise in their incomes (in the form of a freeze, or even a cut) and would capital-owners accept lower dividends for the sake of greater public and private productive investment?
Such possibilities might be conceivable if all parties were governed by ethical imperatives and a sense of responsibility.
However, there is much to suggest this is not the case.
Recent years have seen an astonishing rise in the incomes of CEOs at a time of modest or even stagnant wages, when income polarization has increased in almost all western societies and the middle class has frequently lost out.
The corporate world has been hit by a succession of scandals, eroding trust in its ability to self-regulate.
In such an environment, is it reasonable to expect workers to become altruistic?
Balancing social and economic imperatives requires a return to ethical values:
honesty and trustworthiness, honour and respect, loyalty, hard work, education, family, community, altruism and compassion.
Ethical questions impact international politics as well.
Issues such as environmental protection, securing drinkable water, and combating disease and poverty constitute an urgent agenda.
Failures in this area can ultimately have security implications, as global divisions become amplified and militant ideologies find a receptive audience among the excluded.
The EU has been charged, not unfairly, with not practicing what it preaches when it comes to developing economies – the collapse of the Doha trade round is a signature example here.
This issue, in turn, is connected to the way the Union operates.
EU Commissioners often have a difficult time resisting the pressures exerted by the bloc's heavyweights.
EU policymaking will have to evolve somehow if it is to meet increasingly complex challenges.
Another example is energy, which has a pronounced international dimension.
The relationship with Russia comes quickly to mind.
Moreover, China and India are using their growing economic clout to compete with the EU and the United States for ever scarcer energy resources.
How this competition will evolve in the future is not yet clear, but it nevertheless requires adequate strategizing in Brussels.
The EU has done much, and it can do more.
Its progress would make a significant contribution to how the world evolves in the years and decades, ahead -- economically, socially, and politically.
Such progress will not necessarily be spectacular.
There are too many uncertainties around, and the world has been undergoing considerable change.
A few decades ago, the EU project included less than a dozen European countries;
its development was visible and dramatic.
The steps ahead may be less so, but this does not diminish their importance.
Providing a better framework for the Western Balkan countries in their quest to join the EU is one example.
Enlargement fatigue is a reality, but so is the need to show vision and statesmanship.
If the bloc hopes to act as a guidance rod and a beacon of hope for the rest of the world, it will need to demonstrate the ability to handle seemingly intractable problems on its own turf.
