30/05/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 30/05/05
The EBRD's annual assembly, held from 21 May to 23 May in Belgrade, was the most important international event to take place in Serbia-Montenegro in three decades. 
Some 3,000 participants -- including 59 state delegations and representatives of the world's leading banks and multinational companies -- assembled for this landmark event. 
The sessions included a business forum, a two-day session of the central bank governors of member-countries, and a panel discussion of prime ministers of countries of the region. 
In addition, 27 national presentations took place.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, after a meeting with EBRD President Jean Lemierres, said that the presence of a major banking assembly in Belgrade demonstrated significant support for reforms in Serbia and offered foreign investors a signal to invest in the state union. 
He also said that the EBRD decision to hold the assembly in Belgrade reflected the stability of Serbian institutions -- something which is particularly important in light of the expected start of negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU next fall.
For his part, Lemierres called for greater foreign investment in Serbia-Montenegro, noting that the country has made conspicuous progress over the past four years. 
He added that Serbia is now facing the second, more difficult stage of transition -- structural reforms -- and offered to provide EBRD assistance in the process.
"The Balkan region is the right place to be. 
Serbia-Montenegro is a good place for investment for a number of reasons. 
I kindly invite you to create a better future for the country and its people by investing, opening new jobs and doing business that will be good for all of us," Lemierre said, addressing potential investors.
At the beginning of the assembly, the EBRD and European Investment Bank announced that they will invest an additional 250m euros in Serbia this year. 
The EBRD is already one of the largest investors in Serbia-Montenegro, with some 690m euros invested in 35 projects, and has invested as much as 6.5 billion euros to support reforms across Southeast Europe.
The EBRD and the government also concluded a new loan agreement intended to back reforms in Serbia. 
The deal will provide 72m euros for road construction and another 16m euros for the development of small and medium-sized enterprises. 
The Serbian government is also anticipating an additional 2 billion euros in foreign direct investment this year.
Against that background, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus said 21 May that foreign investors' trust in Serbian institutions has been restored. 
"We are now a much better and safer country for foreign investment."
Participants at a working lunch of top Serbian officials ministers from around the region agreed that the Balkan states should improve their communication, especially since all have the same goal -- EU membership. 
In particular, more needs to be done to implement free trade agreements.
"There was talk of different infrastructure investment projects, primarily in road, rail and airport infrastructure. 
I think we will get a lot of support from the international community in that field because it is in everyone's interest to make infrastructure here better," said Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, meanwhile, said that Southeast Europe is entering a phase of greater stability, illustrated by -- among other examples -- the EBRD's decision to meet in Belgrade.
Kostunica echoed his Montenegrin counterpart's remarks. 
The EBRD meeting "is a clear message that the world is counting on Serbia-Montenegro in the further course of European integration," he said.
"With their hospitality, Serbia and Montenegro have shown that they have a bright future," Lemierres said as the assembly wrapped up, terming the event a complete success. 
He added that changes made in Serbia-Montenegro have put the country back on investors' maps. 
The positive assessment Serbia-Montenegro received on 25 April regarding the feasibility study on Stabilisation and Association with the EU sent "a very strong signal to investors", Lemierres said.
"The holding of our annual assembly in Belgrade is a sign of progress in all Western Balkan countries. 
These states, born out of repressive political regimes, after years of instability and war, are now stable market democracies and the people living in them have developed a new way of thinking, which might be even more important for their future," he concluded.
Lemierres said the EBRD will work to establish a good investment climate, conclude Free Trade Agreements and ensure that small- and medium-sized enterprises have easier access to loans in Southeast Europe.
