21/07/2009
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer on Thursday (July 16th) urged Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to implement the necessary reforms in order to achieve their NATO membership goal.
He held talks with members of BiH's tripartite presidency, leaders of the main political parties and High Representative Valentin Inzko.
After BiH, de Hoop Scheffer travelled to Podgorica where he praised Montenegro for the "remarkable" progress in its Euro-Atlantic integration process.
He said the country could expect an invitation to join NATO's Membership Action Plan (MAP) soon.
De Hoop Scheffer's term as NATO secretary-general is over at the end of the month.
His successor is Anders Fogh Rasmussen of Denmark.
Turkish President Abdullah Gul said on Friday (July 17th) that his country supports the establishment of an independent Palestinian state, but added that in order to be viable, there must be international backing.
At a joint press conference with Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas in Ankara, Gul added "In order to maintain a true peace in the Middle East, two independent states must live side-by-side."
The foreign ministers of Romania, Serbia and Hungary -- Cristian Diaconescu, Vuk Jeremic and Peter Balasz -- held a trilateral meeting Saturday (July 18th) in Timisoara, Romania, to discuss the situation in the region, Serbia's EU aspirations and participation in joint projects, media reported.
The three ministers examined ways to boost co-operation in the fields of transportation, environment, tourism, education and health care.
Serbian authorities have demonstrated a strong desire to strengthen relations with The Hague war crimes tribunal, tribunal President Patrick Robinson said on Thursday (July 16th) in Belgrade.
Rasim Ljajic, the head of Serbia's national council for co-operation with The Hague tribunal, assured Robinson that Serbia is committed to arresting the remaining two war crimes fugitives -- Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.
(Various sources – 14/07/09-21/07/09)
