23/02/2010
EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton was in Serbia on Thursday (February 18th) and Kosovo the following day. 
After top-level talks in Belgrade, she hailed Serbia's decision to submit an EU membership application, as well as its progress in reforms. 
In Pristina, where she met with Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, she said an EU team will visit Kosovo in the coming weeks to prepare an evaluation of the country's progress -- a step towards an eventual visa-free travel regime with the bloc.
***
Spain is a strong supporter of Turkey's EU bid, Prime Minister Luis Rodriguez Zapatero said after a Madrid meeting with Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan. 
He added that Spain would do everything possible to open more chapters in Turkey's accession talks. 
Meanwhile, Erdogan's visit Monday (February 22nd) was marred by a shoe-throwing incident. 
The shoe, throw by a pro-Kurdish protestor, missed Erdogan as he left a municipal building. 
The perpetrator was arrested.
***
Montenegrin Foreign Minister Milan Rocen was in Brussels on Monday (February 22nd) where he met with EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele about Montenegro's integration process. 
EU-Montenegro political dialogue will be held on the sidelines of the EU foreign ministers' two-day meeting that starts on Tuesday. 
Montenegro applied for EU membership in December 2008.
***
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor was in Podgorica on Monday (February 22nd). 
She met with Montenegrin counterpart Milo Djukanovic, President Filip Vujanovic and Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic. 
Talks focused on economic co-operation.
***
Now is the time for Athens and Skopje to settle their long-standing name dispute, EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele said on Friday (February 19th). 
"The leaders have huge responsibility and a fantastic opportunity to give their long-lasting contribution to a bigger regional stability and prosperity," Fuele said after meeting with Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and other senior officials. 
Gruevski said Skopje remains committed to finding a solution.
***
Turkey and Serbia are ready to work together to promote stability and peace in the Balkans, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said in Ankara on Saturday (February 20th) after meeting with Serbian counterpart Vuk Jeremic. 
Davutoglu said that a free trade agreement between Ankara and Belgrade that will be ratified by the Turkish parliament will significantly contribute to improving bilateral economic co-operation. 
He and Jeremic also discussed other co-operation, particularly in resolving the political crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
***
EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele said on Thursday (February 18th) that Croatia could wrap up its EU accession talks this year. 
After talks with Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor in Zagreb, Fuele praised the country's progress in its EU bid and its commitment to fighting corruption. 
Kosor reiterated that it is a priority of her government to wrap up the talks this year.
***
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha met on Monday (February 22nd) with Philip Alston, the UN's special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions. 
Alston pointed to Albania's relatively low murder rates and welcomed government efforts to combat organised crime, domestic violence and feuds.
(Various sources -- 16/02/10-23/02/10)
