21/08/2009
The Serbian government will extend the car scrapping bonus programme for owners of cars 11 years old and up, who decide to trade them in for a new Fiat Punto produced in Zastava Kragujevac, the Economy Ministry announced on Monday (August 17th).
The programme, which gives owners a 1,000-euro car scrapping bonus, kicked off on April 15th.
The programme envisioned subsidy for 5,000 cars, but will cover another 5,000 cars after the extension.
The Kosovo Pension Savings Trust reduced the losses it incurred from the global economic crisis, local media report on Tuesday (August 18th).
This institution announced that its losses dwindled from 110m euros in February to 70m euros in July.
About 1.5 million tourists have visited Albania this year, the Tourism Ministry announced on Wednesday (August 19th).
The figure represents an increase of 36% compared to the same period last year.
Several Chinese companies are interested in investing more than 1 billion euros in the construction of a hydropower plant in Transylvania's Tarnita-Lapustesti, according to Romanian Minister of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, Constantin Nita.
"The Chinese investors are interested in this opportunity as they built 20 such plants around the world but none of them in Europe," Nita said.
Serbian entrepreneur Philip Zepter has bought the tender documentation for three Croatian shipyards -- Brodotrogir, Kraljevica and a special-purpose vehicle shipyard in Split.
Propela, the company that represents Zepter in the tender, said he has been looking for opportunities to enter Croatia's shipbuilding sector for two years.
The high rate of inflation in Greece has increased the prices of clothing and shoes by 2.9% in the country in July -- the highest level among all 16 members of the euro-zone, Kathimerini reported on Wednesday (August 19th).
The inflation rate last month stood at 0.7% compared to 3% a year ago.
Inflation in the euro-zone in July was 0.2%.
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (FBiH) industrial output increased by 1.4% month-to-month in July, the Federal Office of Statistics announced on Monday (August 17th).
However, it dropped by 11.6% on an annual basis.
Corus, the European branch of Indian steel company Tata Steel Ltd, plans to invest 12m euros in a joint move with a Romanian associate to build a new production unit in Sfantu Gheorghe in central Romania.
The production unit, which is expected to start operating in 2011, will create 75 new jobs.
(Various sources – 14/08/09-21/08/09)
