21/09/2009
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Deputy Director General Ana Maria Cetto signed an agreement on technical co-operation Tuesday (September 15th) in Vienna.
Djelic led Serbia's delegation attending the 53rd IAEA General Conference in the Austrian capital.
First-year Greek high school students received free 450-euro vouchers to buy laptops for the new academic year.
The initiative is part of a 68m-euro Economy Ministry project, which will benefit 120,000 pupils.
The Turkish Council of Higher Education approved the opening of a Kurdish institute on September 11th.
The Council allowed the Mardin Artuklu University in the Kurd-dominated southeast to open a faculty where Kurdish language will be taught.
Kurdish was banned in Turkey in 1991.
Romanian scientist Diana-Andra-Borca-Tasciuc received the NSF CAREER award from the National Science Foundation (NSF) which is given to young researchers and future scientific leaders.
She says she will use the award money -- 306,000 euros -- to continue her research into nano-particles warmed by an alternative magnetic field.
A web-portal aimed at helping young people start businesses was promoted in Skopje on Thursday (September 17th).
At http://www.pretpriemac.mk/ young entrepreneurs can find useful information and advice.
The project has been implemented by the Youth Entrepreneur Service with the support of the Open Society Institute and the Norwegian Embassy in Macedonia.
The first volume of a Serbian Encyclopaedia could be published by the end of the year or early next year if financing is guaranteed, the editors announced on September15th.
They voiced regret that editing the second volume has been delayed due to insufficient funding.
Vecernji List journalist Miroslav Ambrus-Kis will be the first Croat in space late next year, the Zagreb-based daily reported on September 13th.
He will make a 12-hour-long trip with Nebojsa Stanojevic, a TV producer from Sarajevo.
They will fly thanks to the Synergy Moon team comprised of scientists, entrepreneurs and NGOs.
(Various sources – 14/09/09-21/09/09)
