19/02/2010
Low-cost airline Easy Jet opened its doors to travellers to and from Kosovo, according to officials at Pristina International Airport.
This week, Easy Jet accepted the first bookings for a direct line between Pristina and Geneva.
Flights begin in June.
The Albanian government decided on Wednesday (February 17th) to cut expenditures by 180m euros this year to stabilise its increasing deficit.
The change came because earlier plans did not take into account the global economic crisis.
Approved cut in expenditures would not affect salaries, pensions and capital investment plans.
Representatives of 14 countries from the Danube River Basin, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia and Slovenia -- along with the EC -- adopted a plan to clean up and protect the river at a meeting on Tuesday (February 16th) in Vienna.
The plan includes measures to reduce organic and nutrient pollution and limiting the negative human impact on the river.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic and visiting Belgian counterpart Ives Leterme signed documents in Podgorica Tuesday (February 16th) covering economic development in regard to transportation projects linking the two nations.
Leterme said after the talks that Belgian businessmen are interested in investing in Montenegro.
Net foreign direct investment in Bulgaria decreased by 55.3% year-on-year in 2009, down to 2.7 billion euros according to figures released by the Central Bank on Monday (February 15th).
The decrease was largely due to the real estate sector, where inflows were down by 77.4% on an annual basis.
The number of Romanian companies declaring bankruptcy in January was 10% higher compared to the same period last year, the National Trade Registry Office announced on Monday (February 15th).
According to the figures, over 2,000 businesses went bankrupt in the first month of this year.
Most of them were in Bucharest and predominantly in the retail-trade, construction, manufacturing, and real estate sectors.
(Various sources – 12/02/10-19/02/10)
