07/05/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 07/05/07
Along with economic woes and continuing uncertainty about status, Kosovo faces another serious problem: most of its young people want to leave. 
According to a UNDP report published last month, more than 50% of Kosovo's youth want to emigrate. 
Given that youth make up more than half the overall population, that's a sobering figure.
The UNDP surveyed 1,200 persons between the ages of 15 and 29 -- including 800 Albanians, 200 Serbs and 200 other minorities.
"Youth in Kosovo encounter a large part of Kosovo's economic and social problems -- which explains to a large extent why they feel reluctant to participate or even live here," says the UNDP representative in Kosovo, Frode Mauring.
Kosovo's young will be crucial to building the future, Mauring says. 
Currently, however, they are vulnerable, impoverished, disempowered and lacking good role models.
The UNDP report on the province is the third of its kind. 
It analyzes youth problems and opportunities, the role of youth in the development processes in Kosovo, and issues related to education, employment, decision making, civil cohesion, and participation in society as a whole.
It provides data on such factors as youth poverty, levels of unemployment, and readiness to emigrate. 
The statistics are meant to be used by policymakers and development agencies as they seek to boost young people's chances of a better life.
"The report analyzes their problems and opportunities from a human development standpoint," Mauring says.
Individual stories demonstrate the sense of hopelessness that many of Kosovo's young feel when they look at the prospects around them.
"I am not working, because I don't have any opportunity," Milaim Bilalli, 24, of Pristina told Southeast European Times. 
In his view, jobs in Kosovo are only available to those with the right connections. 
"My father is a teacher, and he doesn't have power like the parents of some others."
Lulzim Berisha, a 25-year-old mathematical sciences student, has a bleak view of the prospects ahead. 
"How can I be an optimistic man?" he asks. 
"Maybe I can find a job as a teacher, for instance, but I'll get only 180 euros per month … what can I do with such a salary?"
Those working for UNMIK institutions are more hopeful, because they believe they will find a job in the future EU structures in Kosovo. 
"UNMIK is going, but the EU is coming," said one young person who asked to remain anonymous. 
"I believe that I can find a job."
Having worked for UNMIK since 1999, he is less inclined to be pessimistic. 
"I will not emigrate even if I get more money, because my Kosovo is my birthplace," he said.
His friend, who works for the OSCE, also says she feels more secure. 
"I believe the OSCE mission in Kosovo will stay, because Kosovars are not yet ready for democratisation and some other sectors where the OSCE is leading the way."
Not everyone, though, can land a job with an international organisation. 
More common is the experience of someone like Mentor Gashi, a 27-year-old who says he has been looking for work, without success.
"If I can't find [a job], this summer I will try to go to my brother, who works in Germany," he told Southeast European Times
The figures in the UNDP report have alarmed Kosovo's political leadership, which sees mass numbers of Kosovars wanting to leave at the very time when the province's future is being decided. 
Kosovo leaders are appealing to young persons to change their opinions, look at the long-term perspective and have hope that their outlook will improve.
"The government is responsible for working to ensure a development perspective and a better future for these young people who give a great joy to us," says Prime Minister Agim Ceku in a statement appended to the UNDP report. 
"Youth employment, strengthening of youth NGOs, informal education, youth participation and integration, education and health prevention are some of the domains of our activities," he adds.
At the same time, Kosovo leaders say, the prospects for economic improvement cannot be separated from the political issue of status. 
Until that is settled, Kosovo will face huge barriers to attracting investment, opportunities will remain scarce, and the region -- not to mention Europe as a whole -- will continue to face a pressure cooker in its midst.
