18/08/2009
Turkish President Abdullah Gul and the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani agreed on Monday (August 17th) to establish a joint energy commission. 
The meeting was closed to journalists, but local media reported that its main focus were Qatari liquefied gas deliveries to Turkey. 
According to reports, the gas will be stored in underground storage facilities in the Mediterranean city of Ceyhan. 
On Tuesday, al-Thani attended a working breakfast of the Turkey-Qatar Business Council.
***
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) presidency member Nebojsa Radmanovic met with a delegation from the US Embassy in BiH led by Ambassador Charles English. 
Talks focused on preparations for the military exercise Joint Effort, which will take place in September as part of the Partnership for Peace programme.
***
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borissov will be in Brussels on September 9th and 10th for talks aimed at unblocking EU funds for his country, media reported Monday (August 17th). 
The trip will mark Borissov's first official foreign visit since taking office earlier this month. 
Finance Minister Simeon Djankov and Foreign Affairs Minister Rumyana Zheleva are expected to accompany Borissov to Brussels.
***
Serbian President Boris Tadic travels to China on Thursday (August 20th) for a four-day visit. 
He will meet with President Hu Jintao, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao and Wu Bangguo, chairman of China's Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. 
Tadic will participate in an investment forum that will be attended by representatives of a number of Chinese companies. 
The two countries are also to sign an agreement on infrastructure projects.
***
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev's visit to Belgrade this fall will be a historic visit in many respects, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said on Monday (August 17th). 
The visit is expected to focus on boosting political and economic ties, as well as cultural, educational and scientific co-operation. 
This will be Medvedev's first visit to the region as president.
(Various sources – 11/08/09-18/08/09)
