16/02/2010
A European Parliament (EP) delegation arrived in Sarajevo on Sunday (February 14th) to attend the two-day 12th inter-parliamentary meeting. 
One of the topics to be discussed will be liberalisation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's visa regime with the EU. 
The delegation will meet local officials and representatives of the international community.
***
Serbian Justice Minister Snezana Malovic and war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic will sign a memorandum of understanding Thursday (February 18th) concerning war crimes proceedings. 
The document also covers strengthening co-operation in investigating war crimes cases with Canada, local media reported on Monday. 
The memorandum is expected to be signed during a visit by the two officials to Canada.
***
Macedonia should settle its name dispute with Greece if it wants to become member of the EU and NATO, former Danish Foreign Minister Uffe Ellemann-Jensen said on Friday (February 12th). 
He spoke during a ceremony at which he was awarded Macedonia's highest state order, "September 8". 
He was honoured for his personal contribution to the establishment of diplomatic ties between Denmark and Macedonia, as well as his strong support for Skopje.
***
Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said after meeting his Albanian counterpart Sali Berisha in Rome on Friday (February 12th) that he would personally work for Tirana to receive EU candidate status and visa liberalisation by October 2010. 
Berlusconi said Italy is also prepared to help Albania build a nuclear power plant. 
Berisha thanked Berlusconi for Italy's support when heavy flooding hit Albania last month.
***
EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton announced on Friday (February 12th) that she is making her first visit to the Balkans, planning stops this week in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Kosovo. 
She said she plans "to listen to politicians but also civil society and to send very clear messages ... 
[on] what our relationship can be for the future".
***
New EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele visits Macedonia on Friday (February 19th), the foreign ministry announced. 
He will hold talks with Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, Deputy Prime Minister Vasko Naumovski and Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki.
***
Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn said on Thursday (February 11th) in Pristina that Serbia has the option of changing its position towards Kosovo after the International Court of Justice (ICJ) gives its advisory opinion on the legitimacy of the country's independence. 
"This will be a moment of possibility for change," Asselborn said after meeting with President Fatmir Sejdiu, who said Kosovo is fully committed to EU integration.
***
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister for EU Integration Bozidar Djelic said on Thursday (February 11th) that Serbia's application for EU candidate status could be discussed by the bloc's Council of Ministers by the middle of the year. 
Djelic met in Brussels with new EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele.
(Various sources -- 09/02/10-16/02/10)
