17/02/2010
Zagreb's Wine Gourmet Festival took place on Friday (February 12th) and Saturday.
Exhibitors from Croatia and abroad participated in the event, featuring more than 500 local and international wines.
Visitors viewed culinary presentations, a cooking show and sampled a wide array of wines.
A cookbook from Bosnia and Herzegovina was recognised as one of the best culinary books in the world.
"Bosanski Kuhar" (The Bosnian Chef) won the award at the Gourmand World Cookbook Fair in Paris on Thursday (February 11th).
The book contains about 200 recipes of traditional Bosnian cuisine.
A Neanderthal museum will open in late February in Krapina, Croatia, Croatian daily 24 Sata reported on Saturday (February 13th).
Visitors will be able to enjoy multimedia presentation of the life of Neanderthal man and to see an authentic reconstruction of a Neanderthal family.
The project -- featuring 17 life-like models -- cost more than 8m euros.
Albania's National Museum in Tirana hosted an exhibition of Iranian culture from February 11th to February (Wednesday 17th).
The works of eight artists and exhibits of national costumes, pictures and handcrafted items were on display.
The Iranian Embassy described it as a sign of good relations between the two countries.
Croatian biathlon athlete Jakov Fak won a bronze medal in the 10km spring discipline at the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver on Sunday (February 14th).
It is Croatia's only medal so far.
Istanbul is hosting the 9th edition of the !F International Independent Film Festival from Thursday (February 11th) to Sunday (February 21st).
The event, founded in 2001, is the first and only festival of independent cinema in Turkey.
This year's edition includes 64 feature and documentary movies.
The FIFA World Cup trophy will arrive in Serbia on March 31st and will be available for viewing until April 2nd as part of its global tour organised by FIFA and the Coca Cola Company.
The football trophy's next stop in the region is Bucharest, followed by Athens, and Istanbul.
The 225-day tour in 86 countries worldwide started in September last year from FIFA's headquarters in Zurich.
It will travel to South Africa where the World Cup will be held this summer.
(Various sources -- 10/02/10-17/02/10)
