15/09/2009
Germany supports Macedonia's bid to join the EU, Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov said after meeting his German counterpart Horst Koehler in Berlin on Monday (September14th).
Koehler voiced optimism that Macedonia would be assessed positively by the European Commission (EC) and would get a date for starting EU accession talks.
Ivanov said his country expects a positive report from the EC this fall and expects visa requirements to be abolished by the beginning of next year.
Montenegro and the United States signed an agreement on co-operation on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in Podgorica on Friday (September 11th).
The document was initialed by Interior Minister Ivan Brajovic and US Ambassador to Podgorica Roderick Moore.
The two parties also agreed to take steps to strengthen defence and military relations.
Turkey is ready to host nuclear talks between Iran and the five permanent members of the UN Security Council -- the UK, China, France, Russia and the US -- plus Germany, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said on Sunday (September 13th), while in Tehran.
During his two-day visit, Davutoglu met with Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Supreme National Security Council Secretary Saeed Jalili and other senior officials.
Talks focused on energy co-operation and boosting relations.
Albania has a long way to go until it reaches the standards necessary to liberalise its visa regime with the EU, Italian Interior Minister Roberto Maroni said on Thursday (September 10th).
Speaking in Brdo, Slovenia, where he attended a conference on illegal immigration, organised crime, terrorism and corruption, Maroni said that Italy is ready to assist Albania to achieve these standards by January 2010.
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic thanked his Finnish counterpart, Matti Vanhanen, on Wednesday (September 9th) for Finland's support of Serbia's EU integration process.
During a meeting in Helsinki, the two officials agreed that bilateral economic co-operation could be boosted.
Cvetkovic also met with Finnish President Tarja Halonen.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said on Wednesday (September 9th) that he has received Malta's support for Serbia's EU bid and the abolishing of visa requirements for Serbian citizens.
Jeremic held talks with his Maltese counterpart Tonio Borg in Valletta.
An agreement on double taxation avoidance was signed at the end of the visit.
Borg said the document provides an opportunity for Malta and Serbia to increase their trade.
Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman kicks off a Balkan tour Tuesday (September 15th) that includes Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro.
On Tuesday, he will meet in Zagreb with President Stipe Mesic, Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic.
Lieberman will travel to Belgrade on Wednesday for talks with officials.
His Balkan tour ends with a visit to Montenegro.
In a statement ahead of the visit, he said the tour aims to develop new directions for Israeli foreign policy, strengthen bilateral relations and reinforce economic ties.
(Various sources -- 08/09/09-15/09/09)
