13/11/2009
(Various sources – 06/11/09-13/11/09)
Macedonia and Switzerland signed an agreement on regular air transport between the two countries Tuesday (November 10th). 
The agreement should encourage respective air transport companies to set innovative and competitive prices and to guarantee safer transport. 
The document replaces an agreement signed in 1996.
***
China's tractor and agricultural machinery manufacturer YTO Group and Agrovojvodina Mehanizacija will start producing products in Novi Sad in early 2010. 
The announcement was made on Wednesday (November 11th) by Branislav Bugarski, director of Vojvodina Investment Promotion (VIP) fund. 
The tractor construction agreement will be signed later this month.
***
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina(FBiH) Prime Minister Mustafa Mujezinovic and Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik on November 6th agreed on measures to unblock the work of national power grid operator Elektroprenos. 
In early 2008, RS and FBiH clashed over the management rules in the firm and its organisation.
***
Albania registered its biggest increase in foreign direct investment (FDI) for the last three years, a Bank of Albania study revealed on Sunday (November 8th). 
FDI in most other countries in the region is falling. 
According to the report, the main reasons behind the increase in Albania are the privatisation process of key state-owned companies, the opening of the telecommunications market to competition and the expansion of the banking sector.
***
Kosovo Customs Director Naim Huruglica and French Customs head Jerome Fournel signed a co-operation agreement in Paris on Wednesday (November 11th) involving exchanges of information and experience. 
The agreement will facilitate trade between two countries. 
Negotiations with 18 other countries are under way.
***
Turkey's Supreme Administrative Court suspended a tender for construction of the country's first nuclear power plant Tuesday (November 10th). 
The tender was won by a consortium led by the Russian giant Atomstroyexport in 2008, the only bidder allowed to the last stage of the competition.
