11/12/2009
Romanian air carrier Tarom opened a new route connecting Bucharest and Belgrade on Monday (December 7th).
The move came after last month's EU decision to lift visa requirements for Serbian citizens travelling to the bloc.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development approved a 41.1m-euro loan for construction of a shopping centre in Osijek, Croatia.
The financing consists of a 34.4m-euro credit and includes an equity investment.
The retail centre, called Avenue Mall Osijek, will cover 27,000 square metres and include more than 80 outlets.
Serbia took over the rotating presidency of the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) from <b>Montenegro</b> on Friday (December 4th).
Trade and Services Minister Slobodan Milosavljevic said at a CEFTA summit in Becici, Montenegro, that Serbia's presidency will focus on removing economic trade barriers.
Orahovica, Croatia, became a top tourist destination, with more than 140,000 tourists this year.
The small city in Virovitica-Podravina County is also known as Little Switzerland because of similarities in culture, beauty and lakes.
The surge in tourism came after Orahovica was ranked in the highest "A" tourism category.
The UN selected Albania to promote solar energy alongside five other countries -- Algeria, Lebanon, India, Mexico and Chile.
The four-year UNDP-run project ,with a budget of 1.86m euros, aims to establish 75,000 square metres of solar panels in the country.
This is Albania's first major project to reduce carbon emissions.
Kosovo commercial banks continue to charge high interest rates on loans, the GAP Institute, a Pristina-based think-tank, said on Tuesday (December 8th).
Interest rates remain at 10.8% to 12 % levels, despite the market competition, GAP said during a presentation of its Bank-Meter report.
The privatisation of six sugar factories in Turkey brought the country 411m euros in proceeds, the Supreme Privatisation Board announced on Tuesday (December 8th).
The competition for the six facilities was won by Ak-Can Seker.
Eight other companies also took part in the bidding.
(Various sources – 04/12/09-11/12/09)
