10/07/2009
Saranda, a coastal town in Albania, is listed among the world's top five tourism investment sites in a list published Wednesday (July 8th) by the British international investment network, Write About Property.
Albania won high marks from the Blue Flag Programme, which promotes countries with clean and safe coasts.
The number of tourists visiting Saranda is expected to soar in the coming years, which will result in a 200% hike in real estate prices in the area.
The European Court of Justice on Tuesday (July 7th) imposed a 2m-euro fine on Greece and a daily penalty of 16,000 euros, for failing to recoup state subsidies allocated to the national carrier Olympic Airways, ANA-MPA reported.
The ruling came after Greece failed to comply with a 2005 decision by the Court of Justice that deemed the subsidies, worth 850m euros, illegal.
The European Investment Bank agreed on a 370m-euro loan for Romania to fund the construction of a new metro line in Bucharest, Transport Minister Radu Berceanu said on Saturday (July 4th).
The new line will link the city centre with a suburb.
It will cover 9km and have 14 stations.
The project will cost 700m euros.
Turkey and six Gulf region countries -- the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait, and Oman -- agreed on Wednesday (July 8th) on a joint project to build a railway network.
It will connect the countries to Europe via Turkey, the Anadolu news agency reported.
The agreement was reached at the first meeting of foreign ministers of the Turkey-Gulf Co-operation Council.
Bulgaria's United Bulgarian Bank won the Bank of the Year award for 2008 in a contest organised by the local daily Pari, Sofia news agency reported on Wednesday (July 8th).
The contest analyses the financial performance of banks during the previous year, in a bid to encourage local financial institutions.
Pristina International Airport announced on Monday (July 6th) they have made 3.5m euros in net profit during the first six months of the year.
The global financial crisis did not obstruct development of the airport, which has increased its number of flights by 17% while its number of passengers is up by 4%.
(Various sources – 03/07/09-10/07/09)
