11/08/2009
In Ohrid on Sunday (August 9th), EU Representative Erwan Fouere, called on Bulgaria and Macedonia to hold talks on a dispute over a Bulgarian woman jailed for barring her estranged Macedonian husband from visiting their child. 
A Macedonian court sentenced Spaska Mitrova, 23, to three months in jail, prompting allegations of discrimination against Bulgarian citizens living in Macedonia. 
In his comments, Fouere urged the two countries not to exaggerate the problem.
***
Saudi Arabia officially established diplomatic ties with Kosovo, following up on a decision earlier this year to extend recognition. 
The Saudi Ambassador to the UN, Khalid al-Nafisy, said the move would likely spur a significant number of other Middle Eastern countries to do likewise.
***
Turkish State Minister Faruk Celik was in Pristina on Monday (August 10th) to attend commemorations of the 620th anniversary of the death of Sultan Murad I in the Battle of Kosovo. 
In a speech marking the occasion, Celik stressed the importance that Turkey attaches to the independence and development of Kosovo. 
During his visit, he met with President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci.
***
Romanian President Traian Basescu reiterated his country's opposition to Kosovo's  independence during a weekend visit to Serbia. 
Speaking in the Serbian village of Kladovo, he said Bucharest would back Serbia's legal challenge, filed at the International Court of Justice, and would also work to unblock Belgrade's Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU.
***
The first phase of reunification talks between Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat ended on Thursday (August 6th), with property rights remaining a key area of contention. 
The second round is set to begin in September. 
The UN's special envoy for Cyprus, Alexander Downer, said significant progress has been made in the talks.
***
Macedonia established diplomatic relations with Andorra, which became the 125th country to recognise Macedonia's constitutional name. 
The document was signed by the two countries' foreign ministers.
Various sources -- 04/08/09-11/08/09
