09/09/2009
Renowned Romanian soprano Angela Gheorghiu plans an open-air performance in Bucharest's Constitution Square on September 19th.
Also performing will be young Romanian tenor Vlad Mirita.
The 44th traditional "Vinkovacke jeseni" [Vinkovci Autumns] Folk Music and Culture Festival began on Friday (September 4th) in Vinkovci, Croatia, and wraps up Sunday.
The performances focus on old customs.
The festival features ethnographic, tourism and business presentations, concerts, scientific round tables and various contests.
Residents of the Romanian resort Covasna made a record-breaking ice cream roll, 111m long, weighing almost 250kg on Friday (September 4th).
Tourism Minister Elena Udrea attended the event.
Covasna's residents gained fame in the past few years for preparing huge food specialties such as a giant 500-litre bean goulash, a 1,100-litre sour trout soup and 300 litres of lemonade.
Serbian cartoonist Jovan Prokopljevic won first prize at an international competition in Australia organised by the Rotary Club, local news agency Tanjug reported on Monday (September 7th).
He was awarded for his work on the global financial crisis.
The movie "Honeymoon", an Albanian-Serbian production, premiered at the Venice Film Festival, Albanian media reported on Tuesday (September 8th).
After the premier, director Goran Paskaljevic said the audience was interested in the successful collaboration between the two countries.
The movie will premiere in Tirana later this month.
Three renowned Kosovo artists opened an exhibition in Vaxjo, Sweden on September 2nd.
The exhibition of painters Zake Prelvukaj, Ismet Jonuzi and Rudina Xhaferi closes on September 25th.
The city of Konya in Turkey will host the annual International Mystical Music Festival from September 23rd to September 30th, organisers announced on Monday (September 7th).
A total of eight music ensembles from seven countries will take part in the sixth edition of the event, organised annually to celebrate the birth of 13th century poet, theologian and mystic, Sufi Mevlana Jelaluddin Rumi.
This year marks the 802nd anniversary of Rumi's birth.
The second athletic marathon for military officers organised to mark Macedonia's Independence Day started in Ohrid, Macedonia on Tuesday (September 8th).
The event attracted over 30 competitors, including representatives of the Serbian and Albanian armies.
(Various sources – 02/09/09-09/09/09)
