11/01/2010
The Macedonian Education Ministry has signed a Memo of Understanding with Switzerland to include environmental education in the local school system. 
The document was signed by Macedonian Education Minister Nikola Todorov and Swiss Ambassador to Skopje Nicole Wyrsch. 
The MOU envisions incorporating ecology lessons in the curriculum while raising students' awareness of ecology-related issues.
***
Romania's first artificial cornea transplant was performed on Thursday (January 7th) at a private clinic in Oradea, in Bihor County. 
A 51-year-old patient underwent the corrective surgery. 
Doctors used an artificial AlphaCor cornea.
***
The Croatian association for the development of audio-visual art launched the first Croatian Reggae website www.reggae.hr. 
It promotes reggae music -- native to Jamaica and made known to the world by artists such as Bob Marley and Peter Tosh -- while supporting young Croatian musicians through multi-media events.
***
Three young Romanians studying at Princeton, Harvard and Oxford were named the country's Students of the Year 2009 on Thursday (January 7th). 
The Great Prize went to Theodor Brasoveanu, pursuing his doctorate in theoretical physics at Princeton. 
Corina Tarnita, enrolled at Harvard, was named Student of the Year in North America, and Andrei Ilie, admitted to Great Britain's University of Oxford, was recognised as the European Student of the Year.
***
Turkey's leading electronic defence company -- ASELSAN -- has developed a new communication system which allows wireless devices to send text messages like mobile phones. 
The company worked on the system, said to provide faster and more accurate information and co-ordination of actions during disasters, crises or terrorist attacks, for the past ten years.
***
The National Research Foundation in Athens is hosting "The Mechanism of Antikythera: A Tour of Astronomy and Ancient Technology". 
The exhibit, which will be open until January 25th, details the history of the mechanism and prevailing opinions on ancient astronomy and technology.
***
Istanbul's Sabanci University hired Volan Ozgus from the Irvine Sensors Corporation -- headquartered in Costa Mesa, California -- as the head of its Nanotechnology Research and Application Centre. 
Ozgus said his priorities will be issues of agriculture, water and the environment.
(Various sources -- 04/01/10 - 11/01/10)
