08/09/2009
Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu warned countries opposed to Turkey's EU accession that their attitude raises doubts in the minds of Turks and slows down reforms in the country. 
In an article published in the Swedish daily Dagens Nuhetter on Saturday (September 5th), Davutoglu said his country has implemented reforms that would have been unthinkable several years ago. 
He was in Stockholm for an informal meeting of EU foreign ministers.
***
Chinese Defence Minister Liang Guanglie kicked off a visit to Serbia on Monday (September 7th), where he held talks on bilateral military co-operation. 
According to Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac, such co-operation could expand to military medicine, training, economic, military-scientific area and exchange of experience in peacetime operations. 
The two ministers agreed on the need to co-operate and share information in fighting terrorism, organised crime and other criminal activities. 
Liang arrived in Serbia from Slovakia. 
His next stop is Sofia.
***
Bosnia and Herzegovina Foreign Minister Sven Alkalaj arrived in Hungary on Monday (September 7th) for a day-long visit at the invitation of counterpart Peter Balazs. 
The two ministers discussed EU enlargement issues, lifting visa requirements for BiH citizens and bilateral relations. 
Alkalaj also met with Hungarian Prime Minister Gordon Bajnai.
***
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha was awarded the Eisenhower Medallion by the People to People International organisation in Las Vegas, Nevada, local media reported on Sunday (September 6th). 
Berisha was honoured for his contribution to peaceful relations among Albania, regional countries and the international community.
***
Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini said on Thursday (September 3rd) that Italy strongly supports Serbia's EU bid. 
After meeting his Serbian counterpart Vuk Jeremic, he announced that Belgrade's European integration process will be discussed at the EU Council of Ministers meeting in October.
***
Czech Foreign Minister Jan Kohout voiced hope on Wednesday (September 2nd) that Macedonia will meet all remaining benchmarks in order to get a positive assessment from the European Commission in October, that could lead to a green light for the start of Skopje's EU accession talks. 
After meeting in Skopje with counterpart Antonio Milososki, Kohout urged Macedonia and Greece to soon resolve their longstanding name dispute. 
Kohout also met with Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and President Gjorge Ivanov.
***
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic kicks off a visit to Sweden on Tuesday (September 8th), for talks with counterpart Carl Bildt, whose country currently holds the EU's rotating presidency. 
They will discuss Serbia's EU bid and liberalisation of the visa regime.
***
Georgia announced on Monday (September 7th) that it has reached an agreement with Turkey on the fate of a Turkish tanker captain who was sentenced to 24 years in prison by Tbilisi last week for violating an embargo against breakaway Abkhazia. 
The announcement followed a meeting between visiting Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and Georgian counterpart Grigol Vashadze. 
The two officials also discussed ways to boost economic co-operation.
(Various sources – 01/09/09-08/09/09)
