08/07/2009
More than 2,300 women in bikinis were photographed in Serbia -- breaking the world record Saturday (July 4th). 
The Bikini Record was organised by the Cosmopolitan magazine and was shot on the beach of Belgrade's popular Ada Ciganlija Lake. 
The 2,353 women arrived in Belgrade from around the country for a day-long beach party. 
Russia set last year's record.
***
Turkish Culture Minister Ertugrul Gunay and French counterpart Frederic Mitterrand launched in Paris on Tuesday (June 30th) the so-called "Turkey Season", a nine-month campaign to promote Turkish culture in France. 
During the campaign, more than 300 artistic and cultural events promoting Turkey will take place in Paris, Lyon, Marseille, Strasbourg, and other French cities.
***
The 16th edition of the International Istanbul Jazz Festival kicked off on Thursday (July 2nd), the daily Zaman reported. 
Around 30 groups, and 200 Turkish and foreign musicians are performing at various venues throughout the city. 
Jazz greats Marcus Miller, Melody Gardot, Joe Sample and Randy Crawford will all make appearances at the festival, which ends Wednesday (July 15th).
***
Over 20,000 people attended a concert by guitarist Carlos Santana and his band in Bucharest on Saturday (July 4th), organised as part of this year's edition of the B'estfest music festival, the daily Nine O'Clock reported. 
Along with other performers, Santana performed some of his biggest hits.
***
Mehmet Yesilyesil won the Kirkpinar Oil Wrestling Championships which ended on Sunday (July 5th) in Edrine, Turkey, the Zaman daily reported. 
The Kirkpinar Oil Wrestling and Culture Festival is a 648-year-old tradition, and is believed to be the oldest wrestling competition in the world. 
The oil wrestling contest was held along with a number of cultural activities.
***
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic opened the 25th Summer Student Games in Belgrade on Thursday (July 2nd). 
The opening ceremony was held at the Belgrade Arena stadium and attended by 15,000 competitors from 145 countries.
(Various sources – 01/07/09-08/07/09)
