09/10/2009
The Romanian parliament's Budget and Finance Committee backed Mugur Isarescu as central bank governor for another five-year term on Tuesday (October 6th).
Isarescu has co-ordinated Romania's economic policies for 19 years.
Florin Georgescu, Bodgan Olteanu and Cristian Popa were reappointed as deputy governors.
An Albanian-American Development Foundation was established on Tuesday (October 6th) in Tirana.
The organisation aims to develop education, leadership skills, cultural and ecological tourism.
The foundation is supported by USAID.
A dozen foreign dairy companies expressed interest in acquiring the bankrupt dairy producer Swedmilk Macedonia, the company's bankruptcy manager, Blagoj Makrevski, said on Monday (October 5th) at a meeting with milk producers in Bitola.
Offers by some potential buyers are expected by the end of the month.
German tour operator TUI will promote Romania as of next year, Romanian Tourism Minister Elena Udrea said on Tuesday (October 6th).
TUI will launch a special brochure about the country;
120,000 copies will be distributed by tourism agencies in Germany.
Pristina hosted an international forum "Kosovo -- an Energy Opportunity" on Monday (October 5th) and Tuesday in an effort to attract foreign investments to its energy sector.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci promised participants a safe and favourable investment environment.
Companies from Germany, Italy, France, Austria and Switzerland attended the forum.
Automotive sales in Turkey hit a historic high of 85.3% year-on-year to 81,397 vehicles in September, following the 18.5% year on year drop in August, according to figures from the Automotive Distributors' Association, published on Tuesday (October 6th).
The automotive industry has so far incurred losses due to the global economic downturn.
The IMF requested that Serbia step up efforts to harmonise revenue and spending and make the functioning of public companies more efficient, Deputy Managing Director Murilo Portugal said on Tuesday (October 6th).
Portugal discussed with Serbian authorities the 2010 public finance reforms that will be reviewed during the upcoming IMF visit on October 20th.
(Various sources – 02/10/09-09/10/09)
