09/11/2009
Archaeologists discovered the remains of a British military ship off Albania's Ionian Sea shores.
The HMS Volage sank in 1946 after running into a mine.
The incident near the Albanian port of Saranda caused a serious crisis between Tirana and London at the time.
The ship remains were discovered by an international team of scientists from the US Institute of Nautical Archaeology, the Albanian Institute of Archaeology and the Albanian Defence Ministry.
Tax authorities in Istanbul imposed a 32m-euro fine on Google over the company's failure to pay its profit taxes.
The internet giant refused to pay the taxes, arguing its Turkish operations are managed from Google headquarters in Ireland.
Local authorities say Google's Turkey-based company, Google Reklamcilik ve Pazarlama, is liable for taxation.
Researchers in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) launched an internet "atlas of war crimes" on Tuesday (November 3rd) that helps inform about the country's 1992-1995 conflict.
The atlas -- www.idc.org.ba -- contains Google Earth maps and allows finding sites of mass executions and mass graves in BiH, along with the names of victims.
A Science Festival will be held in Belgrade on December 4th and 5th.
More than 200 scientists, lecturers and students will take part in the event, which aims to present scientific achievements in an innovative way.
Electronic cards will replace bus and tram tickets in Bucharest as of January 1st 2010, local authorities announced.
The city's public transport company said that the introduction of the new cards could be delayed in order to give riders time to get used to them.
Serbia's Academy of Sciences and Arts admitted 59 new academicians to its ranks on Thursday (November 5th), bringing the number of members to 184.
Among the new members are writers Dusan Kovacevic and Svetlana Velmar Jankovic, and urologist Sava Perovic.
The first Romanian search engine, Okidoki (http://okidoki.ro), was officially launched by MediaPro Interactiv on November 2nd.
The engine has been online since December 2008 but was undergoing constant upgrades.
Okidoki indexes over 50 million Romanian pages.
The aim is to index all relevant websites in Romanian by the end of 2010.
<I>(Various sources – 02/11/09-09/11/09)</i>
