07/09/2009
The University of Pristina, in co-operation with Kosovo Software Freedom, organised the first conference on free and open software on August 30th and 31st.
More than 300 local and international participants discussed open source software and latest IT technologies at the event.
Officials from open source web browser Mozilla were among the panelists.
Cyprus and the European Space Agency (ESA) signed a five-year co-operation agreement in Nicosia on August 27th.
The document's objective is to allow Cyprus and the ESA to create a framework for more-intensive co-operation.
Communications and Works Minister Nicos Nicolaides said the agreement was a very important development for Cyprus in the sector of science and technology, and especially in the field of space technology.
Serbian students from Kragujevac University won second place at the Imagine Cup world student competition organised by Microsoft in Cairo.
The news was announced by Youth and Sport Minister Snezana Samardzic-Markovic on August 31st.
The Serbian team won in the Live Services category.
A total of 59,000 students from 142 countries took part in the competition.
Bosniak Rusmir Mustajbegovic won a gold medal at the Ninth Moscow International Salon of Innovations and Investments for his lock without a key invention.
The exhibition was held from August 26th to 30th.
Astronomers from the IAU A79 observatory in Bulgaria discovered nine new asteroids in the past two weeks.
The centre recognised the asteroids as minor bodies in the solar system at the Harvard-based International Astronomy Union.
Turkey's second most visited museum after Topkapi Palace, the Mevlana Museum in Konya, Anatolia, is undergoing its largest-ever restoration, and the first comprehensive restoration since 1926.
The first phase revealed new details about the dervishes who lived there in the past.
The Third International Salon of Landscape Architecture opened in Zemun, Serbia, on Thursday (September 3rd).
The event, which ends on September 14th, will show the works of architects from The Netherlands, Croatia, Montenegro, South Africa, Spain and Slovenia.
(Various sources – 31/08/09-07/09/09)
