07/07/2009
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu paid a two-day visit to Bucharest last week at the invitation of Romanian counterpart Cristian Diaconescu.
At a meeting Friday (July 3rd), they discussed a series of joint co-operation projects involving transport and energy in the Black Sea area.
Davutoglu said Turkey is ready to co-operate with Romania in a number of energy projects, primarily the Nabucco pipeline.
He also met with Romanian President Traian Basescu and Prime Minister Emil Boc.
Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac was in Romania on Monday (July 6th), where he discussed bilateral co-operation and the situation in the region with Romanian counterpart Mihai Stanisoara, Foreign Minister Cristian Diaconescu and President Traian Basescu's security adviser, Iulian Fota.
Greek President Karolos Papoulias was in Belgrade on Thursday (July 2nd) for talks with Serbian counterpart Boris Tadic.
During his two-day stay, Papoulias also met with Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and Parliament Speaker Slavica Djukic-Dejanovic.
Papoulias also attended the opening of a Serbian-Greek business forum.
Great Britain supports the Serbian government's and President Boris Tadic's European orientation, British Foreign Secretary David Miliband said on June 30th after meeting with Serbian counterpart Vuk Jeremic in London.
Jeremic said there is full agreement between Britain and Serbia when it comes to European integration as a central strategic goal of the Western Balkans.
Turkish Cypriot Foreign Minister Huseyin Ozgurgun on Monday (July 6th) accused Cypriot President Demetris Christofias of "exploiting" the Republic of Cyprus' EU membership to pressure Turkey.
"I would like to stress once again that we will never allow the Greek Cypriot administration to make political gains through political blackmailing," said Ozgurgun.
Ankara and Nicosia do not have diplomatic relations as Turkey refuses to recognise the Republic of Cyprus.
Turkey will continue to lobby for Kosovo in all its international meetings and will support the young country's territorial integrity, according to Koksal Toptan, Turkey's parliament speaker.
"One of Turkey's foreign policy priorities is the support of Kosovo's independence," said Toptan during a visit to Pristina on Monday (July 6th).
(Various sources -- 30/06/09-07/07/09)
