06/07/2009
The first Genome Centre in the Balkans was inaugurated in Sofia on Monday (June 29th). 
Bulgaria's Agriculture Ministry allocated 2m euros to fund the centre, tasked to reverse the decline in agrarian science and improve the competitiveness of local agriculture. 
It was built under a joint project by the ministry, the Agriculture Academy and Sofia University.
***
The European HIV/AIDS Academy opened in Bucharest on June 27th, local media reported. 
The academy aims to train medical and social staff from Romania and other European states to handle HIV/AIDS-related issues. 
The new institution is part of the Matei Bals National Institute for Infectious Diseases. 
It offers local and long-distance courses with direct access to patients, facilities, experts, knowhow and technical procedures.
***
The US Embassy in Turkey launched a website on June 30th to serve as its Virtual Presence Post (VPP) in the country's third biggest city, Izmir. 
The VPP Izmir is the first of several VPPs the embassy intends to open. 
The website www.izmir.usvpp.gov will combine traditional diplomacy and modern technologies, including branded websites, e-mail, Digital Video Cameras and on-line web chats. 
It will provide information on US government services in Izmir.
***
A team of Greek, Italian and US archaeologists unearthed the ruins of the oldest known human settlement in the Aegean Islands on Limnos, Greece. 
The excavations began in early June and revealed high-quality stone tools from the epipaleolithic period, about 14,000 years ago. 
The finds indicate a settlement of hunters, food-collectors and fishermen of the 12th millennium BC.
***
Bulgarian scientist Albena Yordanova implanted a human gene into a fly, that specialists believe, could lead to a revolution in the treatment of hereditary polyneuropathy. 
The experiment will facilitate research of the enzymes and mechanisms that cause the disease and could help find a cure for it. 
The disease causes degeneration of internal organs, loss of balance, epilepsy and other diseases.
(Various sources – 29/06/09-06/07/09)
