08/12/2009
Turkey's prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, expressed support for Macedonia's EU bid during a meeting Saturday (December 5th) with his Macedonian counterpart, Nikola Gruevski.
Erdogan urged Greece to let Macedonia use its constitutional name.
During the visit, the two leaders also attended a Macedonian-Turkish business forum in Istanbul.
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic began a five-day visit to China on Monday (December 7th).
During his stay, he will sign a bilateral agreement on co-operation between the interior ministries.
Kosovo Interior Minister Zenun Pajaziti and his Macedonian counterpart Gordana Jankulovska signed a police co-operation deal Thursday (December 3rd) in Pristina.
It is the first bilateral agreement signed by the two countries since they established diplomatic relations in October.
Serbia intends to meet all criteria for EU membership by 2014, President Boris Tadic said on Thursday (December 3rd) after talks in Belgrade with his visiting Slovak counterpart, Ivan Gasparovic.
The latter, meanwhile, reiterated support for Serbia's EU bid and vowed that Slovakia will never recognise Kosovo as independent -- unless Serbia does so first.
Britain will assist Kosovo's efforts to join the EU and NATO, British Minister for International Defence and Security Ann Taylor said in Pristina on Wednesday (December 2nd).
She met with President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and Security Force Minister Fehmi Mujota.
Greece reiterated on December 1st its support for Albania's EU integration and its hope that Tirana will be able to complete its visa liberalisation process in 2010.
During a meeting with Albanian Foreign Minister Ilir Meta on the sidelines of the OSCE Ministerial Council in Athens, Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou said his government is committed to integrating Albanian immigrants living in Greece, as he promised in his October election campaign.
During a visit to the United States, Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac held talks on December 1st with Defence Secretary Robert Gates.
It was the first official visit to Washington by a Serbian defence minister in 25 years.
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat continued their reunification talks December 1st.
Discussions focused on the issues of citizenship, aliens, immigration and asylum.
(Various sources -- 01/12/09-08/12/09)
