04/12/2009
The European Commission (EC) approved on Wednesday (December 2nd) 57m euros in conditional aid to Ford Romania, to help pay for an employee training programme.
The EC is monitoring the aid to make sure it is distributed properly.
Serbian Infrastructure Minister Milutin Mrkonjic opened two sections of the Corridor 10 highway between Horgos and Novi Sad on Sunday (November 29th).
The sections are each 10 km long.
Construction on the two stretches, worth 16.5m euros, began last July.
The European Investment Bank announced on Thursday (November 26th) it will provide a total of 110m euros in three loans aimed at boosting the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina and supporting the country's economic recovery efforts.
The Croatian parliament approved the 2010 budget with the support of 81 out of 153 members on Wednesday (December 2nd).
The proposal was opposed by 33 lawmakers, while two abstained.
The budget provides a significant cut in subsidies, especially in agriculture, and reduces capital expenditures.
Serbian air carrier JAT Airways will sell tickets from Belgrade to so-called "Schengen" destinations at prices starting from 19 euros to mark the removal of visas for Serbian citizens travelling to EU countries.
Tickets are available until January 12th on the company's website -- www.jat.com.
Kosovo's trade deficit remains high, reaching 1.2 billion euros in the latest quarter, the Central Bank announced on Wednesday (December 2nd).
Imports in the review period totalled 1.3 billion euros while exports remained low, at 108m euros, 31% less compared to last year.
Greek banks are now offering a new type of favourable credit for consumers who would like to lead an environmentally friendly lifestyle.
The new product will allow companies and private individuals to finance projects related to renewable energy resources, such as buying or building solar collectors, wind or water turbines, and construction of environmentally friendly buildings.
(Various sources – 27/11/09-04/12/09)
