06/11/2009
The city of Belgrade and the Spanish company CAF signed an agreement Tuesday (November 3rd) for 30 new trams.
Valued at an estimated 81m euros, they will be delivered over the next three years.
The new power plant in Vlora will start producing electricity this month, Albania's energy ministry announced on Saturday (October 31st).
Economy Minister Dritan Prifti said that only "the latest technology has been used for the plant, which minimises pollution."
Kosovo needs a developmental strategy for its economy, according to participants in Kosovo Business Week, which started on Monday (November 2nd).
They added that local products need support and promotion in order to secure stable exports, and that the government must do more to encourage neighbouring countries to eliminate trade barriers.
Zagreb hosted traditional business meetings called Nordic Days 2009 from Monday (November 2nd) to Wednesday.
The event brought together representatives of companies and organisations from Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Croatia and Southeast Europe.
Nordic Days 2009 focused on green technologies and sustainable development.
The European Commission proposed lending 100m euros in macro-economic assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The assistance would complement the 1.2 billion-euro adjustment programme agreed on by Bosnian authorities and the IMF.
The financing will depend on BiH's ability to fulfill reforms proposed by the Fund.
A Global Entrepreneurship Week will be held in Macedonia in mid-November.
The event is organised for the second time by the Agency for Promotion of Entrepreneurship.
More than 30 organisations will try to encourage people to start their own businesses.
Romanians care more about what their bank cards look like than how safe they are, Denisa Mateescu, head of MasterCard Europe Romania, said on Wednesday (November 4th).
According to Mateescu, who presented the bankcard operator's monthly survey, the country's bank card market has a huge potential, with only half of the country's population using them.
(Various sources – 30/10/09-06/11/09)
