04/08/2009
Serbia will sell weapons and military equipment to Iraq and will train soldiers in the country, Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac said on Saturday (August 1st), following a visit to Baghdad. 
The countries' defence ministries signed a co-operation agreement as Iraq works to restore its army and police. 
Last year, Serbia agreed to supply firearms, uniforms and helmets to the country, as well as 20 training aircraft.
***
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat held another meeting Thursday (July 30th) as part of an ongoing effort to reunify the divided island. 
The meeting was focused on immigration, citizenship and asylum. 
The UN Secretary-General's Special Representative Taye-Brook Zerihoun said the two leaders will meet again this week.
***
Expert groups from Macedonia and Kosovo began discussions Thursday (July 30th) on a social security bilateral agreement in Skopje. 
Macedonian Labour and Social Policy Minister Xhelal Bajrami voiced hope that the document would be signed after diplomatic relations are established between the two countries.
***
Serbian President Boris Tadic met with Armenian Prime Minister Tigran Sargsyan in Yerevan during a recent trip, as well as with Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan. 
The leaders agreed that regional conflicts such as the one in Kosovo or Nagorno-Karabakh should be settled without the use of force. 
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic, who accompanied Tadic, met with Armenian counterpart Edward Nalbandian, and stressed that Serbia is interested in boosting co-operation in all fields.
***
Iraq will help Turkey and the United States in their efforts to combat militants from the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) until the complete elimination of the movement, Iraqi National Security Minister Shirwan al-Waili said on July 28th. 
The statement followed a meeting between the Iraqi official and Turkish Interior Minister Besir Atalay in Ankara.
***
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic visited Vilnius on Monday (August 3rd) where Lithuanian counterpart Vygaudas Usackas assured him of his country's full support for Serbia's EU integration process. 
"Europe in the future is inconceivable without Serbia's membership in the EU," Usackas said.
***
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin will visit Ankara on Thursday (August 6th) to discuss energy co-operation issues, given Turkey's growing role in projects transporting natural gas and oil to Europe. 
Last month for example, Ankara hosted a signing ceremony for the long-delayed Nabucco pipeline project, which will carry natural gas from the Caspian region to Europe, via Turkey.
(Various sources 28/07/09-04/08/09)
