02/10/2009
The European Commission has approved a 157m-euro loan that will be used to extend Sofia's metro underground railway network, Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov said on Sunday (September 27th).
The total cost of the project is 247m euros.
The remaining funds will be secured by the government and Sofia municipality.
The extension should be completed in mid 2012.
The stock exchanges in Istanbul and Athens are introducing a joint index called Greece-Turkey 30, according to an announcement Monday (September 28th).
The index will unite the top 15 companies in the two countries in equity and trade volumes, in an effort to boost mutual trading.
Telecom operator Hellenic Telecoms, the National Bank and Cosmote were the most profitable companies on the Greek market in 2008, according to a survey of the country's business leaders published by the ICAP Group on Monday (September 28th).
The survey included Greece's 500 most profitable companies and the 200 best performing groups of companies based on their EBIDTA and balance sheets for the past year.
The Japanese government awarded a project worth more than 200,000 euros to Kosovo's Anti-Corruption Agency on Wednesday (September 30th).
The project will aim to increase corruption awareness and establish a regional anti-corruption network.
The reconstruction of Belgrade's Gazela Bridge will begin this month, Serbian Infrastructure Minister Milutin Mrkonjic told Belgrade-based daily Vecernje Novosti on Sunday (September 27th).
The project envisions the rehabilitation of the facility as well as the construction of its remaining sections.
Gazela Bridge is the city's main bridge and forms an integral part of the Trans European Corridor X. The project is worth 290.4m euros.
Macedonian power producer Elektrani na Makedonija said it has started researching coal reserves and their possible exploitation in the Mariovo Basin.
The company plans to open a mine and build a thermal plant with a capacity of 300MW and annual production of 2,000GW/h of electricity.
The EU and the World Bank are prepared to provide another 25m euros in aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina for fresh investments, South-Eastern Co-operative Initiative co-ordinator Erhard Busek said in Vienna on Monday (September 28th).
He said that funds would be disbursed for projects poised for implementation and backed by political consensus.
(Various sources – 25/09/09-02/10/09)
