01/09/2009
Slovenian Foreign Minister Samuel Zbogar and Croatian counterpart Gordan Jandrokovic agreed on Sunday (August 30th) that negotiations between their countries on resolving the long-standing border dispute are moving in the right direction. 
They noted some progress was achieved but refused to reveal any details. 
The two ministers met in Bled, near Ljubljana.
***
European Commissioner for Consumer Protection Meglena Kuneva met with Serbian President Boris Tadic in Belgrade on Monday (August 31st). 
Talks focused on the internal market in the EU and building a civil society in Serbia. 
According to Kuneva, good dialogue between the state and its citizens is necessary. 
The two officials also discussed co-operation in the Balkans and its prospects.
***
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu sent a letter to Organisation of Islamic Conference (OIC) Secretary-General Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu asking for recognition of the former province's independence by OIC members, local media reported on Tuesday (September 1st). 
Recently, Ihsanoglu said Kosovo is very important for the OIC. 
He also called for Kosovo's integration into international institutions.
***
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias arrived in Syria on Sunday (August 30th) for a two-day official visit at the invitation of his counterpart Bashar al-Assad. 
They are expected to discuss the Cypriot problem as well as issues related to bilateral ties. 
Christofias is accompanied by a delegation including Foreign Minister Markos Kyprianou and Communications and Works Minister Nicos Nicolaides.
***
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and Canadian counterpart Stephen Harper signed an agreement on social security Wednesday (August 26th). 
According to the document, about 200,000 Macedonians living in Canada would be able to benefit from their pension and disability insurance rights. 
Gruevski also met with National Defence Minister Peter MacKay and Minister of International Trade Stockwell Day.
***
High Representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina Valentin Inzko on Monday (August 31st) urged the foreign ministers of Croatia, Slovenia and Turkey to continue supporting BiH's bids to join the EU and NATO. 
Inzko had talks with Gordan Jandrokovic, Samuel Zbogar and Ahmet Davutoglu in Bled, Slovenia, on the sidelines of a Strategic Forum that opened Sunday. 
During the meetings, he briefed the foreign ministers on the Office of the High Representative transition process.
***
UN High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres said on August 25th that a long-term solution to the refugees' return issue requires a joint effort by Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) authorities and the international community. 
Guterres insisted a regional approach to the issue is needed. 
In Sarajevo, the UN official held talks with members of the BIH tripartite presidency, primes ministers of the two entities as well as with BiH Minister for Human Rights and Refugees Safet Halilovic.
(Various sources – 25/08/09-01/09/09)
