30/03/2010
German Chancellor Angela Merkel began a two-day official visit to Turkey on Monday (March 29th) to discuss contentious topics between the two countries.
Merkel held talks with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and President Abdullah Gul on issues such as EU membership for Turkey, Cyprus, Greek-Turkish relations, sanctions against Iran and the status of the Turkish diaspora in Germany.
Foreign ministers of Serbia, Hungary, Greece and Croatia met in Budapest on Monday (March 29th).
Vuk Jeremic, Peter Balazs, Dimitris Droutsas and Gordan Jandrokovic discussed regional relations, EU integration in the Western Balkans, the return of refugees and the European strategy for the Danube region.
German Defence Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg is calling on the Kosovo government to step up the fight against corruption.
On Monday (March 29th), the first day of his visit to Pristina, Guttenberg said that his country will continue to support Kosovo.
He urged NATO member states to avoid any unilateral decision on withdrawal of troops from KFOR, and expressed confidence that the EULEX mission will succeed despite the impasse in Kosovo's north and other problems.
Cypriot Foreign Minister Markos Kyprianou met in Washington with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Friday (March 26th).
She confirmed US support for ongoing talks to reunify the divided island.
Kyprianou said that Cypriot President Demetris Christofias is committed to finding a solution to the decades-old issue, stressing that Turkey is key to resolving the matter.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu voiced his country's support for Macedonia's NATO membership during his visit to Skopje on Friday (March 26th).
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski briefed him on efforts by Skopje to overcome the long-standing name dispute with Greece, an obstacle to European and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Davutoglu also met with President Gjorge Ivanov and Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki.
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski discussed the enlargement process with EU President Herman Van Rompuy and European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek in Brussels on Wednesday (March 24th).
Buzek praised Macedonia for reforms achieved so far and encouraged the country to keep searching for a mutually acceptable solution to its name row with Greece.
Serbian President Boris Tadic and Croatian counterpart Ivo Josipovic discussed bilateral relations during their first informal meeting in the Croatian town of Opatija on Wednesday (March 24th).
According to Serbian media, they focused on border disputes, minority issues and refugee concerns.
Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn voiced hope on March 23rd that Serbia will make decisions that would contribute to the stability of the Western Balkans after the International Court of Justice (ICJ) rules on the legality of Kosovo's declaration of independence.
Asselborn held talks with visiting Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic, who said that a compromise solution is needed regarding Kosovo.
British Foreign Secretary David Miliband pledged support for Kosovo at a London meeting on March 23rd with Kosovo counterpart Skender Hyseni.
The officials discussed talks between Kosovo and Serbia on technical issues, the improvement of governance, Kosovo's participation in international conferences, economic development and the fight against corruption.
(Various sources -- 23/03/10-30/03/10)
