31/08/2010
British Foreign Secretary William Hague arrived in Belgrade on Tuesday (August 31st) for talks with senior officials about Serbia's draft UN resolution on Kosovo. 
Britain has criticised Belgrade's initiative, and Serbian officials -- including President Boris Tadic -- say they are ready to discuss a compromise with Western countries, in particular EU members.
***
Thai Foreign Minister Kasit Piromya paid a visit to Montenegro on Monday (August 30th) for talks with counterpart Milan Rocen. 
Afterwards, Rocen told journalists that Montenegro has received no extradition request from Thailand concerning former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who holds a Montenegrin passport. 
Shinawatra, who was ousted in a 2006 military coup and subsequently convicted in absentia for corruption and abuse of office, is wanted in his homeland on suspicion of helping stage deadly anti-government riots.
***
Albania wants to strengthen economic co-operation with China by bringing more investment into the country, officials said on Monday (August 30th). 
Prime Minister Sali Berisha met in Tirana with Liu Yunshan, director of the propaganda department of the Communist Party of China Central Committee. 
Berisha confirmed that exports to China have increased by 600% in the first six months of 2010, and urged Chinese businesses to invest in energy, tourism and industrial parks. 
Yunshan praised relations with Albania, adding that Chinese leaders are interested in increasing co-operation. 
After Berisha, Yunshan met President Bamir Topi.
Both Berisha and Topi raised the topic of Kosovo, urging China to help secure more recognitions for the self-declared state and to play a constructive role at the UN Security Council.
***
Albanian Foreign Minister Ilir Meta kicked off a tour in Central America on Monday (August 30th), to lobby more countries to recognise Kosovo's independence ahead of next week's UN General Assembly session. 
Meta is the first Albanian diplomat to visit Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras.
***
A US congressional delegation arrived in Belgrade on Monday (August 30th) for a two-day visit. 
The delegation, led by Rep. 
William Delahunt (D-MA), is meeting with senior officials, representatives of the private and civil sectors, and lawmakers. 
Talks are expected to focus on US-Serbian relations, Serbia's Euro-Atlantic bid, and democratic and economic developments in the country.
***
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic was in South Africa on Monday (August 30th) to meet with Minister of International Relations and Co-operation Maite Nkoana-Mashabane. 
They discussed boosting political, economic and cultural relations and facilitating the identification of priority areas for co-operation.
***
Belgian Foreign Minister Steven Vanackere expressed his country's solidarity with Greece in its efforts to emerge from economic crisis. 
"Strength lies in unity. 
The more united we are, the sooner we shall see results," Vanackere said after meeting Greek Alternate Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas in Athens on Wednesday (August 25th). 
Earlier in the afternoon, Vanackere met with Prime Minister George Papandreou about economic issues, ways to boost business relations, as well as Turkey's EU prospects and the Cypriot issue. 
Vanackere was in Nicosia on Thursday.
***
Serbian Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic and visiting UNMIK head Lamberto Zannier agreed on Wednesday (August 25th) that dialogue is necessary to resolve open issues in Kosovo. 
They also agreed that the role of the UN mission should be strengthened in northern Kosovo and other Serb-dominated areas. 
UNMIK should provide security and guarantee the free movement of all, Bogdanovic said. 
While in Belgrade, Zannier also met with Interior Minister Ivica Dacic, who said UNMIK should remain in Kosovo while maintaining its status neutral position.
(Various sources -- 24/08/10-31/08/10)
