31/03/2010
The Turkish Cultural Centre Yunus Emre -- which should make intercultural relations between Macedonia and Turkey closer while promoting Turkish language and history -- opened on Friday (March 26th) in Skopje. 
Macedonian Culture Minister Elizabeta Kanceska-Milevska and Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu attended the ceremony.
***
Bosnian Zorana Derikowa, 13, won a gold medal at the 17th Annual World Children's Picture Contest, Bosnia and Herzegovina's Foreign Ministry announced on Friday (March 26th). 
Three Bulgarians, one Romanian and one child from Cyprus also struck gold. 
The contest was organised by Japanese cultural association IE-NO-HIKARI. 
More than 50,000 children's drawings from 67 countries competed.
***
Macedonian Culture Minister Elizabeta Kanceska-Milevska and Slovenian counterpart Majda Sirca met on Friday (March 26th) in Skopje and agreed to enhance cultural co-operation. 
Macedonia will send a culture, education and science programme to the Slovenian Culture Ministry that should be signed by the end of the year. 
The two ministers also discussed the idea of promoting Macedonian cinematography in Slovenia and vice-versa.
***
British music band Massive Attack will stage their first concert in Bulgaria on July 15th. 
Tickets go on sale April 6th at prices ranging between 25 and 40 euros.
***
Albanian cinematography will be promoted throughout the Cannes Film Festival in May. 
The head of the Cinematography Centre in Tirana, Artan Minarolli, announced that Albania has secured a promotional corner at the festival for the movies produced since 1997, and trailers of the most successful movies will be screened 24 hours a day across the venue. 
The centre considers this a golden opportunity to promote local cinematography to the world.
***
An International Festival of Young Musicians is bringing together classical music artists from across the world to perform in Pristina through April 19th. 
Over the course of 15 concerts, the festival is introducing local orchestras and artists, including participants from the region, the US, Lebanon and Switzerland. 
Thirty newly-composed pieces will be performed during the festival.
***
The former number one female tennis player in the world -- Serbian Ana Ivanovic --announced on Monday (March 29th) that she is pulling out of Serbia's Fed Cup World Group layoff tie with Slovakia in April. 
Ivanovic won the French Open in 2008 but recently fell to 58th after a series of defeats.
(Various sources -- 24/03/10-31/03/10)
