29/03/2010
Albanians are complaining of privacy breaches on the social networking site Facebook, according to Flora Cabej, the Parliamentary Commissioner for Personal Data Protection.
Cabej said on March 23rd that the government lacks sufficient cyber capacity to control the attacks.
While measures against internet intruders have been promised, fines will remain low.
The Greek Culture Ministry announced on March 23rd that archaeologists unearthed part of a wall thought to be about 23,000 years old.
The finding was made more than 25 years after excavations in the Theopetra cave began in central Thessalia.
This is the oldest man-made dwelling in Greece and scientists believe it may be the oldest in the world.
The wall was built in the coldest period of the last ice age, suggesting it was constructed to prevent the cave's inhabitants from freezing.
Romania ranks seventh in a recent list of the biggest sources of spam in the world, according to a report published on Wednesday (March 24th) by PandaLabs, an internet virus research company.
Ahead of it were Brazil, India, Vietnam, South Korea, the United States and Russia.
According to the research, most spam emails are used to either threaten recipients or market illegal products.
The OSCE mission in Pristina is training Kosovo police to fight computer crime, the mission announced on March 22nd.
The training will help in tackling a variety of offenses, including identity theft, forged credit cards and money laundering.
More advanced courses on computer crime and IT forensics are planned by the end of this year.
The Serbian parliament passed a set of laws March 23rd on scientific development and intellectual property, with the aim of motivating scientists to remain in the country and curb brain drain.
Among the adopted legislation is a law governing the Serbian Academy of Arts and Sciences and its assets.
The USAID launched a programme Wednesday (March 24th) aimed at promoting e-access for students with disabilities in 20 Macedonian primary schools.
About 200 teachers will be trained to use the technology, working with special-needs children.
The US agency will invest 150,000 euros to support the programme over the next two years.
(Various sources – 22/03/10-29/03/10)
