29/09/2010
Albanian writer Ismail Kadare won the Lirici Pea poetry prize in Italy on Sunday (September 26th).
The 57th edition of the event honoured Kadare for promoting poetry and freedom in an isolated country.
Restoration work at the medieval Maglic Castle near the Serbian town of Kraljevo will start next year.
Most of the funds will be allocated by the Italian Foreign Ministry.
The renovations will cost 152,000 euros.
Romania's national women's handball team won the GF World Cup on Saturday (September 25th), defeating Norway in the final.
The team won the GF World Cup last year too.
Hollywood's Angelina Jolie has tapped Bosnian actress Zana Marjanovic to star in her first directorial debut.
The film is a love story set in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the 1992-1995 conflict.
Shooting will take place in Budapest and Sarajevo.
Srdjan Karanovic's film "Besa" has been selected as Serbia's nominee in the 2011 Oscar race for Best Foreign Language Film, the Serbian Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences announced on Friday (September 24th).
The US Embassy in Skopje will support the restoration and conservation of the 4th century Basilica Frescoes in Stobi.
Macedonian Culture Minister Elizabeta Kanceska-Milevska and US Ambassador Philip Reeker signed a grant agreement worth 53,000 euros on Monday (September 27th).
Reeker said that preservation of St. Bogorodica Perivlepta in Ohrid, the Turkish Spa in Tetovo and the Daut Pasin Amam in Skopje will also be supported by the US grant.
Turkish tennis player Marsel Ilhan joined the Top 100 of the ATP rankings on Sunday (September 26th), becoming the first Turkish men's player to do so.
Ilhan jumped six spots to 96th position after defeating India's Somdev Devvarman at the Turk Telecom 2010 Men's Tennis Tournament.
Istanbul will host the first edition of an international classical music festival on October 16th-20th as part of the events celebrating its title of a European Capital of Culture for 2010.
The first edition of the Istanbul Classical Music Festival will be held under the motto "Cross Over" and will bring together classical music ensembles from Europe and the United States.
(Various sources -- 22/09/10-29/09/10)
