29/06/2010
Greek Alternate Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas and French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner discussed bilateral relations, the EU's enlargement process and various regional and international issues Monday (June 28th). 
Droutsas is on a two-day visit to France. 
On Tuesday, he will address the French Institute of International Relations.
***
Macedonia must continue to implement the Ohrid Agreement in order to develop domestic relations, Albanian Foreign Minister Ilir Meta said on Monday (June 28th), during a meeting with outgoing Macedonian Ambassador to Tirana Blagodarna Mingova-Krepieva. 
They discussed the EU integration process and Meta expressed Tirana's support for Macedonia's NATO membership bid. 
Mingova-Krepieva praised inter-institutional co-operation between the countries, especially on a political level.
***
The number of countries recognising Kosovo will increase after the International Court of Justice delivers its opinion on the legality of the country's independence declaration, Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and Kosovo counterpart Hashim Thaci said on Sunday (June 27th). 
Meeting in Durres, Albania, they discussed exchanging experiences related to European integration. 
The two leaders also discussed possible talks between Kosovo and Serbia.
***
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic and Croatian counterpart Tomislav Karamarko met on Monday (June 28th) in Sombor, northern Serbia. 
Talks focused on security and co-operation. 
On Tuesday, Serbia and Croatia are expected to sign an extradition agreement covering people apprehended on charges of corruption and organised crime.
***
Russia's Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Titov said on Saturday (June 26th) in Banja Luka that any changes in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be based on an agreement between the two entities and the three constitutive ethnic groups. 
Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik praised the political and economic relations between the entity and Russia. 
On Friday, Titov met in Sarajevo with Bosnian Foreign Minister Sven Alkalaj, members of the tripartite presidency and High Representative Valentin Inzko.
***
Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac and Libyan counterpart Abu-Bakr Younis Jaber signed an agreement Wednesday (June 23rd) on military and technical co-operation. 
After the ceremony in Tripoli, Sutanovac said that the two countries have great possibilities to develop co-operation, adding that the agreement marked the beginning of a new era in relations. 
Jaber hailed the deal as a confirmation of good bilateral ties. 
The agreement envisions co-operation in renovating military hospitals in Libya and the exchange of experts.
***
British Minister of State for Europe David Lidington encouraged Macedonian officials on June 22nd to resolve the name dispute with Greece as soon as possible. 
Lidington voiced London's support for Skopje's EU bid and urged it to continue implementing the necessary reforms in the judiciary, public administration and the fight against corruption. 
While in Skopje, Lidington also met with Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski.
(Various sources -- 22/06/10-29/06/10)
