25/06/2010
Poverty has grown in the continent over the past year, 60% of Europeans believe, according to a Eurobarometer survey of the social impact of the global financial crisis published on Tuesday (June 22nd).
In Greece, 85% of people believe they have grown poorer compared to last year.
Bulgaria is next with 82%, while 77% in Romania see their situation as getting worse.
In Cyprus, 66% of respondents experienced a downturn in their financial status over the past 12 months.
Low-cost air company Easy Jet started operations in Kosovo on June 19th.
The first round trip was completed from Basel, Switzerland, to Pristina.
The route will operate four times a week, and is expected to serve up to 20,000 passengers by the end of October.
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic opened a new pharmaceutical factory at Galenika's plant in Zemun on Monday (June 21st).
The investment is worth more than 50m euros and will create 150 new jobs.
The annual capacity of the new factory is approximately 2 billion tablets and 100 million capsules, which should double the total production capacity of the drug maker.
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin affirmed bilateral economic co-operation during a meeting on June 19th in Moscow.
Kosor said she expects that parliament will soon ratify a law on Croatia's participation in the South Stream project.
The pipeline will carry gas from Russia through the Black Sea to Central Europe.
While in Moscow, Kosor opened an office of Croatia's Chamber of Commerce.
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov and visiting Czech counterpart Vaclav Klaus attended a Macedonian-Czech business forum on Tuesday (June 22nd) in Skopje.
They agreed to further develop bilateral economic ties.
On the sidelines of the forum, an agreement on the establishment of a Macedonia-Czech business council was signed.
Croatian oil company INA and Hungary's MOL have discovered significant amounts of natural gas in the Zalata-Dravica field on the Croatian side of the Podravska Slatina-Zalata contract area, INA announced on Wednesday (June 23rd).
The joint project to explore the Drava basin was launched in 2006.
The two companies have equal stakes of 50% and share the costs and production.
Turkish Labour and Social Security Minister Omer Dincer revealed details Wednesday (June 23rd) of a new training programme.
The project, which will run in 111 centres in Turkey's 81 provinces, aims to increase the efficiency of vocational training for employees in the industrial sectors, strengthening the labour market.
The Romanian government approved an emergency ordinance Wednesday (June 23rd) that will boost the share of profits that state companies must contribute to the public budget, and enforce new taxes for individuals.
Under the new rules, state firms must give up to 90% of their profits to the budget, compared to the current 50%.
Food vouchers, childcare and vacation money will be taxed at 16%.
Deductible income on intellectual property products will be reduced from 40% to 20% in an effort to avoid tax evasion.
The measures are part of the government's anti-crisis efforts.
(Various sources -- 18/06/10-25/06/10)
