25/05/2010
Serbia will participate in the EU-Western Balkans conference in Sarajevo on June 2nd, Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said on Friday (May 21st). 
There is no reason for the country to reject the invitation of the Spanish EU Presidency, since the summit will be arranged in accordance with Serbia's demands, he said.
***
Turkish President Abdullah Gul began a four-day official visit to Kazakhstan on Sunday (May 23rd), at the invitation of counterpart Nursultan Nazarbayev. 
Discussions are focusing on regional and international developments, as well as bilateral relations.
***
Turkey signed a military co-operation agreement with Saudi Arabia on Monday (May 24th). 
It provides for training, scientific and technical co-operation. 
The agreement was signed by Saudi Deputy Defence Minister Prince Khalid bin Sultan and Turkey's Chief of General Staff, General Ilker Basbug.
***
A visit to Belgrade by BiH Presidency Chairman Haris Silajdzic on Tuesday (May 25th) had to be cancelled due to engine trouble aboard his plane. 
In New York on Monday to participate in the UN Security Council session on BiH, he was supposed to travel to Munich first and then head to Belgrade.
***
Serbia will never accept making its EU membership conditional on recognition of Kosovo, President Boris Tadic said after meeting his Cypriot counterpart, Demetris Christofias, in Cyprus on Thursday (May 20th). 
Cyprus is among the EU members that refuse to recognise Kosovo. 
Christofias thanked Tadic for Serbia's stance regarding the Cyprus issue and its support for the island's reunification efforts.
***
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic and Montenegrin European Integration Minister Gordana Djurovic agreed on Wednesday (May 19th) to co-operate on their countries' respective EU integration bids. 
Serbia and Montenegro will collaborate in translating the acquis communautaire, the two ministers told a joint press conference in Belgrade. 
Djelic voiced Belgrade's support for Montenegro's integration efforts, saying Podgorica's success will benefit Serbia.
***
Turkey will offer concrete help to Kosovo, especially in lobbying other countries that have yet to recognise its independence, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said after meeting with Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Ankara on Thursday (May 20th). 
The two leaders also signed bilateral agreements in the fields of transport, agriculture, education and the environment.
(Various sources -- 18/05/10-25/05/10)
