24/03/2010
Writers from Albania, Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia, Serbia and Slovenia took part in the Balkan Night, organised on the sidelines of the Leipzig Book Fair on Saturday (March 20th).
The four-day fair featured more than 2,100 exhibitors from 39 countries.
A four-day international food fair wrapped up Saturday (March 20th) in Budva, Montenegro.
About 100 exhibitors from Montenegro, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Italy, Hungary, France, Belgium, Germany and Japan took part in the event.
Cypriot tennis star Marcos Baghdatis defeated Roger Federer -- the world's number one player – during the third round of the ATP Masters 1000 at Indian Wells, California on March 16th.
It was his first victory against Federer.
But it was Croatia's Ivan Ljubicic who won the tournament Sunday, beating Andy Roddick of the United States.
The 31-year-old Ljubicic is the first Croat to win the tournament.
In the women's tournament, Serbia's Jelena Jankovic won her 12th career title against Caroline Wozniacki of Denmark.
Serbian Culture Minister Nebojsa Bradic and Chinese counterpart Cai Wu opened a Days of Serbian Culture in Beijing on Thursday (March 18th).
Visitors to China's National Centre for the Performing Arts can view Serbian movies, folklore and applied arts.
The Belgrade documentary and short film festival will take place from March 30th through April 3rd.
As many as 180 films, 80 of them in the competition programme, will be screened during the event.
A three-month International Puppet Festival began in Istanbul on Sunday (March 21st) as part of celebrations of Istanbul as Europe's 2010 capital of culture.
The event, which opened on World Puppet Day, is bringing together artists from the world over who will perform and participate in workshops, exhibitions and seminars.
A week of Macedonian cinema began in Croatia on Tuesday (March 23rd).
About a dozen Macedonian feature films and documentaries are being screened as part of the event under way in Zagreb and Rijeka.
(Various sources -- 17/03/10-24/03/10)
