23/03/2010
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu believes that the five EU member states that haven't recognised Kosovo's independence yet are moving towards recognition.
There is some "positive movement" concerning Greece, Sejdiu said in his interview with the EUobserver, published on Friday (March 19th).
The other EU countries are Cyprus, Romania, Spain and Slovakia.
Irish President Mary McAleese arrived in Turkey on Monday (March 22nd) for an official visit.
She meets with President Abdullah Gul on Tuesday, after which she will travel to the northwest province of Canakkale to pay respects at a monument commemorating about 3,500 Irish soldiers killed during the Gallipoli campaign of World War I.
Hungarian Defence Minister Imre Szekeres visited Serbia to sign a co-operation agreement with his counterpart Dragan Sutanovac on Monday (March 22nd).
The ministers also discussed bilateral relations and regional security issues.
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and Greek counterpart George Papandreou plan to meet on the sidelines of an EU summit in Brussels Thursday (March 25th), the Macedonian government's press office reported.
The meeting will focus on the long-standing name dispute between the two countries.
Romanian Prime Minister Emil Boc and his Bulgarian counterpart Boyko Borisov inaugurated a new ferry line Friday (March 19th) linking Turnu Magurele in Romania to Nikopol in Bulgaria.
The two officials said their countries are considering reducing transit fees for the Giurgiu-Ruse Bridge this summer, as well as building two new bridges on the Danube River and a hydro-power plant.
Macedonian troops are well trained and prepared to take part in missions abroad, NATO Commander of Allied Joint Force Command Naples Admiral Mark Fitzgerald said on March 16th while visiting the country.
After talks with Defence Minister Zoran Konjanovski and Chief of General Staff of the Macedonian Army General Miroslav Stojanovski, Fitzgerald predicted a bright future for Macedonia in NATO.
European Parliament Rapporteur for Serbia Jelko Kacin discussed Belgrade's challenges to EU integration, during his visit in Serbia last week.
Kacin and Parliament Speaker Slavica Djukic-Dejanovic agreed that Belgrade has made progress.
Much depends, however, on an assessment by The Hague war crimes tribunal chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz on the country's co-operation.
Brammertz is expected to release a report in June.
(Various sources -- 16/03/10-23/03/10)
