24/08/2010
Hollywood star Angelina Jolie arrived on Friday (August 20th) on a surprise visit to Sarajevo. 
The actress, who is the UNHCR Goodwill Ambassador, met on Saturday with Haris Silajdzic and Zeljko Komsic, members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) tripartite presidency, to discuss displaced persons and refugee returns. 
After the meeting, Silajdzic said Jolie showed interest in supporting education and other projects. 
Jolie said she plans to start shooting a movie in BiH this autumn.
***
Turkish President Abdullah Gul will visit Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on September 2nd and 3rd. 
The visit will be an opportunity for him to discuss the situation in the region and Sarajevo's EU and NATO bids, Turkish Ambassador to Sarajevo Vefahan Ocak told Oslobodjenje daily on Saturday (August 21st). 
The visit will take place a month ahead of the general elections in BiH.
***
Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov paid a working visit to Macedonia on Sunday (August 22nd). 
He met with Macedonian counterpart Gjorge Ivanov, and the two officials attended the awards ceremony of the Struga Poetry Evenings. 
The 2010 Golden Wreath award laureate is Bulgarian poet Lubomir Levchev.
***
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu opened the constitutive session of the Municipal Assembly of Partesh/Partes on Thursday (August 19th). 
He described the June municipal elections as a model for all countries with advanced democracies. 
Municipal advisers and the mayor took their oaths of office. 
The Minister of Local Government Administration, Sadri Ferati, said that the Municipality of Partesh is a local governance "success story". 
The mayor of the newly created Serb-dominated municipality, Nenad Cvetkovic, said Serbs had reached out to Pristina, and accepted integration.
***
The Kosovo Embassy in Skopje has started functioning, eight months after the establishment of diplomatic relations with Macedonia, media reported on Friday (August 20th). 
The embassy is located in the vicinity of the US, Turkish and Albanian embassies. 
"We are working in every field to increase co-operation between Kosovo and Macedonia. 
We are negotiating the opening of new border crossings that is in the interest of citizens," Skender Durmishi, the embassy's charge d'affaires, said.
(Various sources -- 17/08/10-24/08/10)
