21/09/2010
Israeli officials say a planned meeting between Israeli President Shimon Peres and Turkish counterpart Abdullah Gul was cancelled after Peres refused to apologise for a deadly late-May raid on a Turkish-led aid flotilla to Gaza. 
The meeting was reportedly to have taken place on the sidelines of the Clinton Global Initiative in New York. 
Peres told reporters Monday (September 20th) that he had accepted Gul's invitation for talks, but subsequently refused them after the Turkish president set unacceptable conditions. 
Gul denied that plans for a meeting ever existed, saying the information "is not true".
***
Baroness Helene Hayman, lord speaker of the British House of Lords, praised Albania's democratic transition Monday (September 20th) as she visited the parliament in Tirana. 
She said the United Kingdom wants to see Albania on its way to the EU, but cautioned that progress is needed in the rule of law and the development of democratic institutions.
***
EU Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilia Malmstrom said on Monday (September 20th) that Albania has made significant progress in meeting requirements for visa-free travel. 
"The European Commission believes that Albania has met the needed criteria," Malmstrom said after meeting with Albanian Interior Minister Lulzim Basha in Brussels. 
She stressed that a decision on EU visa liberalisation is expected this autumn from the Council of Europe and the European Parliament.
***
EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele said on Friday (September 17th) it is time for the EU to take Serbia's membership bid seriously. 
Agreeing to amend its UN resolution on Kosovo has given Serbia new momentum in the accession process, he added. 
Fuele made the comments during a visit to Belgrade.
***
British Ambassador to Pristina Andy Sparks said on Friday (September 17th) that Kosovo status will not be on the table during any future talks with Serbia. 
Sparks was speaking at a meeting with representatives of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK). 
He said Kosovo and Serbia would hold talks as independent states and their dialogue would focus on improvement of peoples' daily lives.
***
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov met with the UN mediator in the name dispute with Greece, Matthew Nimetz, in New York late on Sunday (September 19th). 
Nimetz said he has not come up with any new proposals regarding the dispute and voiced hope that it could finally be resolved through high-level dialogue. 
Nimetz met with Greek Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas on Monday.
***
Bosnia and Herzegovina Security Minister Sadik Ahmetovic and visiting Croatian Interior Minister Tomislav Karamarko signed an agreement Friday (September 17th) on police co-operation. 
The deal will strengthen co-operation between police services in their fight against cross-border and organised crime, the ministers agreed after the signing ceremony. 
Croatia signed recently a similar agreement with Serbia.
