21/01/2008
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 21/01/08
Many in Macedonia think that 2008 will be a historic year due to the challenges and opportunities the country faces in the next 12 months. 
The two key issues that will shape Macedonia's year are the outcome of the Kosovo status issue and a possible invitation for NATO membership. 
Both will influence the overall economic climate, security situation, infrastructure capacities development and financial performances development.
Kosovo
Kosovo is immediately north of Macedonia with a border that has not been demarcated. 
The lack of a defined border is an issue because some Kosovo leaders argue about the division along the Sar Planina mountain range. 
This issue could most easily be resolved if Kosovo would accept the border as one of the preconditions for possible recognition by other states.
The Kosovo status issue could have an impact on Macedonia's security and stability because western Macedonia is populated by a sizable number of citizens with Albanian ethnicity. 
Both the government and experts warn that radical groups might cause a disturbance to accelerate some processes or express impatience for Kosovo to gain independence.
NATO
Many experts view an invitation to Macedonia for NATO membership as a possible solution to the status issue. 
Such an invitation would be viewed as a guarantee of stability and inviolability of Macedonia's borders and as an affirmation of the reforms and commitments Macedonia has made in the past 12 years since joining NATO's Partnership for Peace programme.
The country has completely reformed its army, is taking part in peace missions, has completed reforms of the judiciary and police systems and many countries such as the United States, Turkey, Bulgaria and Slovenia have given support for the country's membership. 
Therefore, expectations are high that the country will receive an invitation. 
If it does not, Macedonia will face security problems, tectonic shaking of the political stage, possible early elections, decreasing interest of foreign investments, a decline in credit ratings and stagnation of the economy.
The name dispute
Macedonia's dispute with Greece about the country's name increasingly appears to be a likely obstacle to the country joining NATO. 
The impending conflict has been building since 1993, when Macedonia became a member of the UN under a reference -- the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) -- rather than its constitutional name -- the Republic of Macedonia -- due to pressure from Greece. 
During the last six months of 2007, Greece waged a strong campaign to resolve the dispute using the momentum of Macedonia's possible NATO membership.
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and President Branko Crvenkovski said that if a name change was a precondition for NATO membership, the country would retain its name. 
The country is prepared, however, to be admitted to NATO under its reference of FYROM.
Macedonia recognizes that more than 110 countries, including three permanent members of the UN Security Council -- United States, Russia and China, have already recognized Macedonia under its constitutional name. 
The government hopes this number will increase, so Greece's objections will become moot.
Progress regarding the name dispute is not likely to be made in 2008, especially if NATO extends an admission invitation for Macedonia using its reference name. 
If NATO does this, Greece will likely veto the invitation or the Greek parliament will not ratify the membership. 
This would lead NATO and the EU to increase pressure on Macedonia and Greece for one of them to give in.
EU
Macedonia is expecting to finally start negotiations for EU membership this year. 
French Minister of State responsible for European Affairs Jean-Pierre Jouyet said in an interview in the January 8th Financial Times that France no longer has anything against the enlargement and views a bigger EU as a stronger force in the world.
Between France's new position and Slovenia's commitment -- as the holder of the EU presidency -- to enable Balkan countries to join the EU, Macedonia is justified in expecting the start of negotiations by late 2008. 
Of course, further reforms in administration and strengthening of the economy should be made by then.
Possible early elections
With an invitation for membership and a nearly certain start of EU negotiations on the horizon, Gruevski will be encouraged to call early parliamentary elections in order to ensure four new years in office. 
The VMRO-DPMNE currently has high ratings and if they are supported with NATO membership they will likely win the elections.
Economy
Macedonia is expected to experience record economic growth in 2008. 
The GDP growth is estimated to be 6.5%, an increase of 2% year-on-year. 
If this growth occurs, it will be a huge leap for Macedonia, in particular because inflation is at 2.5 to 3%.
With a high GDP and low inflation, as well as a record budget of more than 2.2 billion euros, the government will be able to make significant capital and public investments this year. 
The loosening of control by the World Bank and the IMF will allow the government to invest more freely.
Public investments in road infrastructure, free economic zones, construction of sports halls and grounds, education, health, police and customs are expected in 2008. 
Employment rates are expected to increase by 4% and productivity is also expected to increase by 4 to 5%.
Corridors 8 and 10
Pan-European Transport Corridors were planned to make the exchange of goods, people, oil and other energy supplies easier between the EU, Balkan states and the states of central Asia. 
The Corridor 8 and 10 projects are expected to help stabilise the troubled Balkans region. 
Therefore, construction of the Corridor 8 (East to West) and Corridor 10 (North to South) will be particularly important.
An international agreement has been signed for the highways and construction of Corridor 8 will start in late 2008 or early 2009. 
In the spring of next year, construction of Corridor 10 will begin.
Foreign Direct Investments
Increased Foreign Direct Investments are expected in 2008, especially in the micro area. 
This projection is partly based on the government's announcement that they may pass a law under which foreign nationals will be able to buy land in Macedonia.
If the law is passed, it will strengthen the market and construction industry, as well as increase the capital and service demand. 
Agriculture will also increase because Macedonia is starting to use money from the EU's Instrument for Pre-Accession and because the government announced subsidiaries of up to 45m euros.
The government is also expecting more Greenfield investments, a unique public/private partnership and concession granting offer opportunities. 
Most industries in Macedonia have already been privatized, so the only large input would come from the telecommunications or the energy sector. 
Investments in banking are also possible.
In all, Macedonia seems to be looking forward to a successful year. 
Nevertheless, the two significant factors -- NATO and Kosovo -- will determine many development directions.
