19/07/2010
Albania hopes to become a leading internet provider for the region in the near future, State Minister Genc Pollo said on Wednesday (July 14th).
The statement came after the inauguration of a new fibre-optic cable coming from Italy.
Initially, it will provide up to 30MB of internet to Albanians at an affordable price.
Croatian mathematicians won two silver and three bronze medals at the 51st International Mathematical Olympiad, held through Wednesday (July 14th) in Astana, Kazakhstan.
A student from China won the competition.
The next Olympiad will be held in The Netherlands.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic inaugurated on July 11th a new oncology and radiotherapy clinic at the Clinical Centre in Podgorica.
State-of-the-art equipment is on site at the 12m-euro clinic.
A team of Bulgarian archaeologists has resumed excavations at a unique Thracian-era site discovered on the Sredna Gora mountain five years ago.
Archaeologists are describing the area as the Bulgarian Machu Picchu.
It consists of a fortress, a sanctuary, a road and a residence.
Serbian Science and Technological Development Minister Bozidar Djelic and his Austrian counterpart, Beatrix Karl, signed an agreement on scientific and technological co-operation Tuesday (July 13th) in Vienna.
While in Austria, Djelic visited several major scientific institutions including the Biomedical Campus, the Institute for Molecular Biotechnology and the Institute of Science and Technology.
Serbian students from the Technical University in Zrenjanin took second place in Software Design at the Imagine Cup 2010 competition.
About 400 participants from 70 countries have reached the final of the competition.
This year's Imagine Cup was held in Warsaw, Poland last week.
A growing number of Greek taxpayers are using the internet to file their tax statements, the foreign ministry announced on Tuesday (July 13th).
According to the data, the number of electronically submitted tax statements jumped by 57% since the beginning of this year compared to a year ago, reaching 1,954,006.
A Byzantine church, believed to have been built around 900 years ago, has been discovered in the ancient town of Mira in Turkey's Antalya province.
The ancient building was found during archaeological excavations.
(Various sources -- 12/07/10-19/07/10)
