19/10/2010
UN war crimes tribunal (ICTY) chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz was in Sarajevo Monday (October 18th) for talks about the country's co-operation with the court.
Brammertz also met with victims of the 1992-1995 conflict.
Brammertz will also visit Croatia for meetings with government and judicial officials.
Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman and Greek counterpart Dimitris Droutsas signed a civil aviation agreement Monday (October 18th) in Jerusalem.
The agreement -- the first deal between the countries since 1952 -- covers a wide-range of issues, including the licensing of air carriers to offer more flights.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and Kuwaiti counterpart Sheikh Mohammad al-Sabah met in Kuwait City on Sunday (October 17th) to discuss ways to boost bilateral economic and political ties.
Davutoglu said an agreement was reached to set up working teams on economic and cultural co-operation, including in the fields of transport, education and health.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic was in Finland on Monday (October 18th), where he met with counterpart Alexander Stubb.
They discussed bilateral relations, Serbia's EU bid and regional issues.
The visit comes ahead of a meeting of the Council of the EU later this month that is expected to discuss Serbia's EU membership application.
A two-day regional conference on fighting corruption opened on Friday (October 15th) in Ohrid.
The event was organised within Macedonia's chairmanship of the Council of Europe's (CoE) Committee of Ministers.
The event brought together more than 150 representatives of the 47 CoE member states who discussed three key aspects of fighting corruption - confiscation and restitution of property, transparency and integrity of public administration and financing of political parties.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic voiced hope on Friday (October 15th) that the European Commission's opinion on Montenegro's readiness to acquire EU candidate status due in November will be positive and that the country will get also a recommendation to start EU accession talks.
Djukanovic was speaking to journalists after meeting with Charles Tannock, European Parliament rapporteur on Montenegro.
Tannock said Podgorica has made progress but says more efforts are needed in terms of the rule of law.
Montenegrin Defence Minister Boro Vucinic and Bosnian counterpart Selmo Cikotic signed an agreement Thursday (October 14th) on co-operation in the defence sector.
The deal is aimed at boosting regional stability.
European Parliament (EP) Rapporteur on visa liberalisation for the Western Balkans Tanja Fajon congratulated Albanian Foreign Minister Edmond Haxhinasto on Thursday (October 14th) for the work done to merit visa liberalisation.
Haxhinasto said the government is running a public awareness campaign on the benefits and restrictions of visa-free travel.
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina are now waiting only for the Council of the EU to approve the lifting of the visa regime, a decision expected in November.
(Various sources -- 12/10/10-19/10/10)
