20/10/2010
The 50th international theatre festival (MESS) opened on Sunday (October 17th) in Sarajevo under the motto "forever young".
Kicking it off at the National Theatre was the modern play "Life with an Idiot".
Over the next two weeks, the festival expects to welcome 600 guests from 14 countries and offer over 50 plays and other programmes.
A world conference on culture and dialogue among civilisations is taking place from Tuesday (October 19th) through Thursday in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
More than 400 intellectuals from all over the world, famous artists and several ministers of culture, as well as Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa, are attending the event in Sarajevo.
The pilot Albanian edition of a global format aimed at finding top new entertainers kicked-off in Tirana on Friday (October 15th).
"Albanians Got Talent" is hosted by Top Channel.
Albanians from Albania, Kosovo and Montenegro will undergo a selection process of ten rounds before the winner gets the top prize of 20,000 euros.
Kosovo's Ferizaj/Urosevac Theatre is hosting its 40th festival through Friday (October 22nd).
Troupes from Kosovo, Albania, Macedonia and Serbia are participating in the week-long event.
Serbian tennis player Ana Ivanovic won her first title in two years after defeating Switzerland's Patty Schnyder, 6-1, 6-2, in the Generali Ladies tennis final in Linz, Austria.
This was Ivanovic's ninth career victory.
The win moves her to 26th in the WTA rankings.
The movie "Cirkus Columbia" by Oscar-winning Bosnian director Danis Tanovic has won the best film prize in the International Feature Competition at the Antalya Golden Orange Film Festival.
The co-winner was "Dooman River", directed by Lu Zhang.
Cyprus hosted the fifth edition of the Cyprus International Film Festival last week.
The event brought together participants from 85 countries worldwide.
Bulgarian racing pilot Todor Dunev won the European drift title with his Nissan 200 car.
Dunev won the King of Europe drift competitions in Serbia, Andora and Hungary.
(Various sources -- 13/10/10-20/10/10)
