15/06/2010
Co-operation between Bulgaria and Italy is excellent, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said on Sunday (June 13th) during a visit to Sofia. 
Berlusconi inaugurated a monument of Italian national hero Giuseppe Garibaldi at a ceremony with Bulgarian counterpart Boyko Borisov. 
Berlusconi praised bilateral economic, cultural and political relations, and Borisov said he hopes relations continue to develop.
***
A meeting of foreign ministers from the Central European Initiative (CEI) member countries was held Tuesday (June 15th) in Budva, Montenegro. 
Top diplomats from Montenegro, Italy, Serbia, Albania, Slovakia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia discussed regional co-operation and EU integration. 
Montenegro took over the one-year presidency of the CEI in January.
***
Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme reassured Montenegrin counterpart Milo Djukanovic of his country's support for Montenegro's EU bid on Wednesday (June 9th). 
Belgium -- which takes over the rotating EU presidency in July -- plans to encourage the European Commission to give a positive report on Podgorica's membership application, Leterme said. 
Djukanovic also met with EU President Herman Van Rompuy, who said that Montenegro needs to implement judicial reform and boost its fight against corruption and organised crime.
***
Bulgarian Interior Minister Tsvetan Tsvetanov and Greek counterpart Mihalis Chrysohoidis signed an agreement Wednesday (June 9th) that envisions co-operation between their ministries. 
Tsvetanov praised the document, saying co-operation with neighbours is essential. 
The two also discussed human and drug trafficking and skimming equipment.
***
Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou met with Libyan counterpart Baghdadi Mahmudi and Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi in Tripoli on Wednesday (June 9th) to discuss ways to strengthen bilateral relations. 
Tripoli is "ready to co-operate with Greece on green energy, power generation and tourism, as well as increase Libyan investments in Greece", Papandreou said after the meeting. 
The officials also discussed the Palestinian issue and the ongoing reunification talks in Cyprus.
(Various sources -- 08/06/10-15/06/10)
