15/09/2010
Croatia's water polo team won its first European title, defeating Italy 7-3 on Saturday (September 11th) in the European Championship men's final in Zagreb.
The Serbian team, which defeated Hungary 10-8, took home the bronze.
Serbia's oldest cultural event, the Vukov Sabor, opened on Monday (September 13th).
The seven-day programme features events in the village of Trsic, Serbian linguist Vuk Karadzic's birthplace, Belgrade and the municipality of Loznica.
This year's event is being held amid festivities marking the 100th anniversary of prominent writer Mesa Selimovic's birth.
Serbian tennis star Novak Djokovic lost to Spain's Rafael Nadal in the US Open final on Monday (September 13th) in New York.
Nadal's 6-4, 5-7, 6-4, 6-2 win was his first US Open title, which completed his set of Grand Slam titles.
Turkey won silver at the 2010 World Basketball Championship in a final match against the United States on Sunday (September 12th) in Istanbul.
The Turkish team defeated Serbia in the semifinals.
The Tirana Opera and Ballet house will open the new season with "The Tales of Hoffmann" on October 1st, the institution announced on Sunday (September 12th).
Albanian soprano Inva Mula will lead the way at the premiere.
Turkish director Seren Yuce won the Lion of the Future award at the annual Venice Film Festival, which ended on September 11th.
The award, honouring a director's debut, was awarded to Yuce for his film "Cogunluk" (Majority).
Romanian King Michael I awarded athlete Iolanda Balas-Soter, tennis player Ilie Nastase, canoeist Ivan Patzaichin and sports commentator Cristian Topecsu with the "Nihil Sine Deo" decoration on Monday (September 13th).
The four were honoured for their outstanding service to Romanian sports.
Bulgaria won three gold medals at the 2010 World Wrestling Championship, held in Moscow through Sunday (September 12th).
Mihail Ganev won the gold in the 84kg men's category.
Hristo Marinov won the 84kg Greco-Roman wrestling contest, while Stanka Zlateva took the 72kg category in the women's contest.
(Various sources -- 07/09/10-15/09/10)
