13/09/2010
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov inaugurated the 14th European Conference of Power Electronics and Motion Control in Ohrid. 
The three-day event, which ended on Wednesday (September 8th), brought together 500 scientists, professors, students and businessmen from 50 countries. 
Participants discussed co-ordination of the exchange and the publication of technical, scientific and economic information.
***
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Science Bozidar Djelic opened the international mathematics conference at the Serbian Academy of Arts and Science in Belgrade. 
The conference, which brought together 60 students from over 20 countries, ends on Monday (September 13th).
***
Cypriot researchers have created an unmanned aircraft that can withstand severe weather conditions by changing its shape. 
The project, developed by Cyprus's GG Dedalos Technologies and the Israel Computational Fluid Dynamics Centre, aims to build a small affordable unmanned plane that can be used in remote locations at minimum risk and can be guided from the ground.
***
About 100 doctors of Serbian origin working in hospitals abroad gathered in Belgrade last week for the first Serbian Diaspora medical conference. 
The aim was to improve co-operation between local doctors and medical experts from the diaspora with the institutions responsible for the quality of Serbia's health care system. 
According to estimates, about 14,000 doctors have left Serbia to find work in other countries.
***
Kosovo's Public Administration Ministry has launched an e-employment website for all public vacancies at the central and local levels. 
The project is part of the E-Governance process. 
It aims to offer equal employment rights to all citizens.
***
Turkey has invested 60m euros in EU science projects and has been a partner in major scientific research worth nearly 900m euros in the past three years, EU Framework Programmes Co-ordinator Okan Kara told the Anadolu news agency on Tuesday (September 7th). 
The projects have given Turkey access to major data generated in other countries, Kara added.
(Various sources -- 06/09/10-13/09/10)
