12/10/2010
European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek kicked off a three-day visit to Cyprus on Sunday (October 10th) in a bid to boost efforts to find a solution to the longstanding Cyprus dispute.
Buzek met with President Demetris Christofias and other senior officials.
He also travelled to the Turkish part of the divided island to hold talks with Turkish Cypriot leader Dervis Eroglu.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele is expected to pay a visit to Cyprus on Wednesday.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel was in Bulgaria on Monday (October 11th), where she met with Prime Minister Boyko Borisov to discuss a series of issues of common interest, including Bulgaria's entry to the Schengen zone.
The chancellor also met with President Georgi Parvanov.
Merkel travelled to Bucharest on Tuesday.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan was in Syria on Monday (October 11th) for talks on security issues and regional co-operation against the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).
On Tuesday, Erdogan travelled to flood-hit Pakistan.
Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor and Montenegrin counterpart Milo Djukanovic met in Ljubljana on Friday (October 8th), where they praised the level of bilateral economic and political relations and reiterated their support for the EU integration of the western Balkans.
Djukanovic said his country expects to receive EU candidate status in November.
Pahor said "enlargement will bring benefits not only to the southeastern Europe countries but also to the EU."
German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan agreed on Saturday (October 9th) in Berlin that more efforts are needed to improve the integration of the 2.5 million-strong Turkish minority in Germany.
"There are clear problems still that we want to solve when it comes to integration," Merkel noted, adding that Ankara demonstrates "a large desire to help as much as it can and to stand by our side in a constructive manner".
Turkey and China signed eight agreements Friday (October 8th) to boost bilateral trade and co-operation in infrastructure projects, transport and cultural exchange.
Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, on the last leg of a European tour that included stops in Greece, Belgium and Italy, met with Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Ankara.
Erdogan described bilateral co-operation on international issues as "exemplary", while Wen reiterated that China recognises Ankara's growing regional and global power.
Pope Benedict XVI met with Croatian President Ivo Josipovic in the Vatican on Saturday (October 9th) to discuss a series of issues of common interest.
The Pope promised support for Croatia's bid to join the EU.
The two officials also talked about the importance of maintaining the "Christian identity" of predominantly Roman Catholic Croatia.
Other topics on the agenda were the situation of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the return of refugees.
Croatia's chief EU negotiator, Vladimir Drobnjak, says the country should focus on its efforts to close six of the 11 remaining open chapters of its EU negotiations.
His comments followed a meeting with EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele in Brussels on Thursday (October 7th).
He said talks with the Union are "on a good path" and are approaching completion.
(Various sources -- 5/10/10-12/10/10)
