10/09/2010
The Greek economy shrank by 1.8% in the second quarter of the year, the Athens-based Hellenic Statistical Institute announced on Wednesday (September 8th).
The trend is worse than had been suggested by the preliminary forecasts, which anticipated a contraction of 1.5%.
In the first quarter, the Greek economy shrank by 0.8%.
The Union of Turkish Chambers and Commodity Exchanges and the Federation of Egyptian Chambers of Commerce signed an agreement on September 4th to set up a joint trade chamber aimed at boosting business relations.
Trade volume between the two countries exceeded $3 billion last year.
The European Commission (EC) and the German government donated 17m euros to the municipality of Pristina for rehabilitating and increasing the capacity of its water supply system.
The donation, received on Tuesday (September 7th), will be used to extend the system to reach new neighbourhoods, created after 1999.
Albanian Central Bank Governor Ardian Fullani said on Wednesday (September 8th) that Western Balkan countries should build new exports-based economy growth models that are complementary, not competitive.
Speaking at a meeting of local banks' representatives and Oxford University researchers in Tirana, Fullani said the institution he heads is determined to help Albania on its road to meeting EU standards.
Serbian Infrastructure Minister Milutin Mrkonjic and Subotica Mayor Sasa Vucinic signed an agreement Sunday (September 5th) on the financing of industrial zones in the northern Serbian town.
The two-year agreement is worth 944,000 euros.
The funds are to be used to build the necessary infrastructure in various zones.
Serbian President Boris Tadic and Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik inaugurated a new bridge on the Sava River near Sremska Raca on Monday (September 6th).
Construction started three years ago.
The project is worth 13m euros.
The IMF urged Turkey on Wednesday (September 8th) to pass legislation on a proposed fiscal rule without any further delay, saying it would improve transparency and fiscal management.
The rule was proposed by Economy Minister Ali Babacan as a substitute for an IMF stand-by anchor and a means to bring down budget deficits and the public debt/GDP ratio.
It was recently deferred amid concerns voiced by some ministers ahead of general elections next year.
Switzerland will provide 58.3m euros in aid to Bulgaria to boost infrastructure, development of the private sector, human resources, security, stability and reforms, the government announced on Tuesday (September 7th).
The first projects are expected to be launched in December.
(Various sources -- 03/09/10-10/09/10)
