14/01/2008
By Sami Neza for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 14/01/08
The Albanian government has embraced an anti-corruption strategy that will be implemented through 2013 to fight rampant corruption.
The problem in the country is so pervasive, the latest European Commission report on Albania describes it as a social phenomenon.
The strategy provides a legal framework, a plan for progressive and sustainable reduction of corruption and increased transparency.
Ending corruption is one of the most important conditions for Albania to receive an invitation to join NATO during the Alliance's meeting in Bucharest this spring.
The government has addressed corruption via other means, as well, such as by hosting a regional conference on implementing the UN Convention against Corruption and aligning its criminal code with the Council of Europe Criminal Law Convention on Corruption.
Additionally, in the recent re-organisation of the police, the structures dealing with economic and financial crime were upgraded to the directorate level and a special anti-corruption section was established.
Officials are also speaking out about corrupt practices.
President Bamir Topi shocked the public when he declared on December 4th 2007 that Albanian officials think "day and night" about how to steal from the true land owners.
"Even at this moment, I assure you that somewhere property is being stolen.
I assure you that somewhere an administration official has started the day thinking that he is going to get something, that he is going to bargain on something", said Topi.
He added, "It seems like we are saying terrible things about the state, but in fact these practices have become so familiar that no one can declare them to be untrue".
Despite anti-corruption measures and strong statements, corruption indicators in the country remain high.
Corrupt officials are being discovered, however, and held accountable for their actions.
In the last 6 months, 40 officials were arrested for corruption, many due to the advent of e-procurement, which has enabled all parties to see the parameters considered during the tender process.
Many of the corruption cases are related to the increase in land prices and the construction boom in areas of Albania.
In the last three years, for example, Kashari -- a village near Tirana -- has undergone a lot of construction and land prices have increased threefold.
The increase in prices has led to land theft through falsified documentation in co-operation with state officials.
Eight Kashari officials -- including three city councilmen -- appeared in a Tirana court on December 4th.
The officials are accused of using corrupt practices to appropriate approximately 16 hectares of land, which are worth a total value of 16m euros.
Charges of corruption have also occurred at higher levels of government.
After two years of weathering accusations of corruption, General-Prosecutor Theodhori Sollaku was dismissed by the president on November 22nd 2007.
Although no charges were filed, Topi said Sollaku had not done enough to fight corruption and organized crime, especially among the wealthy.
Sollaku was replaced by a former judge in the Appeals Court of Serious Crimes, Ina Rama.
Rama was chosen in part because she does not have any political or business ties in Albania, which will facilitate her work fighting corruption in the highest levels of the administration and public institutions.
Ministry of Labour Secretary-General Spartak Gjini and a construction company owner were arrested on November 7th 2007 on charges of bribery, related to a tender worth a million euros.
In another government sector, Justice Minister Ilir Rusmajli tendered his resignation in November following allegations of corruption in the country's prison service by Prison Director Saimir Shehri.
"Corruption is a difficult phenomenon in Albania, but it is not the only state where we have corruption.
We have asked the Albanian government to provide data about corruption cases and the results of pertinent court cases," General-Directorate for Enlargement at the European Commission head Dirk Lange said.
Although the government is working toward ending corruption, changes still need to be made, including strengthening procedures and training for the police and the prosecutor on seizure of assets and improving training on corruption for tax authorities, private accountants and auditors.
