27/12/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 27/12/04
As he prepares to complete his mandate, the international governor of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina (CBBH), Peter Nicholl, is optimistic about the country's economic future.
"I believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has a reasonably positive story to tell, particularly in regard to the banking sector," he said during a speech at the opening of the Sarajevo Graduate School of Business. 
"You need to remember that BiH is going through three difficult transitions at the same time: from war to peace, from socialism to a market economy, and from being a part of a larger country to establishing its own democratic and administrative institutions."
Nicholl, an economist from New Zealand who was appointed as CBBH governor by the IMF seven years ago, will conclude his second term in the post at the end of this year. 
The next governor will be a native citizen of BiH -- Kemal Kozaric, one of the current vice governors. 
During his speech, Nicholl highlighted the major changes that have brought improvements to the BiH banking sector during last several years.
The Economic Outlook
Two factors make it difficult to forecast the economic outlook in BiH with precision, Nicholls said. 
The first is that BiH is going through many transitions simultaneously; as a result, economic numbers can move through very large ranges. 
Second, economic improvement depends greatly on acceleration of economic, regulatory and legal reform processes.
"Forecasts based on the status quo as compared to those based on an accelerated reform path will be very different," said Nicholl. 
"In fact, unless the regulatory, legal and tax systems are changed, and changed quickly and substantially, BiH will have a very difficult future."
According to Nicholl, the attention of BiH politicians and international consultants should be directed towards improving the environment for private investment -- both local and foreign -- which remains too complicated, despite improvements. 
Many important initiatives require further action, including the establishment of a single indirect tax authority, a proposal to simplify company registration, and the establishment of special commercial courts.
"I am an optimist and believe that we will see a combination of continued macroeconomic stability and accelerated microeconomic and legal reform. 
On this basis, I would expect inflation to remain stable at around current levels of one to two per cent, economic growth rates to be at least six to seven per cent per annum in nominal terms [five per cent real] and the balance of payments situation to gradually improve," Nicholl said.
The Commercial Banking Sector
A number of foreign banks have commenced operations in BiH, particularly in the last three years. 
As a result, depositors have been given more choices, while local banks have been obliged to improve the range and quality of the services they provide.
"These two trends, foreign entry and privatisation, have led to a substantial shift in ownership in the BiH banking sector toward private ownership and, in particular, foreign private ownership," said Nicholl. 
While bank privatisation is now complete in the RS, it continues to be relatively slow in FBiH, he added.
Minimum capital requirements have been substantially increased through a series of steps, from an initial 2.5m KM to 15m KM in 2003. 
This has forced banks to merge or find strategic partners and -- together with increased competition -- has resulted in a sharp reduction in the number of banks in BiH. 
In 1997, there were 76 registered banks in BiH, but most of them were extremely small. 
At present there are 33 registered banks, with the largest 10 banks holding around 85 per cent of the system's deposits.
"I expect the number of registered banks to be reduced further over the next year, as consolidation of the BiH banking system continues," Nicholl said.
In 2001, it became possible for a bank registered in one of the two entities -- the Federation of BiH (FBiH) and the Republika Srpska (RS) -- to operate branches in other entity. 
At least 13 banks, including most of the larger ones, are already doing so and more will follow. 
In the banking sector, Nicholls observed, it is possible to say that BiH now has a single economic space.
The Payment System
Following a decision of the CBBH Currency Board, headed by Nicholl, the cash payment system was unified in 1997 with the BiH currency, the Convertible Mark (KM). 
In the past, the KM was tied to the Deutschmark (DM) at a fixed rate of 1KM=1DM. 
The KM is now tied to the euro at the same rate the DM used to be: 1 euro=1.95583 KM. 
In the non-cash payment area, the old state-owned, centralised monopoly was abolished in early 2001. 
It has been replaced with a modern, European-type system consisting of two clearinghouses, owned and operated by the Central Bank. 
Payments are being conducted by the commercial banks.
"The suppliers we used put similar systems in place in nine other European countries. 
But it was done more quickly in BiH than anywhere else, showing that it is possible to implement large technical projects in BiH successfully. 
It has been operating smoothly and effectively since January 2001," Nicholl said.
Financial Markets Development
The governor also discussed the deposit insurance scheme that started in 2001, noting that it covers deposits in approved banks up to 5,000 KM. 
This, he said, is helping build citizen confidence in the banks that qualify. 
Initially, two deposit agencies were established, one in each entity. 
But in 2002, they were merged into a state Deposit Insurance Agency (DIA). 
At present, 21 banks have met the standards required to be a member of the DIA. 
But all banks will need to meet these standards soon or face the risk of losing their banking license.
In addition, two stock exchanges have been established -- at Sarajevo and Banja Luka -- but both are very small. 
Discussions are being held with the aim of moving towards some form of regional stock exchange. 
In Nicholl's view, this is the only feasible option for BiH and for most other countries in the region.
