10/05/2010
Serbia is a leader in the region with over 2 million accounts on Facebook, according to a study published by AdriaTalk.com.
Croatia is second with 1.2 million users, followed by Bosnia and Herzegovina with 775,000.
Macedonia counts 692,000 Facebook users, Slovenia 568,000 and Montenegro 160,000.
The study shows that more than a half of Facebook accounts in these countries belong to men, and the majority of users are between 18 and 34.
USAID is investing $3m in the renovation of schools across Macedonia.
The agency is also working to increase access and the use of IT, and to enhance math and science education in Macedonian schools.
The environmental group World Wildlife Fund launched a fundraising campaign Thursday (May 6th) to save bears in Romania.
The organisation urged Romanian citizens to redirect 2% of their income tax to the campaign.
The country is home to 6,500 bears, or 60% of Europe's total bear population, but their habitat is threatened by deforestation.
Croatia's State Secretary for e-Croatia, Igor Lucic, opened a Microsoft innovation centre in Split on Wednesday (May 5th).
Split is the second Croatian town to host such a centre after Varazdin.
Nearly three dozen experts from 18 countries participated in the third nephrologists' congress of Bosnia and Herzegovina on Wednesday (May 5th) to Saturday in Sarajevo.
The forum presented 92 scientific works by different authors.
Serbia and Germany have agreed to sign an interstate agreement on scientific co-operation, Serbian Minister of Science and Technological Development Bozidar Djelic announced after meeting with German Education Minister Annette Schavan in Berlin on Tuesday (May 4th).
The German scientific institution Fraunhofer-Institut will open offices in Serbia, Djelic said.
Serbia has already signed similar agreements with China and the United States.
Albania's Electronic and Postal Communications Authority (AKEP) granted authorisation for the use of frequency for the third generation (3G) services this week.
The 3G services will be an important step not only for the development of the local telecommunications market, but also for the country's economic development, AKEP said.
Macedonia's Education Ministry will provide about 70,000 euros in co-financing for seven joint scientific and technological projects with Croatia, as part of a science and technology programme.
Implementation of these projects will start this year, Macedonian Education Minister Nikola Todorov said on May 2nd.
Cypriot women have the lowest mortality rate on earth, according to a new study published by The Lancet medical journal on April 30th.
The results show that only 38 out of 1,000 women die before they turn 60 in Cyprus, the lowest rate worldwide.
(Various sources -- 03/05/10-10/05/10)
