07/06/2010
Albania's public procurement system has improved in terms of transparency, accountability and responsiveness, a UN recent report concludes.
According to the UN's Public Administration Network, Albania is the first country in the world to implement electronic procurement for all public sector projects worth more than 3,000 euros.
This has helped the country fight high-level corruption, the report says.
Serbian female scientists will receive 5,000-euro scholarships, according to an agreement signed by Science Minister Bozidar Djelic and representatives of L'Oreal Balkans and the National Commission for UNESCO on Thursday (June 3rd).
The minister urged all female scientists under the age of 35 to apply for the scholarship by September 1st.
About half of Serbian scientists are women, Djelic said, noting this is one of the highest rates in Europe and the world.
Remains of Roman baths have been discovered during construction of a sports hall in the western Macedonian town of Makedonski Brod, local media reported on Thursday (June 3rd).
According to the preliminary assessment, the findings date back to 3rd or 4th century AD, archaeologists said.
Health Minister Bujar Osmani opened the 4th Macedonian Congress of Cardiology in the town of Ohrid on Thursday (June 3rd).
The Acute Coronary Syndrome is the main topic of the three-day forum that brought together around 800 cardiologists and experts from Macedonia, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Bulgaria, Kosovo, Turkey, Germany, Austria, Greece and other countries.
Taiwanese technology giant Foxconn plans to establish a desktop PC production plant in Turkey, in a joint project with Hewlett-Packard.
The investment is valued at $60m and is expected to create 2,000 jobs.
Turkey plans to soon add its name to the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime through legislation that would allow it to benefit from international co-operation in the field, Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim announced on Wednesday (June 2nd).
The convention, signed by 43 countries, has been in force since July 1st 2004.
By the end of August, all courts in Serbia will be linked through a programme that would enable members of the public to track their cases via the internet, Justice Minister Snezana Malovic announced on Wednesday (June 2nd).
Thus, she added, people will no longer have to go to court to inquire about developments in their proceedings.
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic and Europol Director Rob Wainwright signed a roadmap for an operational co-operation agreement at The Hague on May 28th.
The agreement calls for establishing secure communication links and an interconnected computer network.
This is an important step forward for crime prevention, Dacic said.
The website of Turkish company Dogan Holding received the "Best in Class" award in the "investor relations" domain of the International Interactive Media Awards (IMA) on May 27th.
The competition, held annually since 2004, aims to distinguish the best performers in terms of design, innovation and development.
(Various sources -- 31/05/10-07/06/10)
