08/06/2010
Pope Benedict XVI paid a three-day visit to Cyprus that started on Friday (June 4th).
He expressed hope that differences could be settled, saying that during his visit he witnessed the "sad division" of the island.
President Demetris Christofias met with Benedict on Saturday and urged the international community to press Turkey to lift its occupation of the northern part of the island.
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor met with the members of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) tripartite presidency on Saturday (June 5th) to discuss bilateral relations and regional issues.
Kosor voiced Zagreb's support for BiH's Euro-Atlantic bid.
She announced that a joint meeting of the Croatian government and the BiH Council of Ministers will be held by the end of June, describing it as an opportunity to discuss open issues and to try to resolve some of them.
Croatia is at the EU's door and the accession process should be completed by the end of this year or early in 2011, Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos, whose country holds the EU rotating presidency, said on Wednesday (June 2nd).
Croatia will open all remaining negotiating chapters during Spain's term and will wrap up the technical part of the talks by the end of the year, Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor said after meeting with Moratinos.
He arrived in Zagreb from Bosnia and Herzegovina, where he participated in a high-level EU-Western Balkans meeting.
Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili met with his Romanian counterpart Traian Basescu on Wednesday (June 2nd) in Bucharest.
They discussed security issues in the Black Sea region.
As part of his two-day visit, Saakashvili also met with Prime Minister Emil Boc and other political and religious officials.
Croatian Defence Minister Branko Vukelic and Serbian counterpart Dragan Sutanovac will sign an agreement Tuesday (June 8th) in Zagreb on bilateral defence co-operation.
Sutanovac met with President Ivo Josipovic on Monday.
(Various sources -- 01/06/10-08/06/10)
