06/08/2010
Croatian oil company INA has taken Serbia to court, demanding it either return ownership of 167 gas stations or pay 117m euros in compensation.
The company is also seeking an additional 90m euros in compensation for lost profits.
The stations were sold to Russia's Lukoil after the break-up of the former Yugoslavia.
Kosovo's Tax Administration has decided to abolish VAT for the gambling sector, media in Tirana reported Thursday (August 5th).
According to the authorities, imposing a flat tariff for the sector would help to collect the taxes and strengthen the sector control.
Albania's exported 209,700 tonnes of production in July, amounting to 25,000 more compared to the same period last year.
A total export showed 23m euros increase in value.
The Bulgarian cabinet gave a ten-year concession to British energy company Melrose Resources Wednesday (August 4th) for the exploitation of a 4.36 square km natural gas field in the Black Sea.
The deposit holds 773 million cubic metres of natural gas.
This brings the total in the three fields, discovered by Melrose in Bulgaria, to over 3 billion cubic metres.
Serbia will negotiate the gradual unfreezing of public wages and pensions with the IMF, Economy Minister Mladjan Dinkic announced Tuesday (August 3rd).
The key factor to revive the economy from the crisis is the consumption stimulation, which will be a direct effect of the rise in public wages and pensions, he said, adding that the government plans 8% rise by the end of this year.
The IMF, however, insists that public wages and pensions should stay frozen until the economy picks up.
An IMF mission will arrive in Belgrade for the fifth review of the 2.9 billion euro stand-by agreement with Serbia on August 19th.
Turkey, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon have established a Close Neighbours Economic and Trade Partnership Council (CNETAC) as the first step towards establishing a free trade zone.
The four countries have agreed to strengthen existing co-operation, develop long-term strategic partnership and solidarity, and further boost economic integration, Turkish Trade Minister Zafer Caglayan said Sunday (August 1st).
Spanish companies HG hotels, Sol Melia and investment fund Sigma Capital will invest 50-60m euros in building a hotel complex in Stara Planina Mountain, Serbia.
Serbian Economy Minister Mladan Dinkic signed the contract with the three companies on July 30th.
The contract envisages the building of three four stars hotels with a total capacity of 450 beds by the end of 2011.
(Various sources -- 30/07/10-06/08/10)
