07/09/2010
Turkish President Abdullah Gul paid a two-day visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina starting on Thursday (September 2nd). 
He was accompanied by a delegation of ministers, parliamentary members and businessmen. 
Gul, the first Turkish head of state to visit BiH in the last four years, met with members of the country's tripartite presidency, Prime Minister Nikola Spiric, parliamentary deputies, and High Representative Valentin Inzko.
***
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic and Croatian counterpart Tomislav Karamarko spoke on Monday (September 6th) via a secured video link aimed at stepping up police co-operation between the two countries. 
Dacic said that establishing the link is the first phase of a project for a regional centre to exchange operational information. 
In all, three video links will be established: one between the interior ministers, one connecting police directors, and one among crime police in the two countries. 
Dacic and Karamarko praised the level of co-operation between their respective police services in fighting organised crime.
***
A US congressional delegation led by Rep. 
Bill Delahunt (D-MA) visited Montenegro on September 1st, meeting with President Filip Vujanovic, Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, Foreign Minister Milan Rocen, and Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic. 
Delahunt, who chairs the House Foreign Affairs Committee's subcommittee on Europe, said Montenegro has made significant improvements on the road to EU and NATO membership.
***
Representatives of Republika Srpska (RS) and Serbia agreed on Sunday (September 5th) that Banja Luka and Belgrade have identical views regarding the most important political issues in the region. 
"It is in Serbia's vital interest to co-operate with RS," visiting Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic said, calling for strengthened economic ties.
***
Honduras has recognised Kosovo as an independent state, becoming the 70th country to do so. 
Officials in Pristina announced the recognition on Friday (September 3rd). 
On Monday, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said he received confirmation from authorities in Doha that Qatar will recognise Kosovo's independence.
(Various sources -- 01/09/10-07/09/10)
