06/04/2010
Hungarian President Laszlo Solyom will meet his Serbian and Croatian counterparts Boris Tadic and Ivo Josipovic on April 16th in the Hungarian town of Pecs, Solyom's cabinet announced March 30th.
The leaders will discuss regional co-operation.
Last week, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic discussed the Danube strategy, energy issues and transportation with Hungarian and Croatian counterparts Peter Balasz and Gordan Jandrokovic.
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha on Monday (April 5th) proposed an electronic voting system for his country.
After meeting his Estonian counterpart Andrus Ansip in Tirana, Berisha referred to the Estonian electoral system as one of accuracy and precision.
Ansip urged officials in Tirana to continue reforms and voiced his country's support for the visa liberalisation of Albania with EU.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan was in Sarajevo Monday (April 5th) to attend a forum organised by the Bosniak Institute.
In his speech at the event, he backed BiH's efforts to be included in the EU visa liberalisation process, and also stressed the importance of preserving the country's territorial integrity.
(Dnevni Avaz, Fena, Dnevnik.ba, Anadolu news agency - 05/04/10)
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu appointed several new ambassadors Monday (April 5th).
They include Kerim Uras, who will replace Oguz Celikkol as ambassador to Israel.
Celikkol found himself at the centre of a diplomatic incident in early January, when Israel's deputy foreign minister summoned him to discuss a popular Turkish TV show's depiction of Israelis.
The ambassador was deliberately seated at a much lower level than the deputy foreign minister, who urged reporters to take note of the discrepancy.
Serbian President Boris Tadic thanked Libya for not recognising Kosovo as an independent state.
Belgrade is waiting for the opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of Pristina's independence.
Tadic spoke with Libyan leader Muammar al Gaddafi in the Libyan city of Syrt on Saturday (April 3rd).
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha has invited Kuwaiti investors to Albania, his office announced on Sunday (April 4th).
The statement came after a meeting in Kuwait City between Berisha and high-level Kuwaiti state officials.
Kuwait's Parliamentary Speaker Jassim Mohammed Al-Kharafi said that Kuwait will organise soon an "Albanian week" to bring Albania's potentials closer to investors.
German Defence Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg urged Kosovo to resolve the situation of parallel structures and other governmental conflicts in the north before the International Court of Justice issues its ruling on the legality of Kosovo's independence.
The German minister made his statement after a visit to Kosovo late last month.
(Various sources -- 30/03/10-06/04/10)
