05/10/2010
Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou was awarded Germany's Quadriga Prize for "Power of Veracity" in Berlin on Sunday (October 3rd).
The prize, awarded on the Day of German Unity every year by the non-profit Werkstatt Deutschland organisation, is traditionally given to "role models who are committed to enlightenment".
Papandreou vowed his country will manage to overcome its debt crisis and implement the reforms needed to bring its finances in check.
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic and his Macedonian counterpart, Gordana Jankulovska, signed a readmission agreement Monday (October 4th).
After the ceremony in Belgrade, Dacic said that several other agreements aimed at strengthening co-operation in the fight against organised crime and terrorism will be signed soon.
The two officials were attending a two-day regional conference on organised crime that opened on Monday.
Georgian Prime Minister Nika Gilauri arrived on Monday (October 4th) for an official visit to Bulgaria.
Gilauri and counterpart Boyko Borisov met to discuss energy co-operation, particularly Bulgarian plans to buy compressed natural gas from Azerbaijan via Georgia's gas pipeline system.
The supplies are to be transported by special tankers through the Black Sea.
The project may become functional in 2012.
The two leaders also talked about the potential for launching direct flights between capitals Sofia and Tbilisi, as well as a ferry line between the two countries.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic made a day-long visit to Andorra on Monday (October 4th).
He met with Prime Minister Jaume Bartumeu Cassany, General Council Speaker Josep Dalleres Codina and Foreign Minister Xavier Espot Miro.
Discussions focused on Serbia's EU bid and bilateral co-operation.
Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao said on Sunday (October 3rd) that his country could help Greece overcome its present difficulties through close co-operation.
Addressing the parliament in Athens, Wen said Beijing and Athens should boost bilateral trade and ties in shipping, transport, science and tourism.
Wen met with President Karolos Papoulias, who underlined the strategic importance of relations between the two countries.
Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Muallem said on Sunday (October 3rd) that only Turkey could be an intermediary in any indirect peace talks between his country and Israel.
He commented on the sidelines of a Syrian-Turkish ministerial meeting in the northern town of Lattakia.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said relations between Turkey and Syria "are beyond what existing models of co-operation offer" and could serve as a model.
Representatives of the European Commission's (EC) Unit for Macedonia in DG Enlargement are were in Skopje ahead of the November's EC report on the country's progress in the EU integration process, local media reported on Friday (October 1st).
Sources say the EC will urge Macedonia to take further steps to reform the judiciary, public administration and strengthening of the political dialogue.
The same sources say that the country generally has registered new impetus in the reforms since June.
Montenegro and Croatia have signed an agreement on mutual extradition of people suspected of organised crime and corruption.
The document was inked on Friday (October 1st) by Justice Minister Miras Radovic and visiting Croatian counterpart Drazen Bosnjakovic.
They agreed the deal, which takes effect immediately, should boost bilateral co-operation in the fight against organised crime.
Serbian President Boris Tadic and Republika Srpska (RS) counterpart Rajko Kuzmanovic agreed on September 28th that there are no open issues between Belgrade and Banja Luka.
After talks in the Serbian capital, they concluded that bilateral co-operation has improved, especially in the economic sector.
Kuzmanovic said that his entity will support any agreement between Belgrade and Pristina on the Kosovo issue.
Tadic reiterated that Serbia respects Bosnia and Herzegovina's territorial integrity.
(Various sources 29/09/10-05/10/10)
