03/03/2010
Croatia's Ivica Kostelic, 30, won silver in the Men's Slalom at the Winter Olympics in Vancouver.
Italy's Giuliano Razzoli edged past him to win the gold by just .17 of a second.
Kostelic won his first silver medal in the Super-Combined on February 21st.
Albania joined the world in celebrating the 200th anniversary of the birth of composer Frederic Chopin on Monday (March 1st).
As part of the celebrations, Tirana Mayor Edi Rama inaugurated a square near the Arts Academy named for the famous musician, who was born in Warsaw on March 1st 1810.
Kosovo's documentary and short film festival, Dokufest, was listed among the world's 25 best festivals by US critic AJ Schnack on Thursday (February 25th).
Dokufest was praised for quality, variety of screens, and for the picturesque host city of Prizren, in southern Kosovo.
Serbian tennis star Novak Djokovic defended his Dubai Championships title after beating Russia's Mikhail Youzhny 7-5, 5-7, 6-3 on Sunday (February 28th), securing the 17th title in his career.
In the semi-final, Djokovic beat Marcos Baghdatis of Cyprus.
Istanbul is hosting the 6th Akbank Short Film Festival from Monday (March 1st) until March 11th.
The event is screening 98 films from 24 countries and includes various discussions and workshops.
Serbian Culture Minister Nebojsa Bradic and his Slovak counterpart Marek Madaric signed a programme of co-operation between their ministries through 2013.
The agreement, signed Friday (February 26th), envisions exchanges of information, experiences and artists between the two countries, while promoting each other's culture.
Bassist Aleksandar Stefanoski became the first Macedonian to perform at Milan's La Scala.
He performed in Czech composer Leos Janacek's opera "From the House of the Dead" in late February.
Sofia will be hosting the 14th International Sofia Film Fest from Friday (March 5th) until March 25th.
More than 100 feature films, 20 documentaries and 50 short films will be shown as part of the event.
For the first time, besides its traditional shows in Sofia, Burgas and Plovdiv, the festival will also visit more than ten other cities including Blagoevgrad, Stara Zagora and Sliven.
(Various sources -- 24/02/10-03/03/10)
