04/10/2010
Greek archaeologists have unearthed an ancient skeleton covered with gold foil in a grave on the island of Crete.
More than 3,000 pieces of gold foil have been found in the twin grave, dating back to the 7th century BC.
The discovery was made near the ancient town of Eleutherna.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said on September 28th that his country wants to open a new field called "science diplomacy".
Speaking after meeting professors and students at the Harvard University, Davutoglu said Ankara will appoint scientific attaches to countries with advanced high technologies such as the United States, Japan, China, Germany and England.
The aim of the initiative is to improve Turkey's scientific image and bring high technology to the country.
Romania's biggest mobile operator, Orange Romania, launched Apple's iPhone 4 in the country on September 24th.
The model was launched by Apply in June.
Serbian Education Minister Zarko Obradovic announced on September 28th that 100m euros will earmarked for Serbia's education system by 2014.
He said the funds will be allocated to modernise information systems, implement the National Education Strategy and expand the existing building.
Microsoft Corporation has donated about $225,000 worth of software to the International Commission on Missing Persons.
The news was announced at a press conference in Sarajevo on September 28th.
The software will enable the commission to improve its operational systems and continue its work on assisting governments in dealing with missing people issues.
Republika Srpska (RS) Parliament Speaker Igor Radojcic and Banja Luka Mayor Dragoljub Davidovic inaugurated on September 27th a Genetic Resources Institute of the University of Banja Luka.
The scientific institution was established based on a programme of plant genetic resources conservation adopted by the RS parliament in 2008.
Macedonia's State Archive and the US Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington signed a ten-year co-operation agreement on September 28th.
The deal envisions exchange of archives and research and reproduction of documents related to the period before, during and after World War II and the Holocaust.
(Various sources -- 27/09/10-04/10/10)
