02/07/2010
Japanese company Mitsubishi Heavy Industries plans to build a wind power plant in Krnovo, in the Montenegrin municipality of Niksic.
The economy ministry said on Monday (June 28th) that the expected investment amounts to 70m to 90m euros.
The power plant's capacity will be 50MW that could be expanded by an additional 22MW in the future.
The IMF Executive Board approved the fourth review of its stand-by arrangement with Serbia on Tuesday (June 29th) and allowed the immediate disbursement of a 383.2m-euro tranche of its 2.9 billion-euro loan.
IMF Deputy Managing Director Murilo Portugal said that Serbia's economic performance continues to be broadly satisfactory, in spite of a weaker macro-economic environment during the first half of the year.
Bank of Kosovo Governor Hashim Rexhepi announced on Wednesday (June 30th) that a legal framework is being drafted to attract Islamic banks to the country.
No application has been made from agricultural banks, Rexhepi said.
He added that 8% of the capital of commercial banks operating on the local market is held by local entities.
Bank of Albania Governor Adrian Fullani urged the government Wednesday (June 30th) to be careful when applying for loans and managing the budget deficit.
The warning came as the government agreed on a 25m-euro loan from commercial banks earlier in the week.
Fullani asked the cabinet avoid such steps in the future as they take from capital that could be extended to local businesses.
Turkey has marked an impressive increase in its real estate market transparency index, moving up 27 places in a recent report by Jones Lang LaSalle and LaSalle Investment Management.
Out of 81 countries included in the study, Turkey is ranked at 36th, compared to 63rd in 2008, according to the Global Real Estate Transparency Index 2010 report.
Cypriot trade unions agreed on Wednesday (June 30th) to renew their members' collective agreement with the government, including a clause that envisions zero growth in their salaries.
Cyprus Workers' Confederation General-Secretary Nikos Moiseos said that the step is a "great sacrifice", and noted he expects similar sacrifices from others.
(Various sources -- 25/06/10-02/07/10)
