03/08/2010
Greek Alternate Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas was in Serbia and Kosovo Friday (July 30th). 
In Belgrade, Droutsas met with President Boris Tadic and Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic. 
The two diplomats signed a memorandum of co-operation in European affairs.
In Pristina, Droutsas met with President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci. 
The visit came after the International Court of Justice issued its advisory opinion on Kosovo's independence, ruling that it does not violate international law. 
Greece is one of five EU member states that have not recognised Kosovo's independence.
***
Serbian President Boris Tadic is expected to visit Albania soon, media in Tirana and Belgrade reported on Monday (August 2nd). 
The news was confirmed by Albania's ambassador to Belgrade, Shpetim Caushi, who said Tadic has responded positively to an invitation for a visit.
***
Albania and Andorra pledged to strengthen relations after a visit of Foreign Minister Ilir Meta on Saturday (July 31st). 
Tourism, banks, environment, infrastructure were some of the fields of possible co-operation that were discussed. 
Meta briefed his counterpart Xavier Espot Miro on Albania's European integration process and its constructive role in the region.
***
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha was Brussels on Thursday (July 29th), where he met with his Belgian counterpart, Yves Leterme. 
The two prime ministers re-confirmed their determination to promote bilateral co-operation in all fields, especially economic and trade exchanges and increased Belgian investments in Albania.
***
Slovenian Foreign Minister Samuel Zbogar and his Croatian counterpart Gordan Jandrokovic discussed the former Ljubljanska Banka's unsettled liabilities towards Croatian clients -- a major outstanding issue between the two countries. 
The meeting was held Wednesday (July 28th) in the Slovenian border village of Obrezje.
***
UAE Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed al Nahyan and his Cypriot counterpart Markos Kyprianou met in Abu Dhabi Wednesday (July 28th). 
The two diplomats signed an agreement that exempts holders of diplomatic and special passports of the two countries from entry visas. 
They also signed a memorandum of understanding on diplomatic consultations.
(Various sources -- 27/07/10-03/08/10)
