03/05/2010
A search team is insisting that a wooden, boat-like structure it claims to have found on Mt.
Ararat is Noah's Ark.
Chinese and Turkish excavators affiliated with Noah's Ark Ministries International, an evangelical group, say they discovered remains of the ship at 4,000m above sea level, although they have not revealed the exact location.
They say radiocarbon tests on wood taken from the structure prove it is around 4,800 years old.
Turkish officials quoted by local media said they welcomed the findings, but are investigating how wood samples were taken from Turkey to China.
Broadcast media in Albania will soon be sending only digital signals.
In doing so, Albania aims to meet the EU standards for digital broadcasting, Minister for Innovation, Information Technology and Communications Genc Pollo said on Tuesday (April 27th).
Kosovo will invest in human resources and education as part of its National Science Programme, the Ministry of Education and the EC Liaison Office in Kosovo announced on Tuesday (April 27th).
The goal of the new initiative is to establish an infrastructure for scientific research, international co-operation, and to strengthen ties among science, society and the economy.
Internet connection speed is up sharply in Romania.
The country is in 4th position worldwide in terms of the indicator, according to the latest "State of the Internet Report" published by digital platform company Akamai, on April 26th.
The average internet connection speed in Romania is 7.2 MBps, or 28% faster than in 2008.
British scientists have discovered ancient treasure in the sea near the Croatian town of Cavtat.
They found amphorae and other items, dating back to the second century, in the wreck of a Greek ship.
The net value is about 5.76m euros, the scientists said.
Macedonian archaeologists have unearthed a ceramic lamp bearing the image of Alexander the Great in a necropolis at the Carevi Kuli site in Strumica.
Scholars have also found golden jewelry such as earrings and rings.
They believe the findings date back to the second century BC.
(Various sources -- 26/04/10-03/05/10)
