01/06/2010
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Chairman Haris Silajdzic and the presidents of Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro -- Boris Tadic, Ivo Josipovic and Filip Vujanovic, respectively -- met in Sarajevo on Saturday (May 29th) for talks on EU membership. 
The declaration signed at the end of the meeting called for mutual trust and regional co-operation.
***
Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic said on Monday (May 31st) in Banja Luka that his country respects Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
After meeting with Republika Srpska (RS) President Rajko Kuzmanovic, Vujanovic also voiced Podgorica's support for BiH's bids to join the EU and NATO. 
He added the three constituent ethnic groups should find ways to make the country more effective, in order to achieve these goals. 
He also voiced hope that the two countries will conclude an agreement on double citizenship as soon as possible.
***
Albania and Serbia aim to build a strategic energy alliance, Energy and Economy Minister Dritan Prifti said on Monday (May 31st) after meeting with Serbian counterpart Petar Skundric in Tirana. 
"Despite disagreements on some issues, there are opportunities where we can co-operate, especially on the economy," Prifti said, announcing a visit to Belgrade soon.
***
A meeting of representatives of ten countries with "divided cities" -- including Cyprus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iraq, Israel and Lebanon -- wrapped up on Friday (May 28th) in Serb-dominated northern Mitrovica. 
Participants released a joint statement that called for rebuilding of trust between communities and elected authorities. 
The gathering also resulted in pledges of concrete measures such as training and financial support.
***
Romanian President Traian Basescu, making an official visit to Skopje on Thursday (May 27th), voiced his unconditional support for Macedonia's NATO and EU aspirations. 
At a joint press conference with Macedonian counterpart Gjorge Ivanov, Basescu said Romania supports a compromise in the name dispute with Greece.
***
Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor and Serbian counterpart Mirko Cvetkovic agreed on Wednesday (May 26th) that bilateral relations are good and economic ties are progressing. 
Pahor voiced Slovenia's support for Serbia's EU bid and added Ljubljana wants all countries in the region to wrap up their EU integration processes successfully.
***
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Wednesday (May 26th) praised friendly new relations with Brazil, particularly the diplomatic co-operation between the two countries on Iran's nuclear programme. 
In a statement at a business conference in Sao Paulo, Erdogan stressed that Turkey and Brazil, both non-permanent members of the UN Security Council, had the courage to address a source of deep concern in the international community.
(Various sources -- 25/05/10-01/06/10)
