30/12/2010
101230-WMI-000-ENG
Japanese electronics producer Panasonic, which established a company in Serbia in November, plans to launch operations at the facility before January 10th.
About 580,000 euros have been invested in the facility this year.
The German wind energy company Innovative Wind Concepts plans to invest around 75m euros in construction of a wind park in northeastern Bulgaria.
The park is to become operational in 2013 and will have an annual production capacity of 100 MWh.
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and Hungarian Deputy Prime Minister Tibor Navracsics inaugurated a gas link between the two countries on December 23rd.
The 395m-euro pipeline will provide another direct source of natural gas deliveries to Croatia, helping to diversify the supply routes and strengthen energy security.
Turkey's Foreign Economic Relations Board decided at its general congress in Istanbul on Wednesday (December 29th) to set up new business councils in 13 countries in Africa, South America and Asia.
The councils will be active in the fields of logistics, energy, defence and agriculture.
The European Commission (EC) has given the green light to a project to build two new nuclear power reactors at Romania's Cerna Voda plant, the economy ministry announced on Monday (December 27th).
The two new reactors will have a capacity of 1,400 mW -- two times that of the existing ones, which cover 20% of Romania's energy consumption.
The British financial magazine Banker named Alpha Bank as the Greek bank of the year.
According to the magazine, the bank's policy flexibility and adequate capital have put it in the best position among financial institutions to overcome the country's current crisis.
Serbia will allow free oil and oil derivative imports and liberalised derivatives pricing in the market starting on Saturday (January 1st).
The decision will put an end to the Oil Industry of Serbia's (NIS) monopoly on oil derivative imports.
Croatia was the world's fourth most successful tourist destination in 2010, the country's tourism ministry announced, citing studies by international organisations and experts.
The number of tourists who visited the country this year grew by 7% compared to 2009, the ministry said.
The list of top destinations is headed by South Korea, which saw tourism growth of 28%, followed by China (23%) and Germany (11%).
(Various sources -- 18/12/10-30/12/10)
