25/03/2011
Kosovo and Macedonia signed a memorandum of understanding in Skopje, Wednesday (March 23rd) on co-operation in the agriculture sector.
The two countries' ministries of agriculture reached an agreement on exchanging scientific information and analyses, and on establishing a commission that will monitor the implementation of the projects over the next five years.
Bulgaria's largest oil refinery, Lukoil Bulgaria, decided on Wednesday (March 23rd) to impose a one-sided moratorium on fuel prices for one month, according to an agreement between the government, fuel traders and haulage companies.
Prices at Lukoil's petrol stations will remain frozen for the period, but no information was provided as to prices at the stations of other fuel distributors.
Iberdrola Renewable announced on Wednesday (March 23rd) the start of building the world's biggest electricity generation complex using wind in Romania's Dobrogea region.
The first phase will see the construction of an 80MW farm which is planned to start operating by the end of this year.
The electricity generated by this complex could supply about one million households, dropping annual carbon emissions by 1.25mn tonnes, the company said.
Turkey's Energy and Natural Resources Minister Taner Yildiz on March 23rd rejected Greek criticism of his country's plans to build a nuclear power plant in the southern region of Akkuyu.
According to the minister, Greece's concerns are unrealistic, as Akkuyu is some 900 km away from Greece, while there are similar facilities in other EU member states that are only 500-600 km from Greece.
Yildiz insisted that Ankara will meet all criteria of the International Atomic Energy Agency when building the nuclear power plant.
The Finance Ministry named on Wednesday (March 23rd) financial and legal advisers for two big concession projects.
BNP Paribas and National Bank of Greece will advise on extending a 20-year concession to operate the Athens airport.
Citigroup and Greece's Piraeus Bank were named as advisers in a concession to develop the 1,500-acre site of the former airport.
The Bank of Albania increased the main interest rate by 0.25% up to 5.25%, the bank's governor Adrian Fullani announced on Wednesday (March 23rd).
He explained the move has been prompted by higher prices in February, when inflation was 4.5%.
(Various sources – 18/03/2011-25/03/2011)
