23/02/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 23/02/11
This year Brezovica, a small village and ski resort in southwest Kosovo, opened its winter season late due to minimal snow, which in turn caused low tourism income and poor business for the area.
"Snow makes Brezovica a great place to visit, but the restaurants and services standard is low, and the ski lift never works, so skiing here is difficult," says Taulan Nexhipi, 22, from Pristina.
"I was already waiting for the snow to come;
this winter is not such a good one for skiing fans," says 19-year-old Prizren resident Shpat Sylejmani.
Dragisa Rakic, owner of a small restaurant in Brezovica, said that lots of snow means lots of tourists in Brezovica, but it has not happened this year.
Even when nature co-operates, politics prevents the resort from being integrated into plans to develop Kosovo's tourism sector.
It is located in a predominantly Serb area with a Belgrade-appointed mayor, and local Serb authorities have declined to co-operate with the Privatisation Agency of Kosovo.
Budget constraints, meanwhile, have hampered government efforts to promote tourism.
The Ministry of Trade and Industry's tourism website has not been updated in some time, and authorities took few concrete steps this year other than publishing a guide for visitors.
"Lack of funds for tourism has led to a lack of advertisement.
It is, however, up to the municipalities to do that," said the director of the ministry's tourism department, Bujar Kuqi.
Meanwhile, the possibilities remain largely untapped.
"Kosovo has many tourist places which are have not been considered yet for their tourist potential, due to the blockade of Brezovica, and lack of investments in the Albanian Alps and Sharr mountains," the chairman of the Kosovo Tourism Association, Zeke Ceku said.
"For the moment, Kosovo can't develop qualitative winter tourism."
"Even though we have very beautiful places, the competent institutions are not able to use natural resources and manage them," he added.
Bedri Milaku, who worked for years in the sector, says that Kosovo needs a stronger commitment from the government in order to get tourism off the ground.
"The climate and beautiful nature of Brezovica, the Albanian Mountains and Sharr make Kosovo very attractive for foreign tourists and winter tourism is one of the main attractions with a potential for development," he said.
Gazmend Pula, an industry expert, sounded a more hopeful note.
"Tourism in Kosovo should be interconnected and intertwined with common regional tourist offers, like in Albania, Montenegro and Macedonia, which could create a regionally wider and richer international tourist destination," Pula said.
"Kosovo has its advantages compared to regional countries, with significant nuances in mountain tourism, especially winter tourism and sports," said former trade and industry minister Lutfi Zharku.
"Last year in Kosovo, a meeting of the American Tourism Society was organised, which is a good step in promoting our tourism," he said.
"Kosovo can be an important tourist attraction as our main tourism areas are close to the borders with our neighbours, so cross-border tourism can be developed as well."
