17/12/2010
Turkish Energy Minister Taner Yildiz and Croatian Economy Minister Duro Popijac agreed in Istanbul on Wednesday (December 15th) to look into possibilities to boost energy co-operation.
Yildiz said Turkish energy companies are ready to invest in Croatia, inviting a technical team from Croatia to explore co-operation opportunities early next year.
Popijac welcomed the proposal and stressed the great potential of business ties with Turkey.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and Serbian counterpart Vuk Jeremic announced on Wednesday (December 15th) that a declaration on strategic partnership between the two countries will be signed next year by presidents Dmitry Medvedev and Boris Tadic.
Jeremic praised the growing bilateral co-operation in the energy sector.
Kosovo's Privatisation Agency (KPA) has sold the cement factory Sharrcem to Greek giant Titan in a privatisation deal worth 31m euros, the KPA announced on Tuesday (December 14th).
According to the agency, this is one of the most successful privatisation deals yet, as Titan is expected to invest 87.6m euros over the next five years.
Vodafone Albania has been awarded a license to run the first 3G service in the country, the Authority for Electronic and Postal Communications announced on Wednesday (December 15th).
Vodafone paid 31.4m euros to get the license.
The service will launch in March.
Turkey's Ayen Enerji Corporation, in consortium with Albania's A.S.
Energy SHPK, has submitted the best offer to build five water power plants in Albania, the company announced on Wednesday (December 15th).
Authorities in Tirana have invited the consortium to sign a contract for the plants.
Serbia and the EU will set aside 18.5m euros in 2011 for projects under the EU Strategy for the Danube Region, Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic said on December 13th.
He said 6.5m euros will be invested in the reconstruction of the Golubac Fortress, while 4.6m euros will be used for infrastructure upgrades in the municipality of Veliko Gradiste.
German publishing company WAZ Media Group divested its assets in Bulgaria to Austria-based BG Privatinvest.
WAZ Media Group entered the Bulgarian media market in 1996 and owned some of the biggest daily and weekly newspapers in the country.
Romanians have the lowest purchasing power in the EU, according to the latest data published by Eurostat on Wednesday (December 15th).
Last year, the purchasing power of Romanians fell by 1% -- to 46% of the EU average.
In most Central and Eastern European countries this indicator rose.
(Various sources -- 10/12/10-17/12/10)
