22/04/2011
Turkey's biggest private press group, Dogan Holding, reached an agreement Wednesday (April 20th) to sell its national dailies Milliyet and Vatan for 50m euros to Demiroren-Karacan. 
Dogan had to sell to help pay an unprecedented fine of 1.75 billion euros imposed in September 2009 over unpaid taxes.
***
US computer giant IBM signed an agreement with the Romanian municipality of Targu-Mures on Wednesday (April 20th) to build a centre of excellence in the city. 
Under the deal, Romanian researchers from universities in the Transylvania region will be able to attend post-graduate courses in IBM centres around the world, after which they will be employed in the Targu-Mures centre.
***
A job fair organised by the American University in Kosovo and the American Chamber of Commerce opened on Wednesday (April 20th) in Pristina. 
A total of 18 participating businesses provided information on future employment, targeting students from many universities. 
Kosovo has a young population and an unemployment rate of nearly 40%.
***
Fuel prices in Albania have reached record levels, following the trend of price hikes among all consumer products. 
One litre of fuel now costs 1.26 euros, compared to less than one euro only six months ago, media reported on Wednesday (April 20th). 
Resellers blame the hike on global price increases and state taxes.
***
Republika Srpska power utility ERS has established a joint venture with its subsidiary Hidroelektrane na Trebisnjici for the construction of a new hydro power plant dubbed HE Dabar in the southern Herzegovina region in the second half of the year. 
Investments will reach 180m euros, as the ERS and Trebisnjici will secure 25% of the funding and will seek to borrow the rest. 
The plant should be built in four and a half years.
***
Bosnia and Herzegovina's tripartite presidency approved the country's 2011 budget bill Wednesday (April 20th). 
The draft was approved with the votes of the Bosniak and Croat presidency members, Zeljko Komsic and Bakir Izetbegovic, who outvoted Serb presidency member Nebojsa Radmanovic. 
The draft approved by the presidency puts total spending of state-level institutions at 538m euros. 
The draft will be forwarded to parliament.
***
Greece and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) agreed on Wednesday (April 20th) to boost economic and commercial ties. 
The agreement came in a memorandum of understanding signed by Greek Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas and UAE counterpart Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al-Nahyan in Abu Dhabi, after a joint ministerial EU-Gulf Co-operation Council meeting.
(Various sources -- 15/04/11-22/04/11)
