22/06/2011
Albania and the World Bank signed an agreement on Monday (June 20th) for a Social Sector Reform Development Policy Loan worth $25m.
The project aims to help Albania improve the efficiency of its social safety nets and strengthen the effectiveness and equity of health financing.
Economies in Eastern Europe will have to increase their competitiveness if they want to attract more foreign investments, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development said in its latest Eastern Europe and South Caucasus Outlook presented in Prague on Friday (June 17th).
The governments in the region should try to overcome three main obstacles -- poor education, limited access to financing and lack of appropriate incentives.
Skopje hosted a Regional Finance Fair and Matchmaking Event last week that aimed to bring together businessmen from Southeast Europe with investors and financing institutions.
The event, which was co-hosted by USAID, attracted over 100 participants from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Serbia, providing them with an opportunity to explore new financial opportunities and ways to expand business networks in the region.
The subway tunnel with the biggest cross section in Europe was inaugurated in Sofia on Monday (June 20th).
The tunnel is part of the construction of the second line of the subway in the Bulgarian capital.
The tunnel in the centre of Sofia has a cross section of 258 square metres.
It is 108m long, 18m high and 22m wide.
Serbia Jat Airways resumed flights from Belgrade to Dubrovnik, Croatia, on Friday (June 17th).
This was the first flight between the two destinations in more than 20 years.
The line will run twice weekly during the summer -- on Fridays and Sundays.
The economic downturn in Croatia deepened in the first quarter of 2011, data released by the State Bureau of Statistics showed on Monday (June 20th).
Over the review period, GDP declined by 0.8% on an annual basis compared to a 0.6% drop in the last quarter of 2010.
The European Commission (EC) has suspended financing for Romania through the Axis 2 of the Regional Operation Programme, which is used to upgrade works for local and regional transport infrastructure, the Ministry of Regional Development and Tourism announced on Monday (June 20th).
The total financing under the axis amounts to 850m euros.
The decision to suspend it came over multiple violations in the tender procedures, incomplete documentation and failure to observe the standards and deadlines.
Turkey is the highest ranked among Balkan countries on the 2011 Global Retail Development Index, published by consulting company AT Kearney.
Albania is also high on the list at 13th.
The last Balkan country to make it into the ranking is Bulgaria at 30th.
The index ranks 30 emerging countries based on the urgency of retailers to enter each of them.
(Various sources -- 15/06/11-22/06/11)
