13/05/2011
Turkish Aerospace Industry (TAI) and US satellite company Sierra Nevada Corporation (SNC) have agreed to co-operate to produce satellites for Middle Eastern companies, Hurriyet reported on Wednesday (May 11th). 
A Memorandum of Understanding on co-operation in the area of space systems and technologies for international programmes was signed by TAI General-Manager Muharrem Dortkasli and SNC's CEO Fatih Ozmen. 
Sierra, owned by a Turkish American, specialises in providing and integrating electronic systems.
***
Albania will start repaying an old debt to Serbia worth about 6m euros, media in Tirana reported on Thursday (May 12th). 
The debt was inherited from trade deals between Albania and the former Yugoslav federation. 
The state is due to schedule a five-year plan, allocating payments to Belgrade authorities twice a year.
***
The Serbian government rejected Telekom Austria's improved bid of 1.1 billion euros for a 51% stake in Telekom Srbija. 
The decision was made at the recommendation of the Finance Ministry's working group on the privatisation of the state telecom. 
Telekom Austria's offer fell short of the minimum asking price of 1.4 billion euros.
***
The World Bank approved a 150m-euro loan to Croatia last week under the Economic Recovery Development Policy programme. 
This is the first of two loans aimed at supporting sustainable economic growth in the country. 
The funds will be used for reforms in public administration, health and social welfare sectors, which should lead to fiscal consolidation of public finances.
***
A cornerstone-laying ceremony for the ENFLO Production plant in Macedonia's region of Tetovo was held on Wednesday (May 11th). 
The wind turbine factory is a Swiss investment that will initially create 100 new jobs. 
Production is set to start by the end of the year. 
The total investment could reach 20m euros.
***
Romania's Transport Ministry will sell up to 20% of stakes in the air carrier Tarom after setting up private management in the company by November, according to a letter of intent to the IMF obtained by news agency Mediafax on Tuesday (May 10th). 
The previous plan regarding Tarom envisioned finding a strategic partner and selling 20% stakes in two major airports -- Henri Coanda in Bucharest and Aurel Vlaicu in Timisoara.
***
Greece's Regional Development and Competitiveness Ministry announced on Tuesday (May 10th) that it has approved plans to build a Formula One racing track south of Patras in the Peloponnese. 
The decision to go ahead with the 94.6m-euro project was made after years of debate on where the circuit should be located. 
The project, which is expected to be completed in 36 months, must be approved by parliament.
(Various sources -- 06/05/11-13/05/11)
