09/06/2011
Istanbul was named as one of the world's top performing tourist destinations in 2011, based on Mastercard's new Worldwide Index of Global Destination Cities, published on Wednesday (June 1st).
The company predicted that in 2011, Istanbul will be the city with the largest growth in tourism expenditures -- up 30.1% compared to the previous year.
The Greek government agreed on Monday (June 6th) to sell its 10% stake in Hellenic Telecom (OTE) to Germany's Deutsche Telekom for 400m euros.
After the deal, Greece will hold 10% plus one voting share in OTE, while Deutsche Telekom will control 40% plus one vote.
The remaining 50% are in the hands of international and Greek institutional shareholders.
The Albanian lek hit an all-time record low Monday (June 6th), changing hands at 142.55 lek per euro.
Compared to the beginning of 2011, the price of the euro has increased by 4 leks.
The official minimum wage in Bulgaria will be raised from around 120 euros to 135 euros, Prime Minister Boyko Borisov announced on Sunday (June 5th).
He said the government will start procedures to implement the hike, which will take several weeks.
Internet giant Google will open an office in Zagreb by the end of June, Croatian Times reported on Wednesday (June 1st).
The office will serve the company's operations and provide local support to advertisers in Croatia, Serbia and Slovenia.
The USAID's Competitiveness Project Innovation Centre has launched a new model to finance business start-ups in Macedonia.
The first Business Angel Network is comprised of so-called "angel" investors -- businessmen and others willing to invest money, knowledge, skills and social capital in fresh and innovative business ideas with high potential.
The network in Macedonia already has ten members, who are reviewing about a dozen business proposals.
Athens hosted a Hellenic-Chinese Business Forum on Monday (June 6th), drawing senior officials from over 60 leading Chinese companies looking for business opportunities in Greece.
Greece was represented by 187 enterprises.
Areas of mutual interest include electrical and mechanical equipment production, shipbuilding, energy, environmental technologies, telecommunications, real estate and tourism.
Many Albanians working in Greece are choosing to return home amid grave prospects and massive job cuts in the crisis-hit neighbour.
Recent data of the Chamber of Industry and Commerce in Gjirokastra showed that in the past two months, 40 small businesses have opened in the town.
According to experts, these businesses were opened by returning expats, who are now investing their savings in Albania.
Kosovo's Ministry of Economic Development announced on Friday (June 3rd) that two companies will be competing for the privatisation of Kosovo's Post and Telecommunication Company (PTK).
These are Croatia's Hrvatski Telekom, which is owned by Germany's Deutsche Telekom, and Telekom Austria.
Albania's Albtelecom, Egypt's Oraskom and Yemen's Saba Phone also filed documents in the tender for the state's 75% stake, but failed to qualify.
(Various sources -- 02/06/11-09/06/11)
