08/04/2011
The third Pristina International Fair for travel and tourism opened on Wednesday (April 6th).
Organised by the trade and industry ministry, the fair is an opportunity for businesses to present tourism packages for resorts in Albania and Montenegro.
One of the most famous hotels in Sarajevo, Bristol, officially reopened on Wednesday (April 6th).
The hotel, destroyed during the 1992-1995 conflict, was renovated by Saudi investor Al-Shiddi.
The company invested more than 20m euros in its reconstruction.
The four-star facility will be managed by Dubai-based Shaza Hotels Company.
Serbia has negotiated a 250m-euro loan from the European Investment Bank (EIB) to boost exports, Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic said on Monday (April 4th).
The EIB board of directors is due to approve the funding next week.
Djelic said the funds will be used to improve the liquidity of export-oriented industries.
The European Investment Bank (EIB) plans to invest 400m-500m euros in Croatia during each of the next two years, Vice-President Matthias Kollatz-Ahnen said at a press conference in Zagreb on Monday (April 4th).
The EIB's financing will go mainly towards infrastructure and environmental projects.
Macedonian Finance Minister Zoran Stavreski and his visiting Kosovo counterpart, Bedri Hamza, signed an agreement on double taxation avoidance on Wednesday (April 6th) in Skopje.
They said the deal will boost investments and trade, and will strengthen bilateral relations.
Turkey's parliament on Wednesday (April 6th) ratified an agreement offering international guarantees for investments in conflict-ridden Libya.
The deal reached between Ankara and Tripoli stipulates that the respective governments will provide compensation for any losses suffered by investors due to war, uprisings, or domestic turmoil.
Romania will receive 25m euros in financial aid from the EU Solidarity Fund for the damage caused by last year's floods.
In all, 182.4m euros in aid will go to six countries affected by the floods, which occurred from May-June 2010.
The Albanian government signed an agreement with the Islamic Development Bank on Thursday (April 7th) for a 156m-euro loan to finance part of the Tirana-Elbasan motorway.
The project is expected to cost a total of 280m euros.
(Various sources -- 01/04/11-08/04/11)
