28/09/2011
Subway and bus transport in Athens came to a halt for a second day on Tuesday (September 27th), as workers in the sector staged fresh action against austerity measures imposed by the government.
Tax and customs officials also staged protests.
More strikes are planned for this week.
A Turkish research ship has begun explorations for oil and gas off the Cypriot coast, Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus Prime Minister Irsen Kucuk announced late Monday (September 26th).
According to Turkish media, the exploration section is near the area where US-based company Noble Energy started exploring under license from the Greek Cypriot government.
Workers at the chrome mines of Bulqiza in Albania resumed their hunger strike last week.
A similar action was held in August, but ended after police intervened.
The ACR, the mine's operator, has been refusing to meet demands for a 20% wage hike, better working conditions and sacking the company's manager, who miners hold responsible for the situation.
Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovenia, Macedonia and Montenegro reached a rare agreement among former Yugoslav states on a property issue -- the six countries agreed to sell a $12m apartment on Park Avenue in New York, which has not been used since the 1990s conflict.
Reportedly, Serbia, which has maintained the flat for 19 years, will receive 40% of the money from the sale.
The funds are seen as a healthy injection for the cash-strapped countries in a time of economic crisis.
Montenegro's Council of Privatisation on September 21st called on international investors to submit their offers for the long-term rent of the island of Lastavica in Herzeg Nova.
Bids will be accepted by December 14th.
The island is one of the attractions of the region with the fortress of Mamula on it.
The lease is offered for a period of 30 years with an option for an extension to 90 years.
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic said on September 21st that the country needs to register economic growth of 5% annually to be able to boost employment.
The figure is double the predictions for this year's GDP growth.
According to Cvetkovic, who was speaking at a business forum in Belgrade, the country will be counting on foreign investments to reach the target.
Greece and Macedonia may be at odds, but this does not preclude stronger business ties.
That was the conclusion reached at a business forum organised by the Macedonian Industrial Association, which brought together Greek and Macedonian entrepreneurs.
Representatives of the Industrial Association in Halkidiki, Greece, expressed interest in investing in Macedonia, insisting that the current debt crisis does not have such a serious impact on private business.
The Turkish lira reached an all-time low of 1.865 against the US dollar on Monday (September 26th) slipping 21% from its levels in the beginning of 2011.
According to experts, the decline is due to the growing concerns about Europe's deepening sovereign debt crisis.
Rating agency Moody's Investors Services on September 20th confirmed Croatia's long-term ratings at Baa3, maintaining a stable outlook.
According to the agency, the move reflects the country's "relative wealth and the government's affordable, albeit worsening debt metrics".
At the same time, Moody's warned against Croatia's "impaired" economic model and widespread "euroisation".
(Various sources -- 21/09/11-28/09/11)
