29/02/2012
Hundreds of people rallied in various cities across Bulgaria on Sunday (February 26th) to protest fuel prices that are equal to the EU average in the poorest member of the bloc.
The protestors said local consumers are suffering from market abuse on the part of Russian-owned company Lukoil Bulgaria.
Other demands included lower excise duties to correspond to living standards in the country and stricter measures to secure pricing policy transparency and quality of the offered fuels.
Rating agency Standard and Poor's (S&P) downgraded Greece's rating late on Monday (February 27th), less than a week after Fitch made the same move over the country's bond swap deal with its bondholders.
S&P cut Greece's long-term credit rating to "selective default".
Fitch Ratings downgraded Greece's debt to "C" from "CCC", warning that a default is highly likely in the near term.
The European Commission issued an official warning Monday (February 27th) to eight member-states, including Bulgaria, Cyprus and Romania, to open their energy markets within two months, otherwise they risk legal proceedings at the European Court of Justice.
The countries will have to put their legislation in line with EU directives, to ensure consumers have several options for their gas and power needs.
Officials from Serbia, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Republika Srpska and Croatia signed a Memorandum of Co-operation on February 23rd aimed to improve business environments and attract investments to Southeast Europe.
The deal was inked during a conference in Belgrade dubbed "Southeast Europe -- a Region with Favourable Business Environment".
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha said on February 22nd that the country may adjust its budget spending to secure funds for possible imports of power in case low water reserves force authorities to shut down some of the country's three hydro power plants.
Berisha pointed out that rain in recent days failed to increase the reserves in the facilities.
Tourism ministers from Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Serbia signed a memorandum for a joint project aimed to boost tourism in the Danube area.
The deal, which was inked in the historic Serbian town of Sremski Karlovci on February 23rd, launched the so-called "Roman Emperors' Road Project", promoting the rich historic heritage of the area.
Croatia will spend 1.6 billion euros this year on infrastructure and energy projects aimed to give a fresh boost to the economy and create new jobs, Deputy Prime Minister Radimir Cacic announced on February 23rd.
The funds will be injected into projects by national grid operator Hrvatska Elektrorivreda, national waterways Hrvatske Vode and the national railway company Hrvatske Zeljeznice.
Belgrade hosted the 34th International Tourism Expo last week, which is one of the sector's most important events held in the Balkans.
The expo attracted thousands of participants from 46 countries.
Its partner country this year was Turkey.
(Various sources -- 22/02/12-29/02/12)
