27/07/2011
The first McDonald's restaurant opened in Sarajevo on Wednesday (July 20th).
The chain has been eyeing the market for over a decade but was reportedly thwarted by red tape and other problems.
Attending the opening party were US Ambassador Patrick Moon and Zeljko Komsic, chairman of the tripartite presidency.
The Spanish government announced on Friday (July 25th) it is reintroducing a requirement for work permits for Romanians, a move that sparked immediate EU reaction.
Authorities took the step, which will not apply to Romanians already working in Spain, in a bid to address an unemployment rate of 21%.
The European Commission, however, said the measure violates EU policies regarding the free movement of people and requires empirical justification before it can be implemented.
Rating agency Moody's Investors Service on Monday (July 25th) cut Greece's sovereign debt rating by three notches from Caa1 to Ca, two notches from a default rating.
The move came after eurozone leaders agreed on a fresh 109 billion-euro bailout package for the debt-ridden country.
Bulgaria's power grid operator NEK and Russia's Atomstroyexport appear headed to court after the Russians announced on Friday (July 22nd) plans to sue Bulgaria at the International Court of Arbitration in Paris over delayed payments worth 58m euros.
At issue is payment for work on the country's second nuclear power plant in Belene.
The EU presented on Friday (July 22nd) a 1.5m-euro technical assistance project in Albania aimed at completing the first property registration and updating the existing registration of about 60,000 properties in coastal areas.
The project will be implemented by the OSCE and includes new street signs in several areas in a region that is becoming a popular tourist destination.
The number of millionaires in Bulgaria has skyrocketed over the past year, National Revenue Agency Director Krasimir Stefanov announced on Monday (July 25th).
Last year, there were a total of 1,673 Bulgarian citizens who declared taxable income of 1m leva (500,000 euros) or higher, which is 60 times more than in 2009.
Vincent Degert, head of the EU delegation to Serbia, and Serbian Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic signed a 178.5m-euro agreement on Monday (July 25th) for the 2011 National Programme for Serbia.
The funds will be used for 23 projects designed to strengthen the rule of law, overcome the financial crisis, improve competitiveness of the local private sector, and support social inclusion and reconciliation among people in the region.
Turkish Economy Minister Zafer Caglayan said on Monday (July 25th) that his country will attract foreign investments worth $7-8 billion in the coming months.
He added that he is leading talks with two foreign investors on the projects.
(Various sources -- 20/07/11-27/07/11)
