22/02/2012
Heavy snow and low temperatures in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina will have a negative effect on local vegetable producers and will result in limited early supplies, experts warned.
However, this situation may benefit Macedonian exports to these countries, since they have not been as affected by the cold weather.
A new plant that will produce Chinese brand Great Wall cars was officially inaugurated in Lovech, Bulgaria, on Tuesday (February 21st).
The facility, which is the first by a Chinese automaker in the EU, employs over 120 people with their number expected to eventually reach 2,000.
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and visiting Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu signed an agreement on Thursday (February 16th) to collaborate on natural gas and oil searches in their adjoining territorial waters.
The deal also aims to promote tourism and trade, agricultural and health co-operation.
Bulgaria will need around 40m euros to recover from floods that hit its southeast region of Haskovo two weeks ago, EU Funds Management Minister Tomislav Donchev said on Monday (February 20th).
The severe floods that were caused by a crack in the Ivanovo water reservoir dam took ten lives and destroyed dozens of houses and vital infrastructure in the area.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) announced on Thursday (February 16th) that it approved a 28.5m-euro sovereign loan to support road construction in Brcko, in the northern part of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Montenegro's Privatisation Council adopted a 2012 plan on Monday (February 20th) that envisions the sell-off of 11 state-controlled companies, including news and publishing company Pobjeda, national air carrier Montenegro Airlines and the national railway infrastructure company.
Romanian Prime Minister Mihai Razvan Ungureanu on Friday (February 17th) called for stronger measures against tax evaders in the alcohol and farm produce sectors for the next two months.
According to him, the crackdown would help the country add 2 billion euros to state revenues.
Turkey has seen a sharp hike in the number of Iranian companies in its territory over the past year.
A total of 590 Iranian businesses and 2,140 Iranian joint ventures were established in Turkey in 2011 -- a 41% increase from 2010.
Croatia and Bulgaria have a strong potential to co-operate in infrastructure, tourism and energy, Bulgarian President Rosen Plevneliev and visiting Croatian Parliament Speaker Boris Sprem said on Friday (February 17th).
The officials also noted their commitment to maintaining macro-economic stability, promoting foreign investments, stepping up the fight against corruption and organised crime, and taking measures to improve the business environment.
(Various sources -- 15/02/12-22/02/12)
