18/01/2012
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is included in a list of the world's top ten adventure tourism destinations for 2012, compiled by National Geographic magazine.
The country, the only one from the Balkans to make it into the ranking, has been recommended for its great mountain biking opportunities.
Greece and Cyprus may strike a deal to connect their power grids, Greek Environment, Energy and Climate Change Minister George Papaconstantinou said January 11th.
The government in Athens "would look into the financial and technical aspects of linking Cyprus and [the island of] Crete with the prospect of linking Crete with continental Greece" in an effort to raise security and increase supplies, he said.
Dublin-based oil and gas exploration company San Leon Energy, which holds a 75% participating interest in the Durres Block offshore Albania, said on Tuesday (January 17th) that its latest 3D data has revealed large oil and gas prospects in the area.
According to estimates, Durres may hold over 1 billion barrels of oil equivalent across the proven petroleum systems.
San Leone invited bids for a stake in its Albanian license.
Croatia's economy will probably shrink by 0.2% in 2012, the Central Bank forecasted on Wednesday (January 11th).
At the same time, the bank predicted the economy should return to growth in 2013.
Meanwhile, President Ivo Josipovic said Monday (January 17th) -- just days ahead of a referendum on Zagreb's EU entry -- that the accession to the Union, planned for July 2013, is expected to boost the country's stagnating economy.
Thousands of protestors and strikers against austerity measures paralysed Athens on Tuesday (January 17th) as representatives of the EU and IMF arrived for talks as part of efforts to agree on a 130 billion-euro rescue package.
Meanwhile, private creditors, which are a key part of international efforts to bailout the country, warned on Monday that authorities in Athens must urgently find a way to overcome a deadlock in talks on a plan for a "haircut" of the country's debt.
Rating agency Standard and Poor's downgraded the credit rating of Cyprus by 2 notches on Friday (January 13th), from BBB to BB+, citing the deep political, financial and monetary problems in the eurozone and the exposure of the Cypriot financial system to the ailing Greek economy.
Cypriot Finance Minister Kikis Kazamias criticised the agency's decision as "arbitrary and unsubstantiated".
Macedonia's Economy Minister Valon Saracini met with his Turkish counterpart Zafer Caglayan, representatives of the Istanbul Chamber of Commerce and the Turkish Industry of Business Association (TUSIAD) in Istanbul on Thursday (January 12th) to discuss ways to boost economic relations between the two countries.
Saracini presented his government's ongoing projects and reforms aimed to improve the country's attractiveness to investors.
Thousands of Bulgarians rallied in several big cities on Saturday (January 14th) against the government's plans to allow shale gas drilling in one of the country's most fertile areas in the northeast.
Protestors demanded a moratorium on the so-called "fracking" process, arguing it could poison underground water, trigger earthquakes and cause serious health problems for the people.
The government granted a license for shale gas tests to US energy company Chevron in June in a hope to reduce Bulgaria's heavy dependence on Russian supplies.
The Serbian government adopted a pack of measures on Thursday (January 12th) aimed at boosting the country's finances.
Economy and Regional Minister Nebojsa Ciric announced a $30m programme to provide loan support to the economy, through the country's Development Fund.
(Various sources -- 11/01/12-18/01/12)
