20/07/2011
Germany's Federal Labour Agency announced several vacancies for qualified workers from crisis-hit Greece, Spain and Portugal on Monday (July 18th). 
Germany has experienced a robust economic recovery, creating opportunities for other EU members to capitalise on their neighbour's healthier job market.
***
The European Aerospace and Defence Company (EADS) opened a production plant for Airbus aircraft components on July 12th in Romania. 
The factory is situated in Ghimbav, the prominent helicopter producer of the communist era. 
A subsidiary of EADS, Premium Aerotec, owns the 40m-euro project. 
There are currently 300 factory employees, with the number expected to surpass 500.
***
Bulgarian Minister of Economy, Energy and Tourism Traycho Traykov and his Romanian counterpart, Ion Ariton, agreed on Monday (July 18th) to develop two large-scale hydropower plants on the Danube River. 
At a meeting in Bucharest, the two ministers mentioned plans to sign a memorandum on the preparation and implementation of the two projects in September.
***
Construction on the new terminal at Pristina International Airport began on July 11th. 
The 120m-euro facility will include a new control tower, an apron capable of holding nine Boeing 737s, three air bridges, a car park for 1,750 vehicles, a new access road and wider taxi lanes. 
Turkey's Limak Group, the company running the airport, says this new capacity will enable the facility to serve 4 million passengers each year. 
Construction of the terminal is expected to be completed in June 2012.
***
Albania's Parliamentary Committee on the Economy approved a law Monday (July 18th) that removes customs fees from used cars. 
An annual service tax will replace these fees, a move that will reduce the fiscal burden on consumers. 
The legislation takes effect on September 1st.
***
The European Commission invested 19m euros in the first-loss tranche of Southeast Europe's Green for Growth Fund (GGF) on Monday (July 18th). 
This investment will finance GGF's energy efficiency and renewable energy projects in Turkey and Croatia. 
The funds will provide fiscal assistance to small and medium-sized enterprises as well as private households.
***
Two Greek banks ranked among a list of eight European financial institutions that failed the European Bank Authority's stress test. 
A total of 91 banks underwent this test. 
The two Greek banks -- Atebank and Eurobank EFT -- will have to accumulate additional capital to improve their financial stability.
***
Serbia's Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy announced the completion of a 28km section of Serbia's Corridor 10 motorway on Friday (July 15th). 
The section, which connects Horgos to Bikovo, was recently opened to traffic.
***
On Monday (July 18th), Turkey's Motorway Authority postponed the tender for the construction of a third bridge over the Bosphorus until the end of the year. 
This decision came in response to bidders' requests for more preparation time. 
Seven businesses from Turkey, four from Japan, two from Russia, and one each from Spain, Austria and Italy are in competition for the tender.
(Various sources -- 13/07/11-20/07/11)
