15/02/2012
Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Serbia have suspended shipping on the Danube River due to severe freezing and ice in the waterway.
Authorities are taking measures to break the ice to avoid overflowing and possible floods.
Meanwhile, European shippers are suffering millions of euros in losses due to the blockade.
Greece's GDP shrunk by 7% in the last quarter of 2011, according to official figures published on Tuesday (February 14th).
This compares to a negative growth of 5% in the third quarter.
The news came as the parliament approved a fresh package of austerity measures.
The IMF decided on Thursday (February 9th) to suspend the release of the first instalment of a 1 billion-euro credit line to Serbia due to the country's failure to keep its spending within agreed limits.
The first tranche of the deal, that was agreed in September 2011, amounted to 190m euros.
Macedonia's government decided late on Monday (February 13th) to curb electricity exports until February 29th due to higher local consumption amid continued freezing temperatures in the region.
Earlier, Bulgaria adopted a similar move, while Romania announced it is considering the option.
Serbia, meanwhile, decided last week to cut power to over 200 industrial users to prevent its grid from collapsing.
Montenegro has offered 1 euro to the Russian owners of ailing local aluminium smelter KAP, Economy Minister Vladimir Kavaric announced on Monday (February 13th).
According to the official, the enterprise, which is jointly controlled by Podgorica and the Central European Aluminium Company, would need a state subsidy of 22m euros to survive.
The Croatian government submitted its 2012 draft budget to parliament on Tuesday (February 14th), envisioning serious cuts aimed to bring down the country's budget deficit.
According to the document, GDP this year would increase by 3.8% compared to previous forecasts of 4.2%.
Kosovo Minister of Industry and Trade Mimoza Kusari Lila announced that the country will spend 1m euros to promote its potential to foreign investors via a campaign on CNN.
The promotional videos will run over the next 12 months.
The World Bank's International Financial Corporation (IFC) has announced plans to invest 6m euros in Albania's energy sector.
The funds will be used to build small hydroelectric plants in an effort to increase local production and curb imports of energy resources.
The organisers of the Webit Congress announced that Turkey will be the new host of the top digital business and marketing expo and conference in Central and Eastern Europe.
In 2011, the event in Sofia attracted 5,300 companies and investors from 45 countries.
(Various sources – 08/02/12-15/02/12)
