10/08/2011
Hundreds of farmers blocked the four main crossings in Bosnia and Herzegovina on Monday (August 8th), demanding to receive fiscal support to meet EU standards.
The protest caused traffic jams at the peak of the summer tourist season.
A new 400kW transmission line connecting Albania and Montenegro was inaugurated on Monday (August 8th) at a ceremony attended by Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and Montenegrin Deputy Prime Minister Vujica Lazovic.
The 43m-euro project, which runs between the two capitals, has been implemented with the financial support of Germany.
Health care financing under the first 2011 budget revision, which was approved by the Romanian government on August 4th, has led to the resignation of Health Minister Attila Cseke.
Although funding for the sector has been increased to meet current needs, Cseke said his move was prompted by the fact that nobody consulted him about the planned budget.
A study by the Bulgarian Finance Ministry revealed on Monday (August 8th) that the electronics, IT and services outsourcing industries have the highest growth potential in the country.
The conclusion is based on observations of the real economy between 2008 and 2010.
Croatia is selling two islands in a bid to generate revenue to support its economy.
Oruda and Palacol, situated near Losinj, are being offered for a combined price of 5.8m euros.
Oruda has an area of 36 hectacres and has a small house, a church, an olive grove and a freshwater spring.
Palacol, which measures 4 hectacres, has an old Byzantine fortress that needs reconstruction.
The Trans-Adriatic Pipeline (TAP) consortium announced on Monday (August 8th) it is doubling its investment in Greece to over 1 billion euros, despite the country's financial woes.
The money will go for a gas pipeline that will connect the Caspian basin to European markets.
It is expected to create 2,000 jobs.
Turkey's Central Bank surprised the market Thursday (August 4th) by announcing a cut in policy rates by 0.5% to 5.75% from 6.25%.
After an emergency meeting, Governor Erdem Basci explained the move was made amid rising concerns that turmoil in Europe's finances and slowing US economic growth may drive Turkey into recession, which may possibly require lower rates to shield the local economy.
The final steel segment of the new bridge across the Sava River in Belgrade was placed on Monday (August 8th) at a ceremony attended by senior officials, including Serbian President Boris Tadic.
The bridge, which is set to open for traffic by mid-December, is 964m long and 45m wide and is expected to significantly alleviate traffic in the busy capital.
(Various sources -- 03/08/11-10/08/11)
