08/02/2012
Serbian President Boris Tadic, Croatia's Ivo Josipovic and the members of Bosnia and Herzegovina's tripartite presidency agreed at a meeting near Sarajevo on Friday (February 3rd) that their countries should strengthen economic ties to overcome the global financial crisis.
The leaders discussed a wide range of issues, including access to EU funds for regional co-operation.
The IMF and Romania reached an agreement Monday (February 6th) on the release of a 505m-euro tranche of the country's 20 billion-euro stand-by arrangement with the Fund.
Meanwhile, the IMF lowered its forecast for Romania's economic growth this year from 1.8-2.3% to 1.5-2%, citing slowing exports to Western Europe, the country's main trade partner.
A wave of protest rose in Bulgaria and Romania last week, after the two countries signed the so-called Anti-Counterfeit Trade Agreement (ACTA) that aims to combat counterfeit goods, generic medicines and copyright infringements on the internet.
Amid public fears freedom of expression would be restricted, authorities assured that a dialogue with the civil society would be held before the deal is ratified -- a step necessary for it to take effect in the countries.
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton urged Bulgaria on Sunday (February 5th) to cut its energy dependence on Russia by diversifying its oil and gas supplies.
Clinton's visit came shortly after Bulgarian authorities imposed a moratorium on the planned exploration of shale gas reserves in the country's northeast, citing environmental concerns.
Last week's bankruptcy of Hungarian air carrier Malev left cities across the Western Balkans without direct links to Budapest.
The company's flights were also a key transit point for other destinations around Europe.
Russian gas giant Gazprom announced on Thursday (February 2nd) that it is interested in acquiring Austrian OMV AG's filling stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia.
In December, OMV announced plans to sell its subsidiaries in the Balkans to dispose of its less profitable assets.
Istanbul hosted the 1st Gulf Co-operation Council-Turkey business forum aimed to present and discuss opportunities for co-operation between the two regions.
The event, held on Monday (February 6h) and Tuesday, focused on Clean Energy Resources, oil and gas, transportation, banking and finance, agriculture and food security, SMEs and woman's entrepreneurship.
It attracted more than 165 businesspeople from the Arab Gulf countries.
Montenegro may join the South Stream pipeline project.
The news came after representatives of Russia's Gazprom, which will begin building the pipeline by the end of this year, and Montenegrin authorities met in Podgorica on Friday (February 3rd).
(Various sources -- 01/02/12 - 08/02/12)
