03/08/2011
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Albania surpassed the $1 billion mark in 2010, according to UNDP Resident Coordinator Zineb Touimi Benjelloun.
Last year, $1.097 billion in FDI made Albania the second largest investment recipient in Southeast Europe after Serbia, and the only country in the region where investment has increased despite the global economic downturn.
Greece and Romania, alongside other troubled EU members Portugal, Ireland, Hungary and Latvia, may receive a 2.8 billion euro "emergency package".
EU Regional Policy Commissioner Johannes Hahn said Monday (August 1st) that the package would bolster these countries’ farming, regional and infrastructure projects from 85% to 95%.
The boost aims to help these countries quickly launch programmes that were previously blocked due to their financial difficulties.
Concerns over a fuel shortage spread in Bulgaria last week after the customs office closed Lukoil Nefthochim, one of Bulgaria's biggest fuel providers, due to tax issues, and its failure to install proper product metering led it to be stripped of tax fuel depot licences.
On Monday (August 1st), a court overturned the closure and reinstated the refinery until a higher court could rule on the issue.
Romania completed talks with the IMF on Monday (August 1st) to unlock 480m euros under the country's stand-by arrangement with the institution.
The agreement came after a two-week review of the 5 billion euro precautionary deal.
IMF mission chief Jeffrey Franks praised Bucharest for upholding its obligations and maintaining strict economic policies.
He believes the economy could grow by 1.5% this year, after two years of contraction.
Kosovo's trade embargo on Serbian goods has caused food and medicine supply shortages in the Serb-dominated part of Kosovo.
According to statistics, Kosovo imports over 90% of its food from Serbia.
Bulgaria's Privatization Agency announced on Monday (August 1st) that British American Tobacco has abandoned plans to bid on local cigarette company Bulgartabak.
The only remaining bidder is BT Invest, an Austrian-registered company owned by Russian state bank VTB.
The current tender is the fourth attempt to sell the state's 79.8% stake in Bulgartabak.
According to Eurostat data published on Monday (August 1st), Greece had the highest unemployment rate of any EU country in June.
Last month, unemployment in the debt-ridden country reached 15% from 11% a year ago.
Bulgaria and Cyprus are also high on the list, at 11.4% from 10.1%, and 7.6% from 6.5% respectively.
Serbia launched a tender for the privatization of its indebted airline JAT Airways on Monday (August 1st).
The country had originally hoped to reach a deal with Turkish Airlines to act as the majority stakeholder;
however, an agreement has not been reached.
The tender will expire on September 30th.
(Various sources -- 27/07/11-03/08/11)
