06/07/2011
Albania took over the rotating presidency of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Black Sea Economic Co-operation (PABSEC) at a ceremony in Kiev on Sunday (July 3rd). 
Over the next six months, Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli will chair the organisation. 
The PABSEC includes Albania, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Armenia, Georgia, Greece, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Turkey and Ukraine.
Despite the global financial crisis, economies in Southeast Europe have continued to reform their business regulations, according to the Doing Business in Southeast Europe 2011 report published by the World Bank's International Financial Corporation on Wednesday (June 29th). 
The document analyses the ease of conducting business in 22 cities in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Kosovo, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro and Serbia. 
It measures four areas: starting a business, dealing with construction permits, registering property, and enforcing contracts. 
Some notable mentions include Skopje and Banja Luka, for making the greatest progress across the board.
Interest rates in Bulgaria are lower than those in Romania, but much higher than those in Greece, according to a study by Unicredit Bulbank economists. 
The study, published on Monday (July 4th), looked at ten countries in Central and Eastern Europe over the period 2007-2010 and revealed that the share of "bad" credit is highest in Romania, standing at 20.5%.
Bulgaria and Russia have agreed to extend talks over the Belene nuclear plant project another three months, Bulgaria's Minister of Economy, Energy and Tourism Traycho Traykov announced on Friday (July 1st). 
The previous agreement, which was signed in April and expired in late June, gave the two sides extra time to look into pending issues such as additional safety nets and project costs.
The Fitch ratings agency upgraded Romania's long-term credit rating one notch to BBB- on Monday (July 4th), thus bringing it to investment grade. 
The agency explained that the upgrade-- the first in almost three years -- was decided amid Romania's successful efforts to curb its budget deficit and overcome the two-year recession.
Ratings agency Standard & Poor's warned on Monday (July 4th) that current proposals for a private bank rollover on Greece's debt would, in effect, represent a "selective default". 
German and French financial institutions have already given principle approval for the move, to allow the country time to deal with its debts. 
If the plan is approved, it would include the restructuring of up to 30 billion euros of Greek government debt.
Serbia will receive 137m euros from Germany for various projects targeting energy, institutions and unemployment. 
Most of the money will go towards energy projects, particularly modernisation of the Vlasina hydroelectric plant, Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic announced on Friday (July 1st).
Istanbul will top the list of 132 cities where tourism is expected to grow the fasted this year, MasterCard Worldwide's Target Cities Index revealed on Saturday (July 2nd). 
The company said tourism revenues in the Turkish city will reach $10.2 billion, up 30.1% year-on-year.
Greek Development Minister Michalis Chrisochoides announced on Monday (July 4th) that approximately 20,000 new companies will receive cash subsidies of up to 10,000 euros on the condition they do not to fire workers. 
The programme, intended to curb job cuts in the private sector, began five years ago and will continue through September.
Croatia issued government Eurobonds worth 750m euros on Thursday (June 30th). 
The bonds have a 2018 maturity date and a coupon rate of 5.875. 
They were bought almost immediately.
From various sources -- 29/06/11 - 6/07/11
