17/09/2007
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 17/09/07
A country with an outstandingly complicated government structure, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has been facing particularly slow progress in recent months. 
The election campaign last year was marked by a return to inflammatory, ethno-nationalist rhetoric, and the political climate has continued to deteriorate.
The EU has made it clear that the country's chances of moving ahead in its accession bid depend on substantial reforms, aimed at strengthening state institutions. 
The current state composition -- with three constituent peoples and two entities -- is a product of the Dayton Agreement, which ended the four-year conflict in 1995.
While the deal was credited with halting the violence, most observers agree that the political system it established is complicated, inefficient, expensive and ultimately incompatible with EU standards. 
However, the political will to change it is proving hard to muster.
Hardline politicians in both entities are responsible for the stalemate, but most observers agree that Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik has done the most to foster the current adversarial atmosphere. 
Leader of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), which swept the 2006 elections, Dodik has been a fierce advocate of strengthening the Bosnian Serb entity at the expense of the state.
"I am interested in nothing else but the RS. 
For me, the BiH is just a construction of Dayton, created by the agreement. 
And I respect the agreement," he said recently. 
On another occasion, he described BiH as a "speed brake on the development of RS". 
Local and foreign politicians alike have criticised him for seeking to make the entity a semi-autonomous state.
The election campaign saw calls from Bosniak politicians for RS to be abolished. 
Dodik responded with threats of an independence referendum. 
Top RS officials and entity representatives in the BiH Parliament have warned they could request the return of all authorities that were transferred from the entities to the state in recent years.
"If the requests for the abolishment on the RS continue, we would request to return our authorities for defence, indirect taxation and Higher Judiciary and Prosecutor Council to the entity level," said RS President Milan Jelic.
Dodik and his SNSD stand for a BiH that is organised as a decentralised, federal state, with the RS as one federative unit. 
Dodik claims that the introduction of a simple pluralist democracy, with the entire country as one electoral unit, would lead to the country being dominated by the Bosniaks. 
A man with an extensive network of local business contacts, he believes strongly in the economy as the primary driver of the Bosnian Serb entity's future.
Born in March 1959 at Laktasi, close to Banja Luka, Dodik graduated from the Faculty of Political Science at the University of Belgrade. 
From 1986 through 1990, he headed the Laktasi Municipality. 
During the war in BiH, he served as a representative in the RS National Assembly. 
He formed the Independent Members of Parliament Caucus, which was the only political opposition to the ruling Serb Democratic Party (SDS), the party led by war crimes indictee Radovan Karadzic.
The caucus he chaired formed the core of his current party. 
In 1997, he was elected into the National Assembly of the RS. 
In January 1998, then RS President Biljana Plavsic nominated him as prime minister. 
His government lasted until January 2001.
Dodik concentrated on strengthening his political party, while sharply criticising the SDS. 
He won the attention of the international community in BiH, which came to see him as a progressive alternative to the nationalistic hardliners.
In February 2006, when Dodik was tapped as prime minister after his party's election win, he vowed to protect the existence of RS.
"In 1996, Dodik was among the rare politicians in RS who publicly claimed that [war crimes indictee Radovan] Karadzic and Ratko Mladic must be brought to the UN war crimes tribunal at The Hague," says Tanja Topic, a political analyst at the Friedrich Ebert Foundation in Banja Luka. 
"Being a pragmatist, a combination of politician and businessman, Dodik then gravitated towards the populist politics that brought him huge public support."
According to Topic, there are a number of factors behind the resurgence of nationalist rhetoric. 
One is that the underlying beliefs have never really changed. 
For years, she says, the citizens of RS have been publicly and politically educated that their entity is in fact a state. 
Furthermore, Topic adds, the international community has not been successful in convincing the Bosnian Serbs that the current structure is too expensive and that the money now spent on the huge administration could be better used elsewhere, like social programmes.
The talk of an independence referendum in RS is also being fuelled by the Kosovo status debate, Topi says, arguing that Serbian politicians are using RS as part of the effort to stop Kosovo from breaking away.
The price for citizens in both entities has been a slowdown in BiH's journey towards EU integration. 
Police reform is a key precondition for signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU, a step that could still potentially happen this year. 
The reform is long overdue, however, because of Dodik's insistence that police authority must remain at the entity level. 
Similarly, RS representatives oppose NATO's request to put the Civil Protection Administration at the state level.
With issues such as these proving hard to resolve, the prospects for compromise on the larger problem of constitutional reform are not rosy. 
"BiH is stuck between two concepts of constitutional structure that exclude each other -- one that calls for abolishment of entities, and the other that requests future existence of RS," says Topic. 
"It is hard to find a way out, and the international community has been disoriented about that so far."
Topic believes that overcoming the stalemate will require a firm engagement by the international community, which must somehow find a course between the approaches of two former High Representatives: Paddy Ashdown, who readily used his Bonn Powers to sack public officials and impose the changes he sought, and Christian Schwarz-Schilling, who left local politicians to resolve disputes on their own, without much success.
Current High Representative Miroslav Lajcak, who took office in July, has sharply criticised Dodik's stance, and particularly his suggestion that RS could secede. 
The prime minister "should consider carefully whether he wishes to challenge the international community by statements that question the constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Dayton Peace Agreement," Lajcak warned last month.
An end-of-September deadline has been set for reaching agreement on police reform. 
If political leaders prove unable to compromise, the SAA will not be signed this year, and the country's EU bid will be in limbo. 
"Bosnia and Herzegovina now risks falling farther behind its neighbours and ending up last on the road to Europe," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has said.
