12/09/2012
Croatia's tourism sector has registered the best results in its history in the first eight months of this year, Tourism Minister Veljko Ostojic told reporters.
He said that almost 10 million tourists visited Croatia during the period, which represents a 4.2 percent increase from the same period last year.
Most visitors came from Germany, followed by Slovenia, Austria, Italy and Czech Republic.
Youth unemployment in Greece is among the highest in Europe, standing at 55 percent, according to a report by the International Labour Organisation, published last week.
The youth unemployment situation in southern Europe is also quite dire.
"Even if the eurozone crisis does not escalate in the coming months, unemployment in southern Europe will shrink very slowly in the coming years," Ekkehart Ernst, organisation economist, told Financial Times Deutschland on Monday (September 10th).
The Serbian government adopted a proposal on Monday (September 10th) to rebalance the 2012 budget and stabilise public finances.
Local media reported the decision was taken to raise the VAT from 18 percent to 20 percent starting in October.
The 8 percent rate for food products will remain unchanged in order to maintain the living standard.
A US-based consortium has made the top bid for Albania's state owned oil company Albpetrol's assets.
Veltro Energy's 850 million euro offer for Albetrol's above-ground assets and the right to explore and exploit oil and gas in Albanian territory for 25 years was one of four bids.
The US company's offer more than doubled the value that advisors placed on the sale.
The Cypriot Orthodox Christian Church will co-operate with an international company that has applied to drill for natural gas in the island's exclusive economic zone, Archbishop Chrysostomos II told local media on Friday (September 7th).
According to the report, the church intends to use property as collateral to acquire a share in natural gas drilling and distribution activities.
Greece has submitted its 11.5 billion-euro austerity programme to the troika of international creditors, Finance Minister Yannis Stournaras said on Monday (September 10th).
A team of creditors will be in Athens for several weeks to assess the programme and decide whether the country can receive the next 31 billion-euro installment of its 130 billion-euro bailout package.
Serbia's state-run power company Elektroprivreda Srbije signed a memorandum of understanding with Germany's second largest utility RWE on Monday (September 10th), on joint energy projects.
Included in the plan is the overhaul, extension and operation of hydro-power plants on the Drina and Danube rivers, with a combined capacity of 920 MW, and the expansion of the coal-fired Nikola Tesla complex.
Turkey's economy has expanded at its slowest pace since 2009 in the second quarter of this year, official statistics data showed on Monday (September 10th).
GDP grew by 2.9 percent during the period, compared to 8.8 percent a year ago.
Turkey is set to become Europe's top emerging logistics market over the next five years, realtor Jones Lang LaSalle said in a report on Monday (September 10th).
According to the company, the main factor driving the trend was sparked by recent reforms aimed to boost market transparency and the country's growing retail market and rising trade volumes.
(Various sources -- 05/09/12-12/09/12)
