05/06/2013
The IMF has released 1.74 billion euros in fresh bailout funds to Greece after the country successfully passed a third performance review.
The fund praised the efforts of the government in Athens to meet their commitments.
Countries in the Balkans are among the most unattractive in the world when it comes to foreign investments, according to a research by Swiss-based International Media Development Institute.
The results show that Croatia ranks 58 in the list of 60 countries.
Within the region, Turkey ranks best at 37th, followed by Slovenia at 52nd, Greece at 54th and Bulgaria at 57th.
Rating agency Fitch downgraded Cyprus into junk territory to B-, citing the increased uncertainty over the economy of the island.
According to the agency, there is a risk that the 23 billion-euro bailout assistance from the IMF and the EU may go off track
Montenegro's government expects the country to be visited by around 1.5 million tourists this summer.
Tourism Minister Branimir Gvozdenovic told local media that the forecast was made based on the bookings in hotels before the start of the season.
Croatia's M San Grupa plans to open a new facility to expand its LED TV production in the country.
Currently, the company makes about 84,000 LED TV sets a year.
The output, which comes under the Vivax brand, is mainly exported to the EU.
The world's biggest circulator pumps maker, Denmark-based Grundfos A/S, has opened a new factory in Serbia.
The facility, based in Indjija northwest of Belgrade, will employ 350 people by the end of 2014.
Bank credits for companies and individuals in Albania continue to grow, recent data from the Central Bank in Tirana indicate.
In the end of April they amounted to some 750,000 euros which is 0.02 percent up from December 2012.
Macedonia hosted a regional agricultural business forum, organised by the Regional Competitiveness Initiative in partnership with the USAID, brought together representatives from all over the Western Balkans in an effort to boost competitiveness and increase co-operation in the field.
(Various sources -- 29/05/13-05/06/13)
