29/05/2013
Trade between Albania and Macedonia has grown by 15 percent over the past three years, participants in an Albanian-Macedonian Business Forum in Tirana said.
Businessmen discussed possibilities to further strengthen co-operation in the field of tourism, food and drinks production.
China Glory International plans to invest 1.5 billion euros to build golf courses in Cyprus.
The facilities will be located in the Paphos region in the southern part of the island.
Bulgarian national air carrier Bulgaria Air is considering launching a regular direct air service between Skopje and Sofia, officials said at a joint meeting of the Macedonian-Bulgarian Economic Chamber.
Currently, the company is studying the feasibility and the rate of return on the route.
Norwegian experts believe Greece has natural gas and oil reserves worth $1.7 billion, according to local TV channel Alfa.
They made this assessment after research under the sea south of the Crete Island.
Romania will have to return almost 700 million euros to the EU budget because of errors in the distribution of funds, Union Funds Minister Eugen Teodorovich told reporters in Bucharest.
The biggest violations were revealed in the distribution of funds for public procurements.
Officials from Montenegro, Albania, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a memorandum of understanding to co-operate in the building of the TAP and IAP gas pipeline projects.
The two facilities will bring natural gas from Azerbaijan.
Croatia is counting on its energy sector to deal with its high national debt and a lack of competitiveness, President Ivo Josipovic told CNN in an interview.
He said the country is looking for partners in the area to help reveal oil and gas deposits in the Adriatic.
A business forum called Summit100 was held in the resort complex of Becici in Montenegro.
The event, which focused on ways to boost the competitiveness of Southeast European countries and improve their business performance, was attended by businessmen and officials from Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia.
(Various sources -- 22/05/13-29/05/13)
