03/04/2013
Albania's parliament approved a proposal to exempt all domestic and imported raw materials used in farming, including equipment and pedigree animals, from the VAT.
The move is expected to benefit some 350,000 farms across the country.
The current VAT rate in Albania is 20 percent.
Banks in the region of Central and Eastern Europe are facing a difficult year, according to rating agency Standard & Poor's.
Performance is expected to be particularly weak in Bulgaria, Croatia, Slovenia and Hungary, the group said, citing high levels of bad loans and credit losses, weak credit demand and compressed margins.
The European Commission has finalised a series of measures aimed to promote regional co-operation between Western Balkan countries as part of a 273 million-euro programme for 2012-2013.
The funds will support co-operation with international financial institutions to mobilise funding, help develop civil society, education, student mobility programmes and achieve alignment with EU standards.
The Bank of Cyprus is suspending its operations in Romania for a week with immediate effect.
ATM machines of the bank, which has 10 branches in Romania, will stay open.
Bank of Cyprus' foreign operations will have to be closed under the island's 10 billion-euro bailout deal with international creditors.
Cyprus' economy will shrink by 15 percent in the next 12 months, the European Commission predicted.
The forecast is based on the expected consequences on households and business of the 10 billion-euro bailout deal with international creditors.
The Abu Dhabi Fund for Development has approved $400 million for the development of Serbian agriculture, Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic said.
Dinkic, who is visiting Abu Dhabi, also announced an agreement with local air carrier Etihad to launch direct flights between the two capitals.
Czech power utility CEZ filed a complaint with the European Commission against Bulgaria over the government's move to take away the company's local license.
In February, high electricity bills spurred massive protests in the country which eventually toppled the government.
CEZ dominates power distribution in Bulgaria's west.
People in the social and economic risk groups in Serbia now have the right to free amounts of natural gas and electricity.
The move is expected to benefit 350,000 people, who will be able to use between 120 and 250 kW of free electricity and between 35 and 75 cubic metres of natural gas a month.
Turkey's GDP grew by 2.2 percent in 2012, according to Turkstat.
Meanwhile, rating agency Standard & Poor's on Wednesday raised the country's sovereign credit rating by one notch to BB-plus, citing improved exports and a steady decline in external financing requirements.
Turkish and Macedonian experts agreed to co-operate in the field of vine-growing and forestry.
At a meeting between a Turkish delegation in Skopje and Macedonian Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy Minister Ljupco Dimovski specific steps were discussed related to the protection of forests and reconstruction, the modernisation and upgrade of the water systems.
(Various sources -- 27/03/13-03/04/13)
