01/05/2013
Representatives of seven air carriers from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Hungary and Kosovo gathered in Sarajevo to sign a letter of intent to strengthen their co-operation.
The initiative was launched by Montenegro.
The first factory producing syringes in the region opened in the town of Suva Reka, southern Kosovo.
The 1 million-euro facility will produce three types of syringes for the local and regional markets.
A group of young businessmen in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) created the so-called DijasporaCard, which is available online and offers discounts ranging from 5 to 60 percent to BiH diaspora to buy products from their home country.
German company Henkel will invest 7 million euros in a factory in Bileca, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The plant will make powder products on cement basis such as tiles, coating and roughcast, which will be exported to Croatia, Montenegro and Albania.
Greece's parliament approved a plan that will cut 15,000 public jobs by the end of 2014.
The move is part of a new set of austerity measures aimed to ensure a 2.8 billion-euro installment from the country's international creditors.
The tranche was released on Monday.
The World Bank approved a $100 million loan to help Serbia upgrade its road infrastructure and safety.
The new Road Rehabilitation and Safety Project will improve more than 800 kilometres of roads and will additionally secure traffic calming measures, signage and road furniture for another 1,000 kilometres of national roads.
German auto maker Daimler will invest more than 300 million euros in a new plant in Romania.
The facility will assemble transmissions for Mercedes-Benz luxury cars.
Greek telecom operator OTE has reached an agreement with Norway's Telenor to sell its Bulgarian unit Globul.
Turkey's Turk Telekom had also placed an offer for the unit.
Low cost air carrier Ryanair is launching its first route to Montenegro on June 20th.
The route between Podgorica and Brussels will include two weekly flights and is expected to carry 10,000 passengers a year.
The Turkish government submitted a new bill aimed to attract Turkish assets worth more than $100 billion that are held abroad.
If approved by parliament, the bill will cut taxes for Turkish citizens and firms declaring foreign-held assets from up to 35 percent currently to 2 percent.
The condition is to declare the assets no later than July 31st.
(Various sources -- 24/04/13-01/05/13)
