24/04/2013
Serbia's Industry of Machines and Tractors will supply parts for 5,000 tractors to Turkey over the next three years, according to a memorandum of understanding it signed with Turkey's Tomosan.
The two firms also agreed to develop a joint project for components for a new tractor model that will be sold both on the Serbian and the Turkish market.
Greece will offer residence to investors from outside the EU who purchase or rent property worth more than 250,000 euros.
The move is part of the country's effort to revive its real estate industry and give a boost to its ailing economy.
The Central Bank of Cyprus announced that local and foreign insurance companies will take a 27.5 percent loss on deposits over 100,000 euros as part of a haircut on bank deposits in the island.
These companies were originally excluded from the plan.
A Macedonian delegation, led by Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, is on an official visit to Brazil, Argentina and Mexico.
The tour aims to promote the Balkan country as an attractive investment destination and boost business and political ties.
Turk Telekom has placed a binding bid for the purchase of Bulgaria's second biggest operator Cosmo Bulgaria Mobile (Globul) and Germanos Telecom Bulgaria.
Currently, the two companies are owned by Greece's OTE.
Turk Telekom's bid is part of its regional expansion strategy.
US-based Exxon Mobil is interested in investing in Croatia, Economy Minister Ivan Vrdoljak said during an official visit to the US.
The firm is keen to take part in a tender for the exploration of oil and gas in the Adriatic Sea.
The possible investment in the project is estimated at $400 million, the minister added.
Greek-based Piraeus Bank has reached a deal to sell its Romanian unit ATEbank for 10.3 million euros.
The 93.3 percent, owned by Greece's second biggest lender, will be acquired by construction businessman Dorinel Umbrarescu.
Greece was the biggest foreign direct investor in Bulgaria's economy in the first two months of 2013, according to official data from Sofia.
Over the review period, Greek companies invested 9.4 million euros in the neighbouring country.
Albania, Greece and Italy have established a trilateral co-operation committee tasked with overseeing their support for the Trans Adriatic Pipeline project, the energy ministry in Athens said.
The pipeline will transport Azeri natural gas via Greece and Albania, across the Adriatic to Italy and the rest of Europe.
(Various sources -- 17/04/13-24/04/13)
