15/05/2013
Bulgaria and Turkey will set up two working groups to move forward on top priority energy projects between the two countries, Bulgarian Minister of Economy, Energy and Tourism Asen Vasilev and his Turkish counterpart Taner Yildiz agreed in Istanbul. 
The groups will discuss the implementation of the Nabucco West gas pipeline project and the settlement of administrative restrictions in the exports of Bulgarian electricity to neighbouring Turkey.
***
The International Financial Corporation, a member of the World Bank group, is organising a training course for commercial banking employees from Albania, Kosovo, Macedonia and Montenegro in an effort to improve regional service in the sector. 
The training is taking place in Ohrid, Macedonia.
***
Southeast European economies will experience modest growth this year, the European Bank of Research and Development said in its latest forecasts. 
The region is expected to register an average growth of 1.4 percent this year, with Turkey and Kosovo being in the lead with 3.7 percent and 3 percent respectively. 
The outlook is also positive for Serbia, where GDP is expected to increase by 2.2 percent, as well as for Albania and Macedonia with 1.5 percent. 
Bulgaria and Montenegro economies are expected to grow by 1 percent this year. 
Forecasts for Romania are for GDP to increase by 1.4 percent. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina will register a minimal economic growth of 0.1 percent, while Croatia will remain in recession with a negative growth of -0.3 percent.
***
Cyprus was awarded the first 2 billion-euro installment of its 10 billion-euro bailout plan. 
Greece, meanwhile, got a green light for its latest bailout payment amounting to 7.5 billion euros.
***
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Turkey will take advantage of their good political relations to enhance economic co-operation and joint ventures on foreign markets, the foreign ministers of the three countries said at a meeting in Sarajevo. 
The diplomats met in preparation for a summit in Ankara this week.
***
Slovenian retailer Mercator is exiting the Bulgarian market by the end of June. 
The group first signalled its intention to close its operations in Albania and Bulgaria and concentrate its future activities on the development of its business in Slovenia, Serbia, Croatia, BiH and Montenegro last year. 
It left Albania at the end of 2012.
***
US software giant Oracle will invest nearly 100 million euros in Romania, Romanian Delegate Minister for Infrastructure Projects of National Interest and Foreign Investments Dan Sova said. 
He added that the future plans of Oracle in Romania, which currently employs 2,500 people, also include setting up call-centre operations.
***
About 70 percent of Serbian tourists will spend their summer holidays in Greece this year, according to a poll from the National Association of Travel Agencies of Serbia. 
Turkey, Montenegro and Croatia are also among the top destinations for Serbs.
(Various sources -- 08/05/13-15/05/13)
