08/05/2013
The first euro bill with the word "euro" written in Cyrillic is now in circulation.
The 5-euro banknote also comes with new security features aimed to prevent counterfeiting.
Japan and Turkey signed a deal to build a nuclear plant on Turkey's Black Sea Coast.
The $22 billion facility will be the second nuclear plant in the country.
It will comprise four reactors with combined output of 4,800 mW.
Construction work is expected to start in 2017 with the first reactor put into operation by 2023.
The IMF will release the second 51 million euro tranche of international aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The tranche is part of a 509 million-euro stand-by arrangement aimed to help the country's public finances.
Serbia's economy has officially come out of recession, the finance and economy ministry said.
The conclusion came after statistical data showed earlier that industrial production grew by 5.2 percent in the first quarter of this year, contributing to a moderate GDP growth of 1.9 percent.
Cyprus has met all requirements to get the first tranche of its long-delayed 10 billion-euro bailout plan, the European Commission said.
The European Stability Mechanism is expected to make a decision on the disbursement of the first tranche, which is expected to total 3 billion euros, this week.
Greece's Athens International Airport is under Canadian management after German construction giant Hochtief, which previously ran the facility, sold its airport management business to the Canadian Public Sector Pension Investment Board in a 1.1 billion-euro deal.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development plans to continue its financial support for the Balkan region, and to increase aid to small- and medium-sized enterprises.
The promise came ahead of the financial institution's annual meeting, which will be held in Istanbul during the weekend.
Romanians are among the most optimistic EU citizens when it comes to the recovery of their economy, a recent GfK survey has shown.
In terms of confidence in their future economic prosperity, Romanians are only behind Germans and Austrians.
(Various sources -- 01/05/13-08/05/13)
