29/10/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 29/10/04
The Croatian government is considering amendments to its new law on drinking and driving, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader recently confirmed. 
The measure, introduced in August, reduced the blood alcohol content limit for drivers from 0.05 per cent to zero. 
It has triggered significant opposition from restaurant and hotel owners, who say it is hurting business, as well as from Catholic priests, who argue that they are now effectively barred from traveling between churches to celebrate Mass.
"If the statistics stabilise, and statistically the number of deaths while driving has been halved -- if that trend continues, then we will consider amending the law. 
We also see that the entire Croatian society is working on raising awareness of the need to wear seatbelts while driving, as well as of proper behavior on the roads," Sanader said.
In the meantime, petitions are being organised all across Croatia. 
In Zagreb, the 3,500-member Association of Hotelkeepers, Restaurant Owners and Tourist Workers has sponsored a campaign with the motto "The Right to a Glass of Wine".
According to Stjepan Safran, president of the Chamber of Commerce of Croatia, official statistics on the correlation between legal drinking limits and the number of traffic accidents in European countries do not support the zero tolerance approach. 
While that approach is used in Eastern European countries, including Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary and the Czech Republic, their Western European counterparts set 0.05 to 0.08 as the permitted amount. 
Among the latter countries are Italy, Ireland, Luxembourg, Switzerland and Great Britain.
"The number of traffic accidents in these countries is the smallest, which indicates that the problem lies elsewhere, and not in thousandths of percentage points," Safran says, adding that Croatia, if it wishes to be a tourist country, must adapt its legislation to the guests it wishes to attract.
The key factor in reducing the number of accidents and fatalities is rigorous police enforcement, Safran says. 
He emphasises that hotelkeepers and restaurant owners support strong penalties against those who break the law -- provided the laws themselves are reasonable.
Studies, however, suggest driving skills can become impaired at blood alcohol levels of as low as 0.02 per cent -- the equivalent of one glass of wine.
