29/10/2004
(Various sources -- 28/10/04 - 29/10/04)
The first-ever EU Constitution was signed in Rome on Friday (29 October), nearly half a century after the European integration process was set in motion. 
Heads of state and government and foreign affairs ministers of 29 European countries gathered in the Italian capital for the historic ceremony in a Renaissance palace on the city's Capitoline Hill.
The event took place amid heavy security, with up to 7,000 police and security personnel reportedly involved in an effort to protect the European dignitaries from the threat of terrorism. 
A no-fly zone, backed by a squadron of F-16 fighter jets, was imposed over the centre of Rome during the three-hour festivities, according to the BBC.
The Treaty and the Final Act establishing the Constitution of Europe were signed by the 25 EU member states. 
Candidate countries Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Turkey signed the Final Act.
The EU Constitution replaces most existing treaties, but not the member states' national constitutions. 
Its principal aim is to streamline EU institutions, give Europe a sharper profile on the international arena and accelerate the decision-making process by providing simpler voting rules in the expanding bloc. 
It will give the Union a president, elected for a two-and-a-half year term with one possible renewal, and a foreign minister to represent it on the world stage.
The constitution must be ratified by each of the 25 member states within the next two years so that it can become effective on 1 November 2006 as scheduled. 
Germany and Italy have said they would ratify the treaty through parliamentary procedures. 
But several countries, including Britain, France, Spain and Poland, have decided to put it to a referendum. 
That raises the possibility of rejection, particularly in Britain where euroscepticism is widespread.
EU foreign ministers, according to the British daily <I>Financial Times</I>, have already started considering options in the event the constitution is rejected by one or more member states. 
A declaration attached to the treaty assigns the task of finding a rescue scheme to the European Council of EU leaders.
Urging EU leaders to give the treaty a chance and avoid making amendments once it is signed, former French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing, who headed a panel that drew up the constitution, said this was the only possible text at the time.
"I want to say it is not perfect but it could not be better," d'Estaing was quoted as saying in an interview ahead of the signing. 
"It had to be acceptable for the 25 member states, the big ones, the little ones, the new ones and the old ones who are going to sign it tomorrow. 
It would have taken only one of those to say no and there would have been no constitution."
