30/09/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 30/09/04
Montenegro's representatives on the National Council for Co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia (ICTY) resigned late last week, charging that Serbia-Montenegro has made no visible progress in fulfilling its obligations to the tribunal.
Predrag Boskovic, one of the three Montenegrin members, said that he and his colleagues did not wish to be part of a process that hinders the state union's European prospects.
The decision did not come as a surprise to the council's president, Rasim Ljajic.
However, he said it came in an awkward political moment, given that UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte is scheduled to visit Belgrade in early October.
The next session of the council is supposed to decide on several issues, including whether to allow 29 witnesses to reveal state and military secrets.
The resignations come at a time of steadily increasing pressure on Belgrade to achieve a breakthrough in its co-operation with the international court.
On Tuesday (28 September), US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Pierre-Richard Prosper visited The Hague, where he voiced criticism of Belgrade in particularly strong terms.
"The world is losing patience," Prosper said, remarking that Serbian authorities "needed to co-operate yesterday".
The fact that indicted war criminals are still on the loose could result in the UN Security Council deciding to extend the ICTY's mandate, enabling further trials at The Hague, Prosper said.
Currently, the tribunal is scheduled to wrap up its activities by 2008.
During talks last week with Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, Prosper indicated that continuing problems could obstruct Serbia's bid to try war crimes cases at home.
"If Belgrade wants to solve The Hague issue once and for all, it has to extradite [Bosnian Serb wartime leader] Ratko Mladic.
Only then can we expect to see trials in Belgrade," Prosper said.
Draskovic, who met with Prosper in New York during the UN General Assembly session, warned the co-operation issue could put Belgrade in a tight spot if it is unresolved by the time negotiations on Kosovo's final status are launched, possibly in mid-2005.
The state union would have a better negotiating position if it meets The Hague requirements, he said
