29/09/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 29/09/04
A recently published report by the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (UNFAO) ranks Macedonia third worldwide in terms of toxic waste, with over 10,000 tonnes. 
Only Ukraine and Poland rank higher, with 19,500 tonnes and 15,000 tonnes respectively.
According to UNFAO Director Mark Davis, the problem is mainly caused by the circumstances in which chemicals are kept. 
"This is about very old and toxic materials because they have been kept for a long time and are often held in poor conditions and in outdoor areas," Davis told the daily Utrinski Vesnik. 
"They may be already exuding and polluting water in rivers and lakes, agricultural lands and air."
In fact, Davis said, the problem may be much worse than the UNFAO figures indicate. 
"Experience has shown that when an elaborate study of a country is made, the figures are at least twice as higher." Toxic waste has been implicated in a range of health problems -- including birth defects, lung disease and cancer -- with children being particularly vulnerable. 
According to the UN, the worst affected are often impoverished rural communities whose residents may not be aware of the toxic effects of chemicals in their environment.
The Macedonian Environment Ministry has also presented evidence that the amounts of toxic waste are higher than indicated in the report. 
A study commissioned by the ministry found that in 1999, the total amount of toxic waste in the country exceeded 45,000 tonnes. 
Of that, household waste accounted for 4,800 tonnes, commercial waste for 3,000 tonnes and medical waste for 1,000 tonnes. 
Construction debris accounted for 6,000 tonnes, industrial waste for 30,000 tonnes and agricultural waste for 200 tonnes, according to the study.
A feasibility study has been conducted for reducing environmental pollution in Macedonia. 
According to UN estimates, it costs $3,500 to clean up one tonne of toxic pesticides, while the total cost of cleaning up the waste in Macedonia would be approximately $35m.
