30/09/2004
(Reuters - 30/09/04; Dnevnik, European Policy Centre - 29/09/04)
While challenging, Turkey's accession to the EU would bring important opportunities for both sides, Reuters reported Thursday (30 September), citing a newly obtained European Commission (EC) study. 
It would bring economic and political benefits to both Turkey and the EU, the analysis concluded.
Five years after Turkey became an official EU candidate, the leaders of the 25-nation bloc are due to decide in December whether the country is to be given a date for starting its accession talks. 
Their decision will be based on a report the EC is due to release on 6 October about Turkey's compliance with the EU criteria for membership and its readiness to begin negotiations.
"Overall, EU member states' economies would benefit from the accession of Turkey, albeit only slightly," Reuters quoted the assessment as saying. 
"Turkey would benefit substantially from its accession to the EU."
Even if membership negotiations begin in January 2005, Turkey is not expected to effectively join the Union before 2014.
Given the changes expected to take place both within the EU and Turkey itself during the process of the accession talks, the assessment provided only hypothetical estimates of the cost of the country's membership. 
From 2025 on, costs are expected to range from 16 billion euros to 28 billion euros per year -- which is 0.1 per cent and 0.17 per cent of the Union's GDP, Reuters reported.
Stretching from Europe to the Middle East, Turkey could "help to secure better energy supply routes for the EU", EC experts said. 
A European think-tank, the European Policy Centre (EPC), drew a similar conclusion in a report released Wednesday.
"Turkish accession could provide a significant boost to economic and trade links between the EU and Turkey's neighbours," the EPC report said. 
"Transport links should be improved in the Balkans as well as to the Caucasus and Central Asia, thereby facilitating trade and increasing Turkey's importance as a hub."
Experts agreed that Turkey's membership would bring benefits in the political arena also, including the Union's foreign policy.
"Turkey is a strategically important country whose EU membership would have implications for foreign policy in a number of potentially unstable neighbouring regions such as the Mediterranean, Middle East, Caucasus and Central Asia," the EC study said.
While acknowledging that it would take time before the reforms are fully reflected in the attitudes of the executive and the judiciary at all levels throughout Turkey, the European think-tank urged the EU to give a green light to accession talks.
