27/09/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 27/09/04
In a ruling seen as significant for Croatia's efforts to demonstrate that its judiciary can handle war crimes cases, Croatia's Supreme Court last month overturned a lower court's acquittal of eight former military policemen accused of committing crimes at the Lora military prison in Split in 1992.
Supreme Court Judge Zlata Lipnjak Bosanac annulled the earlier judgment and ordered a retrial, which will be held before a new panel of judges. 
According to Bosanac, the facts in the case were established "incorrectly and incompletely" during the proceedings at the Split County Court.
The eight ex-policemen -- Tomislav Duic, Tonci Vrkic, Miljenko Bajic, Josip Bikic, Davor Banic, Emilio Bungur, Ante Gudic and Andjelko Botic -- were accused of humiliating and torturing mainly Serb prisoners between March and September 1992. 
Two prisoners died as a result of the abuse, while two others suffered major injuries.
The original verdict was sharply criticised both at home and abroad. 
Particular scrutiny was directed at President Judge Slavko Lozina for allegedly demonstrating bias towards the defendants -- shaking hands with them prior to each hearing, and later appearing to mock the testimony of witnesses who said they were tortured.
Lozina has defended the verdict, arguing that the Supreme Court's decision is the result of international pressure and accusing Croatian Justice Minister Vesna Skare-Ozbolt of meddling.
The president of the Croatian Judges Association, Vladimir Gredelj, wants Lozina's judgeship revoked. 
"The imputation against the judges of the highest court in Croatia, without any arguments, claiming that the decision on Lora was passed under (international) pressure ... 
is a case without precedent and requires reaction from the relevant authorities," Gredelj said.
Radivoje Simovic, president of an association representing parents and families of those imprisoned or missing during the Yugoslav conflicts, welcomed the Supreme Court ruling and said he has been calling for such a decision for some time. 
A retrial will provide an opportunity to prove that war crimes were committed in Lora and that the guilty must be punished, Simovic said.
Each case of this kind is a test for Croatia's judiciary, Zagreb law professor Ivo Josipovic told Belgrade-based Radio B92, adding that the 2002 trial had not been conducted fairly and in accordance with the law.
"The fact that the whole of the Croatian public was aghast at the way this trial was being held clearly indicates that we should not expect something similar to happen again," Josipovic said.
