28/10/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/10/04
In 2003, Serbia-Montenegro implemented a civilian service plan meant to accommodate conscientious objectors.
The service lasts 13 months, while normal military service is four months shorter.
At the end of 2003, less than 1,000 draftees had opted for this alternative.
This year, however, the number has been rising steadily -- a fact that worries the military.
Civilian service has become a means to evade obligations towards the state, army representatives say, warning that fewer enlistments may jeopardise the performance of the armed forces.
Others, however, argue that the experience of other countries shows the number of conscientious objectors has no impact on combat readiness.
According to Dejan Milenkovic of the Committee of Human Rights Attorneys, the real problem is that the military has no strategy for determining the number of troops it really needs.
However, civilian service raises another issue -- the short supply of institutions capable of hiring conscientious objectors.
About 330 institutions in Serbia -- mostly health and social centres -- are registered to employ members of the civilian military.
That is far from enough, according to the president of the European Office for Conscientious Objection, Petar Milicevic.
Not only should new institutions be added to the list, he says, but the existing ones should expand their capabilities and become more educated about what civilian service really means.
At the same time, Serbia is mulling over the idea of gradually introducing a professional army.
Such a move would not mean an end to the draft, at least not in the short-term.
A fully professional army, argues Serbian President Boris Tadic, would cost between 24,000 and 41,000 euros per soldier a year -- an amount equal to Serbia’s entire annual military budget.
Serbia's economy simply is unable to produce this kind of money for military purposes, Tadic says, adding that a fully professional army requires an affluent society.
Montenegrin authorities, meanwhile, have said they plan to introduce a professional army on their territory, but they do not have the necessary funding either.
In December 2003, when he was Serbia-Montenegrin defence minister, Tadic outlined a three-phase defence strategy that would eventually lead to establishment of a new, professional military.
For now, however, the army still needs compulsory military service to function.
