27/09/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 27/09/04
Macedonian Prime Minister Hari Kostov's government last week survived a no-confidence motion launched by the main opposition VMRO-DPMNE. 
At midnight Sunday (19 September), 22 MPs voted for the motion, while 67 opposed it.
As a result, the prime minister and his cabinet will be secure for the next three months. 
Under the constitution, no further no-confidence motions can be tabled during that period.
All opposition MPs did not sign the motion. 
Some argued that the timing was not right, and that the top priority is the upcoming referendum on Macedonia's new territorial organisation laws.
Zarko Karadzoski, who authored the initiative, cited declining industrial production, high unemployment and security problems. 
"The government failed to keep up with the process of NATO and the EU integration," Karadzoski said, "[and] has made Macedonia a marginalised country in the Balkans and the wider neighbourhood".
Defending the government's performance, Kostov said the opposition is split over economic and political policy and on how to implement reforms needed for integration. 
"I call upon the opposition to reach consensus on the way to the EU and NATO and act jointly with us to that end," Kostov said. 
"Macedonia will join the EU when it finishes its responsibilities at home."
According to Gjorgi Ivanov, a professor of political science at Justinian I Faculty of Law in Skopje, the motion was doomed from the start because of the opposition's failure to agree on it. 
Only one faction in the VMRO-DPMNE -- that which is loyal to ex-Prime Minister Ljubco Georgievski -- signed on to the initiative.
The opposition also demonstrated lack of preparation, Ivanov said. 
"We heard trite phrases and discussions without anyone saying which key points the government should focus on."
"If you analyse the results of the debate and the issues touched, it is obvious that the whole motion was promoted by Georgievski's wing -- which wanted to distance itself from the current VMRO-DPMNE leadership. 
The submitters of the initiative knew at the very beginning that they would not have the majority. 
I believe one of their goals was to turn the attention away from the upcoming referendum, and direct the government's energy away from EU integration," Ivanov said.
