28/09/2004
(FT - 28/09/04;
Reuters, Mediafax - 27/09/04;
International Freedom of Expression Exchange - 17/09/04)
Romanian journalists and media watchdogs voiced protest Monday (27 September) over the ruling Social Democratic Party's (PSD) plans to reintroduce controversial legislation that would limit activities of the press.
Opponents of the bill say it would curb freedom of expression.
The bill, drafted by Ionel Olteanu of the PSD, was first submitted to parliament several months ago, but was subsequently withdrawn.
Under the proposed legislation, reporters would not be allowed to take photos or videotape the houses of politicians without permission, and would be liable to penalties for exposing the wealth of public figures, according to Reuters.
Describing the bill as "a brutal breach of freedom of expression", 11 media watchdogs, newspapers and radio stations issued a joint open letter Monday, urging lawmakers to reject it.
"It's disheartening to see such an anti-European project surfacing from time to time because MPs don't like to have their wealth scrutinised," said Ioana Avadani, the executive director of the Centre for Independent Journalism.
The letter follows complaints by journalists at two of Romania's biggest dailies earlier this month that sparked concerns about the state of press freedom in the Balkan country.
Switzerland's Ringier group and Germany's Westdeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung (WAZ), the owners of <I>Evenimentul Zilei</I> and <I>Romania Libera</I> respectively, were accused by employees of trying to stifle negative reports on the government ahead of the 28 November presidential and parliamentary elections in Romania.
Journalists at <I>Romania Libera</I> said that in recent months they had been forced by WAZ to change their editorial content and to write less about the PSD.
"They accuse WAZ of attempting to reduce the quality by cutting the coverage of political issues and space for editorial comment, as well as giving daily instructions on who not to criticise," the International Federation of Journalists said in a 17 September press release.
Similar accusations came from journalists at the <I>Evenimentul Zilei</I>, who said they were under pressure to soften the newspaper's critical tone to increase circulation.
In its 2003 report on Romania's progress towards EU accession, the European Commission voiced concern over "certain limits on the freedom of expression" in the country, which is hoping to join the Union in early 2007.
Other organisations, such as the French-based Reporters Without Borders, have also expressed concern over "disturbing" events in Romania.
In its annual report for 2004, the watchdog cited a case in which four journalists investigating corruption among PSD local officials were badly beaten.
"The authorities, keen to present themselves in a good light in the run-up to parliamentary and presidential elections in late 2004, stepped up legal harassment of journalists, who increasingly opted for self-censorship," the organisation said
