28/10/2004
(AP, AFP, Hina, Croatian Radio and Television, Croatian Information Centre - 27/10/04; EurActiv - 05/10/04; International Herald Tribune - 29/09/04)
Less than two months before EU leaders are expected to set a starting date for Croatia's membership negotiations, Austrian President Heinz Fischer pledged full support Wednesday (27 October) for the Balkan country's bid to join the Union.
"Austria fully supports Croatia on its path towards the EU and is in favour of opening accession talks at the beginning of next year," Fischer said following a meeting with Croatian President Stipe Mesic during his day-long visit to Zagreb on Wednesday.
Croatia became an official EU candidate in June, with the European Commission (EC) setting early 2005 as the likely date for the start of accession negotiations. 
In a report issued earlier this month, the EC reconfirmed its position, while cautioning that progress depended on maintaining the pace of reforms and meeting international obligations, including co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
Stressing the need for the talks to be conducted in an expert manner, Fischer said his country was ready to lend technical assistance to Zagreb during the process. 
He also pledged his country would back efforts to solve Croatia's ongoing border dispute with Slovenia over the Piran Bay, though he ruled out acting as an arbitrator.
The Piran Bay issue represents a potential source of trouble for Croatia's accession. 
Following an incident last month, Slovenian Prime Minister Anton Rop threatened to use his country's veto power, as an EU member state, to block Croatia's entry. 
He later eased his stance, however, saying that Croatia's EU membership was in Slovenia's "long-term interest".
Croatia is "ready to sit at the negotiating table [with Slovenia] and if we fail to find a solution we should turn to international arbitration", the AFP quoted Mesic as saying Wednesday.
Another major hurdle for Croatia is the issue of co-operation with the UN tribunal. 
The country has so far failed to arrest and hand over fugitive General Ante Gotovina, one of the tribunal's most-wanted indictees.
Stressing his support for Croatia's EU bid, Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker of Luxembourg, whose country is due to assume the rotating EU presidency on 1 January, said Croatia must convince Europe that it is making every effort to hand over Gotovina to The Hague.
In other news Wednesday, Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schuessel said his country supports Macedonia's efforts to obtain EU and NATO membership. 
During a meeting with Macedonian Prime Minister Hari Kostov in Vienna, Schuessel stressed the importance of fully implementing the Ohrid Peace Accord -- including the newly adopted decentralisation laws, which face a referendum in November. 
Schuessel and Kostov agreed that there were no open issues between the two countries, and that Austria and Macedonia should intensify bilateral co-operation.
