24/09/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 24/09/04
Talks on the future of the Serbia-Montenegro state union should be held this fall, according to Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus.
The G17 Plus party, which Labus leads, is one of the signatories of the Belgrade Agreement, which provided the basis for establishing the current federation.
However, the party now says that the joint state is not functioning and that the time has come for negotiations with Podgorica.
"It is quite certain that we must sit down to the negotiating table, above all within the state union committee for joining the EU, and we must talk openly about what to do next," Labus said.
Serbian President Boris Tadic, however, takes the opposite stance.
According to Tadic, the state union is currently "the most functional solution for both member states and their citizens".
Tadic announced that he intends to "initiate a series of political projects and actions that could, above all, help along the adoption of a comprehensive national-state strategy".
"The parliament, the government and the president must define what our legitimate and national-state objectives are under the new political circumstances of globalisation and under the changing balance of power in the world," he said.
Since the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), the strongest member of Serbia's ruling coalition, persistently rejects any possibility of splitting Serbia and Montenegro, it is not clear how Labus intends to proceed.
The head of the DSS parliamentary group, Milos Aligrudic, said there were no discussions within the ruling coalition on dividing the union.
"The position of DSS on this issue is very clear, which means respect for the Constitution, respect for the Belgrade Agreement, for all deadlines and actions that need to be carried out within those deadlines," Aligrudic said.
The most concrete proposals for a division have come from Miodrag Vukovic of the Democratic Party of Socialists, who suggests three solutions.
One is simply to split up the union.
Another is to create a union of two internationally recognised states.
A third alternative is to preserve the existing union until the Belgrade Agreement expires next year, at which point a referendum would be called.
The EU, meanwhile, has repeatedly insisted that the integration process requires the joint state of Serbia-Montenegro.
If a referendum leads to independence for one of the constituent republics, the new state will have to start again from scratch, negotiating membership in all European institutions.
