25/10/2004
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 25/10/04
After 41 years in the waiting room of the EU, Turkey took a significant step towards membership earlier this month with the release of a favourable report by the European Commission (EC). 
Based on the report's recommendations, EU leaders are expected to issue a decision at their summit in December on whether or not to begin accession talks with Turkey.
Although the report was cause for celebration, it also fueled concerns. 
While recommending that accession talks begin, the EC also spelled out a number of conditions and provisions. 
Ankara is objecting to some of these, and will push for changes before the December summit. 
In particular, the government believes provisions stipulating "open-ended" negotiations and possible restrictions on labour movement are discriminatory and go against past practice.
"We want clarification of the statements on free movement of labor and the open-ended nature of the negotiations," said Justice Minister Cemil Cicek. 
"We want those elements that are different from previous practices and the way other candidates have been treated to be corrected on 17 December."
Amid continuing disagreement within the EU over the prospect of Turkish membership, the EC's provisions seemed intended to assuage fears of a massive influx of labour. 
The country's population of 68 million would make it one of the Union's largest members, while its fragile economy could have an uncertain impact on the bloc. 
Curbing the free movements of peoples, however, is contrary to EU laws.
The EU has "nothing to fear from the accession of Turkey", EC President Romano Prodi said as the report was released. 
However, he added, Europe must "avoid compromising the construct we have been building for the last 50 years".
The negotiation process will force Turkey to work hard to harmonise its laws with the EU. 
One of the major areas of reform will be agriculture. 
Nearly 40 per cent of the country's population is involved in this sector. 
The country will need to improve the qualifications of its agricultural workers and boost the quality of its agricultural products, which will circulate within the Union.
Another important issue is energy. 
The EU is one of the major energy importers, and Turkey's location makes it an "energy corridor" between East and West, according to the country's Energy Minister Hilmer Guler.
"Turkey has a unique geopolitical and geostrategic location. 
And it is the most important route for transportation of energy resources of these countries to the global markets," Guler said. 
In this area, too, Turkey must harmonise its policies with those of the EU.
The country also faces foreign policy challenges, as well as the need to co-operate with the Union in fighting illegal migration, trafficking and organised crime, and in boosting police and military co-operation. 
From Ankara's point of view, however, the first and foremost item on the agenda is receiving a date for talks to begin -- preferably, leaders say, in early 2005.
