26/10/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje --26/10/04
The Macedonian government recently approved the Annual National Programme for NATO membership for 2004-2005, paving the way for a six-month cycle of dialogue between NATO and Macedonia. 
Defence restructuring is one of the major priorities outlined in the document.
Macedonia's military needs to be adjusted "to the new threats, risks and dangers", said Defence Minister Vlado Buckovski, adding that defence missions and functions, as well as the allocation of budget resources, should be brought into line with NATO standards.
"All this is aimed at providing funds for modernisation and development in order to achieve the capability to contribute to the NATO task force," he said.
The defence ministry's budget for next year will be 104.2m euros -- a 5 per cent increase compared to the 2004 budget. 
Staff costs will be decreased to 52 per cent; 32 per cent will be allotted for operations and maintenance, and 17 per cent will go towards reforms. 
Up until last year, as much as 85 per cent of the budget was earmarked for salaries and equipment maintenance, leaving only a small amount for modernisation.
"We are trying to transform 60 per cent of the active units and commands of the Macedonian Army (ARM), and make them reach initial operational readiness under the new formation," the defence minister said. 
"The active part of the ARM will consist of 7,686 people, and the reserve contingent will have 4,851 people. 
Decreasing the number of the army and transferring the unessential activities out of the ARM will continue in the next period."
Increasing the representation of Macedonia's ethnic communities also is an important part of the restructuring. 
"The number of members of ethnic communities in the defence structures is expected to increase by 655 people during 2005, including 474 members of the ethnic Albanian community," according to Buckovski.
The National Programme also includes the transfer of responsibilities for border security from the ARM to the interior ministry -- a process that started in May, with the handover of the southern border, and is expected to be complete by the end of 2005. 
The handover of the southern and eastern border has decreased the number of ARM personnel by 823 people. 
The handover of the northern border should start in May, and the western border will be transferred next November.
