27/10/2004
By Davor Konkikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 27/10/04
Following the price increase of crude oil on the world market, Serbia's Ministry of Energy and Mining sent a request to the finance ministry demanding an 8 per cent price increase for gasoline. 
The current price corresponds to a price of around $33 per barrel of crude oil. 
However, the price of oil on the New York Stock Exchange now exceeds $50 per barrel.
NIS officials say that an increase in the price of derivatives is necessary for importers to be able to buy new quantities of crude oil. 
According to Nebojsa Atanackovic, president of the association of private traders Nafta AD, a large number of importers are now registering losses. 
That could affect the supply of derivatives, especially diesel fuel. 
"In the event that the price hike does take place, it will represent only 50 per cent of the required price hike, and then we could expect that there won't be any shortages," Atanackovic says.
Attempts by authorities to prevent gasoline price increases to maintain the projected inflation rate of 8.5 per cent are untenable, argues Miroslav Prokopijevic, director of the Centre for the Free Market. 
"The solution proposed by the government, to freeze everything, will destroy NIS and will destroy the gasoline industry," he warns. 
"Who is going to come here and invest under such conditions? 
Instead of such solutions that are dragging us back into the past, there are two markets: when prices are formed freely and when prices on the domestic market are formed on the basis of world market prices."
National Bank of Serbia Governor Radovan Jelasic, however, insists that NIS has other options available besides passing costs onto consumers. 
"Just as the banking system does not exist just because of the National Bank of Serbia, so the entire economy does not exist just to be able to provide sufficient income for NIS. 
It is the job of NIS to see what can be done through internal restructuring and internal reforms from the perspective of efficiency and productivity," Jelasic says.
