25/10/2004
(Various sources -- 24/10/04 - 25/10/04)
Voicing disappointment over the small turnout among Kosovo Serbs in the province's second parliamentary elections since 1999, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan praised "those who voted and those who stood as candidates for their courage in the face of severe contrary pressure" Sunday (24 October).
The total turnout in Saturday's vote in the province of about 1.9 million was reportedly about 53 per cent.
Fewer than 1 per cent of Kosovo Serb voters reportedly cast ballots, following calls from Belgrade officials and the Serbian Orthodox Church for a boycott.
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen said many of those who would have liked to vote were discouraged to do so.
Regardless of the low turnout among the Kosovo Serb community, he said, it will be represented in the province's next 120-seat parliament, in which 10 seats are reserved for representatives of ethnic minorities.
"This is the important thing, there will be representatives who will be part of the dialogue, and we will now reach out not only to all voters in all communities who did vote but also to those who wanted to vote but were afraid, because they also share a common interest in the future of Kosovo," Jessen-Petersen said.
The parliament will be dominated by members of President Ibrahim Rugova's Democratic League of Kosovo, which won about 47 per cent of the vote, according to preliminary results.
The Democratic Party of Kosovo, led by Hashim Thaci, finished a distant second, winning about 27 per cent of the vote.
It was followed by Ramush Haradinaj's Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, which garnered 8 per cent of the vote.
Having failed to win a clear majority, however, Rugova's party is expected to try to form a coalition.
Hailing the peaceful elections, which took place seven months after the worst ethnic clashes in the province since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict there, Annan congratulated the people of Kosovo, urging political leaders to respect the voting results and move on.
"He looks to them to co-operatively and quickly form a new government which, in close collaboration with UNMIK will work for the benefit of all, importantly including Kosovo's minority communities," a UN statement quoted Annan as saying on Sunday.
The new government will be in power when a review of Kosovo's progress in implementing UN standards gets under way, most likely in mid-2005.
Fulfilling those standards is a prerequisite for any eventual decision on the province's status.
One of the requirements set by the international community is for dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
The first official meeting held between Serbian and Kosovo officials since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict was held last year in Vienna.
However, the boycott of Saturday's vote by Kosovo Serbs has cast doubt on the future of those talks, according to the Financial Times If Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, who himself urged Kosovo Serbs to not take part in the election, decides against recognition of the results, further dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina could prove difficult, the paper said
