22/09/2004
(FT - 22/09/04;
UNHCR, UN News Centre, Reuters, AP, BBC, FENA - 21/09/04)
Over one million people uprooted by the 1992-1995 war in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have returned to their homes, the UN's refugee agency said Tuesday (21 September), hailing what it described as a "significant milestone" in the reconstruction of the war-torn country.
The agency cautioned, however, that many problems remain and that continued international support will be crucial over the next few years.
"The significance of reaching this landmark figure cannot be overstated," UN High Commissioner for Refugees Ruud Lubbers said in Geneva on Tuesday.
"It demonstrates the determination of so many people in BiH to close this devastating chapter in their lives."
The fighting during the 1992-1995 conflict forced about 2.2 million people to flee their homes.
Of them, a total of 1,000,473 people, including 440,147 former refugees and 560,326 internally displaced persons, had returned to their homes in BiH by the end of July, the UNHCR said in a statement.
Nearly 75 per cent of the returnees went back to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and 25 per cent to BiH's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska.
An estimated 20,000 have returned to Brcko District, which is administered separately from the two entities, as stipulated in the 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement.
"While celebrating the return of so many, we should not forget that for a significant proportion of them, it was an extremely hard and courageous decision to make, in the face of a multitude of legal, economic and social difficulties," said Lubbers.
The past two years have been marked by a sharp decline in the overall rate of returns, according to the UNHCR's representative in Sarajevo, Udo Janz.
However, he was encouraged by the high proportion of people returning to areas in which they are in a minority, including many of the places that saw some of the worst atrocities during the conflict.
"During the first seven months of 2004, a total of 15,470 people returned," Janz said.
"Of these, 10,589 -- or two-thirds -- were so-called minority returns, and there have been significant increases in some areas, including for example in the eastern part of Republika Srpska, including in Bratunac, Srebrenica and Zvornik."
Just under half of all refugees and internally displaced persons who have returned to their homes since 1996 live in municipalities where they are currently in a minority.
"Clearly the situation remains volatile in many parts of the country, so the challenge before us now is to consolidate the returns that have taken place and make them sustainable," Janz said.
The UN agency, which has spent over $500m on programmes aimed at fostering refugee returns since 1995, said the international community's assistance in BiH's reconstruction would be essential for tackling problems such as repair of infrastructure and housing, job creation, and improving healthcare and education.
"It takes a long time to repair a country as badly damaged as this one was -- physically, economically and psychologically."
