23/09/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 23/09/04
The Macedonian government has developed a set of priorities and long-term guidelines for the country's European integration process. 
Known as the National European Integration Strategy, it defines the goals Macedonia should achieve in many areas such as rule of law, economic and social reform, harmonisation with EU legislation, and overhaul of public administration.
Joining the EU is "the government's top priority", says Radmila Sekerinska, the deputy prime minister in charge of the integration process. 
"We need this strategy because a framework should be made for all of us to get to know what changes we are facing in the next period. 
We should be ready for a process that will go on for a while and we should know how to avoid troubles."
Sekerinska says the strategy has a few main features. 
"In a way, this is a uniting strategy that concerns the general development of the country. 
The paper has been drafted by home experts and developed as a long-term rather than a single-usage paper. 
Both the government and parliament gave us full support for the document."
The strategy calls for firmly linking economic and social policy to the goal of joining the EU, with an emphasis on maintaining macroeconomic stability, creating the conditions for accelerating growth and increasing the employment rate, and providing targeted social security services to reduce the social consequences of transition and to narrow the implementation gap.
"Macedonia has to reform its administration to make it more capable of bearing the burden of EU integration," according to the document, which highlights the need for overall reforms in the economic, political and legal systems and the establishment of institutions necessary for the free flow of goods, capital and services into the EU.
Also envisioned are improvements in Macedonia's political and legal systems, including better techniques of law drafting and more efficient parliamentary procedure, as well as more rigorous supervision of how laws are implemented. 
The strategy urges authorities to ensure the independence of courts, steer justice and internal affairs in Macedonia closer to EU standards, take effective measures in combating organised crime and strengthen regional co-operation in this area. 
Improved judicial funding and use of resources, including the computerisation of courts, is also a priority.
