23/09/2004
(UN - 22/09/04;
RFE/RL, UNMIK, VOA - 21/09/04;
AP - 20/09/04)
Following talks in New York with representatives of the international community, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan said Wednesday (22 September) that a general consensus was reached this week on an integrated strategy for Kosovo.
"There was broad agreement on the need to focus on the economy and on security, the need to engage with Belgrade and to bring the Kosovo Serbs into the process, and the importance of the standards process," a UN press statement quoted Annan as saying.
He held two separate meetings Monday with officials from key UN member states and with the leadership of the EU, NATO and the OSCE.
Also participating in the consultations were UNMIK head Soren Jessen-Petersen and the Norwegian Ambassador to NATO, Kai Eide, who conducted a UN assessment of the political situation in Kosovo after violence broke out there in mid-March.
Eide's report, presented to Annan in July, recommended speeding up the transfer of authority to Kosovo officials and expediting preparations for talks on the province's future status.
During Monday's meetings, Annan briefed the participants on possible adjustments to the UN reform plan for Kosovo.
The plan, known as "standards before status", lists targets in eight areas -- including democratic institutions and the rule of law, freedom of movement, refugee returns and the economy -- that Kosovo must meet before talks on its final status can begin.
A review of the province's progress in meeting those goals is set for mid-2005.
Romanian Foreign Minister Mircea Geona said participants at the meetings stressed the need for stronger efforts on the part of the international community in preparing Kosovo for next year's review.
"We just cannot stay idle and wait for the time to go by and then eventually decide on various topics," Geoana told RFE/RL, adding that the discussions focused mainly on the process of decentralisation in Kosovo and the transfer of powers to the provisional institutions of self government.
Annan suggested that the UN would consider further areas of responsibility that could be transferred to the provisional institutions, but added that "a more coherent capacity-building policy" would be essential.
"This transfer policy cannot work without accountability and uniformity of application" on the part of the provisional institutions, he said.
Meanwhile, the month-long campaign ahead of the 23 October parliamentary elections in Kosovo kicked off on Wednesday.
"This may well be the most important election in Kosovo so far," Jessen-Petersen said in a special address marking the launch of the campaign.
"An assembly and government will be elected which will be governing Kosovo as we progress towards the mid-2005 Standards Implementation Review.
If the outcome of that review is positive, then the way will be open to talks on resolving Kosovo's future status in which your elected representatives will be playing a vital role."
Also Wednesday, OSCE Chairman-in-Office and Bulgarian Foreign Minister Solomon Passy urged all of the province's voters to go to the polls, stressing that the international community is "trying to do its best to support the democratic process in Kosovo".
He also asked Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica to "encourage" Kosovo Serbs not to boycott the vote.
"It is essential that all sections of the community should be represented in the new parliament that will be elected on 23 October," Passy said in a telephone call to Kostunica.
