20/10/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 20/10/04
Greek President Costis Stephanopoulos arrived in Tirana Monday (18 October) for a three-day official visit aimed at boosting political and economic co-operation. 
He met with key Albanian political leaders, including President Alfred Moisiu, Prime Minister Fatos Nano, leader of the main opposition Sali Berisha, Parliamentary Speaker Servet Pelumbi, and Tirana Mayor Edi Rama.
"We should intensify the fine relations between us, especially those in the economic field," Stephanopoulos said at a joint press conference with Moisiu following their meeting. 
Both agreed on the need to leave behind problems inherited from the past and look to the future. 
Albania and Greece have wrangled over a number of issues, including the treatment of minorities and restitution for property belonging to Albanians from the Chameria region expelled from Greece after World War II as well as for Greek claims in Albania.
Noting that the two countries' prime ministers will meet in May and have agreed to start bilateral negotiations, Moisiu called for finding "as soon as possible a fair and legal solution to these matters".
During his meeting with Nano, Stephanopoulos described Greek-Albanian relations as "strategic" and affirmed Greek support for Albania's integration into the EU. 
He said the Albanian government has made progress in the area of minority rights. 
Nano, meanwhile, touched on the situation of Albanian immigrants in Greece.
"We discussed and updated the information on the priority sector," Nano said. 
"We understood which are the new duties for the public administration in both countries, experts and what kind of messages of integration, co-existence, respect of human rights, minorities, education and the communication in their mother tongue we should offer to all of our citizens, wherever they live."
Berisha hailed Stephanopoulos as an architect of friendly relations between the two countries. 
"The property issue on both sides of the border will be treated according to the Treaty of Friendship signed by Greece and Albania," Berisha said.
Stephanopoulos also met with the chairman of the Union for Human Rights Party, Vangjel Dule, and visited the southern village of Dhrovjan, which is the place of origin of the Greek president's family.
