22/10/2004
(Xinhua - 22/10/04; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, FT, AP, Reuters, AFP, Anadolu Agency - 21/10/04)
In a major boost for Turkey's EU bid, the OECD has indicated its support for the country's accession. 
A survey released by the influential club of industrialised nations Thursday (21 October) praised Turkey's economic performance over the past three years. 
While outlining some major problems the country still needs to overcome, the Paris-based body voiced confidence that Turkey's progress towards EU membership would give a major boost to reforms in the country.
The short-term effects of the reform programme Turkey embarked upon in 2001 -- following its worst economic crisis since World War II -- have been very positive, according to the OECD. 
In 2002 and 2003 the country's GDP recovered by around 8 and 6 per cent respectively, the survey said. 
This year it should rise to almost 10 per cent. 
This greatly exceeds government targets and makes Turkey the fastest growing economy in the OECD, the 30-nation club said in its 180-page economic report.
"The survey shows economic performances that are stunning since 2001, with remarkable macroeconomics," OECD Secretary General Donald Johnston said at a press conference in Paris on Thursday, attended also by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
The OECD head also emphasised the strong progress Turkey has made in curbing its inflation from 54 per cent in 2001 to 25 per cent in 2003 and to 12 per cent in the first half of 2004, and a possible further drop to a single digit annual rate in 2005, for the first time in three decades.
"These exceptional economic results are in the interests of Turkey and also of the EU," Johnston said. 
If the ambitious reform agenda Turkey has embarked upon is fully implemented and further developed, there is a good chance that its economy can shift to a stronger and sustainable job-rich growth path, the survey concluded.
According to OECD economist Andrew Dean, the reforms had opened a "window of opportunity", which would open further in the event of a positive decision on Turkey's EU bid later this year.
"The recent recommendation by the EU commission to start EU accession negotiations -- if confirmed by the European Council in December -- promises to strengthen the international anchors and could underpin Turkey's shift to a new economic regime," the report said.
The survey, however, also outlined challenges Turkey needs to overcome to ensure growth sustainability.
One of the critical issues the country needs to address, according to the OECD experts, is reducing its informal sector, which accounts for more than 50 per cent of all jobs. 
Low job creation also calls for urgent labour market reform, as continuous high unemployment rates could undermine the social and political support for reforms, the OECD said.
Given the strength of the economy and the risk of a further increase of the current balance deficit, the government should resist any temptation to loosen the fiscal stance and use additional revenues from higher growth for debt reduction, the report said. 
Ankara was also advised to continue its budgetary stabilisation efforts, maintain tight monetary policies to keep inflation on a downward trend, and improve privatisation.
