21/09/2004
(Wall Street Journal, Rompres, Mediafax, European Commission Delegation in Romania - 20/09/04; SEEurope - 16/09/04; EurActiv - 03/09/04)
Romania's chief negotiator with the EU, Vasile Puscas, voiced hope Monday (20 September) that an upcoming European Commission (EC) report would grant it recognition as a functioning market economy -- a key requirement the country must meet to finalise its accession talks with the Union.
"We hope that in the country report to be issued on 6 October, Romania will be deemed a functioning market economy with the mention that, if reforms continue, it would have the full capacity of functioning within the conditions of the EU internal market upon the date of its EU entry," Puscas said in a press statement.
Romania, which has so far closed 25 of the 31 negotiating chapters, wants to complete its membership talks with Brussels by the end of this year before joining the EU in 2007, with Bulgaria.
In a press statement also released Monday, the head of the EC Delegation in Romania, Jonathan Scheele, said the upcoming report would focus on functional market economy status, one of two economic sub-criteria for membership. 
Compliance with the second -- the capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union -- would only be required by 2007, he added.
Bulgaria was recognised as a functioning market economy in 2002, with the EC report saying it "should be able to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union in the medium term, provided that it continues implementing its reform programme to remove remaining difficulties". 
Bulgaria wrapped up its talks with the Union earlier this year.
In its regular report on Romania last year, the EC called for vigorous and sustained implementation of structural reforms and said the country could be "considered as a functioning market economy once the good progress made has continued decisively".
While praising Romania for the reforms achieved so far, the EC said prudent fiscal and wage policies and a continued reduction in the quasi-fiscal deficit were needed. 
It also urged the country to advance its expenditure reform, improve tax compliance, liquidate loss-making enterprises, address the continued accumulation of arrears in the budget and energy sector, and establish natural gas prices that accurately reflect short and long-term costs.
Speaking before members of the European Parliament's foreign affairs committee at the end of August, EU Enlargement Commissioner Guenter Verheugen said it would not be a "disaster" if Romania were unable to complete its talks by late December. 
"We would still have a year left to ensure that Romania can join by 1 January 2007," Verheugen said.
On Monday, however, Romanian President Ion Iliescu expressed his determination that the country would complete the accession talks by year's end. 
He stressed Romania's efforts to implement reforms in the last two years, as well as incentives offered to foreign investors. 
The president acknowledged that the government has two months of hard work ahead to persuade the European Commission to wrap up negotiations.
