19/10/2004
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 19/10/04
The first informal NATO meeting to be held in one of the seven former communist countries that joined the Alliance earlier this year took place on 13 October in Poiana Brasov, Romania. 
The 26 NATO defence ministers met to discuss the missions in Afghanistan and Iraq, as well as the expansion of goals agreed on at the Istanbul summit in June.
A key topic at the meeting was improving the link between NATO's political decision to take on missions and ensuring the availability of the forces to carry them out. 
Ministers discussed ways of meeting the deployment targets set during the June summit, the financing and planning of operations, and the decision-making process.
"I think we made a lot of progress in shaping the future direction of NATO's transformation and in guiding the next steps in our operations," Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said after the meeting.
Also on the agenda was the need to reorganise NATO's mission in Afghanistan. 
According to the US Ambassador to NATO, Nicholas Burns, Washington would like to see the Alliance's 8,000-strong International Security and Assistance Force combined with the US-led Operation Enduring Freedom, which is fighting al Qaeda terrorists and remnants of the former Taliban regime.
"That's the direction the Alliance has been heading for many months now," Burns told reporters.
The ministers also discussed NATO's recent decision to boost its military training contingent in Iraq from 40 to 300 by the end of 2004. 
The contingent -- expected to come initially from Denmark and Norway -- will help increase the number of Iraqi forces from 100,000 to an anticipated 145,000.
"Let me stress the point that the Iraqis themselves consider training inside Iraq of the utmost importance. 
And there should be no doubt, in other words, that NATO is committed to expanding the training mission as quickly as possible," de Hoop Scheffer said.
Meanwhile, Russia said it would contribute to the Alliance's counter terrorism missions by providing two ships to NATO's guard mission in the Mediterranean Sea, known as Operation Active Endeavour. 
Following a meeting of the NATO-Russia Council, Russian Defence Minister Serghei Ivanov also said his country would send a delegation to participate in a nuclear safety exercise scheduled for next year.
Russia and NATO are making substantial progress in increasing military co-ordination through enhanced technological co-operation, Ivanov said.
