20/09/2004
(Various sources -- 19/09/04 - 20/09/04)
Public support for the Bulgarian government has slightly grown from 23 per cent to 25 per cent over the past three months, Bulgaria's MBMD polling agency said Sunday (19 September).
Citing the results of a new nationwide survey conducted among 1,019 eligible voters between 10 September and 16 September, MBMD head Mira Yanova said 35 per cent of respondents viewed the incumbent cabinet's performance as better than that of the previous government.
Except for Foreign Minister Solomon Passy, confidence in all key ministers in the cabinet has grown.
The recent hostage crisis in Iraq and the death sentences handed down to five Bulgarian medics by a Libyan court were cited as some of the reasons for the slump in Passy's support.
For the first time since the ruling party National Movement Simeon II (NMS) came to power in July 2001, Finance Minister Milen Velchev ranks among the three most popular politicians in the country, with 40 per cent voter approval.
Positive economic trends and Velchev's position on education reform are seen as the main reason.
According to the poll, the most highly-regarded Bulgarian politician is Interior Ministry Chief Secretary Lieutenant General Boyko Borissov, with 65 per cent approval, followed by President Georgi Parvanov, with 61 per cent.
Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg garnered 28 per cent public approval, and 8.4 per cent of the respondents said they would support his election to a second term.
The most trusted institutions are the presidency and Bulgarian National Television, with 57 per cent and 55 per cent approval respectively.
They are followed by Bulgarian National Radio and the police, both enjoying the confidence of 51 per cent of those interviewed.
The courts and parliament are among the least trusted institutions, with public support for both at a mere 14 per cent.
If parliamentary elections were held today, four parties and a centre-right coalition would be able to surpass the 4 per cent threshold, the poll showed.
The opposition Bulgarian Socialist Party would win the vote with 22.7 per cent.
The ruling NMS would come out second with 9.2 per cent of the vote, and the right-wing Union of Democratic Forces would be third with 8.8 per cent.
The NMS's junior coalition partner, the Movement for Rights and Freedoms, would take 6.7 per cent of the vote.
Former Prime Minister Ivan Kostov's party, Democrats for Free Bulgaria, would have little chance of entering the next parliament, as only 2.1 per cent of the respondents said they would vote for it if elections were held today.
Over 30 per cent of eligible voters said they would not go to the polls, however, while another nearly 13 per cent were undecided about participating.
