20/09/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 20/09/04
Serbia's local elections, held Sunday (19 September), were marked by the lowest voter turnout since the multi-party system was introduced in 1990, with only 35 per cent of eligible voters going to the polls. 
Voter fatigue, resulting from frequent elections over the past two years, is being blamed. 
As pollsters had anticipated, Serbian President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DS) and the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS) came out ahead.
DS candidate Nenad Bogdanovic won around 33 per cent of the vote in the race for mayor of Belgrade, followed by Aleksandar Vucic of the SRS, who received about 29 per cent. 
A run-off will be held on 3 October. 
Zoran Drakulic, the candidate of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), won 15 per cent of the vote -- not bad for a party whose ratings have been continually dropping. 
The city council election results were similar. 
Out of 90 seats, it is estimated that the DS will get 34, SRS 27, DSS 13 and the other parties 16.
Bogdanovic said he expects support from all democratic candidates in the run-off, which is essentially a repeat of the scenario in June, when the presidential vote came down to a run-off between Tadic and the SRS' Tomislav Nikolic.
"We are half way to turning Belgrade into a European metropolis. 
We want Belgrade as part of a European Serbia. 
I am convinced that Belgraders will not vote for an isolated Belgrade in the second round, as the city hall elections have also resulted in a convincing majority of democratic forces," Bogdanovic said.
Drakulic has unofficially announced a possible DS-DSS coalition at the local level. 
Such a turn of events would help stabilise Serbia's political scene, as the government could then avoid pressure to call early parliamentary elections. 
Analysts agree that this would finally shift the political focus towards adopting a new constitution, with parliamentary elections called later.
Kostunica says the local election results will in no way influence the government. 
"We are satisfied with the results and will continue working on what the Serbian government has set out to do -- passing the new laws," he said.
However, political analyst Vladimir Goati believes the results suggest a different distribution of power than that found in the parliament. 
In his opinion, the looming political crisis can be resolved in three ways. 
"One would be a reshuffle of the government, the other would be calling early parliamentary elections, and the third option is complete passivity on the part of the government," Goati said.
A run-off will also be held in Novi Sad, the capital of the northern province of Vojvodina. 
Maja Gojkovic of the SRS, with 42 per cent of the vote, has a nine point lead over the DS candidate, Borislav Novakovic. 
The SRS and DS also led in Vojvodina's provincial assembly elections, with 31 per cent and 21 per cent respectively. 
The League of Vojvodina Hungarians and the regional coalition Together for Vojvodina achieved good results, winning 11 and 9 per cent respectively.
Other ethnic minority parties also took part in Sunday's elections, including Albanian parties in southeast Serbia and Muslim parties in the region of Sandzak. 
Voter turnout in these areas was better than in other parts of the republic.
