20/09/2004
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens – 20/09/04
The cost of the Olympics, combined with previously existing budgetary and economic problems, has left Greece with a considerable burden.
The General Accounts Office has been focusing on determining the extent of the post-Olympics era inefficiencies and assigning an actual cost size to the Games.
The country is entering a period of self-constraint, as financial figures balloon out of proportion.
Deputy Economy Minister Petros Doukas estimates that the cost of the Olympic Games will surpass 7 billion euros.
Most likely it will approach 8 billion euros, as bills are piling up with no unified administration procedures.
The financial challenge Greece faces is illustrated by the increase in the public debt, which has already surpassed last year's 195 billion euros, and is expected to exceed 210 billion euros by the end of 2004.
The rising numbers are putting pressure on the government, which is being forced to place limits on economic policy.
Greece must present a reliable economic control plan, in the face of its massive debt, to re-establish the country's creditability.
According to Doukas, the government should take specific initiatives that would allow for the controllable rejuvenation of the public sector and at the same time create an attractive environment for foreign investment.
The most serious problem with the public debt is the fact that a large portion of the state budget is inelastic.
Almost 40 per cent covers wages and pensions, another 30 per cent goes towards interest, and 20 per cent to 25 per cent is earmarked for financial aid grants.
A mere 5 per cent to 10 per cent of the budget can be influenced directly by governmental decisions.
Annual wage and pension increases, capped at 3 per cent, raise that portion of the budget by 5.5 per cent, further reducing the amount left for discretionary spending.
The large public debt increase rules out hopes of a decrease in service costs.
Under these circumstances, strategic actions are needed if Greece is to have any hope of bringing its debt servicing expenses under control.
One much-discussed way of doing this is through the privatisation of large public organisations, such as the phone company, the water company, and electricity provider.
Meanwhile, cost control programmes have been implemented in mass transportation and all other public sectors that operate within a bank-debiting framework supported by the Greek Public Office
