20/10/2004
(AP, Scotsman, RFE/RL, Radio B92, Tanjug - 19/10/04)
Serbia's Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic said Tuesday (19 October) that the four army and police generals -- Nebojsa Pavkovic, Vladimir Lazarevic, Vlastimir Djordjevic and Sreten Lukic -- must either voluntarily surrender to the UN war crimes tribunal or be tried in Serbia-Montenegro.
Citing a resolution taken by Serbia's previous government, he said authorities would not arrest and extradite them.
"Until that resolution is reversed by a cabinet decision, no one can arrest them," Stojkovic -- a member of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia -- told the Belgrade daily Blic, arguing the generals' detention would be "dangerous for national security".
The four indictees -- former army chief of staff Nebojsa Pavkovic and his former deputy, Vladimir Lazarevic, and police generals Vlastimir Djordjevic and Sreten Lukic – are wanted by the UN tribunal for their alleged role in war crimes during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo.
Djordjevic is believed to be hiding in Russia, while the three others are said to be living openly in Serbia.
About three weeks ago, Belgrade-based Radio B92 reported that the district court in the Serbian capital had issued a warrant for the arrest of the four generals.
Responding to a reporter's question on Tuesday on whether his statement implied that police would not be instructed to carry out the arrests, the justice minister suggested this would contradict the law.
"The law states that in this situation the court cannot make a decision until the governing body makes a decision on whether or not their arrests would be a threat to national security," Stojkovic said.
"Since the body that has jurisdiction of this sequence of events is the last government, and they have taken the stance that it does threaten national security."
Judges, however, told Radio B92 talked they had never heard of a circumstance obliging the court to wait for a political decision in order to take legal action.
"These generals haven't had contact with national secrets and other such documentation that could pose a threat to national security for some time now.
This is just a search for a formal reason to delay the entire action," Milan Pasanski of the Forum for Terrorism and Violence in Politics told Radio B92.
The minister's statement came amid mounting international pressure on Belgrade to co-operate fully with the ICTY and hand over some 15 indicted war crimes suspects if it wants eventually to join the EU and NATO.
Serbia-Montenegro also faces the risk of losing access to much needed aid from the United States, which has set the arrest of Bosnian Serb wartime military commander Ratko Mladic as a key condition for further economic and political support.
Criticising Stojkovic's remarks, Rasim Ljajic, Serbia-Montenegro's human rights minister and head of the national committee for co-operation with the ICTY, said the country would come under still stronger pressure unless the generals are handed over to the tribunal.
The justice minister's statement sparked criticism from members of the government coalition as well.
"Co-operation with The Hague court is necessary, including fulfilling ...
our international obligations," G17 Plus spokeswoman Ksenija Milivojevic said.
Given its international standing, she added, Serbia was in no position to expect it would be allowed to try the generals at home.
"If arresting retired generals threatens national security, then this means that the country does not have the monopoly of power, rather someone else does," Human Rights Watch researcher Bogdan Ivanisevic told Radio B92, adding that the government appeared to be simply looking for arguments to justify its reluctance to take action against indicted war criminals.
