18/10/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 18/10/04
Nine-year primary education became a reality in both of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) entities in September, when the Federation of BiH (FBiH) began to implement the system, which was launched in Republika Srpska (RS) at the beginning of the last school year.
The move is the most visible part of an ambitious reform programme aimed at modernising primary, secondary and higher education to meet standards for eventual EU membership. 
According to the OSCE Mission, which has taken responsibility as the implementing agency that will support local authorities in completing this task, curricula in BiH are overloaded, teaching methods require updating, and learning is too often based on the mechanistic transmission of large quantities of facts.
"The education system must train primary and secondary school children to live and work in a constantly changing world. 
Education for Europe and the world in the 21st century requires critical thinking, creativity, problem-solving skills, enterpreneurship and use of new technologies," the OSCE said in a report outlining the educational reform strategy. 
"More attention needs to be paid to the acquisition of the skills and values that the modern university graduate requires and expects to receive."
"Moreover, in several cantons of FBiH, Bosniak and Croat children are educated in separate schools, with different curriculum," the document added.
"The children of BiH deserve a quality education, they deserve a modern curriculum, properly equipped classrooms, teachers who are properly paid," said Zinaida Delic, deputy spokesperson of the OSCE Mission to BiH. 
"When BiH parliamentarians unanimously adopted the State Framework Law on Primary and Secondary Education in June 2003, they recognised the importance of protecting the rights of all three constituent peoples, while laying down the foundation for much-needed modernisation of education."
Starting this year, primary school in FBiH begins at age six, instead of seven. 
However, there is opposition to the programme, which has not been implemented in all schools. 
The largest opposition is in three cantons where Croats are the majority -- Western Herzegovina, Livno and Central Bosnia.
The FBiH Ministry of Education has established a working group to deal with the issue. 
Education Minister Zijad Pasic said that there are no "technical preconditions" for the new education system in these cantons. 
He finds that the problem is political.
"It is hard to explain that in the same city, a school with a Bosnian curriculum can fulfil the preconditions for nine-year schooling, while another school with a Croat curriculum can not. 
But I am sure that nine-year education will begin in these three cantons next year, too," Pasic said.
