16/09/2004
(Reuters, AP, HINA, OSCE - 15/09/04)
Croatia has announced the launch of a public awareness campaign aimed at encouraging refugees to return to their pre-war homes. 
The project is a joint initiative by the Croatian government, the OSCE, and other international organisations.
On Wednesday (15 September), government officials and the head of the OSCE mission to Croatia released a report that will form the basis of the campaign. 
It presents the results of a survey conducted by the Puls polling agency among 1,000 Serb refugees now living in Serbia-Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
According to Reuters, only 15 per cent of those interviewed said they wanted to return to Croatia.
The survey showed that there was still interest for return, but also a need to provide accurate information to refugees. 
Now they rely too much on second-hand information," said the head of the OCSE Mission to Croatia, Peter Semneby, who spoke Wednesday at a joint press conference with Croatian Tourism, Transport and Development Minister Bozidar Kalmeta and Foreign Minister Miomir Zuzul.
According to Croatian officials, an estimated 300,000 people, including about 200,000 Serbs, fled the country during the 1991-1995 conflict. 
A total of about 112,000 have since returned.
"We want to motivate refugees to make an informed decision on whether to return. 
We also want to promote the importance of tolerance and multiculturalism for building an integrated society in the spirit of the EU," Semneby said.
Croatia became an official EU candidate several months ago and is due to start its accession talks with the Union in 2005. 
The Union has included refugee return efforts among the key political criteria that Croatia must meet to gain eventual membership.
"We are doing it not because our partners in the OSCE and EU want us to do that, but because we think it is in our own interest," Zuzul told reporters. 
"The Croatian government is determined to continue towards building a better future and healing the wounds of the past."
Authorities have already taken several steps to improve the conditions for return, Semneby said, citing in particular the political agreement reached with Serb minority representatives and other initiatives to foster reconciliation. 
Both, he said, have had "an important positive impact".
Besides the need for reliable information, the Puls survey cites access to accommodations and economic opportunities as important requirements for sustainable return.
According to Kalmeta, whose ministry is implementing most of the refugee return projects, Croatia has so far spent over 1.9 billion euros on post-conflict efforts, repairing or rebuilding 128,000 houses and flats as well as 208 school buildings. 
A total of 13,680 housing units have been returned to their owners, while the whereabouts of another 3,890 owners remain unknown. 
Kalmeta said the government has earmarked an additional 257m euros for social and economic recovery in affected areas.
The OSCE, meanwhile, said another public information campaign would be launched concerning housing programmes for former occupancy/tenancy rights holders who wish to return.
