17/09/2004
(Office of the High Representative Media Monitoring Brief - 17/09/04;
AP, Official Government of Republika Srpska Web Site, Fena - 16/09/04)
Darko Matijasevic was appointed the new interior minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS) on Thursday (16 September).
The move raises the prospect of improved co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
"I expect Matijasevic to fulfil all international obligations of RS.
Co-operation with the tribunal in The Hague must be a priority," the AP quoted RS Prime Minister Dragan Mikerevic as saying as he announced the appointment in Banja Luka.
Calling on Matijasevic to "create a political structure serving citizens and their needs, and also to create material pre-requisites for all tasks ahead of him," Mikerevic urged him to carry out necessary reforms within his ministry as soon as possible.
He also urged Matijasevic to co-operate with all security institutions in BiH.
Prior to his appointment, Matijasevic was serving as military attaché at BiH's mission to NATO in Brussels.
He replaces Zoran Djeric, who was among 59 Bosnian Serb officials fired by High Representative Paddy Ashdown at the end of June for obstructing co-operation with the ICTY.
Ashdown's move followed NATO's decision, at its Istanbul summit, not to invite BiH to join the Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme.
The RS authorities have been criticised frequently by the international community for failing to arrest any of the war crimes suspects wanted by The Hague-based tribunal.
Commenting on the appointment, RS President Dragan Covic noted Matijasevic belongs to no political party, allowing him to make decisions independently.
"I believe in Matijasevic," he said.
Ashdown said he expects steps that would yield tangible results, particularly in the area of meeting the country's obligations to the ICTY -- the most important condition for the country's admission to the PfP.
"After nine years, words, good moves here and there, good statements … they are simply not enough.
We need actions," the veteran British diplomat told the BiH daily <I>Dnevni Avaz</I>.
Another postponement of BiH's admission to the PfP would be a catastrophe, he warned.
"You have another three months, don't waste time."
"I am fully aware of the challenges and responsibility that are ahead of me, ahead of the interior ministry and ahead of the RS government in the upcoming period," Matijasevic said.
"I am fully prepared to face those challenges."
