15/09/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 15/09/04
The Macedonian Parliament has scheduled a referendum on the country's new territorial organisation laws for 7 November.
The decision came after the World Macedonian Congress, the organisation behind the push for a referendum, gathered 180,454 signatures in support of the initiative.
The signatures were collected during the legally required six-month window between 23 February and 23 August.
Opening the parliamentary session devoted to the issue, Parliament Speaker Ljupco Jordanovski explained that under the constitution, MPs should not discuss the referendum itself and could only consider the date on which it will be held.
The recently adopted laws fulfil Macedonia's remaining commitments under the Ohrid Peace Accords, which brought an end to seven months of interethnic turmoil in 2001.
The opposition VMRO-DPMNE Party and Liberal Democrats said the date should be the one preferred by the initiators of the referendum.
"The World Macedonian Congress … wants the plebiscite to take place on 21 November," said VMRO-DPMNE said, "so I think this date, which does not overlap the Muslim religious holiday of Ramadan, should be upheld."
According to Rafis Aliti of the junior coalition member Democratic Union for Integration, however, it is best that the vote be held as soon as possible.
"For us as a party, the 7 November proposal is acceptable," Aliti said, "and religious affairs should not be involved in this."
Macedonian voters will be answering yes or no to the referendum question:
"Do you favour local self-government territorial organisation (municipalities and the City of Skopje) as defined in the Law on Territorial Organisation of the Republic of Macedonia and Definition of Areas of Local Self-Government Units issued in 1996 and the Law on the City of Skopje issued the same year?"
By law, a referendum is considered valid if a majority of voters support it and turnout is greater than 50 per cent.
The result is binding and must be observed by state bodies.
Local elections in Macedonia had been scheduled for 21 November, but will now be delayed as a result of the referendum.
Parliament voted to amend the law on local elections, deciding that local elections will now take place during the first week of March every fourth year.
The 2005 local vote is the exception:
it will take place on 31st March.
Meanwhile, the EU has warned Macedonia that its chances of membership could be jeopardised if voters reject the laws on territorial organisation.
Speaking on Tuesday (14 September), Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot -- whose country currently holds the EU's rotating presidency -- said the Union considers full implementation of the Ohrid Accords "essential".
The EU also confirmed that a European Commission questionnaire concerning Macedonia's application for candidate status would be delivered to Skopje on 1 October.
