14/10/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 14/10/04
Organisers of a referendum on Macedonia's new decentralisation laws formally launched their campaign on 8 October.
Thousands of posters, billboards and leaflets have been printed and distributed throughout the country.
Meanwhile, Macedonia's leaders are warning that a rejection of the decentralisation laws would slow European integration.
The vote is scheduled for 7 November.
"Keeping in mind all the messages the EU and other institutions have been sending to us," Prime Minister Hari Kostov said at the start of the campaign, "a successful referendum, in my opinion, would mean dragging Macedonia back from some processes it has embarked on." Kostov has vowed to resign if the referendum succeeds.
President Branko Crvenkovski urged the public to support decentralisation.
"We do not need a step backwards and new Ohrid negotiations.
If the upcoming referendum is not successful, we will know what is going to happen and where we are going.
But if it is successful, I know Macedonia will face uncertainty and lose precious time," Crvenkovski said.
According to EU mission spokeswoman Sheena Thompson, Macedonia's integration efforts have hit a snag because of the referendum.
Even if citizens vote no, the country will have lost valuable time, Thompson said.
"Decentralisation is a very important segment of reforms in the public administration, and the phase the government has come to is to enable things to happen.
EU Special Representative Mihail Salin believes this is the time when one should think and see if the referendum is a positive thing relating the Euro-Atlantic processes," she said.
During his recent visit to Skopje, US State Undersecretary for Political Affairs Marc Grossman said Washington is convinced that Macedonian citizens will choose the rapid path to EU and NATO membership.
Campaign organisers deny that the referendum could undermine the Ohrid Accords.
"The referendum is not anti-Framework Agreement since it does not suspend the rights and freedoms implemented in the Constitution and legislation," said World Macedonian Congress chairman Todor Petrov, who heads the Referendum Central Staff.
"The referendum is not against decentralisation, but rather against the government's concept of the territorial arrangement."
Albanian political parties have urged their constituents to ignore the referendum.
The Democratic Union for Integration says it is organising meetings with Macedonians to inform them of the issues at stake.
OSCE will send a monitoring mission of 20 long-term monitors, and is recommending the deployment of 200 short-term monitors.
