15/10/2004
(AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, Fena - 14/10/04;
Fena - 13/10/04;
The New York Times - 12/06/04)
More than 7,000 Muslim men and boys were killed by Bosnian Serb forces during the Srebrenica massacre, a Bosnian Serb commission admitted in a report Thursday (14 October).
It was the first time since the end of the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) that the Bosnian Serbs have acknowledged the scale of the killing in July 1995, viewed as the single worst atrocity in Europe since World War II.
"The newly compiled report says that more than 7,000 Muslims were killed in Srebrenica and also establishes their identity," Smail Cekic, deputy chairman of the panel that prepared the report, told Reuters on Thursday.
The commission was set up last year by the top international envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, following previous Bosnian Serb reports that sought to downplay the scale .
The seven-member body included five Bosnian Serb judges and lawyers, a representative of the victims' families and an international expert.
Following the commission's preliminary report in June, authorities in BiH's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska, (RS) admitted for the first time that Bosnian Serb forces were responsible for the massacre.
Stopping short of giving a specific figure, the report said "several thousand" Bosnian Muslims had been killed between 10 July and 19 July 1995 in Srebrenica, which was a UN-declared "safe area" at the time.
The perpetrators moved the bodies to other locations to cover up the crime, the docement said, adding that the killings were committed "in a manner which represents a heavy violation of international human rights".
Cekic says the commission's final report, submitted to the RS government, also provides information on the location of 34 mass graves where some of the victims are believed to have been buried.
"I think that the commission made the most objective and the most correct list [possible] of those killed in Srebrenica," the AFP quoted commission member Djordje Stojakovic as saying Thursday.
"We had more than 30 sources of information but the list is not final.
I'm not sure that there will be a final list ever."
According to various independent assessments, the death toll was between 7,000 and 8,000.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) ruled earlier this year that the Srebrenica massacre constituted genocide.
The ICTY has indicted wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, for genocide over their alleged roles in the BiH conflict.
Both men have managed to evade justice for more than eight years.
