15/09/2004
(Office of the High Representative, Fena - 14/09/04)
A senior international official urged politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Tuesday (14 September) to change their overall approach to meet the challenge of transforming their country.
According to Donald Hays, the principal deputy of the top international envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, the success of the transformation project depends on individuals who have a vision, a plan for achieving it, and the ability to communicate effectively with those who will play a role in the process.
Such "agents of change" are vital to carrying out the difficult, but necessary reforms that will ensure a better future for the country, Hays said at a conference in Sarajevo.
"Political leaders in BiH for the most part have yet to conceive a clear vision of the kind of country they are trying to build," he said. 
"Nor has there been an easy-to-comprehend plan regarding a strategy to construct that vision; and consequently they have been unsuccessful to date in effectively communicating their vision and strategy."
BiH politicians, Hays noted, have in the past been reluctant to push ahead with reforms, fearing loss of popularity. 
"In other transition countries, such successful reformers have been voted out of office, only to have their incoming critics benefit when the reforms start to deliver positive results," he said.
However, he added, the pain of implementing critical reforms is compensated by measurable gains. 
If change leads to a visibly better life, then the agents of change can pursue the reform agenda without exhausting their political capital, Hays said.
"In short, we need a political class that is self confident rather than self-promoting and polemic. 
And I believe that we are experiencing such a change in the character of BiH politicians," Hays said. 
"As we move from the push of Dayton to the pull of Brussels, we see that many of the transition issues that were obscured by the war and its aftermath -- issues of tedious but necessary economic adjustment, issues of European convergence and globalisation -- require fresh ideas and fresh faces. 
We may see the results of this in the coming elections."
For BiH, the destination is Europe, and this goal can motivate people to make the necessary sacrifices, Hays said. 
"Europe means stability, visa-free travel, the very real prospect of prosperity, and the best guarantee for their future," he added.
