14/10/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 14/10/04
The arrest of Bosnian Serb war crimes suspect Ljubisa Beara in Serbia earlier this week could prove a turning point in Serbia-Montenegro's path to EU accession.
"This is extremely good and timely news and we think the rest of the indicted war criminals should follow his example," Cristina Gallach, spokeswoman for EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, told Reuters.
Beara stands accused of involvement in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of more than 7,000 Muslim men and boys.
At the time, Beara was head of security for the Bosnian Serb Army.
Prosecutors say he bore direct responsibility for the atrocities.
In his initial appearance before the UN court Tuesday (12 October), he urged other war crimes indictees to turn themselves in "so that we can take this burden of our people".
The international community has long insisted that Serbia-Montenegro improve its co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
Such co-operation is among the key conditions for launching a long-delayed EU feasibility study for a Stabilisation and Association Agreement, the first stage towards eventual EU membership.
"I am glad that we are finally in a position to move on with Serbia-Montenegro, after long delays due to internal disputes in that country," EU External Relations Commissioner Chris Patten said at a meeting Monday of EU foreign ministers in Luxembourg.
Solana and Patten tentatively agreed that formal negotiations could begin next year, but progress will depend on the Serbian authorities' co-operation in finding and handing over indictees.
War crimes chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte, who paid an official visit to Belgrade last week, said she has become more optimistic about prospects for co-operation.
During her visit, del Ponte met with Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, Serbian President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, federal Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic and federal Minister for Human and Minorities Rights Rasim Ljajic.
The UN prosecutor said she expects to see practical confirmation of their statements of readiness for full co-operation with the tribunal.
She also said she remains convinced that indictee Ratko Mladic is hiding in Serbia.
Ljajic, who also heads the state union's council for co-operation with The Hague tribunal, said there are "no clues" as to Mladic's whereabouts, but vowed, "If he is found in Serbia-Montenegro, he will be extradited."
The arrest of Beara has brought a sense of renewed momentum.
If the country can stay on the path of co-operation with The Hague, many say, it will move more quickly towards EU accession -- without the bumps experienced so far.
