14/09/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 14/09/04
The trial stemming from the March 2003 assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic may have to be delayed in order to give one suspect, Dejan "Bugsy" Milenkovic, time to prepare his defence.
Milenkovic was recently transferred from Greece to Serbia, but the extradition proceedings were slowed because of an error by Serbian authorities.
Currently, the Belgrade district court is hearing witness testimony concerning Milorad "Legija" Ulemek, considered the prime suspect in the case.
"We were surprised and made a technical error, not having submitted proof that the statute of limitations is still active for the criminal act," said Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic.
"For this reason the extradition of "Bugsy" was prolonged.
It could very easily happen that a postponement of the trial could be demanded for defence preparations."
The executive director of the Yugoslav Committee of Lawyers for Human Rights, Milan Simic, was among the first to react to this development.
"This will primarily have a direct effect in terms of an additional slowdown in the trial itself.
Now, after the conclusion of the defence statement by Ulemek, Milenkovic will also have an opportunity to respond to the charges, that is to say to present his defense, after which the presiding judicial committee will be in a position to decide on the continuation of the process," Simic said in a statement to Serbian media.
At the same time, Simic added, Milenkovic's appearance could shed additional light on a previous attempt on Djindjic's life.
Weeks before the assassination, the prime minister's car was nearly hit by a truck allegedly driven by Milenkovic, who was subsequently arrested and jailed.
However, the 4th Municipal Court released him from custody after two days, saying there was no legal basis for keeping him in custody.
Seventeen months later, he was arrested in Thessaloniki.
Police documents indicate that he was a member of the Surcin criminal clan, associated with auto theft, drug, cigarette and gasoline trafficking and linked to several armed conflicts in the underworld.
Milenkovic's arrest has focused attention on an ongoing problem that has hampered the investigation of organised crime networks in the region:
the lack of effective passport control.
Ulemek, the apparent mastermind of the plot against Djindjic, travelled for two years with an unissued Croatian passport, one of 100 that were stolen in 1999 from the Croatian consulate in Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He travelled to six different countries, passing through document control as many as 26 times before being arrested in Belgrade in May of this year.
Following Milenkovic's arrest, Interpol issued a warning about the need for better passport control, saying this represents one of the weakest links in the war against terrorism.
"What shocks me the most is how few countries check whether a passport has been stolen," said Interpol General Secretary Ronald Noble.
