14/09/2004
(Reuters, AFP, VOA, UNMIK - 13/09/04)
Seeking to ensure a secure environment for next month's parliamentary elections in Kosovo, NATO will send 2,000 reinforcements to the province ahead of the vote, KFOR Commander Lieutenant General Yves de Kermabon said Monday (13 September).
The 23 October vote will be taking place seven months after the worst ethnic violence in the province since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict.
Riots in mid-March left 19 people dead and hundreds more wounded.
At a joint press conference with de Kermabon in Pristina on Monday, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen said the situation had since calmed.
He outlined measures UNMIK and KFOR have taken over the past six months to boost security, including closer co-operation in daily activities, contingency plans for riot control and improved protection of vulnerable groups and sites.
"Security is a factor that underpins everything we are trying to do here," Jessen-Petersen said.
"Security for all and everyone, notably for the minorities, is crucial to making Kosovo the kind of a multiethnic society that we all want and where everyone has a future."
A number of measures have already been taken within KFOR to increase the force's efficiency and make it more flexible and more mobile, said de Kermabon, who assumed his post earlier this month.
Both he and Jessen-Petersen stressed that there are no indications of possible disturbances during the October vote.
Nevertheless, de Kermabon said, peacekeepers stand ready to support the process by ensuring a safe and secure environment.
Without going into detail, he said KFOR would be reinforced by 2,000 troops under a special operation dubbed "Determined Commitment".
The soldiers -- reportedly from France, Germany and Italy -- are expected to start arriving later this month.
Both officials underscored the need for local authorities and the people of Kosovo to participate actively in improving the security environment.
"Kosovo is your land, it is your life, you are working for your children, you are responsible for their future," de Kermabon said.
Looking beyond the elections, Jessen-Petersen said the process of standards implementation would be stepped up, with the goal of transferring more powers to local institutions and eventually holding talks on Kosovo's future status.
Every step of that process, he said, "is a test of the political maturity of the authorities and the citizens of Kosovo.
And they must participate and show their maturity as we move forward in that process".
