12/10/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 12/10/04
Ever since the Yugo-America project failed in the late 1980s, plans have been devised to revamp Serbia's one-time industrial leader, carmaker Zastava.
Although the issue has figured in every election campaign, successive governments have proven unable to extricate the company from its huge debts and excessive labour costs.
The September municipal campaign was no different:
only days before the vote, a mayoral candidate promised a write-off of Zastava's debts to the state.
However, the stalled carmaker did see one of its major burdens disappear in the rear-view window earlier this year.
In August, Italy's Fiat agreed to write off 72.5 per cent of Zastava's 41.5m euro debt, which had hindered the Kragujevac-based company's quest for a strategic partner.
Under the deal, modelled after the write-off granted to Serbia-Montenegro by the Paris Club of sovereign lenders, Zastava has 12 months to pay back the remaining 11.5m euros.
The state won't give any further guarantees for Zastava, according to Serbian Minister for International Economic Relations Predrag Bubalo, who led nearly two months of negotiations prior to Fiat's decision.
"Instead, we will assist the company in selling off some of its parts and receiving funds that will allow it to settle its liabilities on time," he said.
Are better days ahead for Serbia's sole producer of passenger vehicles?
It is hard to say.
The write-off came more than two years after the government split up Zastava Holding, spinning off more than 20 companies producing everything from guns to trucks.
Although the state has vowed to end handouts, it has continued to subsidise Zastava to the tune of nearly 66.5m euros over the past three years.
Prior to the deal with Fiat, the automaker's debts -- including those owed to the state, domestic creditors and employees -- reportedly exceeded the value of company assets by 20 per cent.
Previous government privatisation plans and talks with the Peugeot-Citroen Group, Toyota and Volkswagen flopped after Zastava opposed offers to be sold cheaply and receive investments for development.
With 4,500 workers who produced 13,500 cars in 2003, the company hopes that a foreign producer would at least agree to sell a platform to Zastava to develop its own model, if not let it manufacture a foreign model.
But such an undertaking would require another huge government intervention:
specifically, guarantees for a 240m euro loan with an eight-year repayment schedule.
The bold plan presented earlier this year by Zastava's management stipulates a twofold increase in workforce and an output of 40,000 cars in the first year alone.
In the first half of the year, the troubled factory managed to produce 5,500 units out of 18,000 planned for 2004.
Nevertheless, the president of parliament's industry committee, Veroljub Stevanovic, said he believes in the viability of the Zastava plan.
It remains uncertain, however, whether Serbia can afford such an expensive experiment.
