13/10/2004
(AP, FT, VOA, RFE/RL - 12/10/04;
Radio B92, Transitions Online - 11/10/04)
Less than two weeks before key parliamentary elections in Kosovo, a campaign kicked off Tuesday (12 October), encouraging voters to go to the polls.
The 23 October vote, the fourth since 1999, is viewed as a major test for the international community's efforts to build multiethnic democracy in the province.
A pool of international organisations and NGOs launched the "Get Out the Vote" campaign amid indications of low voter interest in the upcoming poll and calls for a Kosovo Serb boycott of the vote.
Quoting one of the organisers, Kreshnik Berisha, the AP reported that 2,800 volunteers are taking part in the initiative, which includes television spots, posters, leaflets, T-shirts and a door-to-door effort.
A survey conducted by the Kosovo Institute for Ethnic Relations has indicated that about 25 per cent of the province's registered voters, mostly Albanians, may stay away from the polls due to continuing economic problems and disappointment with political parties.
Citing security fears, Kosovo Serbs have threatened to boycott the election.
Such a move, the British daily Financial Times(FT) reported Tuesday, could undermine the credibility of multiethnic democracy in Kosovo months before the international community is expected to decide whether talks on determining the province's final status should begin.
The ethnic Albanian majority is pushing for independence, while Kosovo Serbs are intent on seeing the province remain part of Serbia-Montenegro.
Many local leaders want the five years of international efforts to be seen as successful.
In response to the boycott threat, some leading politicians have sought to downplay the Kosovo Serbs' security concerns.
Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova, meanwhile, has accused Belgrade officials who encourage the boycott of using "aggressive, fearful rhetoric".
He also attributed the rise in tensions to the expected approach of status negotiations.
Serbian leaders are split in their positions on the boycott issue.
Serbian President Boris Tadic recently called on the Kosovo Serbs to take part in the vote, while adding that the international community must do more "to secure a normal life" for the community.
"But will the boycott save the lives of our people in Kosovo, will it improve their daily life, encourage the return of the displaced, and rebuild destroyed houses and churches?" Tadic asked.
Days after the president's televised address, the Serb List for Kosovo apparently submitted a list of candidates for the 23 October vote to the Central Election Commission.
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen reportedly has approved the list.
