11/10/2004
(The Sofia Echo, Standartnews - 08/10/04;
Bulgarian Government Web Site, Dnevnik, News.bg - 07/10/04;
Novinite -- 05/10/04 - 07/10/04;
Reuters, SP, AFP, Mediapool - 05/10/04)
The Bulgarian government said Thursday (7 October) it has allocated over 25,000 euros for the completion of excavations at a site where archeologists recently unearthed a unique golden treasure buried in an ancient Thracian mausoleum.
Moreover, the culture ministry is expected to provide further grants -- totaling more than 50,000 euros -- by the end of the year.
"This is the largest Thracian tomb ever discovered on Bulgarian territory, and in it we've found 73 artifacts, 20 of them made of gold," Professor Georgi Kitov said on 5 October, announcing his team's latest discovery.
The huge three-chamber stone tomb near the town of Shipka, in the heart of the Stara Planina mountain range, dates back to the 5th century BC.
A 13m corridor leads to the chambers, one of which is behind a solid marble door decorated with a female head and an image of the ancient Greek god Apollo.
Entering one of the rooms, the archeologists found it filled with gold, silver and bronze treasures, crafted ceramics and three large amphoras.
According to Kitov, the most impressive finds were a golden wreath, golden horse trappings and sword decorations.
"Some of the gold jewels have engraved images unknown in Thracian art -- a deer head with strong horns, a raging lion and black people with palm trees," Kitov told reporters.
The Thracians inhabited parts of present-day Romania, Macedonia, Turkey, Greece and Bulgaria between 4,000 B.C.
and the 8th century, before being assimilated by invading Slavs.
While archeological evidence has shown that the Thracians had a highly developed culture and a refined taste, they never developed a written form of their language.
Thus most of what is known about them today is based on archaeological finds and on accounts from other sources, such as the Greek historian Herodotus.
The new findings, as well as artifacts unearthed by Kitov's team several weeks earlier, are expected to shed more light on the culture, habits and life of the ancient Thracians.
During excavations in August at another site in central Bulgaria, the team found a unique 2400-year old mask made of solid gold, presumably depicting King Seutus III, one of the mightiest Thracian rulers.
Meanwhile, the head of the Bulgarian History Museum said an excavation team at another of Bulgaria's estimated 19,000 Thracian tombs has also found an invaluable treasure.
Refusing to provide details or disclose the site, Professor Bozhidar Dimitrov said only that the golden objects likely were made about 2,000 years earlier than those found near Shipka.
