09/09/2004
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens - 09/09/04
The countdown for the 12th Paralympics starts Thursday (9 September) in Athens with the lighting of the flame at the ancient temple of Hephaestus.
The flame will then be carried in a relay across Attica, covering a distance of 410km until the culminating ceremony at the Olympic Stadium on 17 September.
Organisers say over 180,000 tickets have already been sold, as Greeks seek to continue the excitement of last month's Summer Olympics.
The Games in August were not only a tremendous success, but one that many did not expect.
Members of the media arrived in the Greek capital harbouring considerable scepticism about the country's ability to pull off such a massive event.
The international press was full of reports about missed construction deadlines and bureaucratic snafus.
The International Olympic Committee (IOC) itself expressed concern about the effort.
Putting a hopeful spin on the situation, IOC President Jacques Rogge compared preparations for the Athens Games to a folk dance known as the syrtaki, which starts very slowly, gradually accelerates, and culminates at a frenzied pace.
But the Greeks, it turned out, knew what they were doing.
Despite being the smallest country ever to host the Olympics, the country staged them to worldwide acclaim, eliciting mea culpas from doubters and critics.
The day after the closing ceremony, news headlines praised the success of the Games.
"The Greeks have given us a collection of tales and elemental heroes that will haunt our imaginations," said the London Times.
According to the Daily Mail, Athens 2004 was a reminder that international sport at its best "has the capacity to inspire and lift the spirits".
CNN's Rick Reilly not only celebrated the Games but apologised for having expected the worst.
"It was a glorious Olympics.
It really was.
The opening ceremonies were fabulous.
The nightlife was amazing...
So, sygnomi, as you would say.
Sorry.
Sorry about the way we acted.
We were paranoid and stupid and just flat-out wrong," Reilly wrote.
The Associated Press, meanwhile, offered Greece "a much-deserved 'efharisto' (thank you)!"
"With everything I had seen in July, I was still having my doubts on whether Greece would be able to make it on time," said Kim Zong-Moon of Seoul's Joongang Ilbo daily.
"One month after, I thought I had visited the wrong city.
The change was unbelievable."
