11/10/2004
(The Straits Times - 11/10/04; AFP, VOA, Athens News Agency - 10/10/04; Kathimerini - 08/10/04)
Pledging his country's support for Turkey's EU accession, Greek President Costis Stephanopoulos said Sunday (10 October) that Ankara must resolve its remaining differences with Greece -- particularly the Cyprus issue -- before entering the Union.
"Greece must help Turkey to become a European country, as this would be in EU and Greek interests," Stephanopoulos said at an annual commemoration ceremony in the port town of Nafpaktos. 
"But Turkey must also be reminded of its obligations to Greece and Cyprus."
Cyprus has been divided along ethnic lines since 1974, when Turkish troops invaded following a coup aimed at uniting the island with Greece. 
Turkey is the only country that does not recognise the Greek Cypriot government in Nicosia and the only one recognising the government of the Turkish Cypriot community in the island's north.
"This is a moment to remember that Turkey cannot join the EU if it does not normalise its relations with Greece, recognise the Cypriot Republic and contribute to a solution to the Cyprus problem," Stephanopoulos said Sunday. 
He also called on Ankara to recognise the universal stature of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate in Istanbul and allow a Greek Orthodox seminary to reopen at Halki.
A UN-sponsored reunification plan for Cyprus failed in April, when the majority of Greek Cypriots voted against it in a referendum, while Turkish Cypriots approved it. 
As a result, only the Greek Cypriots joined the EU on 1 May. 
They have since made clear their opposition to any move that could lead to the recognition of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
Following last week's release of a European Commission report that recommended starting accession talks with Turkey, the Greek Cypriot government called for a settlement based on "the principles which govern the operation of the EU".
EU leaders are to decide at a December summit in Copenhagen whether to give Turkey a starting date for its membership talks. 
While stressing that Nicosia was not planning to veto the talks, Greek Cypriot government spokesman Kypros Chrysostomides said there was now "a framework and a procedure in which our side can act, so as to make use of the possibilities towards realising our targets on the Cyprus issue".
A country's entry into the currently 25-nation bloc requires the unanimous approval of all member states.
"It is a great shame that 15 years after the end of the Cold War in Europe, a 'Berlin Wall' still divides the Cypriot capital, Nicosia, separating the island's Christian and Muslim communities," said the leader of Greece's main opposition party PASOK, former Foreign Minister George Papandreou, in a commentary carried by the Singapore-based Straits Times on Monday.
"But the European model of integration has proven effective in overcoming such festering problems. 
While the division of Cyprus set a disastrous precedent for regional co-operation, a united Cyprus will reinforce regional stability," Papandreou said.
