08/09/2004
(Tanjug - 08/09/04; AP, VOA, RFE/RL, Radio B92; VOA - 06/09/04; AFP - 04/09/04; UNMIK; OSCE)
With the approach of the 23 October parliamentary elections in Kosovo, there have been increasing calls for the province's Serbs to take part in the vote. 
Western officials have cautioned that non-participation could harm the interests of the Serbian community and leave it isolated from important processes concerning its future.
Urging Kosovo Serbs to go to the polls next month, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen stressed on Tuesday (7 September) that participation in the democratic process is the key to ensuring better security for their community. 
During a visit to Albania, the Danish diplomat also warned about the detrimental effect of a potential boycott. 
Such a move, the VOA quoted the UNMIK chief as saying in Tirana, would in the end exclude the Kosovo Serbs from future talks on the province's final status.
Albanian presidential spokeswoman Aferdita Sokoli said the "participation of all communities" in the October election would be a key topic in Jessen-Petersen's talks with the country's top leadership.
During his first visit to Belgrade after assuming his post last month, the UNMIK chief pledged "more effort will be put towards resolving the issue of Kosovo's final status" after the election.
Belgrade officials, however, have urged Kosovo Serbs not to participate in the vote, saying authorities have not ensured adequate security.
Calling on the Kosovo Serbs to go to the polls, the EU acknowledged on Saturday "they need adequate protection" and promised to take steps to improve the situation.
"We should urge the Serbs in Kosovo to participate in the coming elections," said Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency. 
"We will develop a strategy ... 
to help them."
After talks with senior Belgrade officials on Friday, representatives of the six-nation Contact Group for Kosovo said there is no better way for the Kosovo Serbs to ensure that they have a voice in the province's future than by casting votes.
Serbian President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, according to Radio Free Europe, have called on the international community to institutionalise protection for Kosovo's minorities on the basis of separate decentralisation plans put forward by Belgrade and UNMIK.
Rejecting Belgrade's plan as a first step toward partition, Kosovo Albanian leaders say the calls from Serb officials to boycott the October vote are aimed at pressuring the UN civilian administration in the province to accept their proposal.
Meanwhile, Belgrade-based Radio B92 reported Saturday that EU foreign ministers have agreed to use some of the suggestions in Belgrade's plan.
"Now it is a matter of taking two documents and making them into one, which would be suitable for all the parties that are involved," the report quoted EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana as saying
