24/01/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 24/01/04
More than a decade has passed since the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) was established as a result of UN Security Council Resolution 827, adopted on 25 May 1993. 
Since that time, many indicted war criminals have been brought to justice. 
Of those that remain at large, at least 12 either are or have recently been on Serbian territory, according to UN chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte. 
Although co-operation between Belgrade and the ICTY improved following the overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic in 2000, it remains slow and erratic. 
Moreover, the current prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica, has openly stated his opposition to the arrest and extradition of wanted war criminals, saying he favours voluntary surrender instead.
As a result, Serbia is at a stalemate in its efforts to rejoin the international community. 
Brussels has made it clear that further progress along the road to Serbian EU accession hinges on full co-operation with the UN court. 
Joining NATO's Partnership for Peace programme is out of the question as long as Serbia continues to harbour war criminals. 
Lack of co-operation has had economic consequences as well. 
On 13 January, the United States announced it was withholding $10m in planned assistance to Serbia-Montenegro for the 2005 fiscal year as a result of Belgrade's failure to meet its international commitments. 
That amount comes on top of the more than $16m that was held last year for the same reason.
Ratko Mladic, one of the UN tribunal's top three indictees, is thought to have been in Serbia as recently as June 2004, when reformist Boris Tadic became president. 
According to Tadic, the former warlord is probably holed up somewhere along the Serbia-Montenegrin and Bosnian border, moving between the two countries. 
In addition, four retired army and police generals wanted for their alleged role in war crimes committed in Kosovo -- Nebojsa Pavkovic, Sreten Lukic, Vlastimir Djordjevic and Vladimir Lazarevic -- remain at large within Serbia.
In all, 13 indicted war criminals have been extradited by Serbia to The Hague, while another 13 have surrendered voluntarily. 
Serbia's first extraditions to the ICTY began in 1996, during the rule of Milosevic. 
Although he refused any deeper co-operation with the ICTY, authorities in the Vojvodina town of Becej arrested two former members of the Republika Srpska (RS) armed forces, Drazen Erdemovic and Radoslav Kremenovic, in early March 1996. 
They were transferred to The Hague at the end of the same month.
In late September 1998, Bosnian Serb Stevan Todorovic was arrested and extradited to the ICTY. 
Todorovic and his lawyer claimed that he had been kidnapped from his house in the Serbian countryside and transported to the SFOR base in the Bosnian town of Tuzla. 
On 21 April 2000, a group of ten men seized another Bosnian Serb indictee, Dragan "Yankee" Nikolic in (near Belgrade) and took him to RS, where he was delivered to the ICTY.
The first indictee to turn himself in after the 5 October 2000 change of power in Belgrade was a Bosnian Serb, Blagoje Simic, who voluntarily turned himself in to the ICTY on 12 March 2001. 
Eleven days later, on 23 March, another Bosnian Serb, Milomir Stakic, was arrested in Belgrade and extradited to the tribunal.
In a sign of stronger co-operation with the ICTY, then Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic brought about the arrest of Milosevic on 1 April 2001. 
The former dictator was transferred to The Hague on 28 June of the same year. 
Indicted for war crimes in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Kosovo, he is currently presenting his defence.
Two brothers, Nenad and Predrag Banovic, were arrested at a Belgrade green market on 8 November 2001 and sent to The Hague the next day. 
Former Yugoslav Army chief of staff Dragoljub Ojdanic turned himself in on 25 April 2002. 
A few days later, on 2 May, former Yugoslav Deputy Prime Minister Nikola Sainovic and Bosnian Serb indictee Momcilo Gruban both surrendered to the tribunal. 
On 15 May 2002, the former president of the so-called Republika Srpska Krajina, Milan Martic, and former RS Army commander Mile Mrksic headed for The Hague. 
On 17 June of the same year, the Serbian government extradited Bosnian Serb Ranko Cesic.
Another group of top Serbian officials arrived at The Hague during the first months of 2003. 
The first, on 20 January, was former Serbian President Milan Milutinovic, indicted for war crimes in Kosovo; he was followed by Serbian Radical Party leader Vojislav Seselj on 24 February. 
Both men went voluntarily. 
In March, former assistant state security chief Franko "Frenki" Simatovic and former state security chief Jovica Stanisic were arrested in Belgrade and handed over to the ICTY. 
Stanisic and Simatovic are indicted for war crimes in Croatia and BiH. 
The tribunal released them from pre-trial detention on 9 December 2004.
Former Yugoslav People’s Army officer Miroslav Radic, one of the so-called "Vukovar three", voluntarily left for The Hague on 17 May 2003. 
Another member of that group, Veselin Sljivancanin, was arrested in Belgrade on 13 June and then extradited. 
Also during 2003, Bosnian Serbs Zeljko Makic and Mitar Rasevic turned themselves in to the ICTY. 
Another indictee, former Yugoslav People’s Army captain Vladimir "Rambo" Kovacevic was extradited in October 2003. 
However, due to a mental health problem that rendered him unfit to stand trial, he was brought back to Serbia in June 2004.
In the course of 2004, Bosnian Serbs Ljubisa Beara -- indicted for crimes in Srebrenica -- and Dragomir Milosevic, charged with the shelling of Sarajevo, surrendered voluntarily and departed from Belgrade for The Hague on 9 October and 3 December, respectively.
Two indicted war criminals have died before they could be brought to justice. 
Zeljko Raznatovic -- nicknamed "Arkan" -- was gunned down in Belgrade on 15 June 2000. 
Former Serbian Interior Minister Vlajko Stoiljkovic committed suicide on 11 April 2002 after the Yugoslav Parliamentadopted a law allowing the extradition of Yugoslav citizens to the ICTY. 
He had been indicted for crimes in Kosovo.
The halting pace of Belgrade's co-operation with the ICTY has led del Ponte to raise the possibility that the current deadline for wrapping up the court's activities might have to be extended. 
The tribunal's completion strategy calls for concluding all trials by 2010. 
But if Serbia continues the present slow rate of extraditions, some fugitives might still be in hiding by then.
It is hardly conceivable that the ICTY would close shop with Mladic and the other two top indictees -- Radovan Karadzic and Croatia's Ante Gotovina -- still on the run. 
While Kostunica appears to be stalling in the hope that justice can simply be waited out, the international community has sent repeated signals that this is not going to happen. 
Lack of co-operation continues to cost Serbia dearly at a time when it urgently needs to move ahead.
