09/09/2004
(EurActiv, Tanjug, The Budapest Sun - 09/09/04; Reuters, AFP - 08/09/04; Government of Serbia - 07/09/04; Radio B92 -- 31/08/04 - 08/09/04)
Voicing concern over ethnic violence against the Hungarian minority in Serbia's Vojvodina province, Hungary has called on the EU to put pressure on Belgrade.
Hungarian Foreign Minister Laszlo Kovacs said Wednesday (8 September) he would bring up the matter at the EU foreign ministers' meeting on Monday, in the hope that a statement expressing concern would be adopted. 
After a government meeting, he said Budapest already has sent out a draft resolution to the other 24 EU member states.
"The document states that the EU observes with worry the attacks against the non-Serb communities, which endanger democracy and the stability and security of the region," Kovacs said.
Hungary lost two-thirds of its territory after World War I, and about 300,000 of an estimated 2.5 million ethnic Hungarians living outside the country are in Vojvodina. 
Accounting for about 15 per cent of the province's population, they are the largest group among the 26 ethnic minority groups in Vojvodina, which borders Hungary to the north.
While the area was not affected by the bloodshed during the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s, Vojvodina's Hungarians have been complaining in recent months of mounting violence against them.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica was on a fact-finding mission to the region Wednesday. 
Speaking to reporters in the town of Temerin, he acknowledged there had been incidents, but described them as "isolated" and involving both Serbs and Hungarians.
The events should neither be concealed nor exaggerated, Kostunica said, warning "If they are exaggerated there is a danger of inflaming interethnic intolerance. 
"
According to the leader of the Council of Vojvodina Hungarians, however, the situation is not being exaggerated. 
"In fact, I think that it is being downplayed, because we are always speaking about the most extreme cases in which physical attacks are involved, while cases of psychological and verbal abuse are never discussed," Josef Kasa told the daily Dnevnik. 
He also criticised the local police and courts for their inadequate responses.
In an interview this week, Kostunica said police had investigated most of the cases and the courts had taken appropriate action. 
Seeing no need to "internationalise the issue", Kostunica said Serbia would seek a solution through dialogue with Budapest. 
The issue is expected to be on the agenda when Hungarian President Ferenc Madl visits Belgrade next week.
