08/10/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 08/10/04
On Tuesday (5 October), four years after the downfall of Slobodan Milosevic's regime, EU officials Javier Solana and Chris Patten were in Belgrade for talks with Serbia-Montenegro authorities.
"Everybody knows there have been ups and downs in our relations but I can tell you that most obstacles have been lifted," Solana said afterwards.
Topping the agenda was the EU's new "two-track" approach for Serbia-Montenegro's EU accession.
According to Solana and Patten, Serbian leaders have accepted the new approach, which envisions Serbia and Montenegro signing one agreement with the EU, but approaching the Union separately when it comes to economic details.
"Now there is no room for any debates and withdrawals and we hope that on 11 October we will be able to submit a positive report to EU foreign ministers, which will lead to the launching of the feasibility study, which I hope could be finished in early 2005," Patten said.
He cautioned, however, that lack of co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal remains the main obstacle in Serbia's path to the EU, and the study would reflect this.
The two EU officials also called on Kosovo Serbs to participate in the upcoming parliamentary election in the province, saying this was the only way to exercise their rights.
Solana and Patten met with Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, Serbian President Boris Tadic, Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, and Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus.
Tadic said the EU officials' statements demonstrated support for the state union while acknowledging the reality of the constituent republics' economic relations.
He agreed with Solana and Patten that Kosovo Serbs should participate in the upcoming vote, and said the war crimes co-operation issue was hampering Serbia's prospects for integration.
Marovic took a similar position, while Kostunica disagreed about Kosovo Serb participation.
Labus said that the common state, if all went according to plan, ought to become a member of the EU in 2012.
According to him, the "two-track" model for Serbia-Montenegro is the only way to continue the integration process.
The model has also received support from top Montenegrin officials, including President Vujanovic.
On Thursday, Tadic and Kostunica continued their disagreement over Kosovo's general elections.
Kostunica accused the president of unlawfully opposing parliament by calling for an end to the Serb boycott, while Tadic said Kostunica is pursuing a policy of inaction that could lead to "the disintegration of the country".
