07/09/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 07/09/04
Turkish Defence Minister Vecdi Gonul's visit to Belgrade last month resulted in an agreement on military co-operation.
Signed by Gonul and his Serbia-Montenegro counterpart.
Prvoslav Davinic, the deal is the first of its kind that the state union has reached with a NATO member.
Davinic said he and Gonul had agreed on mutual visits by military representatives of the two countries, and that specific avenues of co-operation would soon be arranged.
The Turkish defence minister left open the possibility of Serbia-Montenegro having its own display at the military equipment fair in Ankara next year.
Serbia-Montenegro will have Turkey’s support when it comes to military equipment supplies, Gonul pledged.
The deal will provide opportunities for the Serbian military industry, which currently cannot find markets for its products, says analyst Zoran Dragisic.
According to Dragisic, the Serbian military industry has much to offer NATO countries, including high-quality ammunition for virtually all sorts of weapons.
Once a major exporter, the industry foundered following Slobodan Milosevic’s rise and the subsequent period of conflicts and international sanctions.
The Turkish defence minister's visit was also important in terms of the countries' political ties.
Relations between the two countries "are for the time being very good," Gonul said.
While in Belgrade, he also met with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, President Boris Tadic, and Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic.
Tadic and Gonul agreed that co-operation between Serbia-Montenegro and Turkey is important to the region.
"Relations between Serbia and Turkey are a prerequisite for political stability in the Balkans and we will do everything to improve the relations in the coming years," Tadic said.
Gonul stressed that Turkey "strongly wishes to see Serbia-Montenegro overcome possible obstacles to its entry into Euro-Atlantic integration processes as soon as possible," adding that he hoped Serbia-Montenegro would soon become a member of the Partnership for Peace programme.
However, Serbia-Montenegro must first meet the requirements for entry, including full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal at The Hague.
