07/09/2004
(Dnevnik, Utrinski Vesnik, Macedonian TV - 07/09/04;
AP, AFP, MIA, Makfax, Hina - 06/09/04)
Macedonia and Croatia signed an agreement Monday (6 September) on co-operation in the EU integration process, as Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader led a high-level delegation on a two-day visit to Skopje.
Following talks with Macedonian counterpart Hari Kostov, Sanader told reporters that friendly Croatian-Macedonian relations were an example for the region.
"There are no open issues between the two countries," he said, adding that future efforts should be concentrated on economic co-operation.
He pledged that Croatia was ready to share its EU integration experiences with Macedonia to help Skopje's bid.
"Our co-operation should help both of us in efforts to join the EU and NATO," Kostov said.
The deal was signed by Croatian Foreign Minister Miomir Zuzul and his Macedonian counterpart, Ilinka Mitreva, following the meeting between the two prime ministers.
In June, Croatia won recognition as an official EU candidate and is awaiting a date for opening accession talks with the Union.
Macedonia submitted its application several months ago, but has not yet achieved candidate status.
"The project of a united Europe has no chance if it does not include the countries of Southeast Europe," said Sanader.
"Future Europe cannot have holes in its map where our region is."
At the same time, he stressed the need for EU membership criteria to be met.
"Macedonia and Croatia must reach political stability and economic prosperity in order to attain full-fledged EU membership," said Sanader.
Both leaders said there were opportunities to increase economic ties.
Sanader noted that over the past two years, Croatia has climbed from tenth to eighth in the list of Macedonia's trade partners and that he hopes to see his country move further up.
Kostov, meanwhile, raised the possibility of reaching an agreement with Zagreb on hiring Macedonian workers for seasonal jobs in Croatian shipyards.
Bilateral trade between Macedonia and Croatia was relatively balanced and could exceed 130m euros this year, sources say.
As part of the efforts to boost economic co-operation, the Macedonian Chamber of Commerce held an economic forum on Monday.
It was attended by the Croatian businessmen accompanying Sanader, the first prime minister to have visited Macedonia since 1997.
On Monday he also met with Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski and Parliament Speaker Ljupco Jordanovski.
