07/09/2004
By Berat Buzhala for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 07/09/04
The controversy over Kosovo's second mobile phone license remains unresolved, with government ministers and officials of the Telecommunications Regulatory Agency (TRA) at odds over who has the authority to decide the issue.
Following a report by international auditors that was sharply critical of the way the process was managed, Kosovo Transport and Telecommunications Minister Zef Morina announced in August that he had decided to annul the tender.
But the head of the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA), Anton Berisha, has challenged the decision and vowed to go ahead with licensing the winning bidder.
Mobikos, a Slovenian-Kosovo consortium, was declared the winner on 28 June.
However, the outcome was immediately contested by Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Rexhepi, and by representatives of the United States and the United Kingdom.
The head of the US office in Kosovo, Marcie Ries, said, "Potential investors will want to know if this process was conducted in a professional and transparent fashion."
UNMIK assigned an Irish company, HELM, to evaluate the procedures followed during the bidding process.
Working under the auspices of the Central Auditors' Office, international experts from the company found serious flaws in the way the tender was managed.
"If these shortcomings are not eliminated, the tender needs to be annulled," the experts recommended.
According to HELM experts, Berisha and TRA officials have failed to produce the work notes of the specialists tasked with evaluating the offers of the competing firms.
Berisha declared that for "security reasons" he has formatted all the computers and shredded the paperwork of experts who participated in the evaluation.
UNMIK has now requested legal proceedings against the TRA board for concealing data.
Competing along with Mobikos was US-based Western Wireless International, in partnership with the Kosovo firm IPKO.
The two consortia are competitors in Slovenia as well as in Kosovo.
Mobitel, the Slovenian partnership in the winning consortium, insists that it submitted a "quality offer" and that the controversy is harming mobile telecommunications consumers in Kosovo by delaying the introduction of up-to-date services.
Following a meeting with UNMIK deputy head Charles Brayshaw and the head of UNMIK's legal office, Alexandar Borg Olivier, Berisha said he had decided to postpone signing the contract for two weeks.
"The winner of the tender will either be announced in two weeks time, or TRA will not exist anymore.
The issue cannot be delayed any further," local sources quoted Berisha as saying.
Kosovo's cabinet and UNMIK have both backed the move to annul the tender.
"Telecommunications is a transferred competency, and Morina has the right to take any step about the mobile telephony tender, including canceling it," said Mechthild Henneke, a UNMIK spokeswoman.
