06/09/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 06/09/04
Albania has prepared its national strategy on the development of education and is ready to implement it, according to sources at the education ministry.
The strategy, made public in mid-August, is intended to lay the basis for reforming the country’s educational system.
It stipulates nine years of basic elementary education, obligatory for everyone, and three years in total for secondary schooling.
Implementation will start during the new term, later this year, and will include pupils who are currently in the fifth grade, as well as those who enrol in first grade.
Their elementary education will end after four years, instead of three years as before.
"The prolongation of elementary education from eight years to nine years will automatically guarantee more education for Albanians and also will help adjust the education system to European standards," Education Minister Luan Memushi told journalists.
The overhaul of the education system will be followed with a change in schooling programmes.
A completely new system of curricula for the nine years of elementary education will be in place during 2008.
Besides the obligatory classes, pupils will have the opportunity to choose classes of special interest to them.
That, officials believe, will help foster the development of special skills.
"An important part of the strategy for the period 2004-2015 is also the process of decentralisation of education.
Through this process we would give to the school the necessary power and importance," Memushi said.
International institutions have assisted Albanian authorities in drafting the strategy.
It is part of the country's overall national strategy for economic and social development, which is supported by the World Bank.
According to UNICEF, 90 per cent of children of primary school age in Albania are attending school.
In urban areas, 91 per cent of children attend school while in rural areas 90 per cent attend.
The vast majority (88 per cent) of the population over 15 years of age is literate.
The percentage of literacy declines with age.
Among those aged 15-34, nearly 93 per cent are literate;
however the literacy rate is only 65 per cent among those 65 and older.
