07/10/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 07/10/04
European Commission President Romano Prodi brought the EU questionaire to Skopje on 1 October.
It contains around 4,000 questions, which will be answered by about 1,000 ministry personnel who have been training intensively over the past months, using Croatia's questionnaire for practice.
"The questionnaire is not red tape;
it is a useful instrument that provides knowledge of the conditions in a country," Prodi said before presenting the document to Macedonian Prime Minister Hari Kostov.
"This is not about inquiry but dialogue.
The EU wants to know who you are and what you do."
"The questionnaire … is recognition of the efforts Macedonia has made in the past three years," Kostov said.
"We will complete the answers by January 2005 and hand them to the European Commission.
They will reflect the true picture of conditions in Macedonia.
We believe the country has the chance for positive evaluations."
"We are facing at least four months of arduous work,” Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska said.
"The ministries have each formed teams of 10 to 15 people who are in charge of replying to the questions.
The answers will then go to the Committee of Ministers for verification, and the government will give the final approval in a special session that will verify the answers.
All the papers, laws and action plans have already been prepared.
They will be translated and sent with the answers."
"We are expecting about 80 questions, which is a comparatively small number compared to other areas," said Zlatko Veterovski, the co-ordinator of the customs administration-related questions.
"We have intensively prepared ourselves and practiced on the Croatian questionnaire in the past few months, and what is important, we have collected all the supplements [laws, regulations] that will be sent together with the answers.
These are about 32 laws the Customs Administration executes directly."
Macedonia signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU in April 2001, the first country in the region to do so.
Skopje submitted its application for membership in Dublin on 22 March and is now poised to take a significant step forward in the process.
