07/10/2004
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 07/10/04
A much-anticipated report released by the European Commission on Wednesday (6 October) gives a conditional go-ahead to starting negotiations with Turkey, which it says has fulfilled the so-called Copenhagen criteria. 
If EU leaders approve the report's recommendations at their summit in December, Turkey will have cleared a major hurdle on its road to eventual EU membership.
That road, however, is a bumpy one. 
Addressing the European Parliament, EC President Romano Prodi said there are many steps yet to be taken and that the EU could freeze negotiations if Ankara backtracks on human rights and reforms. 
The EC report, which does not recommend a specific starting date for launching negotiations, notes that Turkey would not actually join the EU until around 2015 -- even if the talks begin in early 2005. 
While praising Turkey's reforms and efforts to harmonise its laws with those of the EU, the report also voices concern about implementation.
In particular, it urges Turkey to take further steps to eradicate torture, expand freedom of expression and religion, and strengthen the rights of women, minorities and trade unions. 
According to the EC, torture is no longer systematic in Turkey, but cases continue to occur. 
At the same time, discrimination and violence against women -- including "honour killings" -- and child labour continue to be serious problems.
"Although freedom of religious belief is guaranteed by the Constitution, non-Muslim religious communities continue to experience difficulties," the commissioners found. 
"Regarding the influence of the military, civilian control of the military has been strengthened with a view to aligning it with practice in EU member states. 
But the armed forces in Turkey continue to exercise influence through a series of informal mechanisms."
The report also stresses the advantages and opportunities that accession promises both sides. 
"Turkey’s accession would be different from previous EU enlargements because of Turkey's population, size, geographical location and its economic, security and military potential," it says. 
"Turkey would be an important model of a country with a majority Muslim population adhering to such fundamental principles as liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law."
Although the Commission's "yes" to Turkey was conditional, the report generally met Ankara's expectations. 
Describing it as balanced, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said he hoped talks would begin in the first half of 2005.
"Turkey’s membership will not be realised overnight," Erdogan said. 
"Certainly Turkey anticipates concluding this phase within a reasonable period of time. 
To this end, we in Turkey will fulfil our part."
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul hailed what he described as a "historic step" for both Turkey and Europe, though he also criticised some of the EC's proposals as differing from past practices towards candidate countries.
"Turkey understands the EU’s desire to develop general measures to efficiently implement and monitor the negotiation process," Gul said. 
"However, it is not possible to conclude that it reflects a constructive and objective approach to propose the adoption of different criteria and methods for Turkey. 
These proposals, which are in contradiction with the decisions taken at the Helsinki European Council of December 1999 as regards the principle of equal treatment for Turkey and other candidates, need further discussion."
Deniz Baykal, leader of the opposition Republican People's Party, voiced stronger objections, warning, "Conditional negotiations will make people in Turkey raise questions about the EU’s sincerity."
