06/09/2004
(FENA - 05/09/04;
World Bank -- 02/09/04 - 05/09/04)
Representatives of youth associations from 83 countries around the world have gathered in Sarajevo for the second Youth Development and Peace (YDP 2004) conference, held under the auspices of the World Bank.
The purpose of the forum is to explore ways in which youth organisations and the Bank can best work together for poverty eradication and promoting development.
Approximately 170 young people, aged 18-25, are attending the forum, which opened on Sunday (5 September).
Joining them are 40 senior officials from the World Bank and other international organisations.
According to a statement from the Bank, the event is being held in partnership with the European Youth Forum and the World Organisation of the Scout Movement, with support from the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Participants will build on the results of an earlier conference, which took place a year ago in Paris.
It was attended by more than 110 young people from 70 countries.
Speaking at the opening of the forum Sunday, BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic said the country's youth had greatly contributed to the drafting of the BiH development strategy.
"This convinced us that the youth can take responsibility if they are given the right opportunity," Terzic said.
World Bank Vice President for Europe and Central Asia Shigeo Katsu said one of the purposes of the conference was to assess the progress achieved over the past 12 months in four priority areas:
education, employment, conflict prevention and resolution, and risky behaviours and HIV/AIDS.
Another aim was to reach agreement on a mid-term course of action.
"But more importantly, we are gathered here because we all believe that young people are a tremendous source of untapped potential in world development, but that we haven't even come close to unlocking this potential," Katsu said in his opening remarks.
He added that the Bank itself is already implementing a global framework that would allow it to increase investment in children and youth.
"Whether through economic growth strategies or via housing, rural development, HIV/AIDS control or schools projects, the World Bank is actively adopting 'youth-friendly' programmes and operations," he said.
Young people, rarely part of the traditional power structures that protect vested interests and old practices, are not afraid to tackle seemingly intractable issues such as HIV/AIDS, climate change, debt, and the building of a truly global community, Katsu said.
Being adept at supporting new causes that shake up the status quo, he added, they have the potential to become part of powerful alliances for change.
"Let's explore how we can work together in the future to enable young people to realise their potential in creating successful, open societies offering opportunities to all their citizens.
We might decide to create a loose network of youth representatives with a shared agenda or agree to take joint action on specific advocacy goals, but, whatever the outcome, we should all strive for specificity", Katsu said.
The YDP 2004 conference closes Tuesday after a plenary session with World Bank President James Wolfensohn on a new Bank-youth framework for action.
