05/10/2004
(AFP, International Herald Tribune - 05/10/04;
AP, Reuters, BBC, FT, VOA, Turkish Press - 04/10/04)
Diplomatic sources in Brussels confirmed Monday (4 October) that a European Commission (EC) report due for release Wednesday will recommend that the EU open accession talks with Turkey.
However, the sources said, the document will also warn that negotiations could be suspended if Ankara fails to show further progress on human rights.
"Turkey sufficiently fulfils the Copenhagen political criteria to begin membership negotiations," the AFP quoted the widely leaked report as saying.
Turkey gained recognition as an official EU candidate in 1999, but has not been given a starting date for accession talks.
Two years ago, the bloc's leaders promised to decide during their December 2004 summit in Copenhagen whether to open negotiations with Ankara.
If the EC report gives the go-ahead for the talks, they would begin "without delay," the EU leaders said in 2002.
According to some sources, the negotiation process would likely begin in the second half of 2005 and is expected to last 10 to 15 years before Turkey eventually joins the Union.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said Sunday that the talks could last until 2019.
While noting Turkey's "considerable" progress towards meeting international human rights standards, the commission's report expresses concern over violations.
According to the AFP, the document says that torture is no longer systematic in Turkey, but cautions, "numerous cases of torture and in particular ill-treatment still continue to occur."
Leaked copies of the report suggest Turkey will also be called upon to improve freedom of expression and of the press, as well as the treatment of the country's sizeable Kurdish minority.
The EC, according to the French daily Le Figaro, will recommend that Turkey's application be subject to much stricter controls than those applied to the ten Central and East European countries that joined the EU on 1 May.
Guenter Verheugen's successor as EU Enlargement Commissioner, Olli Rehn, confirmed Monday that the EC would give the green light for Turkey's talks, but added that "we definitely will need a strong monitoring mechanism in order to monitor Turkey's commitments concerning human rights and the rights of minorities ...
and the rule of law."
The EC also sees need for "permanent safeguards" to avoid the risk of a large influx of Turkish labour migrants to the EU, said Rehn, who assumes his post on 1 November.
According to the draft report, Turkey would possibly face an "emergency brake" that would allow the EU to suspend its negotiations with Ankara if it backtracks on reforms.
While saying it could accept temporary measures to restrict the movements of Turks to the EU, Ankara has voiced opposition to any attempts to make such restrictions permanent, arguing that doing so would constitute a breach of Brussels' promise to treat Turkey's entry bid in the same way as those of other candidate countries.
