03/09/2004
(AFP, Anadolu Agency, EurActiv - 02/09/04;
AFP, European Parliament - 01/09/04;
Bloomberg, EUobserver 31/08/04)
If Turkey is found to be in compliance with EU political criteria for membership, it could start its entry talks with Brussels as early as April 2005, some EU officials have indicated.
But many have cautioned that it would be at least a decade before the country joins the Union.
The leaders of the 25-nation bloc are expected to decide at a European Council summit in December whether to invite Turkey to start accession negotiations.
They will base their decision largely on recommendations the European Commission (EC) will make in a report on the country's compliance with EU democracy and human rights norms.
The report is to be published on 6 October.
Turkey "must definitely enter Europe", German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer was quoted as saying Thursday (2 September), stressing the importance of the country's EU membership to the fight against international terrorism.
He added, however, that the negotiation process could take 10 or 15 years to complete.
"Turkey is not yet ripe for the EU and it knows that," the AFP quoted Fischer as telling the German mass-circulation Bild Zeitung, urging Ankara to stay firmly on the course of reform.
Meanwhile, Turkey's Anadolu Agency quoted Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot, whose country currently holds the six-month rotating EU presidency, as saying that if Turkey is determined to fulfil the EU political criteria, its "entry talks should start rapidly".
Speaking before the European Parliament's (EP) Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday, Bot added, "If Turkey does not become ready for talks, different scenarios can be in question." He stressed that the EC report would not set new conditions for Turkey to meet.
Last week, an influential Dutch advisory council issued a report, recommending that the negotiations begin within two years, or "possibly" even earlier.
Addressing members of the EP committee on Tuesday, Guenter Verheugen, the EU's outgoing enlargement commissioner, noted that EU leaders had concluded, at their 2002 summit in Copenhagen, that talks should be opened "without delay" if a positive decision is reached on Turkey.
As for the upcoming EC report, Verheugen pledged it would be "thorough, factual and fair", adding it would also contain "some minor surprises".
He would not say if the EC would recommend opening negotiations with Ankara.
Verheugen is due to arrive in Turkey on Sunday as part of final efforts to objectively assess the country's progress towards meeting EU criteria between 1999 and 2004.
During his three-day visit, he is scheduled to hold talks with leaders, including President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul.
He will also visit Diyarbakir, the main city in the country's predominantly Kurdish southeast, and meet with local leaders and NGO representatives.
During his visit to Izmir on Tuesday, Verheugen is scheduled to meet members of civic groups and business circles.
He will leave Turkey on Wednesday after a visit to Istanbul.
