04/10/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 04/10/04
Democratic Party (DS) candidate Nenad Bogdanovic is set to become mayor of Belgrade after defeating the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party's (SRS) contender for the post in a runoff Sunday (3 October). 
According to the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy, an NGO based in Belgrade, Bogdanovic won 50.3 per cent of the vote, while his opponent, Aleksander Vucic, took 48.3 per cent.
The narrow margin was a surprise. 
Bogdanovic had a 4 per cent lead after the first round two weeks ago, and was endorsed by all the other pro-democratic candidates from that round. 
According to election analysts, many DS voters likely felt certain of victory and opted not to go to the polls.
"There is no doubt in my mind that Belgrade will turn into a reborn city in the next four years. 
I have no doubt in my mind that Belgrade will become a real metropolis and the centre of Southeast Europe," Bogdanovic said after the vote. 
"Belgrade is Europe and has underlined that tonight."
Vucic congratulated Bogdanovic on his victory, but said the close outcome was an indication of "who will win the next elections". 
He also said a larger turnout would have worked in his favour.
In Serbia's second-largest city, Novi Sad, the race was even more dramatic. 
Maja Gojkovic of the SRS had a substantial lead after the first round, but the DS mounted a fierce campaign on behalf of its candidate, Borislav Novakovic. 
The result was a relatively high turnout of 45 per cent. 
In the end, Gojkovic won by 49.9 per cent to 49.2 per cent -- a margin of only 650 votes.
Commenting on the narrow margins in Belgrade and Novi Sad, Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic said more unity is needed on the political scene, as it is clear that none of the democratic bloc members can face the ultranationalists on their own. 
"The fact that populist candidates fared well should be a signal to everyone that a different approach is necessary. 
These results could perhaps lead to better relations between parties of the democratic option," Dinkic said.
The DS's victory in Belgrade on Sunday was the second major win for the party since June, when Boris Tadic won the presidential race against Tomislav Nikolic of the SRS. 
After casting his vote Sunday, Tadic said the election should ensure the continuation of democratic reform efforts in Serbia.
"We must not make a single political step that would take us away from our goal of joining the EU," he said.
