05/10/2004
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 05/10/04
Romania's main opposition alliance on Monday (4 October) officially confirmed that Democratic Party (PD) leader Traian Basescu would be its candidate in the November presidential campaign.
Basescu, the mayor of Bucharest, was nominated after the withdrawal of National Liberal Party (PNL) chairman and alliance co-chairman Theodor Stolojan from the race.
Stolojan, who was prime minister for a period during the early 1990s, cited ill health as the reason for his withdrawal.
"Unfortunately, my road to the presidency ends here," Reuters quoted him as saying.
"It was a tough road which left deep marks … my health problems can be remedied now, but might irremediably aggravate if I do not focus on them."
His decision stunned the PD and PNL, which together make up the Justice and Truth Alliance, and threw the Romanian political scene into turmoil.
Basescu charged that Stolojan's medical condition had been worsened by "blackmail" by the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD).
According to Basescu, PSD leaders planned to launch a smear campaign, publicising treatment Stolojan received at a sanatorium 20 years ago, as well as his alleged involvement in a questionable business deal.
Blasting what he described as "an outrageous system that destroys the ruling party's political opponents," Basescu said the PSD aimed to use its network of party-controlled newspapers and media to destroy Stolojan's reputation.
"Boys, you can't have me," he said, vowing that he would not be intimidated by political dirty tricks.
Prime Minister Adrian Nastase -- who is also the ruling party's candidate for president --firmly denied the accusations, saying that he had called Stolojan following his announcement and that the two had talked for more than 15 minutes.
"Stolojan did not tell me anything about any sort of blackmail," Nastase said, accusing Basescu of exploiting the PNL leader's illness for political gain.
Analysts say the change of opposition candidates will make it harder for Nastase and his party.
During local elections in June, Basescu humiliated the PSD candidate, Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana, in the mayoral race.
Basescu's aggressive, populist style is seen as more likely to fire up Romanian voters than that of the reticent Stolojan, who was lagging by as many as eight points behind Nastase in the polls.
According to Cornel Nistorescu of the daily Evenimentul Zilei, a "spectacular relaunch" of the campaign has taken place, setting the stage for a dramatic showdown.
