05/10/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 05/10/04
Officials noted after the local elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Saturday (2 October) that there were no incidents in the neutral Brcko District, and that the area had higher voter turnout -- 64 per cent -- than in either of BiH's post-war entities.
"These elections mark another important shift for the Brcko District and a new degree of citizens' participation in government," Brcko Supervisor Susan R. Johnson said in a statement.
BH Radio One reported on Sunday that the Serb Democratic Party and the Social Democrat Party were the winners in this 439 sq km area in northeastern BiH -- which had not had an election since before the 1992-1995 conflict.
Because of Brcko's contentious and strategic location on the Sava River, linking eastern and western Republika Srpska (RS), the Dayton Agreement that ended the conflict left the area up to international arbitration.
In 2000, Brcko became a district, a sort of condominium shared by both entities but under the direct authority of neither.
The area is now one of the most prosperous in BiH, with higher average salaries than in either RS or the Federation of BiH.
Saturday's countrywide local elections, in which voters chose new city councils and mayors in 142 municipalities, were the first since the war to be organised and funded by the local authorities.
They were also the first elections in which mayors were directly elected.
Countrywide turnout was a mere 45 per cent, down significantly from the 66 per cent turnout during the last local elections in 2000.
"This may be the result of voter fatigue and the complicated registration process, but the voters may also be punishing those in power or they simply don't believe things can change," election commission official Lidija Korac told the press.
The low turnout was widely figured to be behind the strong showing of nationalist political parties.
The Muslim Party of Democratic Action, the Croat Democratic Union and the Serb Democratic Party appeared poised to win in areas where they have ethnic majorities, although it appeared that the moderate Union of Independent Social Democrats would take power in Banja Luka, the largest Serb-majority city.
The international community's top official in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, noted that a "tough job" awaits the winners.
"Local authorities will be expected by the citizens to deliver concrete results and real improvement in their lives," he said in a statement Sunday.
