04/10/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 04/10/04
The municipal elections held Saturday (2 October) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) were the first since the 1992-1995 conflict to be organised and financed fully by local authorities, without international support. 
A total of 2,322,687 registered voters had the opportunity to vote directly for their local mayor and for municipal councils and assemblies.
Sixty-eight political parties, 146 independent candidates, 18 party coalitions and six coalitions of independent candidates participated. 
According to an observation mission sent by the OSCE and the Council of Europe, the vote took place without major incident and was administered in line with international standards.
The mission's report, published Sunday, hailed the elections as marking progress towards democracy and rule of law, but also voiced concern about the low turnout and the dominance of ethnicity as a factor in the campaign. 
With 45.52 per cent of eligible voters going to the polls, the turnout was the lowest in any election since the end of the conflict.
Still, election officials say, the results were satisfactory. 
"In normal, democratic countries, 45 per cent turnout would be considered positive," says Lidija Korac, a member of the Electoral Commission. 
"In BiH, this is not the case. 
Keeping in mind that elections have been organised so often after the war, this lower turnout is understandable."
Preliminary results published Sunday confirmed the victories of the three largest nationalist parties. 
In Republika Srpska, the Serb Democratic Party lost in some municipalities it had controlled before, but still won 37 mayoral races. 
The Alliance of Independent Social Democrats was the only opposition party to improve its position, doubling to about 20 the number of municipalities under its control. 
It also won a major victory in the capital of the Bosnian Serb entity, Banja Luka.
In the Muslim-Croat half of the country, the Croatian Democratic Union won in about 25 municipalities with majority Croat population. 
The main Muslim Party of Democratic Action regained ground in some of 15 mainly Muslim cities, where the opposition Social Democratic Party had won in 2000. 
Smaller parties captured just 10 municipalities. 
Final results are to be announced in 30 days.
The international community's top envoy to BiH, High Representative Paddy Ashdown, said the vote had demonstrated the maturity of local authorities and was an important milestone on the country's road to joining the EU and NATO. 
OSCE Mission chief Peter Eicher, however, cautioned that some election procedures and regulations must be improved.
"Despite progress, however, these elections are transitional, after all," said Eicher. 
"According to the unique constitutional context in BiH, the ultimate power still lies within the international community."
