02/09/2004
(International Herald Tribune - 02/09/04; AFP, CNEWS - 01/09/04; KFOR - 20/05/04)
The new KFOR commander, French Lieutenant General Yves de Kermabon, has pledged stronger efforts to avoid a recurrence of the mid-March violence in Kosovo.
"The situation has remained fragile, so it is undoubtedly necessary to change the ways the force acts, to be more mobile, more reactive and to improve intelligence," the AFP quoted de Kermabon as saying during the handover ceremony in Pristina on Wednesday (1 September).
He takes over months after an outbreak of ethnic violence in which 19 people were killed and hundreds of others wounded. 
During the almost three days of unrest -- the worst since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict -- hundreds of homes belonging to ethnic minorities, particularly Kosovo Serbs, were either damaged or destroyed, as were dozens of churches and other religious sites.
Referring to that crisis, de Kermabon said it had sent out a "red signal" that the situation on the ground remains fragile and that a much progress must yet be made.
"The first effort is the reinforcement of security," he said, adding that he planned to work with "all Kosovo authorities, both Serb and Albanian, politicians, militaries, religious or security ones, because everything is done for them and with them".
Replacing German Lieutenant General Holger Kammerhoff, de Kermabon is the ninth commander of KFOR since its deployment in 1999. 
He had served as KFOR deputy commander since March 2003. 
Before that, he served as General Officer, Commanding Multinational Brigade North, in Mitrovica.
At Wednesday's ceremony, the Commander of NATO's Joint Force Command Naples, Admiral Gregory Johnson, praised Kammerhoff for his service, but also criticised the peacekeeping force for its failure to thwart the mid-March riots.
"The standards of those days don't meet the expectations of the North Atlantic alliance," Johnson said, acknowledging that the different rules of engagement among troops from the 36 countries participating in the NATO-led multinational force -- had complicated their response.
French Defence Minister Michele Alliot-Marie also attended the handover ceremony. 
"We're entering a period of maximum risk," she said, referring to the 23 October parliamentary elections in Kosovo. 
"The situation is calm but extremely fragile."
Meanwhile, Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova pledged his support and that of the people of Kosovo for KFOR, which he said, "has proved its capacities and maturity".
