01/10/2004
(BNN, Standartnews – 01/10/04; AP, BTA, Novinite, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Bulgarian Government – 30/09/04)
Voicing support for Bulgaria's EU bid, Spain pledged Thursday (30 September) to assist the Balkan country prepare for membership. 
Bulgaria completed its entry talks with the Union in June. 
It is expected to sign its Accession Treaty in the first months of 2005 before joining the EU on 1 January 2007.
Brussels has warned Bulgaria, however, that it must focus on the effective implementation of required reforms, including in the judiciary and public administration sectors, to ensure entry is not delayed. 
EU officials have also urged Sofia to take firm action to reduce corruption and crime in the country.
Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero said on Thursday his country would help Bulgaria meet the EU requirements by teaching it how to better manage aid funds and by sharing its experience in the areas of judicial and administrative reforms, the AP reported. 
He also pledged an increase in Spanish investment in Bulgaria, particularly in the areas of tourism, defence and infrastructure.
"We are going to undertake a variety of initiatives," Zapatero said at a joint press conference with Bulgarian Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg, who arrived on a two-day official visit to Madrid on Wednesday.
Accompanying him were Economy Minister Lydia Shuleva, Foreign Minister Solomon Passy and Defence Minister Nikolay Svinarov. 
A business delegation that arrived with Saxe-Coburg had several meetings and participated in a round table discussion on opportunities Bulgaria offers. 
The forum was reportedly attended by more than 20 Spanish companies, which Bulgarian government spokesman Dimitar Tsonev says account for 80 per cent of Spain's GDP.
One of the most important results of the visit, Tsonev said on Friday, was the "strategic alliance" the two countries have agreed to form to ensure Bulgaria's entry into the EU in 2007. 
The initiative reportedly envisions the establishment of a joint working group to co-ordinate the positions of the two countries on all issues on the European agenda before presenting them to EU institutions.
Passy and his Spanish counterpart, Miguel Angel Moratinos, signed a memorandum of understanding Thursday on co-operation between their foreign ministries.
At a special ceremony that day, Saxe-Coburg was awarded with the "Son of Madrid" title, described as the highest honour conferred on people not born in Madrid, for their contribution to the development of the Spanish capital.
"I am deeply touched by this great honour. 
To me, the city of Madrid is a symbol of many things - youth, home, family, friendship," the Bulgarian leader said as he accepted the award. 
A former Bulgarian king, he spent years in exile in Spain, before finally returning to Sofia a few years ago.
