01/09/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 01/09/04
US Ambassador Michael Polt reiterated last week that his government is determined to see fugitive war crimes indictees Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic brought to justice.
Washington is counting on Serbia-Montenegro to meet its international obligations, Polt told the Belgrade daily Politika on 23 August.
His statement came amid rumours that Belgrade has been given an October deadline to extradite Mladic, or face sanctions.
Asked about this, Polt said the deadline was "yesterday" -- that is, Mladic should have been arrested long ago, and the international community expects immediate action.
He rejected speculation that a deal has been struck between Belgrade and Washington, under which four retired generals indicted for war crimes in Kosovo would be tried in Serbia if Mladic were extradited.
Serbian authorities have stepped up efforts to find and arrest him.
According to Polt, co-operation between Belgrade and the United States has also increased.
"Especially after Boris Tadic’s victory in the presidential election, both he and [Prime Minister Vojislav] Kostunica and his government are co-operating actively with us.
They assure us that they are completely devoted to finding, arresting and extraditing Ratko Mladic to The Hague.
We are working together with them to make sure that the verbal promises and undertaken obligations are transferred into action," Polt said at a press conference over the summer.
"Co-operation refers to everything that the security services and the police in Serbia-Montenegro can do in making progress and, above all, establishing where Mladic is located, and to subsequently make a plan for his arrest," he said, in response to journalists' questions.
Tadic, who took office in July, has pledged that Mladic would be arrested if found in Serbia.
In an interview with the daily Vecernje Novosti, he cited police and military reports which, he said, indicated that Mladic is hiding out in the border regions of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
