01/09/2004
(The Guardian, The Christian Science Monitor - 01/09/04; AP, FT, International Herald Tribune, Kathimerini, Macedonian Press Agency, San Francisco Chronicle - 31/08/04)
Days after the end of the Athens Olympics, Greek authorities are mulling over the best possible future use for some of the venues and facilities built for the Games.
Greece was initially planning to spend 4.6 billion euros on the Games, but preliminary estimates suggest the final budget figure will likely exceed 7 billion euros. 
Of this, at least 2.5 billion euros reportedly went towards the construction of new venues and the renovation of existing ones.
Maintenance costs for more than a dozen of the venues, including the main Olympic stadium, will range between 50m euros and 100m euros annually. 
Authorities are anxious to come up with ways to prevent them from becoming "white elephants" -- a term used by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) for costly venues of little post-Games use.
"There are ideas. 
Some plans are being studied. 
But there is no definite solution," the AP quoted Christos Hadjiemmanuel, the head of the state-run Olympic Properties company, as saying.
The future of some venues reportedly has been decided. 
The Olympic village, for instance, will be turned into apartments for low-income workers, while the media and broadcast centres will be used as exhibition and conference halls.
Other options that are being discussed, according to the International Herald Tribune, include finding private buyers for facilities such as stadiums and others, renewing Athens's bid to bring the Games permanently to their home country, and organising -- independently from the IOC -- Greece's own Olympics, to be held biannually in years not conflicting with IOC Games.
As the country basked in the worldwide praise it received for conducting successful and safe Games, Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis said in a televised address Monday (30 August) that the event heralded the start of a new era for Greece.
"We must prove that the success of such a great and complicated undertaking is not limited to two weeks of celebrations. 
It is a watershed of the new era," Karamanlis said. 
"It is an investment in the new period that Greece is beginning. 
It is capital for the years that are coming."
In other news, cabinet spokesman Thodoris Roussopoulos said Tuesday that the government is proposing the establishment of a special parliamentary committee to address the problem of doping athletes. 
Several doping scandals marred the Olympics, including one involving track stars Costas Kenteris and Katerina Thanou, who withdrew from the Games. 
The government has decided to tighten controls over health and sports organisations and impose stricter penalties for the distribution and use of banned substances.
