30/03/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 30/03/05
Bucharest will soon have its fourth general mayor in less than nine years.
Victor Ciorbea, elected in the summer of 1996, resigned a few months later after becoming prime minister.
Interim mayor Viorel Lis remained in power after the 1998 elections, but lost in 2000 to Traian Basescu.
He in turn was re-elected in June 2004, but stepped down from the post in December following his election as president.
Opinion polls suggest that Sunday's (3 April) vote will primarily be a contest between Adriean Videanu, the candidate of the ruling Justice and Truth (DA) Alliance -- composed of the National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Democrat Party (PD) -- and Marian Vanghelie, the representative of the former ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD) and mayor of Bucharest's 5th district.
Videanu, a prosperous businessman and a member of the PD, is backed by about 35 per cent of voters.
"I hope to win in the first round, in order to solve Bucharest's problems," he told journalists recently.
His opponent, currently trailing with about 25 per cent of the vote, has expressed confidence that he will pull ahead.
"The general mayoralty is not too much for me, no matter what my opponents say," Vanghelie insists.
A third candidate, former PSD member Cristian "Piedone" Popescu, is also vying for the post.
He represents the political organisation formed by one of Romania's main unions -- the National Democratic Bloc Party -- and is drawing about 10 per cent of the vote.
As chief inspector in the 6th district mayoralty, he became known for visiting Bucharest's markets in search of expired food or merchants selling goods by short weight.
Ralu Filip, the president of the National Audio-Visual Council, is running as an independent, and is expected to get 4 per cent to 5 per cent of the vote.
Anca Petrescu, representing the nationalist Greater Romania Party, is expected to receive about the same percentage.
Petrescu was the principal architect of Nicolae Ceausescu's People's Palace, the world's second largest building, which cost several billion dollars and replaced a substantial part of the city's historic centre.
Few expect a surprise outcome.
"Videanu will most probably win by using the people's sympathy for the DA," says political analyst Stelian Tanase.
"But the fight is still interesting.
It's a battle for controlling the country's most important economic centre and also a battle for image."
Among the most important projects the city has inherited from Basescu are modernising the road and tram infrastructure and rehabilitating the historic centre.
Polls show that most residents place a high priority on improving the condition of the streets and the city's cleanliness.
