29/03/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 29/03/05
Arriving in Pristina after two days of high-level meetings in Belgrade, UNMIK head Soren Jessen-Petersen said Tuesday (29 March) that agreement has been reached on resuming dialogue with Kosovo's provisional government on energy and the return of refugees.
The talks would be led, respectively, by the EU and the UNHCR.
The UNMIK chief praised the readiness of Serbia-Montenegro officials to resume dialogue, while also urging them to encourage Serbs to take part in the political life of Kosovo.
"Dialogue is not only the right platform for resolving all practical issues but also a good way to build mutual confidence and trust as Pristina and Belgrade are moving closer to the issue of status," he said in a statement to the media at the end of his visit.
Serbian President Boris Tadic "clearly" indicated his readiness for talks with representatives of the new government of Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi, Jessen-Petersen said.
He noted, however, that Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's stance had been non-committal.
Earlier, during a lecture on the UN and Kosovo, Jessen-Petersen said he believes Belgrade "has a place at the table beside Pristina and a crucial role to play" in any future talks on status.
Those talks could start in September, he said, if a positive rating of the implementation of standards is reached in June and July.
Moving ahead with the process will enable Kosovo to address its economic problems while also helping Serbia along its road towards European integration, he said.
"The future of this region is bound, mutually and collectively, in the respective futures of all its constituent peoples.
With its resources, its highly educated and motivated populations, this region stands ready to enter a more prosperous and more peaceful era.
For the leaders of the region, this presents a great challenge, to keep to decisions that will sustain, even accelerate, its full integration within the modern European framework," Jessen-Petersen said in an address to the Institute of International Politics and Economics in Belgrade.
While declining to speculate on the outcome of status talks, Jessen-Petersen said he had conveyed to Tadic and Kostunica the message that "Dividing Kosovo is not an option." He said he is pleased with the fact that the EU shares this view.
Jessen-Petersen, who has been nominated by Denmark for the post of UN High Commissioner for Refugees, said he might step down as UNMIK head in June, but would stay on to follow through with the status talks if a decision is made to launch them in September.
"I told [Tadic] that I have bad news, that I will be staying in Kosovo for awhile, because we find ourselves in a very important moment currently," Jessen-Petersen said.
