29/03/2005
(Reuters, AFP, Athens News Agency, Cyprus News Agency, The Hellenic Radio, NTV MSNBC - 28/03/05)
Eleven months after the latest international efforts to reunite Cyprus ended in failure, Greek Foreign Minister Petros Molyviatis urged UN Secretary General Kofi Annan on Monday (28 March) to initiate new peace talks.
A similar call came from Ankara.
After his meeting with Annan in New York, Molyviatis suggested that there was now a general consensus among the four major parties concerned -- the Greek Cypriots, the Turkish Cypriots, Greece and Turkey -- that talks to end Cyprus's more than 30-year division should resume.
"We expressed the view that there is a convergence now of views to the effect that we should restart the process of reunifying the island on the basis of the secretary general's plan," Reuters quoted the Greek foreign minister as saying.
"And we should make sure that this time there is no failure.
We cannot afford another failure."
The last international initiative to find a solution to the Cyprus issue collapsed following a referendum in April of last year, when the Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected the UN plan to reunite the island.
While the majority of Turkish Cypriots voted in support of the blueprint, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot south joined the EU on 1 May.
Annan had indicated that he would not initiate a new round of talks if the chances for reaching an agreement were slim.
The UN has also made clear that it expects Nicosia to specify the changes it wants made to the blueprint that the Greek Cypriots rejected last year.
Athens' push for new international efforts to resolve the Cyprus issue follows a recent public statement by Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos, calling for more UN-sponsored negotiations.
"Our wish is for a resumption of Cyprus settlement talks as soon as possible, under the auspices of the UN, with more active involvement from the EU and within the framework of the Annan plan," the Greek Cypriot leader said on 18 March.
On Monday, Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul reiterated Ankara's call for the UN to launch a new initiative.
But he also hinted that there could be a delay in the signing of the enlarged customs union protocol with the EU, which now includes Cyprus.
He said the government received the draft text of the document from the European Commission last weekend but sealing it might be delayed until the second half of this year.
Ankara is expected to begin EU membership negotiations on 3 October.
Gul added that signing the protocol would not imply recognition of the Greek Cypriot government.
"Recognition of the Greek Cypriot sector is out of the question," he said.
"This can happen only after a lasting settlement is found."
