29/03/2005
(bTV, Vsekiden.com - 27/03/05;
BTA, Sofia News Agency - 23/03/05)
With polls showing it faces an uphill battle, Bulgaria's ruling National Movement for Simeon II (NMS) launched its election campaign on Wednesday (23 March), saying that boosting voter participation would be a top priority.
A survey conducted by the Alpha agency in early March showed the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) leads with 23 per cent of voter support, while the NMS was trailing with 11 per cent.
Recent polls also suggest that a quarter of registered voters do not plan to vote in the parliamentary elections on 25 June, while another 20 per cent are undecided about which party or coalition to support.
The June vote will usher in the next government, which is expected to lead the country towards its entry into the EU, scheduled for January 2007.
If it is not active and strong enough, said NMS election campaign chief Lydia Shuleva, potential problems could arise in meeting that goal.
It is important to understand what people want to change, Shuleva said, adding that law and order, and social and economic security are areas in which the public wants to see improvements.
"We wouldn't want to give promises, but to define people's problems and suggest projects for their solution," the Bulgarian News Agency (BTA) quoted the former deputy prime minister and minister of economy as saying as the campaign got under way.
As for the party's programme and lists of candidates for the 240-seat parliament, Shuleva said both would be tabled for discussion at a session of the NMS governing council in a week or so.
The party's nominees for MPs, she added, would be people with proven loyalty to the NMS ideas, experts and people enjoying the respect of others in their professional field.
In an interview with bTV, she voiced confidence that many of those who supported the NMS in the 2001 elections would vote for it again.
Her party would lead a positive campaign, she said, acknowledging that the BSP poses its biggest challenge.
The NMS, according to Shuleva, is open to all types of coalition talks, though no specific decisions have been taken yet in this respect.
