31/03/2005
(FT, Turkish Daily News - 31/03/05;
Reuters, NTV MSNBC, Dunya, Cyprus News Agency, EurActiv, EUobserver - 30/03/05;
AFP, Athens News Agency, Cyprus News Agency - 29/03/05)
UN-brokered consultations on a new Cyprus peace initiative are likely to kick off after the Turkish Cypriot presidential election on 17 April, Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister George Iacovou said Wednesday (30 March).
The discussions, expected to last several weeks or months, would set the stage for restarting negotiations on reuniting the divided island.
"Proximity talks would be likely, in the initial stages.
It could also possibly be in April," Reuters quoted Iacovou as saying in an interview with Cyprus radio on Wednesday.
"We have to ensure a successful conclusion, a solution to the Cyprus problem and not have a crisis on our hands because of the lack of a good negotiating framework."
In the proximity talks -- an approach that has been applied in previous Cyprus peace initiatives -- a UN-appointed mediator shuttles between the Turkish Cypriots in the north and the Greek Cypriots in the south.
There are no direct consultations between the two sides.
The latest effort to resolve the Cyprus issue on the basis of a UN peace plan ended in failure in April 2004, when the Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected the proposed deal.
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots approved the UN plan, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the Mediterranean island joined the EU on 1 May.
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has made clear that he would not initiate a new round of negotiations if the chances for reaching an agreement were slim.
This week, he met with Greek Foreign Minister Petros Molyviatis, who also called for the revival of Cyprus reunification efforts.
Both officials acknowledged the need for serious preparations.
"We should make sure that this time there is no failure.
We cannot afford another failure," Molyviatis said following a meeting with Annan in New York on Monday.
Annan's spokesman Fred Eckhard said Tuesday that the UN chief wants to see -- in writing -- the Greek Cypriots' critique of the plan they rejected last year.
"He is waiting to receive this.
He wants to make sure that they are on firm ground before restarting negotiations," the AFP quoted the spokesman as saying.
"He doesn't want another failure."
