28/03/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European times in Skopje -- 28/03/05
The second round of local elections took place in Macedonia on Sunday (27 March) amid reports of recurring irregularities in several municipalities. 
The ruling coalition won most of the races, but the opposition claimed victory in 17 municipalities.
According to a spokesman for the National Election Committee, Zoran Tanevski, 55 mayors were elected in 57 municipalities. 
According to initial results announced by the committee, the ruling For Macedonia Together coalition, led by the Social Democrats, won 33 of the mayoral races, including seven won by the junior government partner Democratic Union of Integration (DUI). 
The opposition bloc led by VMRO-DPMNE won 17 seats, while VMRO-Narodna won three.
A coalition of two ethnic Albanian opposition parties, the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) and the Party for Democratic Prosperity (PDP), boycotted the vote, but nevertheless won one seat. 
Three other seats went to independent candidates.
Among larger cities/municipalities in Macedonia, the VMRO-DPMNE-led opposition claimed victory in Prilep, Bitola and four municipalities in Skopje: Gazi Baba, Aerodrom, Kisela Voda and Butel. 
The ruling coalition won the mayoral post in Ohrid as well as in the Skopje Karpos Municipality. 
The DUI will have mayors in Gostivar, Debar, Struga and Aracinovo.
A number of incidents were reported during the second round. 
The most serious took place in Prilep, where four armed people broke into an election post and stuffed the voting box with ballots. 
Voting was halted there. 
An almost identical incident at the village of Otlja in Kumanovo ended with a broken ballot box; police have arrested two people. 
Voting was also stopped at Butel Municipality in Skopje, where a group of unidentified people took away the voting box. 
A Macedonian NGO, MOST, reported that it documented irregularities, including group voting and ballot box stuffing, at 14 polling stations.
Irregularities during the first round two weeks ago prompted the Macedonian Supreme Court to order repeat elections in more than 30 polling stations, including Skopje and Tetovo. 
The Skopje race now goes to a runoff, to be held on 10 April.
Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska downplayed the reports, saying less than 1 per cent of the country's 2,057 polling stations were affected. 
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, expressed "great pleasure" with the voting, saying that authorities had succeeded in blocking attempts to undermine the elections.
"What the Ministry of Interior, National Election Committee and Basic Public Prosecutor Offices have made today returns confidence in the functioning of the legal state," Buckovski said, adding that there had been co-ordination with international observers and that the state had reacted adequately to all incidents.
Opposition leader Nikola Gruevski, meanwhile, decried what he called "numerous irregularities and falsification," predicting that the local election results would pave the way for an opposition triumph in the next parliamentary vote.
Immediately after casting his vote, President Branko Crvenkovski said he hoped the second round would take place without incident. 
"After the voting and closing of the election posts, the key issue will not be 'who'? 
but 'how'?," Crvenkovski said. 
"I hope the answer will be 'peaceful, fair, European'."
A total of 5,192 domestic and 260 foreign monitors observed the second round of elections
