30/05/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia – 30/05/05
The campaign for the 25 June parliamentary elections in Bulgaria kicked off Wednesday (25 May) and will close at midnight on 23 June. 
The Central Election Commission (CEC) registered 14 parties and eight coalitions to participate in races for the country's 240-seat legislature. 
The threshold is winning at least 4 per cent of the vote.
Three to five parties and coalitions have met the threshold in parliamentary elections during the past 15 years, according to an interview with CEC Deputy Chairman Mihail Konstantinov, published in Tuesday's daily <I>Dnevnik</i>. 
The current situation does not suggest that the outcome of next month's vote will differ significantly, he added, predicting a voter turnout of at least 60 per cent.
Citing surveys conducted by different polling groups in the recent weeks and months, Konstantinov said the coalition led by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) is likely to win about 104 parliamentary seats. 
The liberal ruling National Movement for Simeon II (NMS-II) and its junior coalition partner, the Movement for Rights and Freedoms, (MRF), would field about 65 and 20 representatives respectively, he said.
Two right-wing coalitions -- the United Democratic Forces and the Bulgarian People's Union (BPU) -- as well as the Democrats for Strong Bulgaria (DSB), could win a total of about 51 seats, though it is also possible that either the BPU or DSB might fail to pass the 4 per cent threshold, Konstantinov said.
Most of the parties and coalitions already in parliament have publicised their election programmes, promising higher salaries in the public sector, lower taxes and an annual economic growth of between 7 per cent and 10 per cent at the end of the new parliament's four-year term.
The expected winner of the vote, the BSP, is promising tax-free investments and creation of at least 240,000 new jobs. 
According to its election platform, it would increase the budget allocations for education and healthcare to up to 5.8 per cent and 6 per cent of GDP, respectively, the Bulgarian News Agency reported Wednesday. 
Recent polls, however, suggest that the left-wing party might not be able to win enough votes to run on its own.
Konstantinov said there were indications that campaigning would be more respectful than in previous years, with the key players taking care not to alienate potential coalition partners.
Last week, the cabinet of Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg approved raising the elections budget to about 8.5m euros. 
Of this, 2m euros will be set aside for initiatives aimed at encouraging voter turnout. 
Another 1.5m euros will cover the foreign ministry's expenses for opening some 300 polling stations in 78 countries, including in Iraq, Afghanistan and Kosovo, so that the members of the Bulgarian contingents there may also exercise their right to vote.
