31/05/2005
(Blic - 31/05/05;
AP, The Scotsman, Radio B92 - 30/05/05)
Serbia-Montenegro Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic, who also heads the country's national council for co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, said Monday (30 May) that Belgrade was ready to arrest wartime Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic and hand him over to The Hague-based court.
"There is no dilemma any more, the psychological barrier has been crossed," Ljajic told Belgrade-based Radio B92.
His statement came amid mounting international pressure on Serbia to extradite the top fugitive to the UN tribunal, which has charged him with genocide for his alleged role in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre.
According to UN prosecutors, the killings of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys between 11 July and 19 July 1995 were carried out under orders from Mladic and wartime Bosnian Serb president Radovan Karadzic.
Ljajic, who returned from a visit to the United States and The Hague several days ago, said Monday that the international community would very much like to see Mladic handed over to the ICTY before the 11 July commemorations of the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica atrocities.
Mladic, who went on the run nearly ten years ago, is widely believed to be taking refuge in Serbia.
However, Ljajic told Radio B92 that despite "huge efforts", the fugitive's location has not been confirmed.
International observers are "very aware of a great portion of our activities, because they participate in a great deal of those activities", the minister said.
"In any case, it is up to us to show that a readiness exists, a political will, to take care of these problems as soon as possible.
There still exists suspicion, a small suspicion, in our true intentions."
Although more than a dozen Serb suspects have been transferred to The Hague since October, another ten indictees, including the three most wanted from the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s -- Karadzic, Mladic and retired Croat General Ante Gotovina -- remain at large.
"We will not be held hostage to those people," Ljajic said.
Echoing a recent statement by chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn urged Belgrade on Monday to start arresting ICTY indictees, if its policy of persuading them to surrender no longer works.
''We expect Serbia-Montenegro to show progress leading towards full co-operation with the tribunal," a report in Tuesday's issue of the Serbian daily Blic quoted Rehn as saying.
"This means when measures of voluntary turnings in are exhausted, Serbia-Montenegro has to be ready to arrest the remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladic in the first place, and to co-operate with the Republic of Srpska in the case of Radovan Karadzic," Rehn told journalists in Brussels.
