31/01/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 31/01/05
Serbia's G17 Plus party will decide soon whether it will remain part of the government led by Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, a party representative said over the weekend. 
The decision, Miloljub Albijanic added, will depend on Belgrade's fulfillment of its international obligations -- specifically, co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
Although General Vladimir Lazarevic, one of four police and army generals wanted by the tribunal on charges relating to the 1999 Kosovo conflict, agreed last week to face justice at The Hague, the status of the three others remains unclear. 
In addition, the UN court believes at least 12 other indictees are still hiding in Serbia, and analysts say that Lazarevic's surrender alone will not clear the way for Serbia's further progress towards EU integration.
During his recent visit to Belgrade, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn stressed that co-operation with the tribunal is a "key condition" for receiving a positive feasibility study.
EU security and foreign policy representative Javier Solana cancelled a scheduled visit to Serbia-Montenegro, saying not enough had been achieved. 
His spokeswoman, Christina Gallach, said the EU "expects to see the other indictees before the ICTY very soon". 
Calls for the arrest of all indictees have also come from the OSCE mission. 
Meanwhile, Belgrade's non-co-operation has led the US State Department to freeze financial support earmarked for this year.
Recent reports have suggested that one of the other indicted generals, Sreten Lukic, will surrender during the coming weeks. 
Meanwhile, the lawyer for General Nebojsa Pavkovic, also wanted by the UN court, said Sunday (30 January) that he has met with Kostunica to discuss his client's situation, which he said would be "clarified" in the near future. 
The lawyer, Ljubisa Zivadinovic, also said he is preparing the documents necessary for Pavkovic's defence.
The fourth general, Vlastimir Djordjevic, is thought to have fled to Russia.
The combination of international and internal pressures poses a major test for Kostunica. 
While G17 Plus has indicated it will leave unless there is full co-operation, the government also depends on support from the Socialist Party, still nominally headed by Slobodan Milosevic. 
It has vowed to withdraw that support should any indictees be arrested and extradited.
In that case, Serbian President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DP) could step in to take its place. 
However, Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia has been at odds with the DP for years, and it is unlikely that an alliance between them would be either stable or lasting. 
Should the government collapse, the party with the most to gain would probably be the ultranationalist Radicals -- whose leader, Vojislav Seselj, is currently on trial at The Hague.
