30/11/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 30/11/04
Sharply criticising the continued lack of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic has warned that the actions of some political forces in Serbia are undermining the state union's hopes for EU integration, as well as its stability.
In a statement released Sunday (28 November), he charged that certain institutions and ministries are "verbally endorsing the union, but in reality taking steps to directly slow down the joint state's accession to the EU, undermining its stability and possibly quickening its demise". 
In particular, he cited Serbia's sluggishness on war crimes co-operation and the endangering of a special fund meant to help the Serbia-Montenegro armed forces carry out reforms needed for eventual Partnership for Peace membership and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Failure to co-operate "directly jeopardises the European future of Serbia-Montenegro, as well as the stability and survival of the common state" Marovic said, adding that he would brief the EU about the activities of those involved.
"I beseech all who are responsible, well-meaning and dedicated to agreement to help discuss and solve our problems," Marovic said. 
He called on the presidents and prime ministers of the constituent republics to attend a meeting that, he said he has been trying to organise for the past two months.
On Monday, Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic backed Marovic's remarks, saying he agrees that EU integration efforts are in jeopardy and that this is hurting both Serbia and Montenegro. 
He said he is ready to meet to discuss the functioning of the common state and co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
"I am convinced that we have an obligation and responsibility to discuss the union's failure to function and its benefits as well as the problem of the lack of co-operation with The Hague tribunal and military reform," Vujanovic said in a letter to Marovic.
Meanwhile, Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic warned on Monday that early parliamentary elections were possible. 
He said his Serbian Renewal Movement would withdraw from the government of Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica unless steps are taken to boost co-operation with the international tribunal.
Serbia must not be allowed to become the "black hole" of the Balkan region, Draskovic said.
Serbian President Boris Tadic, whose Democratic Party (DS) currently stands in opposition, favours early elections. 
Tadic said Monday that the DS had a good chance of participating in a new government following the elections, and that one of its main tasks would be to resolve the issue of co-operation.
