30/11/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 30/11/04
The Albanian Parliament approved a bill earlier this month allowing the country to join the EU peacekeeping mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), which takes over responsibilities from NATO in December. 
The parliament resolution, however, did not say how many troops Albania would commit.
Currently, 70 Albanian soldiers serve in the NATO peacekeeping force in BiH. 
According to government sources, an additional 140 troops could be sent.
"The ministry of foreign affairs, in co-operation with other relevant Albanian institutions and those of the EU, will define the status and the size of the military forces, as well as the necessary diplomatic and legal steps for the fulfilment of all legal, financial and logistic modalities of the participation," Foreign Minister Kastriot Islami said.
The 7,000-strong EU mission, codenamed "Althea", was approved in September by the EU foreign ministers, and is part of the European Security and Defence Policy. 
According to Islami, establishment of the mission demonstrates the EU's "multi-dimensional commitment to the maintenance of peace and security in the Balkans".
In addition to its possible role in Althea, Albania has established two new peacekeeping companies as part of the Southeast European Brigade (SEEBRIG) -- created in 1998 and comprised of Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Greece, Italy, Slovenia, Romania, Turkey and the United States. 
NATO is expected to give its final approval during the first half of next year to make the force fully operational.
Albanian troops are also located in Afghanistan, with nearly 23 peacekeepers serving as part of the Special Operations Battalion "Commando". 
According to Albanian Defence Minister Pandeli Majko, the three Adriatic Charter defence ministers recently met to discuss the Albanian-Croatian-Macedonian medical unit that will be deployed in Afghanistan. 
They agreed to meet all necessary capacities for the participation of this unit in the ISAF Mission by June 2005. 
This medical unit is the first joint peacekeeping initiative at the operational level for the Adriatic Charter countries.
Albania has been a steadfast supporter of the US campaign in Iraq, and one of only four nations to contribute troops to the combat phase of Operation Enduring Freedom. 
A unit of 71 Albanian special army troops is in Iraq. 
The forces are serving in a non-combat role, mainly patrolling the airport in the city of Mosul. 
Authorities seek to increase the number to 120 in the future.
