29/11/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 29/11/04
In the presence of senior officials, local, SFOR and EU generals the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Ministry of Defence presented the first joint unit of the BiH Armed Forces on Friday (26 November) in Sarajevo.
The BiH Armed Forces Honour Unit is a company-size formation, composed of three platoons, a colour party and military orchestra from all three of BiH's constitutive ethnic groups. 
It will be used to welcome and pay honour to high-ranking international and domestic officials and generals.
According to BiH State Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic, it is expected that the Honour Unit will be used 60 times next year. 
Estimated costs for transportation and per diems will be around 175,000 euros.
The BiH Armed Forces consist of the Army of Republika Srpska (VRS) and the Federation Army (VF) with its two components -- Bosnian Muslim (Bosniak) and Croat. 
Following the latest defence reform, which is being implemented this year, the entity armies are connected with one state-level chain of command under the joint BiH Ministry of Defence and the tripartite BiH presidency.
The guard of honour consists of seven officers, ten non-commissioned officers and 54 soldiers, who are detached from their original VF and VRS units. 
During the presentation at the Sarajevo International Airport, the guard wore the different camouflaged combat uniforms of their entity armies, but with BiH's state coat-of-arm on their right shoulders.
The official presentation at the airport began when VRS Brigadier General Mirko Tepsic, the head of the working group that created the unit, asked the Bosniak member of the BiH Presidency, Sulejman Tihic, to give the go-ahead for the ceremony. 
When Tihic ordered him to begin, Tepsic issued the order to VRS Major Milorad Krajsumovic, the commander of the Honour Unit.
It was the first time since the conflict in BiH that a VRS officer publicly fulfilled a direct order from a Bosniak official.
"We did not have a joint honour unit so far because of the fact that there was no political consensus about the complement and procedures of such unit," said Radovanovic. 
"We finally reached that consensus and in accordance with the State Defence Law formed the unit. 
The company is result of many compromises. 
But we have the 1 September 2005 as the deadline for the solutions, uniforms and procedures."
