29/12/2004
(AFP - 29/12/04;
AP, AFP, Croatia News Online, Centre for Public Opinion and Democracy - 28/12/04)
Ahead of Sunday's presidential election in Croatia, incumbent Stipe Mesic is widely expected to win the vote and lead his country into the EU.
Answering questions sent out to all presidential candidates, Mesic said Croatia's EU entry was his main goal.
Continuing with reforms and undertaking job creation initiatives were the other two priorities he listed in the answers posted on the CroatiaNewsOnline.com web site Tuesday (28 December).
Mesic is running against 12 other candidates.
His chief opponent in the race is Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor of the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ).
A poll conducted by the Metron agency among 900 Croatian voters less than ten days ago placed Mesic well ahead of the other contenders.
According to results released Monday, 49.6 per cent of the respondents would vote for Mesic, giving him more than a 30 per cent lead over Kosor, who was favoured by 14.1 per cent of those interviewed.
Many analysts believe Mesic will win outright re-election on Sunday.
But if the first round produces no clear winner, a runoff will be held on 16 January.
Mesic, who turned 70 on 24 December, was the last president of the former Yugoslavia before its breakup in 1991, when Slovenia and Croatia declared their independence.
He has also served as Croatian prime minister and parliamentary speaker.
Mesic was elected president of Croatia on 7 February 2000, dedicating considerable effort during his first term to the country's bid for EU accession.
The three main opposition parties support his candidacy.
"All that we have done towards that and all that we still must do, we do for ourselves and not for the EU," he wrote in his answers to the CroatiaNewsOnline.com questionnaire.
"I view the unification of Europe as the undertaking of the millennium and no one can be excluded from this process." He cautioned, however, that a united Europe "does not bring milk and honey instantaneously and in order to make use of the EU, we have to prepare for it, which does not only mean talking like Europeans but also acting like ones".
Croatia became an official EU candidate in June.
Earlier this month, European leaders set March 2005 as a starting date for the country's accession talks.
However, they made the decision conditional on Zagreb's full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, particularly the handover of retired General Ante Gotovina, one of the tribunal's three most-wanted indictees.
Voicing confidence that his country would meet that condition before March of next year, Mesic said recently that authorities would "either arrest [Gotovina] or give proof that he is abroad".
