30/11/2004
(FT, International Herald Tribune, Ziarul Financiar - 30/11/04;
OSCE, AFP, AP, DW, Reuters, CNN, Mediafax - 29/11/04;
BBC - 28/11/04)
OSCE monitors Monday (29 November) urged Romanian authorities to investigate all allegations of voting irregularities in the country's presidential and parliamentary elections.
Results released by the Central Electoral Bureau on the basis of a 70 per cent count of all ballots cast suggest that Prime Minister Adrian Nastase won 40.24 per cent of the vote, giving him a 6.5 per cent lead over his main rival for president, Traian Basescu, who garnered 33.89 per cent of the vote.
The two are set to face each other in a runoff on 12 December.
The alliance between Nastase's Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the Humanist party (PUR) won 35.95 per cent of the parliamentary vote, a mere 4.5 per cent ahead of the centrist alliance between Basescu's Democratic Party (PD) and the National Liberal Party (PNL), with 31.44 per cent.
"While the democratic election process appears to be further consolidated in Romania, some procedural concerns have been raised regarding suspension of the use of voter cards," said Ambassador Stephen Nash, head of the ODIHR team that monitored the election.
"In the context of a closely contested election, this has the potential to affect public confidence."
Romanian rights groups believe that as much as five per cent of the vote might have been affected by the use of stickers affixed to the laminated plastic identity cards, which can easily be removed.
In the past, according to the BBC, Romanians voted with a cardboard identity card, which was stamped after they cast their ballot.
The OSCE/ODIHR observers said they had not received "any convincing information" as to why that method had been suspended for this election.
"This, combined with the possibility to vote in any polling station, has the potential to open the door for multiple voting.
Any such alleged problems should be fully dealt with through the appropriate administrative and judicial processes."
The AFP quoted a report published Monday in the Romanian daily Evenimentul Zilei, alleging that the Socialists had "used a whole arsenal" of measures to secure a victory.
Pro Democratia, Romania's main civil rights group, which reportedly had deployed thousands of observers at polling stations across the country, said it had been "submerged with complaints about irregularities".
It also cited cases of voters being transported from one polling station to another, making multiple voting possible.
Pro Democratia president Christian Parvulescu said his group plans to withdraw from the presidential runoff to "protest the failings of the Romanian electoral system".
"Irregularities, including some of a criminal nature, have been reported from practically all departments," said Ioan Onisei, a senior representative of the PD-PNL alliance.
"We have already informed the police and prosecutors in several towns and we are waiting for the Central Electoral Bureau to analyse our complaints," he added.
