24/03/2005
(AP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, VOA, RFE/RL, MIA, Radio B92, UN News Centre - 23/03/05)
Speaking on Wednesday (23 March), UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen welcomed the election of Kosovo's new government, led by Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi. 
Citing what he described as a growing political maturity in Kosovo, he praised the provincial institutions for abiding by the principles of democracy in forming the new cabinet, following former Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj's resignation earlier this month.
Kosovo's 120-seat assembly approved Kosumi and the new government -- a coalition between the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) -- by a vote of 71 to 36.
Kosumi, 45, is the deputy leader of the AAK and served as environment minister in Haradinaj's cabinet. 
A former student activist, he was sentenced to 15 years in prison in March 1981 for taking part in demonstrations. 
He was released after serving almost ten years of his sentence.
In 1993, Kosumi headed the Parliamentary Party of Kosovo, founded by Veton Surroi, the current leader of the opposition ORA party. 
Viewed as a moderate politician, he was part of the Kosovo delegation in the Rambouillet peace conference in early 1999, where he was reportedly praised for his concentration and focus.
As he was sworn in Wednesday, Kosumi pledged to continue his predecessor's work and strive for the fulfillment of democratic standards -- including rule of law, democratic institutions, minority rights and an impartial legal system -- set by the international community as a condition for launching talks on Kosovo's final status.
A review of the province's progress in implementing standards is scheduled for June.
In his remarks, Jessen-Petersen noted the need for progress ahead of the review. 
"We have less than three months before the next assessment of standards' implementation and it is critical that the new government build upon the hard work of the past few months and maintain both the momentum and focus on the priority standards," the UNMIK chief said in Brussels on Wednesday. 
"We need to make even greater and faster progress in those standards that have to do with improving the living conditions of the minorities, especially the Kosovo Serbs," he added.
In Brussels, Jessen-Petersen met with NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, who confirmed that KFOR's operational power in Kosovo would be preserved. 
The NATO chief noted that the situation in Kosovo remains "rocky" and that KFOR's main task remains security. 
He also reiterated his call for the full participation of Serbs in the decentralisation process
