24/03/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/03/05
Serbian war crimes prosecutors have asked the Belgrade District Court to freeze the assets of all 13 fugitives from Serbia and Republika Srpska indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), a spokesperson for the prosecutors, Jasna Jankovic, said Wednesday (23 March). 
The move follows action taken earlier this week by the National Council for Co-operation with The Hague, which endorsed a Serbian Justice Ministry proposal to freeze the assets.
The list of fugitives includes wartime Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, ex-police and army generals Srjeten Lukic, Nebojsa Pavkovic and Vlastimir Djordjevic, as well as the former leader of Serb separatists in Croatia, Goran Hadzic.
"We have to meet our international obligations … and assure both the tribunal and the international community of our sincere intentions to fulfil the obligations in the shortest possible term," Council President Rasim Ljajic said.
The stepped-up pressure on war crimes indictees is aimed at securing a positive feasibility study from the EU on Serbia-Montenegro's prospects for accession. 
Brussels has made it clear that a favourable assessment will not be forthcoming without the transfer of Lukic and Pavkovic, who are living openly in Serbia. 
The administration of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has resisted making arrests, pursuing instead a policy of voluntary surrenders. 
But the two ex-generals have declined to turn themselves in.
According to Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, the government would like the voluntary surrender model to prove completely functional, but will resort to a strict application of the law if the model does not work out. 
"We are only a step away from obtaining a positive feasibility study -- we must not trip just before the goal," Labus says.
Speaking on Wednesday, Local Administration Minister Zoran Loncar announced that concrete measures will be taken in the next several days to extradite Lukic and Pavkovic to the tribunal.
"For Serbia to complete all of its obligations to The Hague tribunal, it is necessary that all the indictees who are left, including generals Lukic and Pavkovic, be extradited to The Hague," Loncar said, without elaborating.
On 19 March, Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic told reporters that he had received clear assurances from Kostunica that the indictees will be transferred to the court "one way or the other".
Co-operation with the ICTY was a major topic of discussion during talks Kostunica and Serbian President Boris Tadic held with EU officials, including Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and security chief Javier Solana.
After his meeting with Tadic on Monday, Solana said a "time of better relations between Serbia-Montenegro and the EU has begun," while Rehn voiced confidence that the remaining conditions for a positive feasibility study would be met. 
The study is to be finalised by the end of March and delivered to the European Commission on 12 April.
Serbia has made considerable progress and needs only to take a few crucial steps in order to fulfil its obligations, Rehn said
