24/03/2005
(Reuters, EU -- 21/03/05)
Four months after the EU took over the mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) from NATO, officials are discussing possible troop cuts. 
EU defence ministers met last week in Brussels to discuss the future of EUFOR's Operation Althea, which currently has more than 6,000 soldiers in BiH.
"We are going to reassess the need to keep Operation Althea at its current level," said Luxembourg Defence Minister Luc Frieden, whose country holds the rotating EU presidency. 
He stressed, however, that no formal decision had been made.
Frieden said the priority is to strengthen the police force in the country and gradually bring down the number of foreign troops. 
A review of the operation will take place in May. 
EU security chief Javier Solana, meanwhile, said EUFOR would not be reduced below 5,000 soldiers. 
The current level is about 6,300 soldiers.
"The future will be less soldiers, more police," Frieden told reporters Friday (18 March). 
"If everything goes well, we will go in that direction," he said. 
He gave no timeframe for potential troop cuts.
One source said any reduction would take into account the situation across the region, particularly in Kosovo, where some observers see the risk of new ethnic tensions as international talks begin on its future status. 
EUFOR leaders describe conditions in BiH as generally stable, yet acknowledge problems may flare up from time to time.
The EU formally took over control of the force from the NATO on 2 December 2004. 
It was the first major military operation undertaken by countries acting as the EU, rather than individually.
The Union wants to become a credible military player and is striving to prove it can take on more ambitious operations in far-flung zones. 
The UN has called on the EU to do more in trouble spots around the world -- for example, restore order in crisis zones until local troops arrive -- as with a French-led peacekeeping operation launched in 2003 in Bunia, eastern Congo.
The discussion comes at a crucial time for BiH. 
The country must reform its police system before the European Commission will approve a Feasibility Study -- considered a major step towards signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Union.
