29/11/2004
By Marija Lazarovai for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 29/11/04
Two days after officially being named Macedonian Prime Minister-designate, Vlado Buckovski voiced confidence Sunday (28 November) that consultations on forming the country's new government would be completed within a week and the new cabinet announced a few days later. 
He also pledged to establish regular communications with the opposition.
President Branko Crvenkovski officially gave Buckovski -- Macedonia's defence minister -- the mandate to form a the country's new government on Friday, after the ruling Social Democratic Alliance of Macedonia (SDSM) elected him as its leader during an extraordinary congress on Thursday. 
Buckovski will replace Hari Kostov, who resigned earlier this month as prime minister.
Buckovski won 391 votes in the second round after all three candidates for the post failed to garner an absolute majority. 
Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska was second with 265 votes. 
Parliament member Tito Petkovski also ran for the post; he won 144 votes during the first round.
"I believe that the new government will be announced on 7 December or 8 December," before being put to parliamentary debate between 15 December and 18 December, Buckovski said in an interview with Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) on Sunday.
He already has started consultations with the parties in the outgoing SDSM-led coalition government, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI).
Following talks Saturday, the leaders of the LDP and DUI, Risto Penov and Ali Ahmeti, confirmed that they would remain in the SDSM-led coalition. 
They also agreed that the coalition talks should not take longer than a week, given some pressing issues awaiting the formation of a new government, such as putting together the country's 2005 budget.
Buckovski said there were also negotiations with VMRO-Makedonska leader Boris Stojmenov on a possible alliance. 
"However, this would be a coalition for the local elections, and not for the new government."
According to local press reports, only Foreign Minister Ilinka Mitreva is certain to retain her post in the new cabinet. 
It is unclear whether Sekerinska will stay on as deputy prime minister. 
As for the defence minister's post, there is speculation in the press that the SDSM would possibly agree to give it to the LDP, with outgoing Social Minister Jovan Manasijevski seen as Buckovski's possible replacement.
