29/04/2005
(Office of the High Representative - 29/04/05; AP, Fena - 28/04/05)
International officials Thursday (28 April) hailed the progress achieved during the first phase of political talks on police restructuring in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
At the end of three days of negotiations, 11 parties with representation in parliament agreed on the core principles of the reform. 
The remaining issues, including the most controversial question -- that of defining the boundaries of policing zones -- will be dealt with during the second phase of talks.
In line with EU requirements, the agreement reached on Mt. 
Vlasic late Wednesday night sets the stage for the establishment of a single police structure at the state level, to be funded from the state budget and kept free of political interference.
Welcoming the deal, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn praised the BiH politicians for their will to find a solution.
"It is very encouraging that the present solutions are in conformity with the EU principles," BiH news agency Fena quoted Rehn as saying Thursday. 
"Politics is about finding practical solutions to difficult issues and the BiH politicians have shown that they are willing to find answers which will benefit the country as a whole."
The BiH parties have agreed on the creation of a special working group of experts from BiH's two entities to prepare proposals for the territorial disposition of local police areas (LPAs). 
BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic is expected to appoint that group by 3 May, and it will then present its police map proposals by 9 May. 
The starting point, Terzic said, would be the so-called 9+1 map proposed by the Police Restructuring Commission, chaired by former Belgian Prime Minister Wifried Martens, which envisions nine LPAs plus a Greater Sarajevo metropolitan police area.
High Representative in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, also praised the participating politicians. 
Speaking to reporters with Terzic and Martens by his side, he added that an agreement on the police maps should be reached during the second and final phase of the talks, expected to resume on 11 May.
The negotiations are to be completed by 19 May, when a European Commission (EC) team is due to arrive in Sarajevo for a review of BiH's progress in meeting the requirements set out in the EU feasibility study. 
A positive assessment will pave the way for BiH to start talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Brussels.
The parliaments of the country's two entities, the Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska, will have until mid-June to ratify the final political agreement. 
That is when the EU will make its decision on whether BiH will move ahead on its path towards Europe, Ashdown said.
The US Embassy in BiH also welcomed the progress made at the talks on Mt. 
Vlasic and called on the participating parties to quickly resolve the outstanding issues."Only by embracing these principles will Bosnia's leaders construct a policing structure that will serve its citizens effectively and that will open the doors to Bosnia's European future," the embassy said in a statement.
