28/02/2005
(Romanian Press Review, Ziua - 28/02/05; AFP, Rompres, Focus - 27/02/05; EU, Evroportal.bg - 25/02/05)
Hundreds of Bulgarians and Romanians are expected to join a competition for jobs announced by the EU's personnel office last week. 
The European Parliament (EP) and other institutions are seeking non-permanent staff to work on pre-enlargement tasks ahead of the two countries' EU entry.
As many as 226 jobs could become available, with 64 expected to be filled this year, Bulgarian media reported Friday (26 February), quoting EP sources. 
According to an announcement on the European Personnel Selection Office (EPSO) Web site, candidates should register online by 24 March in order to be considered for jobs at the administrator and assistant levels.
Applicants must be citizens of either of the two countries, or of one of the current EU member states. 
Besides having perfect command of their respective native language, they must also have "satisfactory knowledge" of English, French or German, as well as appropriate educational levels and professional experience, the announcement said.
The successful candidates will be assisting the 35 Romanian and 18 Bulgarian experts who will work as observers at the Strasbourg-based EU legislature following the signing of their countries' accession treaty with the Union on 25 April.
In the first step of a three-step process leading to the signing of a treaty, the European Commission (EC) last week issued a favourable opinion on Bulgaria and Romania's bid to join the EU in 2007. 
The two countries now await a similar decision from the EP and the Council of EU foreign ministers.
The treaty will include two safeguard clauses for Romania and one for Bulgaria, leaving the door open for the EU to postpone membership by one year if requirements are not met. 
As he announced the EC's decision, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn urged Sofia and Bucharest to focus on fulfilling their accession commitments.
Authorities"cannot lie back and relax: in 2005 and 2006; a lot of hard work will be needed to progress on reforms in order to fully and timely meet all conditions for membership", Rehn said.
On Sunday, he arrived on his first official visit to Bucharest since assuming his post in November. 
During three days of talks with Romanian officials, including President Traian Basescu and Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, Rehn will review the progress the country is making.
Ahead of his trip, Rehn outlined "justice, domestic affairs, finances and environmental protection," as areas in which Romania still had "certain difficulties".
Basescu and Tariceanu, who have both described the fight against corruption as a key priority, voiced confidence at the weekend that their country would move along its EU accession path as scheduled.
"I believe we have proven that there is no political influence in justice, that magistrates are doing their job now and we hope that concrete results in the fight against corruption will appear," Tariceanu said.
