22/09/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 22/09/08
As if the Macedonian summer wasn't hot enough, the political scene has been in the throes of upheaval.
In July, the Social Democrat-led Sun Coalition walked out of parliament, protesting the detention of Strumica Mayor Zoran Zaev.
Members of the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA), meanwhile, also staged a boycott of parliament, as a response to what it claims are invalid election results.
Due to the walkouts, for the first time since independence the new Macedonian government had to be voted in without the opposition present and without debate in parliament.
Zaev obtained his release, but that in turn irritated the public prosecutor, who filed two complaints.
The Criminal Council accepted the second of these and decided to place Zaev in pre-trial confinement, spurring new protests.
Finally, President Branko Crvenkovski intervened, saying he would give Zaev amnesty in exchange for the opposition returning to parliament.
It was only the second time a Macedonian president has used this power.
The first was in 2003, when the late Boris Trajkovski gave amnesty to former Interior Minister Dosta Dimovska and the ex-director of the Fifth Department, Aleksander Cvetkov, in connection with a wiretapping case.
Even as passions over the Zaev affair were finally cooling down, a new storm flared up.
With no prior warning, the ruling party and its allies adopted a new set of rules for parliamentary procedure.
The old rules of procedure had been a huge stumbling block for Macedonia's previous parliamentary formation.
The majority then introduced several new laws, covering such topics as energy, labour relations, lobbying and advocacy, expropriation, and use of the Albanian language.
The DPA cried foul over the last bill, accusing a rival ethnic Albanian party – the Democratic Union of Integration – of betraying Albanian interests.
NGOs complained about the lobbying law, and trade unions were unhappy over the labour legislation, which President Crvenkovski refused to sign.
The president used his powers on another front, promising the DPA he would veto the bill on Albanian language use if it dropped its parliamentary boycott.
All this comes only a few months ahead of the European Commission's progress report for Macedonia, due in November.
One of the main tasks the EU set for the country was improvement of co-operation between the government and the president.
Another was adoption of the parliamentary rules of procedure with a wide political consensus.
As the crisis unfolded, the EU mission in Skopje reacted with a reminder that constructive dialogue and consensus are one of the conditions for securing a date for negotiations on Macedonia's EU bid.
According to Crvenkovski, failure to resolve the crisis is saddling Macedonia with a "partial democracy" and ensuring the country will not get a date for negotiations as hoped.
The president's interventions, however, have simply opened up a new area of controversy, with some lawmakers calling for his impeachment.
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski had to step in and say that his party, the VMRO-DPMNE, had no intention of pursuing impeachment proceedings.
"We want to defeat Mr. Crvenkovski at the elections, not in some other way," he said.
The Sun Coalition is now back in parliament but has said it will challenge, in the Constitutional Court, laws that won parliamentary approval during its boycott.
The DPA deputies have not yet returned to their seats but say they will return once their draft law on language use appears on the agenda.
The outlook for the EC's November report, however, remains uncertain.
And as the political infighting gives Brussels plenty of red flags to raise, it also undermines the government's claim that Greece is the primary obstacle to Macedonia's EU progress.
The two countries are locked in a bitter name dispute, and Greece's leaders have made it clear that it has no qualms about using its veto power within the bloc.
"We have met all the conditions required by Brussels," Gruevski said on September 7th, adding that the name dispute is the only reason Macedonia has not yet received a start date for negotiations.
But EU officials took a different view, indicating the problems are as much in Skopje as in Athens.
"Substantial further efforts are still needed before we can tick all the boxes," Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said, calling on the government to "take the lead to ensure the proper functioning of democratic institutions and to enhance political dialogue".
