28/02/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 28/02/05
Last week, Macedonian political parties began campaigning for the third local elections since independence. 
Over the next 12 days, 380 candidates who hope to win the mayor's office in 85 municipalities will present their platforms to voters.
The campaign will last until midnight on 11 March, with the first round of voting scheduled for 13 March. 
Mayors will be elected according to the majority model and councilors according to the proportional model. 
A second round, if necessary, will be held on 27 March. 
The fiercest battle is expected to be the mayoral race in Skopje.
The front-runner is incumbent Risto Penov of the ruling "For Macedonia Together" coalition, which held its party convention last week. 
Its election slogan is "With Each Day, Closer to Europe". 
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, who leads the largest party in the coalition, the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), told delegates that the government is committed to ensuring fair and democratic elections.
"We will lead this campaign in the European style," Buckovski said. 
"We will give a chance to the opposition though we will persuade you that what the Macedonian government has been doing is the only solution."
The united opposition, led by the VMRO-DPMNE, launched its campaign in Ohrid. 
Its motto is "Results Now". 
In the Skopje race, the opposition has thrown its support behind independent candidate Trifun Kostovski.
He launched his campaign with a walk outside the Most department store in the Skopje Old Bazaar, where he met representatives of the Craftsmen's Association. 
He received the support of another opposition party, VMRO-Narodna, whose unofficial leader is former Prime Minister Ljubco Georgievski.
According to VMRO-DPMNE president Nikola Gruevski, the opposition is larger and more united than ever before. 
Both the ruling and opposition forces are pledging to lead Macedonia towards a higher standard of living, greater democracy and stability, and membership in the EU and NATO.
The ethnic Albanian parties -- the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) and Party for Democratic Prosperity (PDP) -- will be testing their strength in Tetovo and Gostivar. 
The ruling DUI nominated Hazbi Lika as its candidate for mayor of Tetovo. 
The DPA-PDP coalition is pitting Vebi Bexheti against Lika in that race. 
The DUI candidate in Gostivar is parliament member Nevzat Bejta, while DPA spokesman Sulejman Rushiti is competing for the post on behalf of the DPA and PDP.
Recent amendments to the law on local elections have lowered the voter turnout necessary for elections to be successful. 
According to the new law, the winning candidate will be elected in the first round if one-third of eligible voters go to the polls. 
Around 200 OSCE monitors will monitor the voting process.
