28/12/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 28/12/04
The report to the UN Security Council by the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Carla del Ponte, affected Croatian politics, though her findings had been widely expected.
Del Ponte emphasised that Croatian co-operation with The Hague "will not be complete until General [Ante] Gotovina is arrested or hands himself over" -- a demand she has been making since June 2001, when the indictment against Gotovina was first issued.
Once again, del Ponte noted that the case is the sole hurdle preventing Zagreb's co-operation with the tribunal from being pronounced complete.
Moreover, she charged, the failure to bring Gotovina to justice is partly due to divisions within state institutions concerning his arrest and the support he receives from individuals within the government.
Croatia must prove that "the networks which aid various criminals" are not more powerful than the rule of law, the prosecutor said.
Her accusations echoed similar ones made in last year's report, in which she held the government of then-Prime Minister Ivica Racan directly responsible for the fact that Gotovina is not in The Hague, on the grounds that she had informed Racan about his whereabouts.
This year's report comes at a crucial juncture in Croatia's progress towards EU membership.
At their summit on 17 December, EU leaders decided to launch accession talks with Zagreb, but made the offer conditional on full co-operation with The Hague.
Luxembourg, which will hold the EU presidency during the first half of 2005, will determine whether Croatia is meeting that condition sufficiently to allow talks to begin in March, as planned.
In remarks after the summit, Luxemboug Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn indicated that del Ponte's input would play a large role in making that determination.
Hailing the European Council's decision as a "great day" for his country, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader sought to reassure European leaders that authorities were committed to resolving the co-operation issue.
"It is clear that we must solve the case of Ante Gotovina," Sanader said.
"We are aware of it and will do everything to complete [the requirement]." The prime minister, who has steered the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) away from its nationalist past towards becoming a European-oriented conservative party, has already begun shaking up the Croatian intelligence services.
He replaced the head of counterintelligence and is uniting the various services under the direction of a special board.
Nevertheless, Sanader's ability to over-ride hardliners within the HDZ -- some of whom may have a vested interest in blocking further co-operation with the ICTY -- remains something of an open question.
As a result, analysts say, any perceived delays in the process will likely become a political issue, with the opposition eager to pounce on any indication that the current government is not up to the task.
