28/12/2004
(Standartnews, Novinar - 28/12/04;
BTA, Sofia News Agency, BNN, Vsekiden.bg, Mediapool.bg, Dnevnik.bg - 27/12/04)
While acknowledging a number of weaknesses in Bulgaria's 2005 budget, President Georgi Parvanov endorsed it Monday (27 December), saying he did not want to block the administration's work in the coming year.
Describing next year's budget as "soft", Parvanov said it would likely allow the government to again spend any surplus revenues without parliamentary debate or approval.
In a statement issued by his office Monday, Parvanov said he believes this not only infringes on the best practices in public finance management, but also sets the stage for "political and economic distortions", making the budget's social effect uncertain.
In Parvanov's view, the fiscal plan fails to press important public sector reforms, including in the areas of health care and financial decentralisation.
"Furthermore, a large portion of the budget subsidies for the health sector were adopted in violation of parliamentary procedures, which is inadmissible and undermines the National Assembly's authority," the statement quoted him as saying.
Once it was approved on 19 December, opposition members urged Parvanov to veto the Budget Act.
They object to the envisioned state guarantees for a 36m-euro loan from Bank Austria Creditanstalt for the construction of a new paediatric hospital in Sofia.
Even by Western standards, it was too expensive, they said.
According to some, the inclusion of the project in the fiscal plan for next year violated the constitution and other laws.
Parvanov, however, argued that it was unacceptable for a country with an established rule of law to have its budget act challenged before the Constitutional Court every year.
He said it would be up to lawmakers to decide if they would support the loan agreement for the hospital when it is put to a vote in parliament.
While approving the budget, the president vetoed a new law on political parties, saying it would undermine political pluralism and the freedom of assembly in the country.
The legislation would require parties not represented in parliament to apply again for legal registration, submitting to court lists with personal data and signatures of at least 5,000 members and certificates that their party names are unique.
Failure to meet that requirement would make a party ineligible to run in elections due next summer.
That requirement does not apply to parliamentary parties, regardless of size.
"I don't understand the criterion by which the law gives such a privilege to parties, which have been created recently, haven't run in any elections [on their own] and still have to prove themselves in the political life," Parvanov said.
He was referring to splinter groups in the legislature, which seceded from the ruling National Movement Simeon II and the centre-right opposition Union of Democratic Forces and intend to run in next year's elections on their own.
The new legislation would effectively make it impossible for the majority of Bulgaria's more than 200 parties to participate in the polls.
Under Bulgarian law, MPs must consider Parvanov's objections, but could eventually ignore them and leave the newly passed law intact.
