28/12/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 28/12/04
In a move intended to aid the fight against organised crime, the Macedonian government has drafted a bill to establish a special witness protection programme. 
Witnesses testifying in criminal cases that entail jail sentences of more than four years would benefit from a range of protection measures, including changes of residence and personal data, and in extreme cases, transfer to another country under bilateral international agreements.
A special five-member panel, known as the Witness Protection Council, would be responsible for reviewing cases and deciding whether protection is needed. 
Witnesses who enter the programme would sign an agreement requiring them to testify in court in exchange for the protection. 
Jail sentences of at least four years are stipulated for anyone revealing the identity of a protected witness. 
In cases where compromising a protected witness leads to their murder or suicide, the penalty would be a life sentence. 
Funds for the programme would be provided by the government and by foreign donors.
"Enacting a law that provides for protection of key witnesses is a part of the reform of the judiciary," says Ixhet Memeti, the former justice minister under whom the bill was drafted. 
"It is in line with the measures taken as part of the fight against organised crime."
If adopted, the legislation creating a witness programme would resolve a debate over whether Macedonia actually needs one. 
Given the small size of the country, critics say, such a programme is neither necessary nor feasible.
Memeti, however, argues that it is necessary to bring Macedonia into line with international standards. 
"All [other] countries in the West Balkans have enacted such legislation, so Macedonia was also supposed to do that given her intention to become a member of the EU one day."
The legislation provides for selecting members of the Witness Protection Council from the Public Prosecution Office, the judiciary, the sanction enforcement administration and the interior ministry. 
They would be appointed to five-year terms. 
The Council would be headed by a Supreme Court judge. 
A special department in the interior ministry would implement the measures available under the programme.
