23/03/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 03/23/05
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said Tuesday (22 March) that he expects more war crimes suspects to surrender to the UN tribunal. 
Speaking to Olli Rehn, the EU commissioner for enlargement, Kostunica pledged that significant progress would be made in the next week towards achieving full co-operation with the UN court. 
He also signaled that his government is working to persuade two top suspects, retired generals Nebojsa Pavkovic and Sreten Lukic, to surrender.
"I am quite optimistic that in the days to come … we will have significant progress that will lead us to full co-operation with the ICTY," Reuters quoted the prime minister as saying after his talks with Rehn. 
Kostunica's visit is being seen as part of an all-out diplomatic effort by Belgrade to secure a positive feasibility study on Serbia-Montenegro's readiness to move ahead with the EU accession process.
The study is due to be published on 12 April. 
A positive assessment would pave the way for the signing of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement between Serbia-Montenegro and the Union -- considered a major step along the road to membership in the Union.
Most analysts agree that the surrenders of Pavkovic and Lukic are crucial for Belgrade's chances. 
"We are aware of the fact that these cases are something that leads us to full co-operation with the ICTY, and we are treating these cases more than seriously," Kostunica said in response to a question about the two men.
Federal President Svetozar Marovic has said he believes that by 31 March, Serbia will fulfil all obligations necessary for a positive feasibility study. 
"There is no question that co-operation or lack of co-operation on our part with the court in The Hague is the greatest obstacle facing us," Marovic told the daily Haaretz during a visit to Israel last week.
"I would like to remind you that two former presidents of Serbia are now facing the court in The Hague, one of them the former president of Yugoslavia (Slobodan Milosevic), two Yugoslav chiefs of staff and several ministers and deputy prime ministers," the president said. 
"In the past two months, eight people have turned themselves in of their own free will, including six generals. 
It is now clear that there is a positive trend in co-operation between Serbia and Montenegro and the court in The Hague, and we will continue with that until we complete everything that can be done."
He reiterated the government's stance on Ratko Mladic, denying that the government has any knowledge about where the fugitive -- one of the UN tribunal's three most-wanted indictees -- is hiding. 
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte has charged that Mladic is not only hiding in Serbia, but receiving protection from a network of supporters within the Serbian military."If the Serbian government were to decide that it really wants to arrest Mladic, it could do so within hours," del Ponte has said.
In a separate development, Deputy Defence Minister Pavle Jankovic said Wednesday that co-operation with The Hague is the only obstacle standing in the way of Serbia-Montenegro entering NATO's Partnership for Peace programme. 
Serbia-Montenegro could join in as little as a month's time if the conditions were met, he said during a visit to Washington.
