26/05/2005
(Reuters - 26/05/05; Reuters, BBC, VOA, The Scotsman, Breakingnews.ie, Fena - 25/05/05)
Hoping to find clues about the whereabouts of one of the world's most wanted war crimes indictees, NATO troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have raided the homes of Radovan Karadzic's son Sasa and wife Ljiljana. 
Both live in the town of Pale, a wartime Bosnian Serb stronghold, about 16km east of Sarajevo.
"Today we are in the home of Sasa Karadzic and again we are looking for evidence and information about the movements and whereabouts of Karadzic, his support network and other war crimes suspects," Reuters quoted NATO spokesman Derek Chappel as saying Thursday (26 May).
In a similar statement Wednesday, the spokesman told reporters about the search that was being conducted in Ljiljana Zelen-Karadzic's home. 
Dozens of NATO-led US soldiers were reportedly involved in both raids.
Chappel, however, said troops did not anticipate apprehending Karadzic himself during the actions Wednesday and Thursday.
"If we had information that Karadzic was hiding somewhere, it would be a different kind of operation," the spokesman told Reuters by telephone.
While at the home of Karadzic's wife, NATO soldiers confiscated some unspecified items for forensic analysis at Butmir Camp in northern BiH. 
Chappel, who described the operation as "successful", said the objects eventually would be returned to their owners. 
According to media reports, soldiers took a woman and a man from the house to one of the dozens of NATO vehicles standing outside, where they were questioned.
Karadzic, along with his wartime military commander, Ratko Mladic, disappeared several months after the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) issued its initial indictments against them in 1995. 
They face a number of war crimes charges, including two counts of genocide each for their alleged roles in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo.
The searches, which are viewed as a new effort to step up the pressure on war crimes fugitives, follow several unsuccessful attempts by international troops in recent years to catch Karadzic. 
The last time was in April 2004 in Pale, about eight months before NATO handed over its peacekeeping duties in BiH to the EU in December 2004. 
NATO currently keeps a small force in the Balkan country, whose main tasks include tracking down war crimes fugitives and helping the authorities fight organised crime.
Karadzic, 59, served as Bosnian Serb president through most of the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH. 
He is believed to be hiding in eastern BiH and his native Montenegro and to be receiving financial and other assistance from a network of supporters, which has helped him escape arrest for nearly ten years now.
The international community has imposed a number of measures against individuals suspected of helping fugitives evade justice, including visa bans, freezing assets and dismissals of Bosnian Serb officials.
Meanwhile full co-operation with the ICTY, including the arrest and hand over of all those indicted by The Hague court, remains a key condition for both BiH's and Serbia-Montenegro's progress towards European integration.
