26/05/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times – 26/05/05
Turkey has seen a notable increase in attacks by terrorists from the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) recently, and many analysts point to a 12 May ruling by the European Court of Human Rights as a catalyst. 
The court found the trial of PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan to have been unfair -- a decision that may have emboldened the outlawed group. 
It has threatened to further boost the number of attacks, and even spread its campaign to the country's major cities.
More than 36,000 people have been killed in clashes between Kurdish militants and the Turkish Army since 1984, when the rebels took up arms for self-rule. 
The violence died down in 1999, when the PKK said it would end its armed campaign and seek a peaceful solution. 
But last year it reversed that decision, turning again to bombings and shootings.
In cities across the country -- Antalya, Istanbul, Batman and Mersin -- police and security forces have arrested several suspected militants accused of planning bomb attacks on government and tourist locations. 
According to the police counterterrorism unit, plastic explosives, guns and mobile phones also have been seized.
In Diyarbakir, a suspected female suicide bomber was detained while carrying 1.5kg of C-4 plastic explosives. 
In Ankara and Istanbul, two people were arrested and found to be carrying 7.5kg of plastic explosives. 
Besides bombs, police and gendarmerie forces have been recovering a large number of guns in the southeast part of the country.
Clashes between security forces and terrorists have reached 1999 levels, Land Forces Commander General Yasar Buyukanit said during a visit to the southeast. 
Moreover, there is increasing evidence not only of PKK concentrations around the country, but of preparations for urban warfare.
"Terrorists coming from northern Iraq are bringing along large amounts of C-4 [plastic] explosives," Buyukanit said. 
"Let me warn you that this could be dangerous both in rural areas and in big cities."
For years, the extremists have taken advantage of the instability in Iraq. 
In 1999, when the PKK temporarily gave up its armed struggle, most of its fighters withdrew there. 
It is estimated that 3,500 PKK militants are still holed up on Kandil Mountain, in northern Iraq. 
Now, Turkish officials say, the region has become a base for conducting operations across the border.
On his recent state visit to Turkey -- his first official trip abroad since the formation of a new government -- Iraqi Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari pledged to take action. 
"We will not let any group in Iraq damage the security, economy and political interests of the neighbouring countries," al-Jaafari said. 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan is expected to address the issue with US President George W. 
Bush when he visits Washington early next month.
