23/03/2005
(AP, Reuters, VOA, Deutsche Welle - 22/03/05)
The government of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Serb-run entity launched a campaign Tuesday (22 March), urging members of the public to help track down suspects sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
It is the first time since the end of the 1992-1995 BiH conflict that Republika Srpska (RS) authorities have turned to Bosnian Serbs with such an appeal.
The "Us or Them" campaign features a video spot showing the images of indictees who remain at large. 
It starts with former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, both indicted by the ICTY back in 1995. 
It then shows seven other indictees. 
"Either they go to The Hague or we go to hell," the voice-over says, reminding citizens that BiH's progress towards EU and NATO membership will remain blocked for as long as the suspects are at large.
The spot will be run on the three most popular TV stations in RS. 
A list of ICTY fugitives will also be displayed on billboards across the entity, along with a telephone number to call with information.
The failure of the RS authorities to arrest and hand over indictees to The Hague tribunal has twice cost the country an invitation to join NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme, a first step towards eventual Alliance membership. 
BiH's application for admission into the PfP will likely be discussed during a meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Vilnius, Lithuania, on 20 April. 
According to an AP report, a third rejection could spell the end for BiH's chances of joining the programme.
While voicing his country's support for BiH's NATO bid, German Defence Minister Peter Struck reminded officials in Sarajevo on Monday that full co-operation with the ICTY remains a critical condition.
Following talks with BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic, Struck stressed that the surrender of some of the tribunal's top indictees, notably Mladic, would "advance to a great extent" the country's chances for PfP membership.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, meanwhile, told BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic on Monday that Brussels could issue a positive assessment of his country's preparedness for accession by the end of May, setting the stage for the opening of talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement later in the year. 
For that to happen, however, BiH must show substantial progress by that time towards meeting the Union's conditions, Rehn said.
