27/01/2005
(RFE/RL, FT - 26/01/05; The Scotsman, AFP - 25/01/05; Council of Europe - 24/01/05)
Organised crime is likely to remain a priority concern of European societies in the foreseeable future, the Council of Europe (CoE) warned this week. 
Economic crime, drugs, and the smuggling and trafficking of people are the three main crime markets posing a major threat to most of Europe, the 46-nation body said in its annual report on the organised crime situation in member states during 2004.
"Organised crime …undermines our fundamental European objectives, including the rule of law, democracy, and human rights," Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) quoted Alexander Seger, one of the authors of the report, as saying.
Economic crime, including fraud and corruption, now accounts for a large share of organised crime cases detected in many countries across the continent, regardless of their level of economic development or prosperity, the CoE said. 
In countries such as Belgium, Bulgaria, the Netherlands and Slovakia, economic crime is the primary activity of at least a quarter of the organised crime groups and networks. 
In Estonia, Moldova and Serbia-Montenegro, it is the main category of recorded organised crime cases, the 191-page study noted.
According to the CoE experts, Europe is now perhaps the most profitable market in the world in terms of the production and trafficking of drugs, with the latter believed to be the most important activity of organised crime groups and networks in about a third of the organisation's member states.
Albanian gangs, which have expanded beyond their natural geographical area in the 1990s, are particularly active in drug smuggling, as well as in the trafficking of arms, human beings and contraband cigarettes, according to the CoE.
Reports on the trafficking and exploitation of people are coming from an increasing number of European countries, according to the CoE.
Moldova, Romania, Ukraine, the Russian Federation, Bulgaria and Lithuania are said to be the most often-quoted countries of origin in cases of trafficking in human beings. 
In countries such as Croatia and Slovenia, meanwhile, people smuggling represents the main type of organised crime.
Fears that the EU would be exposed to increased crime from newcomers have fuelled much of the debate over the Union's eastward expansion, Seger told RFE/RL, noting that it has not turned out that way.
"It goes both ways actually," he said. 
"I think a lot of the crime in Eastern Europe would not be possible without [criminals being able] to tap the financial sector in Western Europe, and that is particularly true for money laundering."
The CoE report also warns that organised crime members are increasingly using computers to facilitate their activities. 
It provides a detailed analysis of the different forms of computer-related crime, its links to organised crime and terrorism, and its impact on societies.
