28/04/2005
(AP, AFP, Albanian Presidential Web site - 27/04/05;
RFE/RL - 26/04/05;
AP, Reuters, AFP - 25/04/05)
Sixteen Albanian political parties and coalitions that plan to participate in the 3 July parliamentary elections have signed a code of conduct, pledging a free, fair and democratic poll, to be preceded by a civil and peaceful campaign.
"The code of conduct ...
is a moral contract putting the country's interests and those of holding free and democratic elections over any other interest," President Alfred Moisiu said at the signing ceremony on Wednesday (27 April), two days after setting the election date.
"We are here today to give a message of understanding and hope to the citizens and the society that we are capable of staying above anything that could be an obstacle to Albania's pushing ahead."
The upcoming vote is widely seen in the international community as a test of Albania's political maturity and adherence to democratic standards.
Previous elections have been tarnished by irregularities and charges of vote rigging.
The ruling Socialist Party, headed by Prime Minister Fatos Nano, is hoping to win the vote and secure a third four-year term in office.
The main opposition Democratic Party, led by former President Sali Berisha, says it can lead Albania more quickly towards its goals of EU and NATO integration.
The code of conduct signed Wednesday calls for politicians to respect the constitution, electoral law and other relevant legislation.
It also obliges them -- and members of the ruling party in particular -- not to "use resources, administrative structures, public premises, transportation means, or public administration personnel financed by taxpayers' money… for political campaign aims or for the deepening of their electoral interests".
The parties have agreed to refuse financing from suspicious sources and to abide by principles of transparency concerning campaign financing.
Furthermore, they pledged not to intimidate voters or other participants, nor offer bribes or bonuses.
"The real importance of the code of conduct begins now with the phase of fulfilling the pledges," Moisiu said.
"It is our common responsibility for this pledge not to remain on paper, but to find real implementation at any time and day of the electoral process."
With a population of about 3.5 million people, Albania is one of the poorest countries in Europe.
Tirana signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU last year, but Brussels officials have criticised authorities for slow progress in implementing the required reforms.
