27/12/2004
(Office of the High Representative - 27/12/04;
AP, BBC, FENA - 24/12/04;
BBC - 23/12/04)
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Defence Ministry has ordered an investigation into the Bosnian Serb army's suspected involvement in the sheltering of indicted war criminals in military facilities, the BiH daily Nezavisne Novine reported Monday (27 December).
BiH Deputy Defence Minister Enes Becirbasic told the daily on Sunday that the probe was demanded by High Representative Paddy Ashdown.
The news follows recent revelations suggesting that former Bosnian Serb military chief Ratko Mladic, one of the most wanted indictees of the UN war crimes tribunal, was being sheltered this summer at an underground military facility at Veliki Zep, near the town of Han Pijesak in eastern BiH.
The bunker was also reportedly Mladic's favourite shelter during the NATO air strikes in the summer of 1995.
"Mladic was here in the past six months," EUFOR Commander Major General David Leakey said Thursday as he greeted reporters at the bunker, adding that he had already ordered its closure so that indictees cannot use it as a hiding place again.
Similar facilities in the area would also be sealed off, the British general said.
Located in a thick forest deep in a mountain, the nuclear-proof facility at Veliki Zep is described as one of the most secret and sophisticated military complexes of the former Yugoslav Army.
Construction of the compound began in the 1950s, but it was formally handed over to the former Yugoslav military in 1983, according to Captain Milomir Deric, the commander of the complex, who has spent the last two decades working there.
It is currently being run by the RS Army.
Besides communications rooms and conference rooms, the facility has bedrooms and bathrooms, and even a suite of rooms, seemingly designed for the most senior commander.
"We have an air filtration system and underground water supply and fuel," Deric told a BBC reporter.
According to him the facility could "keep 150 men for two weeks with full rations," but reporters noted that it appeared to have the capacity for accommodating even more people and for a longer period of time.
Asked if Mladic had visited the bunker, Deric said "No -- never".
But Leakey said the bunker had been under observation and that the former Bosnian Serb military commander was there as recently as the summer.
He says RS authorities must be aware Mladic has used the facility as a hideout.
Quoting Western diplomats, the BBC reported that over the past few years the war crimes fugitive has often visited Han Pijesak, attending birthday parties or hunting in the woods there.
Mladic was originally indicted in 1995, along with wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
In an amended indictment of November 2002, the UN tribunal charged him with two counts of genocide and a total of 13 counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war.
