27/01/2005
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 27/01/05
More than five years after the murder of Serbian journalist Slavko Curuvija, the killer has yet to be identified -- at least publicly.
Last month, however, Belgrade-based B92 Radio reported that police have had a suspect for more than a year, but are not following through on the case.
Curuvija was killed in April 1999 while under police surveillance, after being accused by pro-Milosevic media of treason.
According to B92, testimony by a witness to the murder led police to identify the killer in 2003.
The reported suspect is Luka Pejovic, a Montenegrin gang figure.
Rajko Danilovic, the lawyer for Curuvija's family, said he has heard of Pejovic, but could not confirm whether the allegations are valid.
He called on police to interview the government agents who were tailing Curuvija the day he was shot and killed outside his home.
"If criminal police investigators do not take things into their own hand … I don't think it will be possible to hold a trial, and we will continue to remain bogged down," Danilovic said.
According to Humanitarian Law Centre Director Natasa Kandic, the lack of progress in the investigation is a sign that those connected with the murder remain linked to the state's security agencies.
"They have their particular reasons for not identifying the killer or killers and this is part of the whole issue of this crime," she said.
"In this country, politics influence things," says Dobrivoje Radovanovic, director of the Institute for Research in Criminology and Sociology.
"I think, unfortunately, that politics are involved in this matter."
For its part, the Organised Crime Division has confirmed that a witness positively identified the killer, but says investigative efforts are being aimed at identifying who ordered the crime.
It also claims that releasing information about the case could constitute a national security breach.
Former Justice Minister Vladan Batic told B92 that the issue was discussed several times by the cabinet.
The chief of police at the time, Dusan Mihajlovic, "made a statement that the police had some information.
But he never mentioned who had been identified or what had been discovered," Batic said.
Mihajlovic has refused to comment on the case.
