22/03/2005
(EUobserver, AP, Ireland Online, Fena, The Centre for SouthEast European Studies - 21/03/05;
EU - 16/03/05)
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Monday (21 March) that Brussels could launch talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) by the end of this year.
However, he added, the country must first meet a key precondition:
full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
"BiH must make significant progress leading to full co-operation with the UN tribunal," Rehn said at a joint press conference in Brussels with visiting BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic.
"There have been recently very welcome moves, but ...
we expect more progress."
Four Bosnian Serb war crimes indictees have surrendered to the ICTY since December.
A fifth, General Vinko Pandurevic, is expected to go to The Hague on Wednesday.
Retired General Rasim Delic, the wartime commander of the Bosnian Muslim army, turned himself in last month.
However, the ICTY is still seeking the arrest and handover of another 15 indictees, including the three most wanted fugitives -- former Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, and retired Croatian General Ante Gotovina.
A second major requirement for progress towards EU membership is police reform, Rehn said, calling for "a clear state-level competence".
Should BiH make substantial progress towards meeting these two critical conditions, Rehn said, the EU could issue a positive feasibility study by the end of May and recommend starting SAA negotiations -- considered a first step towards membership.
It is "fully realistic" for the talks to begin by November or December, the commissioner said, adding that realising that goal is up to BiH.
Responding to Rehn's comments, Terzic assured him that "adoption and implementation of European standards" was no longer an obstacle for his country.
Separately, in an interview published by Dnevni avaz on Tuesday, EUFOR Commander Major General David Leakey said that if BiH really wants to enter the Euro-Atlantic structures, authorities should assume responsibility for apprehending ICTY indictees.
He stressed that EUFOR and NATO were committed to assisting the process.
The previous day, Republika Srpska's leadership repeated its call for all indictees to surrender.
