18/02/2008
PRISTINA, Kosovo, Serbia -- Kosovo's declaration of independence on Sunday (February 17th) was hailed by its closest neighbour, Albania, the only Balkan country to respond immediately to the move. 
Prime Minister Sali Berisha described it as the day of "Kosovo's revival". 
Celebrations were held throughout the country.
Macedonia was more moderate, saying it will carefully observe the situation. 
Hundreds of Albanians, however, gathered in many towns throughout Macedonia to celebrate the declaration.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) remained relatively calm. 
While a few hundred ethnic Albanians celebrated the move in Sarajevo on Sunday, about 100 Bosnian Serbs gathered in downtown Banja Luka to protest the secession. 
BiH Presidency Chairman Zeljko Komsic said on Sunday that BiH would not be among the countries to recognise an independent Kosovo in the near future. 
Republika Srpska leaders view the secession as an unacceptable violation of Serbia's territorial integrity.
EU member Bulgaria will present its position Monday at the EU foreign ministers meeting in Brussels. 
The foreign ministry said only that the country will continue to work actively to achieve a unified EU position on Kosovo.
Romania, which joined the EU with Bulgaria last year, announced it remains opposed to Kosovo's independence. 
EU fellow members Greece and Cyprus previously voiced their opposition to Kosovo's declaration of independence.
Croatia is looking to the West for guidance. 
"We will wait and see the reactions of the United States and the EU," Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic said on Sunday. 
Montenegro also indicated it is in no hurry to recognise Kosovo's independence.
Turkish media reports suggest Ankara will recognise Kosovo two days after it declares independence. 
Serbia has threatened to retaliate economically against countries that support independence. 
(Koha Jone, Shekulli, Shqip - 18/02/08; AFP, Makfax, BGNES, Darik, Rompres, BTA, HRT, Vecernji List, Balkan Insight, Balkanweb, Top-Channel, Albanian President website, RTRS, SRNA, Fena, DPA - 17/02/08)
