22/03/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 22/03/05
In a television address earlier this month, Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis reviewed the government's course of action during its first year in power.
He and his cabinet have been fighting an uphill battle, Karamanlis said, adding that this has stood in the way of fulfilling all their goals.
Without directly blaming the previous PASOK administration led by Costas Simitis, whose fiscal practices have been sharply criticised by the EU, Karamanlis said that political tricks and ploys have no place in this government, and that he will always be honest with the public.
According to Karamanlis, the first thing that must be done over the next two years is to develop the national economy."We must produce, we must export, we need to become more competitive.
Today we are leader of the rear guard in competitiveness among our European partners," he said.
Pledging bold moves to change the structure of the economy in the coming months, he asked Greeks to be patient as his cabinet attempts to reduce the public deficit and trim spending.
To obtain the funds necessary to build an infrastructure that will appeal to foreign investors, the National Bank of Greece -- the country's largest financial institution -- will be privatised, Karamanlis said, adding that controlling shares in many other public organisations must also be sold.
The energy market, meanwhile, will be deregulated.
In addition, the government -- with the help of the EU -- plans to continue efforts to sell Olympic Airlines, the national flag carrier on the brink of bankruptcy.
At the same time, the highly profitable Athens International Airport will be listed on the Athens Stock Exchange (ASE).
With the telecommunications market now reaping the benefits of four years of deregulation, the government is willing to assign the development of national roads to companies.
Projects would be undertaken at no cost to the government, in exchange for the right to operate private tollbooths.
Greece is an important player in Balkan transport, acting as an intermediary for commerce between Africa, Asia and Europe.
Therefore, any investments in transport will most likely bring an immediate return.
Karamanlis' plan also envisions joint public-private ventures for building local roads, schools, hospitals and other public facilities.
While attempting to increase revenue, the government will also seek to rationalise spending in public health, education, local government and grants.
As for restoring investor confidence following the ASE fiasco of 2000, Karamanlis said he does not plan to pursue charges against the politicians who were allegedly involved.
Too much time has passed for any wrongdoing to have legal significance, he said.
