30/06/2005
(FT, The Independent, The Guardian, The Telegraph, EurActiv - 30/06/05;
AFP, AP, Reuters, BBC, The Scotsman, EUobserver, European Commission - 29/06/05)
The European Commission (EC) adopted a draft framework Wednesday (29 June) for Turkey's EU accession negotiations.
Confirming that the talks will open on 3 October, the document lays down the rules to be followed during the process, which is expected to last at least a decade.
The framework, which must be approved by all 25 EU member states before the start of the negotiations, sets the most rigorous conditions a candidate country has ever faced.
"It is in Europe's interest to have a stable, democratic, prosperous Turkey that adopts and implements all EU values, policies and standards," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said as he presented the document, adding it was adopted following a "lengthy, argumentative and very political debate".
During their summit in December, the EU leaders set 3 October as the provisional starting date for Turkey's membership talks, confirming it during a meeting in Brussels earlier this month.
The two main conditions the country was asked to fulfil ahead of the negotiations were to bring into force six remaining pieces of legislation -- which Ankara did on 1 June -- and to sign a protocol extending its customs agreement with the Union to the 10 new EU member states.
It is expected to fulfil that requirement within weeks.
"The opening of the accession negotiations is a recognition of the reforms already achieved in Turkey," Rehn told reporters in Brussels.
"It gives this country a chance to demonstrate, through a fair and rigorous negotiation process, whether it is able to meet fully all the criteria required to join the EU," he added.
Rehn cautioned, however, that the process would be long and difficult.
"We have to take into account the concerns of citizens," he said, apparently in reference to the rejection of the EU Constitution by French and Dutch voters.
Their "no" votes have been interpreted as partly reflecting worries about continued enlargement, including Turkish accession.
Rehn acknowledged that some commissioners had suggested during Wednesday's meeting that Turkey be granted a "privileged partnership"instead of actual membership.
In the past, Ankara has rebuffed that idea, saying that it will settle for nothing less than full integration into the Union.
While confirming that the "shared objective of the negotiations is accession," the document adopted Wednesday describes it as "an open-ended process, the outcome of which cannot be guaranteed beforehand".
It calls for ensuring Turkey is "fully anchored" in EU structures "through the strongest possible bond", should the country fail to meet the requirements for membership.
In addition, the document explicitly lays out the possibility that talks could be suspended in the event of a "serious and persistent breach by Turkey of the principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law on which the Union is founded".
To move ahead with the accession process, Turkey will have to commit to good neighbourly relations, support efforts for reaching a comprehensive solution to the Cyprus issue and meet its obligations under the customs union, the document says.
"Long transitional measures, derogations, specific arrangements and permanently available safeguard clauses may also be considered," it adds.
Turkey will be the first candidate country to have its accession talks broken down into as many as 35 chapters, including chapters on foreign policy, free movement of workers, food safety, education and culture.
The Union will specify benchmarks that the country must meet for the provisional closure of each chapter.
"We focus less on words and more on deeds," Rehn said.
