29/06/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 29/06/05
The Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) Unit of the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Armed Forces completed its first military operation in Iraq just days after its deployment on 10 June.
The BiH soldiers destroyed a stash of old Iraqi weapons and ammunition that has been stored close to a US Marine camp in the Fallujah area. 
The platoon-sized EOD unit consists of 36 soldiers in three teams, representing all three constituent ethnic groups in BiH.
"Our soldiers did a good job," said the chief of the BiH Joint Staff, Lieutenant General Sifet Podzic. 
"One team accomplished the EOD task, while the other two were preparing their containers for accommodation in the camp. 
While in Iraq, our troops will be subordinated to a US Marine engineering battalion. 
The commander of the battalion has already praised BiH soldiers for their first job done."
The deployment proceeded in spite of verbal threats that appeared in some Sarajevo media. 
The bi-weekly youth magazine SAFF, known for its hard-line Islamic stance, published what it claimed was a message from Iraqi insurgents, warning the BiH soldiers that they would be treated as "aggressors" and subject to attacks.
BiH defence officials said such statements came as no surprise, and that they have contingency plans in place to deal with any dangers to the troops.
"It is clear to us that not all the people in Iraq accepted the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime, and we can expect such situations," said Podzic. 
"The mission of our soldiers is to identify and destroy conventional unexploded ordnance that present a threat to any man, Iraqi child, member of the Coalition Forces or anybody who walks in the country. 
They have their rules of engagement and they will act accordingly in the event of combat."
The cadre selected for the mission consists of combat-experienced professional soldiers who volunteered and completed a specialised five-month training course. 
The first BiH contingent will serve for six months in Iraq, while a second contingent prepares itself in the meantime.
