18/04/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 18/04/05
In a clear sign of the improved security situation in Macedonia four years after the interethnic conflict, plans are under way for the withdrawal of Proxima, the EU mission entrusted with monitoring and counseling activities in the country.
Speaking on 31 January, mission head Juergen Scholz confirmed that the force will be "reducing our staff numbers and following a strict timeline, as our mandate will end in December 2005".
"As soon as the EU accession process starts and a positive reply [to Macedonia's application for candidacy] is received, it is normal to decrease the presence of crisis management instruments such as myself, Proxima or the EU monitoring mission," the Union's Special Representative for Macedonia, Michael Sallin, told local television.
Residents of the former crisis regions say their main focus now is on economic issues.
"We live well.
We are neighbours and there is no need for anybody of us to fear each other," Ramush Iseni, a local farmer in Tetovo says.
Nikola, who lives in the nearby village of Jegunovce and is a former worker at the Jugohrom factory, voices a similar opinion.
These days, he says, people are concerned with their jobs and with looking after the fields that were not seeded during the conflict.
Polls reflect the shift.
Whereas earlier surveys had found most Macedonians worried about security, recent ones show the economy is the top issue.
In January, the International Republican Institute published a poll that showed 51 per cent of Macedonians are concerned about unemployment.
Meanwhile, 48.5 per cent of respondents in a December survey on EU membership, conducted by the Institute of Democracy, Solidarity and Civic Society, said that the most important issue is economic development.
Only 12.7 per cent said security is the most important.
With last month's local elections finished, people anticipate improvements to infrastructure and increased opportunities for business.
As part of their obligations under the Ohrid Framework Agreement, authorities are now set to delegate many responsibilities to local government.
Speaking about Macedonia 's progress towards meeting EU standards, Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska points to the country's success in implementing the framework agreement, including ongoing police and administrative reforms.
"We have adopted and changed 36 laws, plus 32 related to the power decentralisation process," she says.
Only two major obligations -- a law on official languages and another on use of state symbols -- remain to be met.
Success in carrying out the often tough reforms called for by the framework agreement has given Macedonia the strength to focus on the EU and NATO integration process.
The first country in the Western Balkans to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU, it recently submitted its answers to the European Commission (EC) questionnaire.
The EC is expected to issue a formal opinion, or avis, in the autumn.
If affirmative, the way will be open for Macedonia to receive membership candidate status in December, followed by the start of accession talks.
Experts agree that Macedonia is poised to become a success story for the Western Balkans.
Bruce Jackson, director of Project Democracy in Transition, a US-based NGO, told Greece's Mega TV Network in late March that his organisation expects Skopje to receive an invitation for NATO membership in 2006.
"Last year was very successful for Macedonia," he said.
"It has made much better progress compared to the other Western Balkan countries regarding negotiations with the EU, and it ranks right after Croatia".
Macedonia has the potential to become one of the most prosperous countries in Europe, said former US Ambassador Lawrence Butler before he departed to take on his new duties in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He, too, voiced his belief that the country would soon be invited to join NATO.
At the same time, he called on the government to act responsibly and meet the needs of citizens.
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos, director and regional co-ordinator of the World Bank for Southeast Europe and Central Asia, also offers a positive assessment.
"Macedonia is a point of light in the Balkans and we are very happy with how the country is progressing on its way to the EU.
Macedonia has realistic chances to advance swiftly in economic terms.
Macroeconomic performances, such as low-level inflation, are an important image for the country to attract capital, but reforms in the judiciary are necessary," she said in February.
Perhaps the most encouraging sign is that Macedonia has stayed the course on reforms despite challenges and political turbulence.
Opponents of the new territorial organisation laws called for under the Framework Agreement organised a referendum which, had it succeeded, could have stalled or delayed the country's progress towards integration.
Despite the heated rhetoric surrounding the issue, citizens remained level-headed and the referendum failed.
Two governments have been in power since the agreement was signed, and the country's institutions have demonstrated the capacity to absorb the shifts and uncertainties that accompany political change.
Most recently, authorities succeeded in completing the often arduous process of answering the EC Questionnaire -- an operation which required great co-ordination among the different agencies and personnel involved.
In a commentary published by the Institute for War and Peace Reporting, Sekerinska says a green light from the EC would demonstrate that hard work and commitment to reform make integration into crucial Western institutions a realistic prospect, even for Balkan countries which have experienced ethnic conflicts.
"If Macedonia is deservedly rewarded for its efforts regarding EU/NATO accession, it can serve as a positive example for the region," Sekerinska said.
Moreover, analysts say, Macedonia's progress is a sign that multiculturalism can succeed in the Balkans, allowing different ethnicities to live and work together with tolerance and understanding.
