11/10/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 11/10/04
A recent war crimes indictment issued by prosecutors at Bosnia and Herzegovina’s (BiH) fledgling state court is just one part of a regional push to try war crimes committed during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s closer to home.
Iraqi-born BiH citizen Abdul Maktouf, 45, was charged on 13 September with allegedly abducting Serb and Croat civilians in 1993 and transporting them to a mujahadeen camp where they were severely beaten.
The case is significant because it is the first war crimes indictment to be issued by BiH’s state court, which was created by the country’s top international official, High Representative Paddy Ashdown, in January 2003.
The indictment was issued by prosecutors within the court’s special department for economic crime, organised crime and corruption, where international judges and prosecutors work alongside nationals.
BiH’s special war crimes chamber isn’t slated to begin work until January, but its setup will mirror that of the special department.
"It’s also, to our knowledge, the first mujahadeen case anywhere," said BiH state prosecutor and special department head John McNair, referring to the foreign-born Muslim fighters who came to BiH to fight on the side of the government during the conflict.
The mujahadeen issue is a highly sensitive one in BiH, given the heightened fears after the 11 September 2001 attacks on the United States that some of the men who remained in BiH after the war could be involved with terrorist groups.
When BiH’s war crimes chamber begins work at the beginning of 2005, it will join other regions of the former Yugoslavia that are beginning to take on cases in local courts as the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) prepares to close its doors by 2010.
The ICTY has tried more than 40 people since being established in 1993.
The strategy between now and 2010 will be to continue to try leaders such as former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic in The Hague, while deferring lower-level cases.
Some tribunal observers say that local trials may present steep learning curves for local judiciaries that haven’t proven themselves to be particularly fair or unbiased.
"In a way [local trials] already should have started a long time ago, but as far as the messages I get about the region, basically they are far from ready," said the project manager of the London-based Institute for War and Peace Reporting’s tribunal update, Ana Uzelac, noting that the lack of debate in parliaments when passing war crimes legislation was "disturbing".
"On the other hand, one can be an optimist and say that once the trials start and once there is a jurisprudence, and once the judges and prosecutors get experience, things may turn out rapidly for the better," she said.
Croatia, for example, has designated four courts -- in Zagreb, Osijek, Rijeka and Split -- to deal with war crimes, rather than the myriad of smaller courts that have handled the issue up to now, with uneven results.
The problem with the smaller courts, said one analyst, is that their verdicts can be overturned by a higher court, as has been the case in an ongoing trial against a man who stands accused of allegedly killing 13 civilians in Karlovac in September 1991.
"This is the third time the process has started in a local court in Karlovac," said Vesna Terselic, a consultant who formerly worked for the Institute of Peace Studies in Zagreb.
"There have been two liberating sentences, and the high courts have said, 'no, he did kill those people,' and they keep returning it to the court."
"[The lower courts] are really under pressure from the local community.
The pressure would not be so high in Zagreb," she added.
Judges have been appointed and are being trained with help from the ICTY, but it’s not clear when these four courts will actually begin taking cases.
Terselic said that while The Hague tribunal is an essential institution and local trials would never have come about without it, it’s important to try crimes locally as well.
"Trials in our country really have an impact on public opinion, and have more importance to people in realising what kinds of crimes have been committed," she said.
"Each ex-Yugoslav country deals with this in different ways, and which is the best we’ll have to see."
In Serbia, six Serbs accused of killing 200 Croat civilians in Vukovar in 1991 went on trial in Belgrade in March.
The trial is still under way and is widely seen as a test of Serbia’s judiciary.
Kosovo’s panels of international and national judges have been trying war crimes and other cases for the past two or three years, and one justice official there said that bringing in internationals to handle certain types of cases -- including war crimes cases -- have been received well by the local courts and prosecutors.
"It takes the pressure off the local judiciary, who’d be worried about their safety or risk of intimidation," said Thomas Monaghan, the director of UNMIK’s justice department.
As to lessons that BiH’s state court could learn from the experience in Kosovo, Monaghan said that justice should be swift.
"The most important thing with the war crimes cases is to investigate them early and to try them as quickly as you can," he said.
"My sense of the difficulty is that the witnesses, the more they’re interviewed and the more they have to testify, the more they’re reluctant to be witnesses.
It’s a painful process to have to testify to the details."
Whatever the process ends up looking like in BiH, McNair said that war crimes cases would be prosecuted no matter their level of sensitivity.
"We didn’t select this case because it involved any particular perpetrator or perpetrators, and I suppose that is the point," McNair said.
"As in the other cases we have brought, we will prosecute serious crimes, irrespective of their ethnic background or political influence or their economic status."
