27/04/2005
(Xinhua - 27/04/05; AP, AFP, Reuters, UPI, Kyodo, UN News centre - 26/04/05; Background info: BBC, World Bank, OECD)
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan on Tuesday (26 April) named a former Turkish economy minister and World Bank vice president as the new administrator of the UN Development Programme (UNDP). 
If his nomination is approved by the General Assembly, Kemal Dervis will lead the largest UN specialised agency for the next four years, replacing Britain's Mark Malloch Brown. 
He would be the first-ever UNDP chief coming from a recipient rather than a donor country.
"Dervis has outstanding qualifications and numerous accomplishments in the area of economics and global governance," UN spokesman Stephane Dujarric said Tuesday, announcing the candidacy.
According to a UN statement, Annan chose the prominent Turkish economist from among more than 100 nominees.
Currently a member of the Turkish Parliament from the main opposition Republican People's Party, Dervis, 56, is widely credited with leading Turkey out of its worst economic crisis in modern times.
Serving at the World Bank when the crisis hit the country in February 2001, Dervis was summoned home by Bulent Ecevit, the prime minister at the time. 
Following his appointment as minister for economic affairs and the treasury in March that year, he spearheaded a programme of ambitious and often painful reforms that helped curb political interference in the economy -- a main contributor to Turkey's financial problems. 
He was also instrumental in the introduction of anti-corruption measures.
Dervis had worked for the World Bank for nearly 24 years. 
As vice-president for the Middle East and North Africa Region and later as vice-president for the Washington-based institution's Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network, he co-ordinated Bank support for the peace process in the Balkans and the Middle East and was responsible for developing new poverty reduction strategies.
In a letter to the president of the UNDP Executive Board, Annan said he believed Dervis would build on the successful reforms implemented by Brown over the past six years and would consolidate UNDP's "critical role in helping address global development priorities from the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) to crisis prevention and recovery".
Brown, who was appointed Annan's chief of staff in January, praised his likely successor, saying the UN chief "could not have chosen a person who is more knowledgeable about development than Dervis".
"I have worked with Kemal on many occasions, and have come to admire him greatly, both for the depth of his understanding of the issues and the strength of his commitment to meeting these challenges," said Brown. 
"I am confident that he will prove to be a superb leader, both for UNDP internally and for the attainment of the MDG globally."
Dervis's four-year appointment is expected to be approved by the UNDP executive board later this week. 
After that, it will be sent to the 191-member UN General Assembly for a vote. 
If approved, Dervis is expected to assume the post sometime before mid-September.
The semi-independent UNDP has an annual budget of nearly $3 billion and a staff of 4,000 people, operating in 166 countries.
