25/02/2005
(Independent - 25/02/05; AP, AFP, Reuters, VOA, Radio B92, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 24/02/05)
Retired General Milan Gvero, a former senior aide of wartime Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, arrived at The Hague on Thursday (24 February) to face charges stemming from war crimes he allegedly committed during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has indicted him in connection with an onslaught conducted by the Bosnian Serb Army (VRS) on the Srebrenica and Zepa enclaves in eastern BiH between 11 March 1995 and the end of August the same year.
Gvero faces a joint indictment with another former senior Bosnian Serb officer, Radivoje Miletic. 
Both have been charged with four counts of crimes against humanity and one count of violations of the laws or customs of war. 
According to a statement the ICTY issued on Thursday, the two are accused of murder, persecution, forcible transfer and deportation of Bosnian Muslims during the operation in Srebrenica and Zepa.
During the events referred to in the indictment, Gvero was serving at Mladic's wartime headquarters as the VRS Main Staff's assistant commander for morale, legal and religious affairs. 
In addition, he was in charge of media information. 
Miletic was chief of operations and training and deputy chief of staff.
Gvero and Miletic "were members of, and knowingly participated in, a joint criminal enterprise and operation, the common purpose of which was to force the Muslim population out of the Srebrenica and Zepa enclaves," the ICTY statement said. 
The two enclaves were declared UN "safe zones" in 1993.
According to the indictment, the campaign that began on 11 March 1995 was formally endorsed by wartime Bosnian Serb President Radovan Karadzic in a special directive, allegedly drafted by Miletic.
Seeking to force the Muslim populations of Srebrenica and Zepa to leave the area, the Bosnian Serb forces resorted to tactics to weaken Bosnian Muslim military forces and civilians, as well as the UN forces deployed in the area.
To make the life of the Muslim inhabitants of the enclaves unbearable, they shelled civilian targets and restricted the inflow of food, medicine and other goods, which were already in short supply in the region. 
They also sought to undermine international protection of the enclaves. 
By the end of August 1995, all Muslims living in Srebrenica and Zepa had been forced to leave their homes and move to other parts of BiH and the former Yugoslavia.
Dozens of friends and relatives were at the Belgrade airport on Thursday to see Gvero leave for The Hague. 
According to a report in the British daily <I>Independent</I>, his departure was aided by a significant cash payment from the Serbian government, which is said to be paying out hundreds of thousands of euros to the families of war crimes indictees who have agreed to go to The Hague.
According to Jovan Simic, Serbian President Boris Tadic's advisor for relations with the ICTY, negotiations are under way with Miletic concerning his surrender.
Quoting an ICTY source, the AFP reported that a third person has also been indicted along with Gvero and Miletic, though the tribunal has not disclosed his identity. 
Simic told reporters, however, that the person in question is former General Zdravko Tolimir, the wartime deputy chief of Bosnian Serb military intelligence.
"I have reliable information according to which Tolimir's name is on the indictment," the AFP quoted Simic as saying.
