29/06/2005
(Blic - 29/06/05; Radio B92, FoNet, Reuters, RFE/RL, Kosovareport - 28/06/05; AP, RFE/RL, Kosovareport - 27/06/05)
Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic urged Kosovo Serbs on Tuesday (28 June) to join the province's provisional institutions so that they can defend their own interests. 
His comments came during a two-day visit to the province, which began Monday. 
Serbian Culture Minister Dragan Kojadinovic and the head of the Serbian Orthodox Church, Patriarch Pavle, accompanied him.
In boycotting the institutions, Kosovo's Serbs risk allowing the province's Albanian majority to "make their own moves and those of the Serbian side," Belgrade-based Radio B92 quoted Draskovic as saying after a St. 
Vitus' Day service at the Gracanica monastery. 
In addition, he said, Serbs were unfairly being blamed for the "decisions and misunderstandings" of the Kosovo Albanians.
"This is another reason for us to join the institutions and defend ourselves," he said.
In the lead-up to last year's parliamentary elections in Kosovo, Belgrade officials and the Serbian Orthodox Church repeatedly urged the Kosovo Serb minority -- which constitutes about 10 per cent of the province's population -- to boycott the vote. 
Eventually, less than 1 per cent of the community's eligible voters participated in it.
Key Serbian officials, including Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, have since reiterated their calls for Kosovo Serbs to stay away from the provisional institutions. 
Currently, Slavisa Petkovic, Kosovo's minister of returns and communities, is the only Kosovo Serb in the government of Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi.
"When Belgrade called on us not to participate in the elections, it didn't tell us how we should pursue our interests in Kosovo and we still don't have an answer to this," several Kosovo dailies quoted Petkovic as saying Monday. 
"Those who don't live in Kosovo cannot decide for Kosovo Serbs," he added.
On Saturday, Petkovic and about 100 of his supporters founded the Serbian Democratic Party -- Kosovo and Metohija (SDS-KiM). 
Its main principle, according to Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, is that Kosovo Serbs must take their fate in their hands and not rely on Belgrade. 
By depending on Belgrade to resolve their problems, the Kosovo Serbs have achieved none of their goals since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict, Petkovic was quoted as saying.
During talks with UNMIK deputy chief Larry Rossin, Draskovic reportedly said that Belgrade agrees with the international community that a return to the pre-conflict status quo is out of the question. 
Talks on the final status of the province are expected to begin later this year, provided the UN issues a positive assessment of progress made in implementing internationally set standards.
"I recalled that we on the Serbian side used to have extreme positions [during the Milosevic era], while the Albanian side advocated an attitude of either independence or death," Draskovic said, arguing that Belgrade is now ready for a compromise but that the Kosovo Albanians have not budged from their stance.
Protesting his visit, about 100 Kosovo Albanians gathered outside the UN headquarters in Pristina. 
As Draskovic's convoy arrived, some of the protestors hurled eggs at it. 
Several of the demonstrators were arrested.
"His visit is unacceptable, because ... 
Serbia is unacceptable," the AP quoted the organisers of the protest, a group called the Kosovo Action Network, as saying in a statement. 
"The state union that (Draskovic) represents was an accomplice in crimes here," it added.
