26/01/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 26/01/05
The outcome of the November 2004 presidential and parliamentary elections has given Romanian politicians the motivation for change.
The former ruling Social Democrat Party (PSD) seems one step away from breaking apart, while the Justice and Truth (DA) Alliance -- comprised of the National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Democratic Party (PD) -- is considering the possibility of becoming one party.
Other, smaller centre-right organisations are planning to pool their forces into a single populist party.
The PSD won the race for Senate and Chamber of Deputies by about 4 per cent, but lost the presidential vote.
The new president, Traian Basescu, appointed PNL member Calin Popescu Tariceanu as prime minister, and the country now has a coalition government consisting of the PNL, the PD, the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians (UDMR) and the Humanist Party (PUR).
As a result of his unexpected failure as the PSD candidate for president, party leader and former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase lost his strong position within the organisation.
Former President Ion Iliescu, meanwhile, has said he will become more involved in the party.
"I want to play a serious role inside PSD.
I was, and I will be, a party leader," he said.
Local PSD officials in Transylvania and Moldova, led by former interior minister Ioan Rus, have given him their backing.
But not all agree.
Marian Oprisan, head of the Vrancea branch, has called for Iliescu and Nastase to "take a step back" for the sake of social democracy and party reform.
Oprisan has said he would like to see someone new at the party helm -- for example, former Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana, former Transportation Minister Miron Mitrea, former Defence Minister Ioan Mircea Pascu or former Justice Minister Cristian Diaconescu.
Any decision will be made by a PSD extraordinary congress.
Some members have said it should be held as soon as next month, while others want to wait until April.
While the former ruling party faces a possible internal crisis, the current governing coalition could merge.
A final decision is still far in the future;
some PNL members want to absorb PD, but some are willing to accept only a unification process.
"Most PNL members would like an absorption.
But, anyway, the new party will have to change its name and become the European Popular Party", the daily Gardianul quoted PNL leader Dinu Zamfirescu as saying.
"We could only accept to merge with PNL.
And we should all surpass the problems of the past," said PD Vice President Radu Berceanu.
So far, the only concrete decision has been made by four smaller organisations.
The National Peasant Party, the Union for Reconstructing Romania, Popular Action and the Christian Democratic Party have announced they will join forces to become a populist Christian Democrat party by 1 March.
