27/04/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 27/04/05
The prosecution office of the UN war crimes tribunal has halted proceedings on four cases related to the 2001 interethnic conflict in Macedonia and will return the cases to Macedonia.
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte communicated the tribunal's decision to Macedonian Minister of Justice Meri Mladenovska-Gjorgievska and Chief Prosecutor Aleksandar Prcevski during a two-day visit by a Macedonian delegation that began Monday (25 April).
The four cases involve members and leaders of the former ethnic Albanian rebel force, the National Liberation Army.
They concern the kidnapping and torture of workers at the Mavrovo Construction Company, the killing of 12 Macedonians from Tetovo who were later found in a mass grave, the NLA's closure of a dam at Lipkovo -- a move which left the nearby town of Kumanovo without running water for several weeks -- and ten members of the NLA leadership suspected of participating in war crimes.
According to del Ponte, the decision was made because of a UN Security Council requirement stipulating that all investigative proceedings be completed by the end of last year.
That left the tribunal with no option but to return the cases to local courts, she said.
Mladenovska-Gjorgievska said the Macedonian Public Prosecution Office and their counterparts at The Hague will work out the technical details concerning the return of the cases, which will be officially handled by the justice ministry.
The Macedonian delegation was in The Hague to discuss the ongoing trial against former Interior Minister Ljube Boskovski and former security officer Johan Tarculovski, who have been charged with war crimes against ethnic Albanian civilians in Ljuboten in August 2001.
The tribunal has announced that Antonio Apostolski will serve as Tarculovski's lawyer.
Boskovski's defence team has not yet been confirmed.
The former interior minister is charged with command responsibility for the Ljuboten incident, in which Tarculovski -- the bodyguard for the late President Boris Trajkovski -- allegedly led an action in which seven ethnic Albanians were killed.
Tarculovski was extradited to The Hague on 16 March.
Boskovski went there on 24 March.
Both have pleaded not guilty.
