25/02/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 25/02/05
Despite negative public opinion, members of the Serbian Parliament finally raised their own salaries, after several previous attempts over the past few months. 
Thanks to a decision by parliament's administrative board, lawmakers have received a raise of 100 per cent.
Critics accused the lawmakers of rewarding themselves at a time when most Serbs are struggling to make ends meet. 
MPs who supported the increase argued that it is common practice in most countries around the world for parliamentary deputies to receive several times the average salary.
Following the move, the basic net salary for MPs now stands at 1,000 euros, not including blanket sums and per diems. 
Many economists say it will now become more difficult for the government to resist demands by other budget users for salary hikes. 
Although the G17 Plus party, a member of the ruling coalition, has repeatedly appealed for control of public spending, is deputies did not abstain from voting for a raise.
According to Snezana Stojanovic Plavsic, the deputy chief of the G17 Plus parliamentary group, public spending control does not apply to salaries that are financed from the state budget.
"Control of spending refers to the public sector, and significant savings have been realised in that sector. 
Rationalisation does not mean lower salaries, but rationalisation of human resources, of spending and the quality of work performed by employees. 
Fewer people with higher quality work, that’s the point," Plavsic said.
Slobodan Zivkucin, an MP for the Serbian Renewal Movement, acknowledges that it is hard to explain to a budget user with a salary of 193 to 200 euros that an MP earns more than four times that figure, but he adds that lawmakers' salaries were low until now.
"It is a fact that MPs need to be independent and to be relieved of pressures, to be beyond the forceful hand of corruption, and I understand this as a way of allowing MP's to bring greater quality, responsibility and respect to their jobs," Zivkucin said.
Court employees have not been given a raise, although by law their salaries are linked to those of ministers and MPs. 
Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic has issued a statement saying that negotiations are under way for "properly increasing" the salaries of court employees in Serbia.
