24/05/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 24/05/05
In 1997, there were more than 175,000 miners in Romania. 
Eight years later, their number has dropped to 57,000, and the trend is continuing. 
By the end of 2006, up to 50 non-profitable mines will be added to the 400 that have already been closed, and another 16,000 miners will be out of a job. 
The closures and layoffs are a direct result of the government's policy of eliminating state subsidies -- a reform imposed by the country's EU accession and an agreement with the IMF.
"[By] 2007, only those mines that will be able to support the production costs will still be functioning. 
The subsidies for lignite, ferriferous, and non-ferriferous ores will be totally dropped by then, while those for pit-coal will be gradually eliminated by 2010," Ionel Mantog, a secretary in the economy and commerce ministry, was quoted as saying by the business weekly Capital.
Opposing the closures, National Confederation of Mining Unions leader Marin Condescu warns that the government's policy amounts to "the extermination of the extractive industry in Romania" and that switching to gas and oil is too expensive. 
"The European energetic powers recently started to revert to the electricity produced from coal as gas and oil prices exploded," Condescu says.
Despite his predictions, the restructuring strategy will continue. 
About 30 mines -- mostly situated in central and northern Romania -- are scheduled for closure this year, resulting in 7,600 miners losing their jobs. 
The government, meanwhile, hopes to ease the social impact with a $120m loan from the World Bank. 
The loan will be used for compensatory payments over the next two years, for creating new jobs in the affected regions, and for protecting the environment around the closed mines.
However, the loan is nothing compared to the $5.7 billion the state has spent to subsidise the mining industry since 1989 -- money which some say could have been better used for other things. 
"We could have now modern and fully-equipped hospitals," says Alexandra Sava, a 58-year-old woman from Bucharest. 
Gabriel Turcu, a 38-year-old sales agent from Brasov, thinks of the poor transport infrastructure. 
"Romania has now only 200km of motorways. 
That money would have been enough for building another 1,000km," he says.
