19/05/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 19/05/08
The UEFA European Football Championship, Euro 2008, will kick off June 7th, with 15 European national teams competing for the top title.
Austria and Switzerland are the host countries, marking the first time that two countries will jointly host the European football championship.
Southeast Europe has four candidates vying for the football throne -- Croatia, Greece, Romania and Turkey will vigorously try to win the UEFA cup.
Turkey is in Group A with Switzerland, the Czech Republic and Portugal;
Croatia is in Group B with Austria, Germany and Poland;
Group C, called "The Group of Death", contains Italy, France, the Netherlands and Romania.
Finally, Greece, Sweden, Spain and Russia will compete in Group D.
Southeast Europeans are passionate football fans.
Each big championship undergoes careful scrutiny;
national coaches face scathing criticism from fans if the team loses but are praised to the stars if the team wins.
Perhaps the Croatian popular saying that "each Croat is either a prime minister or a national football coach" paints an appropriate picture.
The region's teams are quite successful, possessing the ability to surprise football superpowers such as Italy and Germany.
The teams are unpredictable, experts agree, as they can change the game suddenly and win.
At the same time, they do not fear the traditional superpowers and fight passionately until the referee's final whistle.
Their results show that, too.
Greece won Euro 2004 in Portugal;
Croatia won the bronze in 1998.
Turkey, traditionally "a dark horse", placed third in the 2002 World Cup in Korea and Japan and reached the quarterfinals in Euro 2000.
Romania seems to face a mission impossible in this year's championship.
Holding first place in its group after the qualifying matches -- which it achieved in competition against The Netherlands, Bulgaria, Belarus, Albania, Slovenia and Luxembourg -- the team, recently ranked 12th by FIFA, will face Italy, France and, again, The Netherlands in Group C. Romania kicks off against France on June 9th in a confrontation seen by the French coach as the "most difficult" match for the team from the Hexagon.
"There's no need for me to characterize the group;
it's extremely difficult, the most difficult at this final tournament," said Romanian coach Victor Piturca.
"It's a beautiful group though, because we will have the experience of playing against a world champion, a world vice-champion … and against formidable players," he said.
"It's a tough test but pleasant and motivating," said legendary Gheorghe Hagi, the greatest Romanian football player ever.
Romania played two friendly preparatory matches against Israel (0-1) and Russia (3-0) and will play Montenegro on May 31st.
Currently, observers favour Germany to be the Euro 2008 champion, followed by Spain and Italy.
According to Gamebookers, Romania has 29-1 odds of winning the championship, while Bwin places Romania's odds of winning at 34-1.
"Our slogan for Euro 2008, 'Expect emotions', describes in a nutshell what Euro 2008 has to offer;
all kinds of emotions -- joy, disappointment, relief or high tension -- right up to the final whistle," UEFA President Michel Platini said.
The first match of the championship will take place on June 7th in Basel, where the Swiss hosts will try to defeat the Czech Republic.
As football is the most popular sport in Europe, Euro 2008 will change everyday life through the final on June 29th – meaning football commercials, sold-out tickets and souvenirs in shop windows throughout the continent.
In Croatia, just before football championships start, TV stores traditionally see vastly multiplied profits.
"Because people want to have peace at home while the championship lasts, they enable the other members of their households to watch their own TV programmes, not exclusively football for a whole month, by buying a new TV set," a Zagreb salesman says.
Not only do households get new TVs, but coffee shops and bars, nightclubs, pubs and restaurants buy TVs as well.
During summer afternoons and evenings, fans watch matches while standing on the street and outside terraces.
Cheering and screaming, swearing and harsh complaints are part of the scenery.
Life in the workplace also reflects the event, as many fans take days off during the tournament.
The tourist industry suffers;
polls show that football-loving travellers tend to stay at home and watch the games and travel only after the championship has finished.
"We do not expect European football fans in our resorts in the first weeks of June," Croatian Tourism Minister Damir Bajs said.
The phenomenon is widespread, affecting all the tourist hubs in the world.
The only exceptions will be Austria and Switzerland, who are expecting tens of thousands of excited fans to pour into the seven host cities from all over the continent, including from Southeast Europe.
The host countries prepared by tightening security, improving infrastructure around the venues and stocking up on football merchandise.
According to the latest press report from Vienna, for anyone dying during the football fever of Euro 2008, Vienna's leading funeral home will offer a special football-shaped cremation urn for 362 euros.
Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest contributed to this report.
