25/11/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 25/11/04
UN war crimes tribunal chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte, in her regular report to the UN Security Council, has sharply criticised Serbian authorities for their lack of co-operation with the tribunal. 
At least 12 indictees are on Serbian territory, she said, but Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has so far refused to take action.
"Premier Kostunica openly showed that he was not willing to arrest them, but only to try to convince them to surrender voluntarily," del Ponte said Tuesday (23 November). 
"The Serbian government has deliberately chosen to ignore its legal obligations."
Noting that tribunal President Theodor Meron told the Security Council in May that Serbia was failing to co-operate, del Ponte said the government's "defiant attitude towards the tribunal -- which also challenges the Security Council -- has not changed".
As an example, she cited the disappearance of former Croatian Serb leader Goran Hadzic, who is wanted for his alleged role in persecution, murder, forced expulsion and other atrocities committed during the Croatian-Serb conflict. 
Hadzic disappeared several hours after authorities in Belgrade received the indictment against him on 13 July, raising suspicions that he was tipped off.
Following del Ponte's remarks, US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Pierre-Richard Prosper said in an interview that Washington has lost confidence in the Serbian government because of the co-operation issue.
For this reason, Prosper told the Tanjug agency Wednesday, the United States does not back the processing of war crimes cases in Serbian courts.
Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, meanwhile, said war crimes suspects are holding the nation hostage.
"Hague indictees are being proclaimed national heroes in Serbia," Draskovic said Wednesday. 
"All of them, including serial killers, here in the country, have multiple levels of protection: political, propaganda, military, police, physical and financial. 
It's really unreasonable and dangerous for the whole nation not only to be held hostage by indicted war crime suspects, but also by someone who is enthusiastically defending them," he added, referring to Kostunica's stance on extraditions.
For his part, Kostunica has maintained that Serbia is ready to co-operate. 
"Of course it would be more satisfactory if more had been achieved in this field, but action is being taken. 
There are some things that cannot be achieved overnight," he said. 
Kostunica added that authorities are conducting extensive searches to determine whether Ratko Mladic is in Serbia.
On Thursday, del Ponte said there are indications that Kostunica may have changed his stance following the report to the Security Council. 
"I was informed … that a meeting was held and that it looked as if Kostunica is now willing to carry out the arrest of indictees," she said.
"I'm expecting concrete results immediately and I'll be grateful if there are," del Ponte said.
