25/11/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 25/11/04
As U.S. 
NATO troops commemorated the end of the SFOR mission in Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the US general in charge of European operations said the NATO peacekeeping job in the country was done.
"The mission is complete, the mission has been accomplished," said US Army Commander Europe General B.B. 
Bell to a crowd of soldiers at Eagle Base, in northeastern BiH, at a ceremony marking the US troops' imminent departure.
"This has not been an easy mission, and in recent years it has not been a spotlight mission, but it demonstrates what can be accomplished when people and nations and militaries work together for a common cause," he said.
The end of the mission comes nine years after NATO deployed 60,000 troops to BiH to enforce the peace agreement that BiH's warring parties signed in late 1995. 
Maintaining that peace after 2 December will be the job of 7,000 EU troops -- the same number that SFOR has had in theatre since its most recent troop drawdown last spring.
The gradual drawdowns have been a result of the improved security situation in BiH since the end of the 1992-1995 conflict.
Retired Major General William Nash, who was the first commander of Task Force Eagle, said that NATO's success in helping build a nation from the rubble of BiH was due also to the strong role played by the office implementing the civilian parts of the peace agreement.
"NATO was able to stop the war, and NATO was able, with the Office of the High Representative, to start the peace," Nash said. 
About 150 American troops will remain at Eagle after 2 December, complementing the 100 who will be part of the NATO headquarters that will remain on the outskirts of Sarajevo.
Brigadier General Timothy Wright, who has commanded Task Force Eagle since March, said that the remaining Americans will be tasked with helping BiH with defence reforms and entry into NATO's Partnership for Peace programme, conducting counter terrorism operations, and searching for war crimes indictees.
Former Bosnian Serb political and military leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic remain the UN tribunal's most wanted fugitives for crimes stemming from the conflict in BiH.
"That's one of the primary reasons for leaving 150 soldiers here -- those are the guys we're going to go get," Wright told reporters after the ceremony at Eagle.
US troops will remain until 1 March under the command of US Brigadier General Steven Schook, the commander of the outgoing SFOR mission. 
A new contingent will rotate in after that date.
