24/05/2005
(AP - 20/05/05; OSCE, AP - 18/05/05; OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights)
Following an invitation from the Albanian government, the ODIHR is sending a team of more than 400 observers to monitor the 3 July parliamentary elections.
Announcing the establishment of the observation mission, the OSCE said on 18 May that a team of 37 experts would be in Albania until mid-July to assess the entire election process. 
The mission, headed by Jorgen Grunnet of Denmark, includes a core team of 12 experts, based in Tirana, plus 25 long-term observers who will be deployed throughout the country. 
The monitors represent 15 of the participating states in the 55-nation OSCE.
"The holding of democratic elections in which the voters can have confidence is the joint responsibility of the Albanian authorities, the political parties, the media and civil society," Grunnet said. 
"Our role here remains the same as in previous elections: to observe this process and report on our findings."
The mission currently in Albania will be joined by 400 short-term observers that the OSCE has asked member states to provide shortly before Election Day. 
They will be deployed across Albania -- in teams of two -- to monitor the opening of polling stations, the voting, the counting of ballots and tabulation of results.
The Warsaw-based ODIHR is active throughout the OSCE area in the fields of election observation, democratic development, human rights, tolerance and non-discrimination, and rule of law. 
It has observed a number of elections in Albania, including the 2001 parliamentary elections and the 2003 local vote.
The July election is seen as a crucial test of the democratic process in Albania, which is hoping to join NATO in 2006 and the EU by 2015. 
The vote must be free and fair to join the two organisations. 
In January, the country adopted a new electoral code, which the ODIHR has praised as bringing about positive developments.
Under the Albanian Constitution, 100 members of the country's 140-seat parliament are elected directly. 
The remaining 40 are elected by proportional allocation. 
To enter parliament, parties must win at least 2.5 per cent of the vote.
The ruling Socialist Party of Prime Minister Fatos Nano is hoping to win a third consecutive term. 
Its main rival is former President Sali Berisha's Democratic Party. 
Both parties have pledged to move Albania closer to EU integration.
