24/02/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 24/02/05
The National Anti-Corruption Prosecutor's Office (PNA) monitored phone conversations of journalists, lawyers, judges and citizens for 13 months, between April 2003 and May 2004. 
PNA authorities say the operation was part of a bribery investigation involving Andreea Ciuca, a former judge in the Mures County Court.
"I have proof that PNA prosecutor Marin Sandu is sending requests to phone companies to provide transcripts and audio recordings of the phone calls," said Ciuca. 
Journalists have protested in front of the PNA office in Tirgu Mures, calling for Sandu's resignation.
Many of those whose phones were tapped say the prosecutors listened in on their conversations without having obtained legal approval. 
"I have information that our phones were [tapped]. 
I asked the authorities to tell us what warrants were issued for these activities," said Aurelian Grama, manager of the weekly paper Ziarul de Mures.
Beside Grama's publication, PNA is accused of tapping phones of national dailies including Evenimentul Zilei and Romania Libera. 
It is also suspected that e-mails sent by Mures Court judges and court clerks were monitored.
"I feel damaged by these investigations which broke the secret of the relationship between a lawyer and his client," said Lucian Badiu, Ciuca's attorney, to the daily Ziua. 
Badiu also said he is afraid he will lose clients because he is "a monitored lawyer".
The Ciuca case is not the first phone tapping scandal in the country. 
In November 2003, journalists discovered that Virgil Ardelean, the former chief of the Interior Minister's secret service (DGIPI), asked that the phones of Mediafax and AM Press news agencies be tapped. 
The official explanation was that certain policemen were suspected of furnishing secret information to the press. 
One of the names mentioned was that of Inspector Constantin Duvac, head of the watchdog group overseeing the police.
A few months earlier, Duvac accused representatives of DGIPI and the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) of protecting those indicted in relation to the National Investments Fund (FNI) bankruptcy case. 
According to the daily Curentul, Duvac and his colleagues investigating the FNI file were monitored by the two secret services. 
The information obtained reportedly was used for blackmail, threats and bribery.
The most recent controversy involving this kind of activity involved the Foreign Intelligence Service (SIE). 
Former Dutch European parliamentarian Arie Oostlander, one of the most vocal critics of the Romanian government from 2001 until 2004, told Ziua that he has received information suggesting he was being monitored by Romanian intelligence services, including both the SRI and SIE.
SIE has denied the allegations. 
"Such actions would put our credibility and professionalism in serious danger. 
We didn't, and won't, target European or EU officials," SRI chief Radu Timofte said.
