25/11/2004
(International Herald Tribune, FT - 25/11/04;
AFP, Anadolu Agency - 24/11/04)
In the run-up to a long-awaited EU decision on Turkey's membership prospects, EU officials told Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul on Wednesday (24 November) that his country should step up its legal reform efforts and try to improve its ties with EU member Cyprus.
Turkey has been an official EU candidate since 1999, but has not started its accession talks yet.
In December 2002, the EU leaders promised to make a decision on the issue during their December 2004 summit in Copenhagen on the basis of a report by the European Commission (EC).
If given the green light by the commission, the talks would begin "without delay," the EU leaders pledged two years ago.
On 6 October, the EC recommended starting negotiations, saying that Turkey "sufficiently fulfils the political criteria".
Citing the EC report, Gul said Wednesday his country deserved a favourable decision in December.
"Since the commission report is there and there is a clear-cut recommendation, it's our right to see all member countries honour their signature," Gul said during a visit to The Hague.
"We fulfilled the political conditions, and the commission declared this.
I think we have a right to start negotiations."
While in The Hague, Gul held talks with Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot, whose country holds the current EU presidency, Luxembourg Foreign Minster Jean Asselborn, whose country will succeed the Netherlands at the EU helm on 1 January, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana and the Union's new commissioner for enlargement, Olli Rehn.
Bot stressed that it is the governments of member states that would have the final say on whether Turkey is eligible to start accession talks, irrespective of the position of the EC.
"Let's be clear on this:
The member states decide," Bot said at a joint press conference in The Hague.
"In a number of fields more progress should be made."
He said it would be "helpful" if Turkey would adopt the required legislation on criminal procedures and judicial policing in the coming weeks and focus on implementing four other laws already approved by parliament.
Bot suggested Ankara should also try to improve its relations with Cyprus.
"Turkey will be negotiating with 25 member states" including Greece and Cyprus, Bot said.
"We hope that the situation will be settled before we open negotiations."
Rehn, meanwhile, assured Gul that Turkey's bid to join the Union is a top priority for the new EC team, led by Jose Manuel Barroso, which formally assumed office this week.
"The Barroso commission considers the development of EU-Turkish relations as one of its key priorities in the future," said Rehn.
