26/04/2005
(Cyprus Mail, Dunya - 26/04/05;
Reuters, Cyprus News Agency - 25/04/05)
EU foreign ministers on Monday (25 April) endorsed a position paper on Turkey, urging the country to step up political reforms ahead of its entry talks later this year.
The document, approved a day before the EU-Turkey Association Council meeting in Luxembourg on Tuesday, cautions that Ankara has not made sufficient progress in some key areas.
In December, the leaders of the 25-nation bloc set 3 October as the starting date for Turkey's accession talks, making it clear, however, that Ankara should take the necessary steps to meet the EU criteria for membership.
Ahead of Tuesday's meeting, Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said it would focus on his country's progress in achieving the EU standards.
"Turkey has been constructive so far and will continue to be so.
We're expecting the same constructive attitude from the EU as well," the minister was quoted as saying.
Gul's European counterparts, however, voiced concern about lack of progress in the areas of religious freedom, freedom of expression and minority rights.
The paper, according to Reuters, urges Turkey to improve the rights of the country's Kurdish and Roma minorities.
Ankara, according to the EU foreign ministers, has also failed to do enough to ensure full civilian control of the country's powerful military, which continues to exercise influence in politics through ''informal mechanisms''.
The paper the ministers approved Monday also highlights the need for firm measures to eliminate cases of torture, urging the government to enforce a policy of zero tolerance.
The document further calls for steps to ensure the fulfillment of all other commitments Turkey has made, including protection of intellectual property rights, elimination of discriminatory legislation and reduction of state industrial subsidies.
Greek Cypriot authorities welcomed the EU position paper, particularly a section calling on Turkey to sign as early as possible an agreement extending its customs union with the EU to all new member states.
The document also reportedly urges Ankara to allow Cypriot vessels to dock in Turkish ports.
Speaking Tuesday, Gul said Ankara is ready to sign the customs union protocol and would boost political reform efforts ahead of the October talks.
At the same time, he said the EU must fulfil its pledge to help end the isolation of northern Cyprus.
