24/02/2005
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 24/02/05
The Croatian government has earmarked more than 770m euros for the next three years to finance the process of joining the EU. 
The country is expected to start membership talks with the Union on 17 March, provided it meets a still-unresolved requirement for full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
This year, 218m euros from the state budget will be directed towards accession. 
In 2006, the amount will be raised to around 270m euros. 
In 2007, when Croatia hopes to complete accession negotiations, more than 290m euros -- 85 per cent of GDP -- will be invested.
According to the National Programme for Joining the European Union (NPPEU), most of the money spent during the next few years will be invested in education and research. 
The rest will go towards other costs, including a massive overhaul of public administration. 
Officials in charge of implementing the programme estimate these costs could amount to around 2 per cent to 3 per cent of the total costs.
While pre-membership funds will be used to carry out the tasks Croatia must fulfil during the accession process, EU structural funds will become available after the country joins.
EU assistance to Croatia -- channeled mainly through the CARDS programme -- has so far focused on democratic stabilisation, including the return of refugees and displaced persons, economic and social development, justice and home affairs, building administrative capacity, environmental protection and boosting regional co-operation. 
Among other things, Brussels has helped fund a public administration reform project, an integrated border management partnership, and the development of a national waste management strategy.
As part of its efforts to harmonise domestic laws with the EU, Croatia will seek to adopt regulations this year on meat processing and production, as well as changes to forestry and fishing laws, media regulations, bankruptcy codes, free legal aid legislation, and the penal code.
According to the NPPEU, the territorial statistical division of regions in Croatia should also be completed this year. 
The State Bureau for Statistics has offered a proposal for statistical organisation, under which the existing 20 regions in the country and the capital will be classified into five geographical statistical areas.
The government is expected to calculate the GDP on a district-by-district basis, using the results to assess the balance of regional development and establish the amount of aid for each region. 
This assessment will be carried out with the help of the EU.
