28/06/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 28/06/05
With the help of EU funds, a historic monastery that was destroyed during Macedonia's interethnic conflict on 21 August 2001 has been partially restored. 
Located in the village of Lesok, in the former crisis area near Tetovo, the site dates back to the 14th century and originally included three churches -- St. 
Atanasie, St. 
Maria and St. 
Lazar.
The major part of the reconstruction work was completed on 17 June. 
St. 
Atanasie has been rebuilt, with the same rock used in its original construction. 
The stones were preserved and numbered with the assistance of the National Institute for Preservation of Cultural Heritage, which produced detailed studies for the project. 
The EU provided around 410,000 euros to rebuild the wall and the facade, through the European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR) in Macedonia.

In all, EU assistance for the project totalled 540,000 euros, covering both the St. 
Atanasie church and the mosque in the nearby village of Neprosteno. 
The mosque suffered comparatively minor damage during the conflict, but its foundations needed reinforcing and its electrical wiring required repair.
"Rebuilding Lesok's Saint Atanasie Church, while at the same time repairing the Neprosteno Mosque, is a concrete way of continuing to promote reconciliation not only in the Tetovo region, but in the country as a whole," Daniel Giuglaris, the head of the Agency’s Operational Centre in Skopje said as the repairs began on 26 August 2003. 
"The EU is funding this project to erase the scars of the conflict and to restore understanding between the communities."
Father Dimitrija Krstevski of St. 
Atanasie and Imam Ejup Selmani of the Neprosteno Mosque visited each other's places of worship to mark the beginning of reconstruction and to underscore their support for reconciliation. 
They were joined by municipal and government officials.
Although most of the job is finished, the frescoes and iconostasis inside the church still must be restored. 
A panel established by Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska and the Sector for European Integration has come up with an analysis of the work that remains to be done. 
The government hopes to secure EAR support for the initiative, which requires some 118,000 euros.
The formal reopening of the church is scheduled for mid-July.
