25/01/2005
(Rompres - 25/01/05; EUobserver, Rompres, Mediafax, RFE/RL - 24/01/05)
European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso assured Romania on Monday (24 January) that its progress towards meeting the requirements for EU membership will be monitored objectively. 
But hard work lies ahead if the country is to join the Union in 2007, he cautioned Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu.
"I gave my phone number to the prime minister, so he can call me whenever there's a problem," Barroso told reporters in Brussels on Monday following his first talks with the head of Romania's centre-right government, which took office less than a month ago.
Tariceanu's two-day visit to the Belgian capital comes three months before Romania and Bulgaria sign an accession treaty with the Union on 25 April, ahead of their effective EU entry, scheduled for January 2007.
Following a major expansion on 1 May that brought ten new countries into the bloc, the EU introduced tougher monitoring mechanisms to ensure that future newcomers will be fully prepared for membership. 
Three safeguard clauses will be included in the treaty with the two countries -- one for Bulgaria and two for Romania.
Each of the countries could see its entry into the Union delayed by one year if the current member states unanimously decide that membership requirements are not being met. 
Furthermore, Romania's accession could be postponed by a simple qualified majority if Bucharest fails to fulfil commitments made during the negotiation process, especially in the areas of justice, home affairs and competition.
Brussels has criticised Bucharest for its failure to deal with widespread corruption. 
It also wants state subsidies to Romania's huge steel sector substantially reduced and has voiced concern about problems in the judicial sector.
A month before the signing of the accession treaty, the EC is to submit a report on Romania's justice and law enforcement systems.
Hailing Tariceanu and President Traian Basescu's firm pledges to fight corruption and to address critical problems in the judiciary and in public procurement, Barroso voiced hope that Romania will be able to meet its entry target date.
"Setting the priorities by a government is an important sign to measure its political offer", the EC chief said. 
"I'd like to see things go right and I hope they will."
"I'm convinced that we will be able to fulfil all our obligations throughout the two years before we join the EU in 2007," the Romanian prime minister said Monday.
Romanian state news agency Rompres quoted him as saying that the first steps towards curbing corruption have already been taken and that the panels that address the issue had been urged to exercise their duties. 
The objectives of the government, Tariceanu said, also include conducting reforms in other areas, such as the environment, the economy, freedom of speech and media freedom
