28/06/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 28/06/05
The four-party centre-right coalition, which came to power in Romania last December, has survived its first major political challenge.
On 22 June, both chambers of parliament soundly rejected a censure motion initiated by the opposition Social Democratic Party (PSD).
A total of 265 senators and deputies voted against the motion, while 186 supported it.
The PSD, which led Romania for 11 of the 15 years since the collapse of communism, used the issues of judicial reform and property laws as grounds for launching the attack on the cabinet.
The opposition strongly objected to a government-sponsored, 17-law package meant to address reforms the country must complete if it is to enter the EU on schedule in 2007.
Prime Minister Calin Popescu-Tariceanu and his team are "defying the legislators and breaking the Constitution," said PSD Senator Dan Mircea Popescu.
The opposition charged that the government is promoting a politically controlled justice system and is tinkering with a property system that was only recently stabilised.
Rebuffing the censure motion, Tariceanu described it as a "motion against Romania's accession into the EU" and implied that the PSD is to blame for the possibility that the country could see its accession delayed.
"The reform of the justice and the fight against corruption are two key-areas where the safeguard clause might be imposed and that's due to the PSD government ...
We fight for an independent and honest justice and I know this is worrying you," Tariceanu said.
The EU has weighed in on the side of the government.
"It would be a pity if the parliament will reject this legislative package.
I believe it would affect the perspectives of Romania's accession and would lift question marks regarding parliament's support for the integration process," European Commission delegation head Jonathan Scheele was quoted as saying by the online news service HotNews.
Lawmakers ultimately adopted the 17-law package.
Even if signed by President Traian Basescu, however, there is a chance the legislation would not take effect.
The PSD has already announced it will file an appeal at the Constitutional Court.
Since many of the judges are former top PSD officials, analysts are not ruling out the possibility that the opposition will manage to derail the legislation.
