24/11/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 24/11/04
Following the UN Security Council's unanimous approval Monday (22 November) of the establishment of a European-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the commander of the new force and his SFOR counterpart have announced they are ready to work together.
"This is a team effort between NATO, the EU and the BiH authorities. 
We are better together," SFOR commander, Brigadier General Steven P. 
Schook, said at a joint news conference Tuesday with EUFOR commander, Major General David Leakey.
"Once all the guidance and the ideas are sent from Brussels, we will work out details for the best way of doing this," he said.
SFOR will complete its mission on 2 December, having fulfilled its task of ensuring a safe and secure environment in BiH, Schook said. 
He added that NATO's long-term political commitment to BiH remains unchanged, noting that the establishment of a headquarters under his command will constitute the Alliance's residual military presence in the country.
NATO headquarters in Sarajevo will continue to support BiH defence reform and will undertake other supporting tasks, including counterterrorism activities and assistance in the search for war criminals wanted by the UN tribunal at The Hague, Schook said.
The inauguration ceremony for NATO HQ Sarajevo will be held in conjunction with the inauguration ceremony for EUFOR at Camp Butmir on 2 December.
NATO's longest running peacekeeping mission has involved more than 500,000 troops from 43 countries over the last eight years. 
EUFOR will have the same mandate as SFOR, but will also reinforce the EU's political engagement, assistance programmes and ongoing police and monitoring missions, to help BiH make further progress towards European integration.
The EU presence will be headed by the international community's top envoy to the country, High Representative Paddy Ashdown, who also holds the post of EU Special Representative to BiH. 
His duties as High Representative will be transferred to the EU post.
Leakey said EUFOR would provide a robust, capable force of 7,000 troops from 33 countries, including 22 EU member states.
"The national contributions that are here are entirely the EUFOR's assets and capabilities," Leakey said. 
"All the operations that EUFOR will conduct here are exclusively the force's operations. 
The Berlin Plus arrangement gives EUFOR the opportunity not to duplicate things like communications and information structure and architecture, the satellite networks and so on. 
We are sharing intelligence, because NATO has a whole intelligence bank and facilities there. 
Also, we are sharing some contract arrangements for basis support that NATO previously established."
Schook and Leakey both emphasised that the prime responsibility for the arrest of war crimes suspects lies with BiH authorities. 
However, Leakey said, EUFOR will intensively continue the search, in conjunction with NATO HQ.
"We have very good co-ordination. 
The job will get done," Leakey told reporters.
