13/10/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 13/10/08
Southeast European Times: New Democracy is a new political party on the scene in Macedonia. 
In promoting the party, you have said you support fast integration into the EU and NATO. 
Do you think the name dispute with Greece is worth staying out of NATO and the EU?
Imer Selmani: The position of New Democracy is clear. 
We think that the question of identity and the name dispute are two different issues. 
In Macedonia, between 90% and 100% of the population wishes to be part of NATO and the EU. 
I think that … [the solution is for] the political elites to find a compromise with Greece without touching the integrity or the identity of the Macedonians, the ethnic Macedonians.
The solution will not come by itself; it has to be sought, to be negotiated. 
In that connotation, I think that for the first time in more than ten years, this issue has become very serious.
SETimes: The position of Macedonia and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski on the name dispute with Greece is well-known. 
What is the position of your party? 
Do you support the position of the government on this issue?
Selmani: The government has a clear position that each acceptable solution in the future must go through a referendum so that it can gain broad support by the citizens. 
I cannot say that this is an easy topic that anyone could sit down and solve very easily. 
That is a complicated process, which needs a consensus inside the political parties in Macedonia. 
I still do not see that compromise. 
That means that we need more collaboration, more dialogue to be better prepared -- not only to propose a solution but also to accept a solution that our citizens [agree with].
SETimes: Recently, there has been much speculation in the Macedonian media concerning the country's recognition of Kosovo. 
The government says that recognition depends on state interests, while the ethnic Albanian political parties say they reject "blackmail". 
Should Macedonia recognise Kosovo and, if so, when?
Selmani: This government's stand is not new. 
I identify the state interests with the demarcation of the border between Macedonia and Kosovo, and I think that this question was [resolved] in the best possible way. 
Everybody expected some disputes or problems, but the demarcation ended very fast, neatly and elegantly, [with] mutual satisfaction. 
I think that it is not good to leave [room] for speculation, and that will be the case if Macedonia continues to withhold recognition from Kosovo without any explanation. 
My opinion is that we should not wait to recognise Kosovo, unless there is something that the citizens do not know. 
And if they do not know, it should be explained in a transparent manner.
SETimes: New Democracy's membership rolls include some former Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) officials. 
You have said you left the DPA because there was no democratic climate in the party. 
DPA leader Menduh Thaci says that New Democracy is a project of Gruevski aimed at eliminating Albanian political parties. 
How do you respond to such accusations?
Selmani: New Democracy is neither a Thaci project nor a project of Gruevski and his VMRO-DPMNE. 
New Democracy is a project that answers Albanians' need for a political alternative that will present values. 
[The party serves] as a solution to many questions -- not only for Albanians in Macedonia but also for other communities that live in this country.
New Democracy is a political party that is necessary for this moment. 
The DPA and the Albanian Union for Integration (DUI) have been on the same path for years – thus sparking conflicts inside the Albanian community or conflict between the Albanians and the other communities. 
[It is a party for those who] had no chance in the existing parties -- intellectuals, professors, businessmen, students and ordinary people who have not identified with the DPA or DUI.
SETimes: What is the position of New Democracy concerning the four Hague cases being returned to Macedonia?
Selmani: We fully respect the Ohrid framework agreement. 
I think that the spirit of the Ohrid framework agreement does not advocate opening cases where -- in a domino effect -- many other cases from the past could follow suit.
Every opening of the old wounds from the conflict of 2001 is not productive for interethnic relations in Macedonia. 
I think that neither NATO nor the EU wants regions with conflicts in its framework. 
They both want to have stability above all, and every appearance of unfriendly neighboring relations could be an obstacle later to our integration into NATO and the EU.
