24/11/2004
(Bloomberg, The Scotsman, International Herald Tribune - 24/11/04; International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, UN News Centre, AP, Reuters, BBC, VOA, Radio B92, HINA, US State Department - 23/11/04)
The failure of the former Yugoslav republics involved in the Balkan conflicts in the early 1990s to arrest suspects wanted by the UN war crimes tribunal is hindering The Hague court's efforts to complete its work, Carla del Ponte said Tuesday (23 November).
Under a completion strategy endorsed by the UN Security Council, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) plans to close all investigations by the end of this year. 
All trials are to be completed by 2008 and appeals by 2010.
Briefing the 15-nation body about progress towards meeting those deadlines, the chief UN war crimes prosecutor said 20 fugitives remain at large, including the top three indictees -- wartime Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, and Croatian General Ante Gotovina.
"The governments of Croatia, Serbia-Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have the main responsibility in bringing these fugitives to The Hague," said del Ponte, adding that at least 12 of those wanted were living freely in Serbia.
"The Serbian government has deliberately chosen to ignore its legal obligations," the Swiss prosecutor charged. 
She added, however, that some progress had been made in areas within the competence of Serbia-Montenegro's Council on Co-operation with the ICTY. 
A huge backlog of waivers authorising witnesses to testify in trials at The Hague has been cleared. 
Some progress has also been made in resolving problems related to access to documents. 
But when the requested documents were in the hands of authorities blocking co-operation with the ICTY, obtaining them remained difficult, del Ponte said.
"All in all, the lack of co-operation of Belgrade remains the single most important obstacle faced by the tribunal in the implementation of the completion strategy," del Ponte said, pointing to Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's stated unwillingness to arrest indictees. 
Kostunica has repeatedly said they should surrender rather than be arrested.
The prosecutor also criticised authorities in BiH's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS) for failing to apprehend a single indictee in the nine years since the 1992-1995 conflict in the country ended. 
According to del Ponte, war crimes fugitives hiding there continue to enjoy the protection of powerful networks.
"This raises fundamental questions about the willingness of RS leaders to match their pledges to co-operate with the ICTY with firm action," del Ponte said in her report.
The only obstacle standing in the way of Croatia's full co-operation with the ICTY is Gotovina's arrest, the UN prosecutor said. 
According to her, "a well-organised support network, including within state structures, continues to help the fugitive general evade justice. 
"Until Gotovina is located, be it inside or outside of Croatia, and transferred, it will mean that the networks protecting war criminals are more powerful than this part of the government that genuinely wants to co-operate fully with the tribunal,"del Ponte said.
She urged the international community to maintain pressure on the three Balkan countries to meet their obligations.
"If some of the most important indictees -- like Karadzic, Mladic and Gotovina -- are not arrested and transferred in the months to come, it may be necessary to revise the target dates of the completion strategy," del Ponte said. 
She noted that 2005 would mark the tenth anniversary of three key events: the Srebrenica genocide, the Dayton Agreement and the indictments against Karadzic and Mladic.
"If the international community could not prevent the genocide, it should at least not allow this and other most serious crimes to go unpunished," del Ponte said.
