27/06/2005
by Dimitris Agrafiotis for Southeast European Times in Athens – 27/06/05
In the lead-up to the 2004 Summer Olympics, Greek officials hailed the Games as a great investment for the country.
Now that the athletes and visitors are long gone, however, the government has yet to come up with a comprehensive plan for making use of the costly infrastructure, as well as the executive knowhow of the Olympic personnel.
Both the present New Democracy government and its Socialist predecessor focused their energies mainly on making the Games a reality, without giving much attention to the post-Olympic use of the facilities.
As a result, Athens has not been able to successfully reap the fruits of this important global event.
The Athens Olympic Stadium, one of the most magnificent stadiums in the world, is currently being used by soccer teams.
The other stadiums are being used on an ad hoc basis, without a permanent plan for future exploitation.
The government has announced that any proposal for the use of the infrastructure will be considered.
The security infrastructure created for the Games presents a special kind of problem.
To keep the Games safe, the government spent more than $1 billion on one of the most advanced security systems in the world, using C41 technology.
Among other things, it includes 300 street cameras located in critical areas around the capital.
Although the system would be extremely helpful in the ongoing fight against terrorism and crime, its use raises issues of privacy and personal rights.
The Hellenic Data Protection Authority, which is tasked with implementing and enforcing regulations concerning personal data, has blocked further activity using the C41 system.
Although progress has been slow, the government has reiterated its commitment to implementing a systematic programme for the Olympic infrastructure, with Barcelona as the model.
Several international and Greek companies have shown interest in investing in the Olympic infrastructure, though a deal has not yet been reached.
A state-owned company called Hellenic Olympic Estate has been established to take charge of the properties.
Just as it took time for construction of the facilities to get under way in the first place, it is taking time to develop a plan for their long-term use.
