24/01/2005
(Pressreview.ro - 24/01/05;
AFP, Mediafax, Evenimentul Zilei - 23/01/05;
RFE/RL - 21/01/05;
Reuters, EurActiv, IntelliNews - 20/01/05)
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu starts his first talks with top EU officials on Monday (24 January), less than a month after assuming his post.
The purpose of his two-day visit to Brussels is to present his priorities and to assure the European Commission (EC) chief and others that the government is making every effort to meet the requirements for Romania's EU entry in 2007.
"EU membership is our government's absolute priority," the AFP quoted Tariceanu as saying Sunday before his departure for the Belgian capital, his first trip to Brussels since he was elected prime minister at the end of December.
He heads a delegation that includes Foreign Minister Razvan Ungureanu, Interior Minister Vasile Blaga and Justice Minister Monica Macovei.
Romania completed its membership talks with the Union last month and is due to sign its accession treaty on 25 April, before joining the 25-nation bloc in January 2007, along with Bulgaria.
Under a safeguard clause to be included in their accession treaties, however, the two countries could see their entry into the Union postponed by one year if they fail to implement reforms needed to ensure their compliance with EU standards.
A decision to enact the safeguard clause would need the support of all 25 EU member nations.
Some key conditions Romania must meet include curbing widespread corruption, implementing judicial reforms and improving competition.
A statement by the government press service said that during his talks in Brussels, the prime minister would specify the steps authorities plan to keep the country on track for EU membership.
The upcoming signing of Romania's accession treaty will be another item on the agenda.
Tariceanu meets with EC President Jose Manuel Barroso on Monday afternoon.
Other officials he is due to hold talks with include European Parliament President Josep Borrell, representatives of the different political groups in the EU legislature and his Belgian counterpart, Guy Verhofstadt.
During the Romanian delegation's visit to Brussels, Macovei is expected to discuss with EU officials the measures the government plans to take to ensure the independence of the judiciary and its greater efficiency, as well as steps towards meeting other commitments made during the talks on the justice and home affairs negotiation chapter.
According to the Romanian news agency Mediafax, Bucharest is due to present a new reform strategy and an action plan for the judicial system by March.
Voicing confidence that his country will meet the membership requirements, Tariceanu pledged earlier this month to take the steps necessary to achieve that goal.
Last week, he ordered his ministers to review all public contracts signed by the previous government to eliminate any possible cases of corruption.
Among them are a 1 billion euro border security contract signed with the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, a 480m euro motorway construction contract signed with the French construction company BTP Vinci, and a 2.5 billion euro motorway construction contract signed with the US company Bechtel.
Tariceanu has criticised the previous administration for awarding contracts to companies without a tender, or for concluding deals in which the winning company was the only bidder.
