25/04/2005
(Blic - 25/04/05; Radio B92, Beta, Kosovareport - 24/04/05; BBC Monitoring - 23/04/05; Serbian Government Web site - 22/04/05)
While expressing Belgrade's readiness for dialogue aimed at resolving Kosovo's status, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said on Sunday (24 April) that no solution implying a change in the country's current borders would be accepted.
"Serbia is ready for a compromise, because it wishes to maintain the vital and essential national and state interests, and more than anything, we must make sure that the internationally recognised borders of our nation are not altered," Kostunica said at a celebration of the 190th anniversary of a Serbian uprising against Ottoman rule.
While formally a part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been a de facto UN protectorate since June 1999. 
Kosovo's Albanians, who account for about 90 per cent of the province's population, are pushing for independence, while the province's Serbs want it to remain within Serbian borders.
The international community is expected mid-year to review Kosovo's progress in implementing a set of UN-endorsed standards in eight areas, including rule of law, democratic institutions, respect for human and minority rights, and the economy. 
A positive assessment would clear the way for the initiation of talks to determine the province's final status, which could begin later this year.
"One side should not get everything while at the same time the other one should lose everything," Kostunica said. 
"We want political dialogue, and we want to find a joint solution through patient talks which would respect the interest of both [Serbian and Albanian] peoples and contribute to preserving stability both in our country and in the whole region."
In earlier statements, he voiced support for a solution to the Kosovo issue based on the formula "more than autonomy, less than independence".
Kostunica's statement on Sunday followed a meeting two days earlier with Serbian President Boris Tadic and Nebojsa Covic, the head of Serbia's Kosovo co-ordination centre. 
They agreed to pursue an active policy in three areas, including working group talks between Belgrade and Pristina on technical issues. 
They also decided to seek UNMIK's support for the participation of Serbian representatives in the task force in charge of decentralisation of powers in the province, and to push for talks between Kosovo and Serbian leaders.
