22/04/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/04/05
Following the overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic's regime and the rise to power of the new democratic authorities, many expected the disclosure of secret service files, both their own and those of others.
Several years later, this has yet to happen.
Most recently, parliament rejected a proposal by the Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO), a ruling coalition member, on regulating access to the files.
The SPO had submitted a draft law, demanding a summary procedure for its adoption.
At the end of March, however, MPs blocked the proposed legislation, saying it did not include solutions to possible "political, security, legal, ethical or other consequences".
The proposal would have provided citizens access to any of their personal files that were kept prior to the adoption of the law.
All files, not just certain categories, would have been subject to disclosure, with the only exception being files that could jeopardise Serbia's international relations.
Politicians have repeatedly pledged their readiness to tackle the issue of access to Security Information Service archives, but parties hold different opinions about what should be done.
Since Milosevic's ouster in 2000, the public has been presented with several draft laws written by NGOs and political parties.
Because of inadequate political will and negative assessments from the security services, however, none have been adopted.
Under public pressure, the Democratic Opposition of Serbia opted for a partial solution and allowed citizens who suspected that they were subjects of interest to check whether a file on them existed.
If so, they were allowed to read their files at secret service facilities.
According to the interior ministry, nearly 8,000 citizens submitted requests as a result of the government decree.
Subsequent verification, however, indicated that only 413 citizens actually had files kept on them.
In June 2003, the Constitutional Court of Serbia deemed the government decree unconstitutional, necessitating a full-fledged law to regulate the files, instead of a mere decree.
The draft law that has received the most attention is one proposed by the Centre for Antiwar Action.
It is controversial because of a clause allowing persons who were the subject of security files to publish their contents.
Opponents say this would "threaten the conspiratorial nature of the service" and potentially damage state interests.
