25/04/2005
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 25/04/05
"You have the floor, Comrade ...
Mister Nastase," Social Democratic Party (PSD) founder Ion Iliescu said as he completed his opening remarks at the party's congress on 21 April.
Some delegates laughed, while others shifted uncomfortably in their seats.
At a time when the PSD is seeking to remake its image, Iliescu's gaffe -- using a word that conjures up memories of the communist era -- was a reminder of its past.
It was an inauspicious sign for the former head of state, who was seeking a new mandate as leader of the party he built in the 1990s.
Last summer, Iliescu, 75, completed his final term as president and was asked to return to the party's top post.
The PSD, widely viewed as the heir of the former Communist Party structures, was ousted from power in November 2004 elections, amid allegations of corruption and authoritarian behavior.
Iliescu said the party needed "a credible leadership with moral authority" to earn back public support.
Nobody predicted that hundreds of delegates at the congress would stage a rebellion against the elderly founding father.
After the votes were counted, and following intensive backroom negotiations, it was former Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana who had won the party chairmanship, with 964 votes in favour and 541 against.
Iliescu was a distant second, receiving 530 votes for and 975 against.
Former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase declined to compete with his former mentor, Iliescu, deciding instead to run -- virtually unchallenged -- for executive president, the party's second highest post.
It was Geoana, 47, who seized the opportunity to challenge the old leader.
"It's time for a change from the grassroots to the top", he said in his speech to delegates, receiving thunderous applause.
An unexpected alliance was formed between the Transylvania-based reformists within the PSD and the so-called party "barons", giving Geoana a victory.
Some political commentators have questioned whether the upset amounts to more than political theatre.
Writing in <I>Jurnalul National</I>, Ion Cristoiu characterised it as a "well-organised spontaneous vote".
Mark Percival, director of the Romanian Think Tank, meanwhile, is sceptical about the likelihood of real change.
"The new leadership is still dominated by the old guard.
The election of Geoana, though a surprise, has changed nothing fundamental in the PSD," Percival says.
Moreover, the new PSD leadership has a popularity problem, stemming from the party's poor showing in recent elections.
Geoana was humiliated in the Bucharest local elections last year, losing in the first round to Traian Basescu.
Basescu then went on to defeat Nastase in the 2004 presidential vote.
PSD Vice President Ioan Rus, who leads the reformist camp, lost in his bid last year to become mayor of Cluj.
The new party president has already sought to mend fences with Iliescu, saying "his advice will always be listened to and his opinion respected".
Iliescu is the party's greatest success story, having won three presidential elections since 1989, and is still extremely popular in rural areas and among the elderly.
Time will tell how successful the PSD's rebranding will be without its founder at the helm.
