27/06/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 27/06/05
A new contingent of Macedonian soldiers left for Iraq on 8 June to take part in Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
Their departure came one day after parliament adopted a decision enabling the 33 Special Forces members, a high-level liaison officer and a logistics officer to begin their six-month mission in Iraq.
In addition, a high-level military officer and a liason officer have begun yearlong assignments at US Central Command in Tampa, Florida.
The troops sent to Iraq will help ensure stability and support for operational coalition bases there, and will serve under the US High Command. 
The United States is funding their transportation, food and accommodation, and any urgent medical care, while Macedonia is covering other costs. 
The military team underwent special training to be able to act in accordance with their assigned tasks.
Macedonian soldiers first took part in Iraqi Freedom in June 2003 and have since shifted contingents on every six months. 
Every Macedonian Army contingent has been made up of Special Forces members and liaison officers.
The mission in Iraq is just one example of Macedonian Army participation in international peacekeeping efforts and the war against terrorism. 
Macedonian soldiers are also taking part in the Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission in Afghanistan, known as Enduring Freedom. 
These soldiers operate within NATO under the command of the German contingent. 
During Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski's visit to Germany on 9 June and 10 June, defence officials praised the Macedonian soldiers' involvement.
"Macedonian soldiers participating in the peace mission in Afghanistan are showing great results and are a real pride for the Republic of Macedonia and act and work as soldiers of the country as if it were already a NATO member," reported the Macedonian Information Agency, citing Walter Colbo, Parliamentary State Secretary of the German Ministry of Defence.
During a September visit to Macedonia, US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld personally honoured three Macedonian soldiers. 
"I have just returned from Iraq where the soldiers are standing shoulder by shoulder with the US and Coalition forces with the aim of helping create a free Iraq," Rumsfeld said.
