23/02/2005
(EurActiv, EUpolitix - 23/02/05; European Commission, AFP, BNN, Sofia News Agency, Rompres, Mediapool - 22/02/05)
The European Commission (EC) on Tuesday (22 February) issued a favourable opinion on Bulgaria and Romania's bids to join the EU in January 2007. 
The two Balkan countries now need similar decisions from the European Parliament (EP) and the Council of EU foreign ministers in order to sign their accession treaty with the Union on 25 April, as scheduled.
While expressing its readiness to welcome Bulgaria and Romania in the 25-nation club in less than two years, the EC warned there is no room for complacency and that both countries have much to accomplish in the coming months.
"Today's decision is another milestone in our relations and a clear signal that the Commission welcomes Bulgaria and Romania in the European family," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said after the EC's regular meeting in Strasbourg on Tuesday. 
"However the authorities in the countries can not lie back and relax: in 2005 and 2006 a lot of hard work will be needed to progress on reforms in order to fully and timely meet all conditions for membership."
Romania submitted its application for EU membership in June 1995. 
Bulgaria followed suit in December the same year. 
In December 1999, both were given the green light for starting their accession negotiations with the Union. 
The process kicked off in February the following year and was officially completed in December 2004.
In its latest assessments of the two countries' progress towards membership, published in October 2004, the EC said that both have already met the bloc's political criteria for membership and were expected to fulfil the economic and legal ones by the time of their official entry into the Union, scheduled for 1 January 2007.
Following the entry of ten new countries into the EU last May, the Union introduced tougher monitoring mechanisms to ensure that future newcomers will be fully prepared for membership before joining the bloc. 
Three safeguard clauses have been included in the Union's treaty with the two countries -- one for Bulgaria and two for Romania.
Under the treaty finalised on 4 February, each of them could see its entry into the Union delayed by one year if EU member states unanimously decide that important requirements have not been met. 
Furthermore, a simple qualified majority could also postpone Romania's accession, if Bucharest fails to carry out judicial reform, restructuring of internal markets and other commitments.
After it has been signed, the treaty must be ratified by all current EU member states, as well as by Bulgaria and Romania, no later than 1 January 2007.
