21/01/2005
(EurActiv - 20/01/05;
MIA - 19/01/05;
EU, AFP - 18/01/05)
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn briefed the European Parliament's (EP) foreign affairs committee this week about the current situation in the bloc's further expansion and the goals of his four-year mandate.
Rehn, who replaced Guenter Verheugen as enlargement commissioner on 1 November, indicated that the four current candidate countries -- Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia and Turkey -- would be able to enter the Union only after meeting all the requirements for membership.
He said a decision on Macedonia's EU bid could be made by the end of this year, while the next 12 months would be critical for the European integration prospects of other Western Balkan countries.
"My goal for my mandate until 2009 is to ensure that Bulgaria and Romania enter the Union fully prepared for membership," Rehn told the members of the EP committee on Tuesday (18 January).
Both countries "still have plenty of hard work to do before membership" and their progress in meeting commitments and reform requirements would be strictly monitored, he said.
Rehn made clear that he would not hesitate to invoke safeguard measures, including the postponement of EU entry by one year, if requirements are not being met.
As for Croatia, Rehn said the European Commission (EC) would be ready with a draft negotiating framework in early February.
The country is scheduled to begin its membership talks with the Union on 17 March, but the EU has made that conditional on Zagreb's full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and particularly on the handover of fugitive General Ante Gotovina.
"It is now of outmost importance that Croatia does everything in its power to ensure full co-operation with the ICTY," Rehn said, adding that he has warned Croatian officials that the Gotovina issue must be resolved for talks to begin.
"Without a positive assessment by the ICTY, negotiations will not open on 17 March," he stressed.
If everything goes according to plan, however, Croatia could join the Union in 2009 and become a positive example for the Western Balkans, Rehn added.
Turkey is scheduled to begin its EU membership negotiations on 3 October.
Meanwhile, the EC will focus its efforts on implementing the conclusions of the December 2004 EU summit and on preparing a negotiating strategy.
As for Macedonia's EU bid, Rehn said officials in Skopje are in the process of finalising replies to the EC questionnaire, which will likely be submitted in mid-February.
Depending on the quality of the replies, the commissioner said, the EC could be ready with its opinion on Macedonia's EU bid by the end of the year.
As for the other countries in the region, Rehn said this year would be critical.
Voicing concern about the political climate in Albania, the commissioner said progress in the ongoing negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) would depend on the conduct of the country's upcoming parliamentary elections and on implementing the required reforms.
Voicing hope that authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina would soon show "solid progress" on the reform issues identified in the November 2003 EU feasibility study, Rehn said the EC would likely be able to recommend that SAA negotiations be opened with the country.
"As regards Serbia-Montenegro, the Commission is working on the feasibility study on the country's preparedness to negotiate an SAA," said Rehn.
"Meanwhile, we are urging the authorities in Serbia-Montenegro to co-operate with the ICTY and to take full advantage of the twin-track approach, so that progress can be reflected in our study.
