15/09/2008
Text and photos by Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 15/09/08
Merixhan Tomislav worked for 45 years at a state company.
Now he sells cigarettes, newspapers and snacks in a small shop in the centre of town, while depending on money from the Belgrade authorities to help him get by.
On the surrounding streets, the face of Serbian nationalist politician Tomislav Nikolic appears on countless posters.
This is Strpce, a predominantly Serb municipality on the border with Macedonia.
About 70% of its population is Serb, while 27% are Albanians and the rest belong to other minorities.
Serbian President Boris Tadic came here during his first term and promised that Kosovo would remain part of Serbia.
But on February 17th leaders in Pristina declared the province's independence.
Since then, 46 countries have recognised it as a sovereign state.
The atmosphere in Strpce is not warm.
Yet it is not as tense as before.
According to Tomislav, life has become easier since the independence declaration, though he does not elaborate.
"We should live together with Albanians," a Serbian man says.
Asked if Albanian and Serbs can manage this, he replies:
"who says that they can't?"
His friend, who does not want to be named, is convinced that co-existence between Albanians and Serbs is the only way to achieve a sustainable Kosovo.
"We are living together," he says.
"And I don't know who said that Albanians and Serbs cannot live together." He also relies on a pension from Belgrade, because, as he says, the Kosovo government does not give him one.
Strpce, or Shtërpcë as it is known in Albanian, is about 61km from Pristina.
The municipality consists of 16 villages.
Roads are in generally poor condition, and while most of the villages have water, it is affected by contamination from an old and damaged sewage system.
The electricity network is also in dire need of an upgrade, and power cuts have become a regular part of life.
The political situation is in limbo.
The last elections, in 2007, were derailed by a Kosovo Serb boycott, so the UN's special representative simply appointed the existing incumbents.
The mayor, a Kosovo Serb, has taken his oath, as have eight Kosovo Serb and two Albanian members of the assembly, but seven others have not done so.
Police duties, meanwhile, are entrusted to a local Kosovo Police Service force.
It comprises 45 Kosovo Serbs and 11 Albanians, and operates under supervision by two UNMIK police officers.
As to the international military presence, Ukrainian KFOR troops are in charge of the area, controlling access to the Kosovo Serb areas.
The overall mood in Strpce is one of uncertainty.
Few entertain optimism, though some are cautiously hopeful that things will improve.
On the question of Kosovo independence, locals alternate between insisting that their municipality is part of Serbia and urging the Kosovo authorities to create more jobs for citizens.
"We don't have a life here.
Serbia is not doing anything for us.
They are trying to win for themselves." says Goran Milutinovic.
A teacher for 30 years, he is now unemployed.
"I took my children to Nis [Serbia], to my wife's family.
In October 2004, they returned because I thought they could find a job, but nothing has happened.
Now I am so pessimistic."
Milutinovic's wife, meanwhile, says people in Strpce want to live freely."The international community should understand that we shouldn’t remain a victim of the regime of previous leaders," she says.
"We are born here and we should stay here.
But we cannot live as we are doing now."
As in much of Kosovo, if people in Strpce are suffering, it's not for lack of economic potential.
The municipality is located within 100km of industrial and mining centres such as Trepca, Ferizaj, Prizren, Peja and the capital, Pristina.
"Serbs are positioned in the better places of Kosovo, but our leaders don't know to exploit this wealth.
They should be more attentive," says Miodrag Lajic.
According to him, it's in the interests of Albanians and Serbs alike to work together and create a sustainable future.
"Only together can we establish a European Kosovo, because with these divisions, the world will not let us make progress."
Many hope tourism will spur jobs and revenue in the future.
The municipality is home to the Brezovica ski resort, and already more than a few visitors pass through the Serb-populated areas.
"I cross through here sometimes, on the way to Brezovic and Prevalac, which are the two best touristic sites in Kosovo," says Agron Gashi, an ethnic Albanian from Pristina who has stopped in Strpce to buy cigarettes.
"We don't have any problem here."
"We think that Kosovo will be a better place for everyone," says a Serb who did not want to be identified.
"This is a way toward Europe.
They should be more optimists, because Kosovo Serbs didn’t have better conditions before.
Now we have many rights, more than minorities in other countries."
