22/12/2004
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 22/12/04
A month has passed since UN chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte reported to the UN Security Council on Serbia's lack of co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
The prosecutor has since reiterated her claim that at least 12 war crimes indictees are living openly in Serbia, and that Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica is continuing to obstruct the process of bringing them to justice.
"What I can say is that Kostunica, for political reasons, doesn't want to arrest the fugitives -- because he told me that personally in our last meeting," she told the BBC in an interview earlier this month.
Kostunica has said he espouses voluntary surrender of indictees -- a policy that, according to del Ponte, has yielded no results.
Many analysts believe the prime minister's stance is dictated by worry that handing over the indictees could destabilise his minority government, which is dependent on parliamentary support from Slobodan Milosevic's Socialists.
"There will be terrible political pressure on Kostunica and on all relevant political subjects in the country" as a result of del Ponte's statements, according to Jovan Simic, an adviser to Serbian President Boris Tadic.
For his part, Tadic has continued to stress the need to co-operate with The Hague.
"That is our international and domestic obligation, and at the same time, the only condition for becoming a member of the EU," he said.
The Union has repeatedly said it will not consider beginning membership talks with Belgrade until the issue of co-operation is resolved and indictees are on their way to The Hague.
The United States has also stepped up pressure, freezing some forms of aid and warning that it no longer backs the transfer of war crimes cases to Serbia.
Economists, meanwhile, warn that another negative report from del Ponte could seriously damage Serbia's economic prospects by dampening the confidence of foreign investors, who are already worried by the volatile political landscape, the resurgence of ultranationalist politicians, and the republic's sluggish progress towards rejoining Europe.
In related news, Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic denied on Tuesday (21 December) that a retired Bosnian Serb general wanted by the UN tribunal, Vinko Pandurevic, is being detained at federal army facilities in northwest Serbia while authorities discuss transferring him to The Hague.
"We have full knowledge of what is going on in our barracks and there is no way that a Hague suspect could be currently located in a Serbia-Montenegro military complex," Davinic was quoted as saying.
The allegations were made by the Banja Luka-based daily Nezavisne Novine, which cited a source close to Kostunica's cabinet.
