21/01/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 21/01/05
Albania's industrial and energy sectors have set their sights on becoming integrated into regional and EU markets. 
Authorities are already implementing a plan to reorganise the country's energy markets, and steps are being taken to integrate oil production as well.
In an important step forward along its road to EU accession, Albania in 2003 signed the Athens memorandum on creation of a regional energy market. 
The country has also signed multimillion euro agreements with the World Bank and the European Bank of Investment for the construction of a thermo-central facility in the southern city of Vlora and the privatisation of small hydro centrals -- projects which will help Albania advance towards its goals.
Reform of the energy markets is intended, among other things, to end recurring power cuts. 
The problem, which is most serious during the winters, is a side effect of the transition from the old communist-era infrastructure, experts say. 
At the same time, the sector has had to deal with enormous losses of revenue due to customers not paying their bills. 
According to Albanian Minister of Industry and Energy Viktor Doda, authorities are now implementing tariff reform to cover energy production costs.
At the same time, Albania is advancing towards its goal of becoming a greater presence in international oil production. 
"We are going through a reconstruction process of oil companies and for their privatisation," Doda said.
Of particular interest is a regional oil pipeline proposed by Albanian Macedonian Bulgarian Oil (AMBO), a US-based company. 
Its construction has been under consideration for over a decade, and analysts say it is important not only for Albania but Southeast Europe in general.
Another important project under consideration is the trans-Balkan gas pipeline proposed by Switzerland's EGL Group. 
"It is important that Albania, after reforming its systems, finds itself integrated in the regional and European markets," Doda says.
