23/05/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/05/05
From Friday (21 May) through Monday, the EBRD held its annual meeting and business forum in Belgrade. 
Around 3,000 participants attended, including 59 state delegations, leading international bankers, multinationals and foreign reporters. 
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and his Montenegrin counterpart, Milo Djukanovic, opened the meeting, and five government ministers presented Serbia-Montenegro's economic potential and investment opportunities at a special forum.
Following the recent positive feasibility study on Serbia-Montenegro's EU accession bid, the event presented an important opportunity for the country to boost its international image, Serbia Central Bank Vice Governor Dejan Simic said as the proceedings began.
"Representatives of the international financial establishment will get acquainted with Serbia-Montenegro's banking reforms, while investors will learn of the country's investment opportunities," Simic said. 
"On the other hand, this is a great chance for Belgrade, the regional centre of the Western Balkans, to show its capacities and potentials to investors that are cofinancing numerous projects together with the EBRD."
Although officials are optimistic, the EBRD's Transition Report for 2004 did not exactly applaud Serbia-Montenegro. 
Reviewing the transition achievements of 27 countries from Central Europe to Central Asia, the report rated Serbia-Montenegro 23rd. 
The EBRD did recognise the country's GDP growth, which rose 2 per cent year-on-year to 5 per cent in 2004. 
However, statistics show that other countries are advancing more quickly.
The EBRD signed its first project in Serbia-Montenegro in April 2001 and approved a strategy for the country in June 2002. 
The bank soon became the largest single investor in the state union, with the financial sector as its strategic priority. 
Having noted a serious lack of assets and a low level of commercial capacities in local banks, the EBRD has pledged to monitor the chosen banks and support them with all necessary trade guarantees and loans, when appropriate.
The EBRD's strategy for Serbia-Montenegro points to creating an investment-friendly environment, eliminating red tape, cracking down on corruption and offering private sector incentives as the main challenges facing the country. 
Assistance from the bank will focus on three fields. 
Firstly, it will back the advancement of large-scale privatisation, agribusiness projects and green field investments. 
Secondly, it will tackle the energy and infrastructure sectors, including electric power, and telecommunications sector privatisation. 
Finally, technical co-operation and co-financing will allow the EBRD to encourage investments in Serbia-Montenegro together with other international financial institutions, donor agencies and local and foreign banks. 
The bank especially emphasises projects assisting local companies, such as the TurnAround Management and Business Advisory Services.
