21/12/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 21/12/04
The Chairman of the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Police Restructuring Commission (PRC), Wilfred Martens, announced on 15 December that a committee of top local and international security officials has reached a consensus on a single police structure for the country, which would be monitored at the state level.
Established by High Representative Paddy Ashdown in July, the PRC agreed to propose that the State Investigation and Protection Agency, the State Border Service and the new Local Police Services become joined as part of a single police force, under the supervision of the BiH Ministry of Security.
Martens will propose his recommendation to Ashdown before the end of the year.
"As chairman, I must now withdraw to draw up the final report.
There are a significant number of detailed technical proposals agreed by BiH's policing professionals that must now be included in these documents," said Martens.
However, members of the PRC failed to agree on a number of areas in which the Local Police Services will operate.
Officials from the Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), insist on keeping the entity-level interior ministries, while Federation of BiH (FBiH) officials are interested in a more centralised structure.
Adopting the PRC proposal is one of the conditions set by Ashdown on 16 December, when he announced a series of measures in response to RS's lack of co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
If RS fails to meet the criteria, Ashdown said, "I will not hesitate to take measures that deal, directly and powerfully, with the assets and the institutions of the RS so far as I am able to do so, and no options are ruled out."
According to a published summary of the PRC's proposal, the Local Police Services are to operate in Local Police Areas commanded by Local Police Commissioners.
Groupings of existing municipalities would make up the Local Police Areas, and technical policing criteria would determine their geographical size, shape and location.
The existing political lines between the entities, cantons in FBiH or districts in the RS would have no direct significance in formation of the Local Police Areas.
In each Local Police Area, a Local Police Council made up of local elected officials, members of the judiciary and community leaders would maintain community oversight and accountability.
The state-level Police Administration Agency would provide basic centralised support to the police services in the single structure, including co-ordination of recruitment, promotion and transfer of all police officials under common standards, salary and rank conditions.
A human resources mechanism would be used to ensure that policing reflects the ethnic structure of BiH's population.
"This proposal meets the minimum requirements set by the European Commission and by EU Special Representative Javier Solana for this reform:
the establishment of a single structure, with all competence for police legislation and police funding at the state level," said Martens.
