22/12/2004
(Reuters, HINA, Croatia Business Report - 21/12/04;
Transitions Online, HINA, Croatian Information Centre - 20/12/04;
BBC, EU - 17/12/04)
Luxembourg, which will assume the rotating EU presidency on 1 January 2005, urged Croatia on Tuesday (21 December) to find fugitive retired General Ante Gotovina before March of next year, when its accession talks with the Union are expected to begin.
Last week, EU leaders set 17 March 2005 as the starting date for Croatia's negotiations, but made the launch of talks conditional on Zagreb's full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
In the concluding statement of their two-day summit in Brussels, the leaders of the 25-nation bloc placed a special emphasis Friday on the need for Gotovina to be arrested and handed over to The Hague-based tribunal "as soon as possible".
"Croatia must co-operate not just fully but 100 per cent," Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn said Tuesday, as he outlined the issues on the agenda of his country's six-month EU presidency.
"It is an obligation for Croatia to co-operate with the ICTY so that above all General Gotovina can be found."
Asselborn said Luxembourg would ask chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte to assess Croatia's co-operation with the tribunal and then make a recommendation as to whether the negotiations process could begin.
"We as the presidency want Croatia to have the chance to start negotiations but Croatian leaders know it's not automatic and that this co-operation must really be proved," the minister stressed.
In a report to the UN Security Council last month, del Ponte criticised Croatia for failing to apprehend Gotovina, one of the three most wanted war crimes fugitives from the 1990s Balkan conflicts.
He went into hiding in June 2001, weeks after the ICTY indicted him in connection with an operation conducted by forces under his command towards the end of the 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia.
As a result of the operation, at least 150 Krajina Serbs were killed and up to 200,000 others were displaced.
On 23 November, del Ponte described Gotovina's handover as the only remaining obstacle to Croatia's co-operation with the ICTY.
"As soon as Gotovina will be in The Hague, it will be possible to say that, indeed, Croatia is co-operating fully with the tribunal."
At the same time, del Ponte questioned the efficiency and seriousness of the measures Croatian authorities were taking, saying there were indications that Gotovina is being protected by "a well-organised support network, including within state structures".
Croatian officials deny this, insisting that Gotovina has fled the country and they are unaware of his whereabouts.
After the Brussels summit, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader voiced confidence that the Gotovina issue would be resolved soon.
The fugitive's continued refusal to face justice in The Hague would harm not only his interests, but Croatia's as well, said Sanader.
Meanwhile, the Croatian news agency HINA reported Monday that the country's interior ministry and the Chief State Prosecutor's office had agreed to interview presidential candidate Ljubo Cesic Rojs in connection with a statement he made concerning Gotovina.
During an election rally Sunday in Vukovar, Rojs said the fugitive is "very well" and sent the people of Vukovar his regards.
