21/12/2004
By Seremb Gjergji for Southeast European Times -- 21/12/04
An standoff involving an unknown number of armed men in the village of Kondovo, 10km west of Skopje, was resolved peacefully last week, according to ethnic Albanian politicians who said they had convinced the men to hand over their guns and address their concerns through institutions.
"We have managed to put out the fire that started in Kondovo," Albanian Democratic Party (PDSH) head Arbën Xhaferri told reporters. 
The party's deputy head, Menduh Thaçi, said the agreement demonstrated confidence in the ability of ethnic Albanian political parties to address concerns in the community.
Peace has flared, rather than grenades and bullets, said Ali Ahmeti, the head of ruling coalition member Democratic Union for Integration.
Police had been unable to enter the village since early November, when the men -- reportedly wearing uniforms and carrying Kalashnikov rifle -- began patrolling the streets, only days before a national referendum on Macedonia's new decentralisation laws. 
The situation was seen as a key test for the country's multiethnic ruling coalition, which has been working to fully implement the peace accord -- known as the Ohrid Framework Agreement -- that ended seven months of fighting in 2001.
The problem in Kosovo represented "a potential threat to the stability of Macedonia and should be immediately resolved," President Branko Crvenkovski said prior to the negotiated agreement, which coincided with the election in parliament of Vlado Buckovski as prime minister.
Addressing lawmakers, Buckovski said his government had "no intention of allowing anyone to destabilise the security situation". 
However, authorities had indicated that they strongly favoured resolving the issue through negotiations rather than force.
During a visit to Skopje last week, NATO Director for the Balkans Robert Serry expressed support for government efforts to defuse the situation. 
Following closed-door talks with Prime Minister-designate Buckovski, Serry said he doubted the standoff would lead to destabilisation.
