20/01/2005
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 20/01/05
Amid a heated race for the leadership of Turkey's Republican People's Party (CHP), incumbent party leader Deniz Baykal has called for an extraordinary congress, to be held on 29 January. 
He did so after the CHP's disciplinary panel voted 8-7 not to expel his main rival for the post, Mustafa Sarigul, over corruption allegations.
The move is the latest sign of a growing rift among members of the CHP, Turkey's main opposition party, which has stumbled in recent elections.
Baykal has come under fire for the party's failure to catch up with the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), which enjoyed a decisive victory in the 28 March local elections. 
The CHP garnered only 18 per cent of the vote. 
According to many analysts, the current turmoil within the party is a sign that it in a process of transformation into a more solidly Social Democratic party.
However, some warn that the party could be in danger of breaking apart. 
So far, several different factions have emerged, each supporting a different candidate. 
In addition to Baykal and Sarigul, two other party members -- Hursit Gunes and Zulfu Livaneli -- are vying for the top post. 
As the two main contenders try to rally support across the country, Baykal's opponents have been seeking ways to unite.
Internal divisions are not the only source of trouble for the CHP. 
Two members of the party's Supreme Disciplinary Board, Cafer Dursun and Engin Baba, are currently facing disciplinary action themselves due to accusations of bribery. 
These two will not vote during the party congress.
The general consensus among political observers is that some sort of shift is needed if CHP wants to regain its momentum. 
Many say it has faltered because the public does not see it providing an answer to ongoing problems such as economic instability, political corruption, unemployment and unequal income distribution.
At the same time, analysts say, the CHP has suffered because of its emphasis on domestic rather than international issues. 
The AKP's international stance, by contrast, has boosted its popularity at a time when EU membership and foreign relations in general are pressing items for Turkey.
