23/11/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 23/11/04
A delay in issuing warrants for the arrest of five war crimes suspects has sparked controversy in Croatia.
The lag between ordering and issuing the warrant gave the indictees -- wanted for their role in crimes allegedly committed at the Lora military prison in Split -- an opportunity to flee before they could be brought to justice.
Why the delay occurred is still unclear.
Although the presiding judge of the Court Council for War Crimes, Spomenka Tonkovic, ordered the warrant on 20 October, the police department of Split and Dalmatia did not issue it until 26 October.
Split Police Chief Nino Curic has blamed the postal service for supposedly misplacing the order, causing its delivery to be delayed for several days.
But post office receipts indicate that the directorate received the order on 21 October, apparently contradicting the police chief's claims.
Meanwhile, the Regional Court in Split has rejected any suggestions that the order was sidetracked in one of its bureaus.
"The police ignored the fact that the so-called Lora case is an exceptionally sensitive court case that cannot be treated lightly, especially given the intense public scrutiny it is subjected to," the court said.
With the credibility of the police account under attack, many are now asking whether the delay in issuing the warrant was a deliberate attempt to assist the fugitives.
Croatia, which hopes to receive a starting date for EU accession talks next year, is anxious to show that local authorities are capable of handling war crimes cases.
In August, the country's Supreme Court overturned a lower court verdict in the Lora case, following widespread accusations of bias.
With the five defendants now on the run, the War Crimes Court faces additional bureaucratic tasks before it can hold its first hearing on the case.
Following the police report on the unsuccessful attempt at detaining the accused, a request to hold trials in the absence of the accused will need to be processed.
The indictments will need to be changed, but that can only happen after witnesses from Serbia and Montenegro are heard.
