22/02/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 22/02/05
Authorities in Albania are working on re-establishing the country's domestic air transport network, as part of an overall strategy to encourage business and tourism. 
In the northeast town of Kukes, the construction of a domestic airport is under way, with 13.6m euros in funding from the United Arab Emirates. 
It is to be completed by June.
The Kukes airport will be used primarily for transportation of goods. 
But authorities are negotiating with several international companies on a possible concessionary agreement to build two airports in the south, in the seaside cities of Vlora and Saranda, to be used mainly for tourism.
"We are seriously thinking about developing the domestic air transport, seeing it as a possibility to boost the development of economy in these particular areas of the country, not only with business activities but also cultural tourism," says Albanian Transport Minister Spartak Poci.
Currently, Mother Teresa Airport in Tirana is the sole airport in the country. 
Over the next 20 years, it is expected to be expanded and modernised. 
In November 2004, Albania signed a concessionary agreement worth 82m euros with the US-German consortium Tirana Airport Partners to undertake the task.
Poci says the ongoing project for Mother Teresa Airport is a good example of efforts to develop air transport. 
Given the country's notoriously poor road network, domestic air travel is seen as crucial to attracting greater foreign investment.
Building airports in Vlora and Saranda will pave the way for the construction and development of facilities planned for Gjirokastra, Korca and Shkodra, officials say.
Air traffic in Albania started in the 1930s. 
By 1944, there were airports in Tirana, Vlora, and Kucova, while construction was in process in Korca, Kukes, Gjirokastra, and Shkodra. 
At the time, domestic air traffic consisted of about three light planes -- all foreign-owned and operated -- capable of transporting up to ten passengers as well as mail. 
During communism, domestic flights came to a halt, with the exception of military flights.
Today, Albania is connected with a number of European destinations -- Rome, Milan, Athens, Frankfurt, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Sofia, Istanbul -- offering connections to the rest of the world.
According to transport ministry data, last year passenger numbers increased by 13 per cent in comparison with 2003, and the number of flights rose by 18 per cent.
