23/11/2004
(UN, AP, Reuters, UPI, Big News Network - 22/11/04)
The UN Security Council on Monday (22 November) unanimously approved the establishment of a EU-led force (EUFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
It is due to take over peacekeeping duties from SFOR early next month.
Adopting resolution 1575, the 15-nation Council welcomed NATO's decision to end the SFOR operation by the end of the year and establish a headquarters in Sarajevo to continue assisting BiH in implementing the Dayton Peace Accords in co-operation with EUFOR.
SFOR was established in December 1996 as a legal successor of the NATO-led multinational Implementation Force (IFOR) after it completed its one-year mandate from the UN. 
It was to implement the military aspects of the Dayton Agreement, which ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH.
The improvement in the security situation over the past nine years allowed NATO to substantially downsize its presence on the ground. 
Over 60,000 troops from more than 40 countries were deployed in BiH in late 1995. 
Today, SFOR numbers 7,000 troops.
The EU is planning to keep that troop level unchanged as it launches its largest military operation to date on 2 December. 
According to British Major General David Leakey, who is set to become EUFOR's first commander, 80 per cent of the current force would merely change commanders, replacing their NATO insignia with those of the EU.
More than 1,000 US troops are expected to leave BiH as part of the transition. 
EU military personnel will replace them, with Finland reportedly sending the largest contingent.
The Security Council resolution gave EUFOR an initial 12-month mandate, with the potential for further extension, depending on the circumstances on the ground.
After the transfer of responsibilities, NATO will set up a new headquarters in Sarajevo. 
Its personnel will be tasked with assisting the BiH authorities on defence reform, counter terrorism and apprehending war crimes indictees sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
According to Monday's resolution, both EUFOR and the residual NATO presence will be legal successors of SFOR.
Urging all parties to comply strictly with their obligations under the peace agreement, the Council stressed that the primary responsibility for its further successful implementation lies with the BiH authorities. 
Their compliance and active participation in the process, particularly their full co-operation with the ICTY, the Council said, would determine the continued willingness of the international community and major donors to assume the political, military and economic burden of implementation and reconstruction efforts.
According to the resolution, all parties "have committed themselves to co-operate fully with all entities involved in the implementation of this peace settlement," including the ICTY. 
That full co-operation, the Council added, "includes, inter alia, the surrender for trial of all persons indicted by the tribunal and provision of information to assist in tribunal investigations".
The UN also expressed its appreciation and full support for the continued role of the international community's top envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, reaffirming that he is the final authority on the interpretation of civilian implementation of the peace agreement.
