21/12/2004
(Pressreview.ro, Xinhua - 21/12/04; AP, VOA, RFE/RL, UPI, Evenimentul Zilei, Mediafax, Rompres - 20/12/04)
Traian Basescu was sworn in as Romania's new president Monday (20 December), eight days after winning the runoff election against outgoing Prime Minister Adrian Nastase. 
Pledging to fight corruption and poverty, the former Bucharest mayor also said he would focus on revamping human rights and on the reforms Romania must implement to be ready for EU membership in early 2007.
"We can't talk about joining the EU without solving the two fundamental problems we face: corruption and poverty," Basescu told lawmakers. 
He pledged to dedicate his efforts to improving democracy, restoring press freedoms and protecting state institutions from political interference.
Outlining his foreign policy priorities, Basescu said he would seek to promote Romania's role in NATO and its relations with other partners and allies. 
He stressed in particular the importance of further strengthening his country's strategic partnership with the United States and Britain.
Basescu, 53, won the 12 December runoff as the candidate of the centrist Justice and Truth Alliance, formed by the Democratic Party (PD) and the National Liberal Party (PNL) in 2003.
He replaces Ion Iliescu, becoming Romania's third president since the overthrow of communism in the country in 1989 and the first to be elected to a five-year term.
Pledging to back all initiatives that would benefit Romania and its people, Iliescu -- who is expected to take over from Nastase as leader of the Social Democratic Party (PSD) -- assured Basescu of his support. 
"I don't agree with this permanent confrontation that has brought us so many troubles all these years," he said.
Basescu assumed office hours after leaving his post as Bucharest mayor. 
Razvan Murgeanu will serve in the interim until early mayoral elections in 2005.
Basescu also stepped down from his post a party leader, naming PD executive chairman Emil Boc as his successor until a national convention in May.
The first major test for the new president is to establish a new government, as neither the PSD, which won most votes in the 28 November parliamentary elections, nor the PNL-PD alliance have a majority to govern on their own. 
Basescu has voiced confidence that a PNL-PD-led government would be formed this month.
"I will consult the parties soon after taking the oath before the parliament," the Romanian daily Evenimentul Zilei on Monday quoted Basescu as saying. 
"Then I will appoint the premier whom I announced during the election campaign, Calin Popescu Tariceanu."
The PNL-PD alliance has already started consultations with the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania, which appears ready to join the new government. 
Party sources say they could be given three positions in Tariceanu's cabinet.
