19/01/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 19/01/05
Soldiers in the first military contingent from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) that will join US-led coalition forces in Iraq began their official training on Monday (17 January).
Out of the 49 professional soldiers in the training, 36 will ultimately be chosen for the Explosive Ordnance Disposal Unit (EOD), a platoon-sized formation representing all three constituent ethnic groups in BiH -- Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs.
The EOD's mission "will be to identify and destroy conventional unexploded ordnance (UXO) at designated collection sites," said BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic.
He denied previous media reports that the unit would be involved in mine removal.
According to Chief of the BiH Joint Staff Lieutenant General Sifer Podzic, the first contingent will serve for six months in Iraq;
during that time, the second contingent will be preparing to step in.
The location and area of responsibility for the BiH EOD unit has not been decided.
One BiH liaison officer is already working with the US Central Command Headquarters in Tampa, Florida, and a second will soon follow.
Another officer will be working at the Coalition Forces Headquarters at Qatar.
The four-week-long training programme is under way at the Military School for Professional Development and is being conducted by local military instructors.
Some of the training will be held at training ranges across BiH.
Following that, a nine-week specialised training in UXO disposal will take place, involving some foreign military instructors.
"The unit should be combat ready in mid-April," said Commander of the BiH Armed Forces Operational Command, Major General Vlado Dzoic.
According to Radovanovic, the mission will cost approximately 600,000 euros.
The US government will pay some of the support expenses.
In addition to their regular military salaries, the soldiers will get a daily per diem of $90 for engagement in a high-risk environment.
A total of 127 volunteers responded to the BiH Defence Ministry's announcement of the mission.
After the initial physical and security screening, 49 were chosen to go ahead with the training.
The BiH presidency has voiced its wholehearted support of the mission.
"The United States is a well-proven friend.
We are happy to support our friend in Iraq," said presidency member Sulejman Tihic.
