18/08/2008
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 08/08/08
Southeast European Times: Are there any signs that, after the arrest of Radovan Karadzic, the remaining fugitive war criminals may be finally brought to justice?
General Richard Wightman: d Since entering into a Memorandum of Understanding with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on May 9th 1996, NATO has detained 29 indictees and has contributed to the transfer to The Hague of many more. 
From a total of over 120 persons charged with war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to only one, Ratko Mladic now remains at large. 
We have been vigorous and consistent in pursuing our mandate to support the ICTY. 
We have maintained steady pressure on the supporters of these criminals and we have seized a large quantity of evidence that has been shared with the ICTY. 
The fact that arrests of the remaining fugitives are being made in states outside of BiH shows that we have been effective in denying them safe haven in this country. 
The arrest of Karadzic and the anticipated arrest of Mladic clearly demonstrate that political and diplomatic initiatives are now the essential factors to deliver these criminals to The Hague.
SETimes: What is the meaning of Intensified Dialogue on BiH's aspirations to become a full NATO member? 
What is the timeline for MAP and full NATO membership?
Wightman: The NATO decision to invite BiH and Montenegro to participate in Intensified Dialogue is further proof of our commitment to assist in the preservation of security and stability in the Western Balkans. 
Moreover, the invitation is testament to the NATO integration efforts of BiH institutions and agencies. 
Defence reform in particular remains one of the key reform successes in BiH and continues to serve as an example of what can be achieved when there is unity, co-operation and dialogue among all peoples.
The aim of Intensified Dialogue is to help countries better understand and, more importantly, to implement many of the standards they will need to meet to become a credible candidate for NATO membership. 
It will provide an opportunity to enter into substantive dialogue concerning the rights and obligations inherent in NATO membership as well as to provide extensive expertise concerning what is expected from BiH in the coming years.
As Intensified Dialogue runs its course, the focus will remain on the implementation of necessary reforms to bring BiH further in its Euro-Atlantic aspirations. 
BiH authorities will need to concentrate their efforts on practical activities and the realization of commitments already undertaken within the framework of Partnership for Peace (PfP). 
NATO will continue to provide assistance, advice and support.
Concerning the timeline for Membership Action Plan and full NATO membership, we must not lose sight of the fact that the decision to extend NATO membership to BiH is a political one that NATO Allies must take. 
That decision will be taken in Brussels based upon the Allies' assessment of progress made here. 
If BiH is serious in its foreign policy goal of obtaining NATO membership, BiH must continue to demonstrate progress in wide-ranging reforms to ensure that it becomes a credible candidate. 
There are many steps to pass through before NATO membership; BiH must undertake these steps with the commitment and vision that has already been shown in defence reform.
SETimes: What is the current stage of defence reform and what are the key steps that should now follow?
Wightman: Defence reform is primarily focused on the implementation of those reforms that have already commenced with the passing of the 2005 Law on Defence and Law on Service in the Armed Forces of BiH (AFBiH). 
In addition, we must not forget that defence reform also entails the obligations that BiH has incurred as well as the commitments that have been made within the framework of PfP, including reform goals within the Planning and Review Process (PARP), as well as wider security and political obligations that BiH will incur as the Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) process develops. 
Other requirements will be derived from the programme that will be developed and the subsequent obligations arising from Intensified Dialogue. 
As such, the key for BiH will be to fulfil commitments made under PfP and to continue with the implementation of those reforms required to implement all defence legislation and regulations. 
Naturally, NATO is interested in the development of deployable capabilities that could be made available for collective security operations.
In terms of specific steps in the medium term, the agreed force structure must be fully implemented in accordance with the BiH Presidency decision that defines the current size and structure of the AFBiH. 
The units and other elements of that structure must be adequately equipped and trained, supported by the full range of defence operating systems such as personnel and resource management; planning, programming and budgeting; education and training; acquisition and procurement; and so on. 
All of this must be based on well-developed plans, policies and doctrine. 
In addition, a major part of force structure implementation will be to ensure the speedy and effective transfer of movable property coupled with accelerated progress on the disposal of excess stocks of weapons and ammunition.
Furthermore, BiH has so far made good initial progress in developing co-ordination and co-operation among government ministries and agencies. 
In particular, the BiH Council of Ministers NATO Co-ordination Team has conducted a sterling job of steering the development of all efforts to realise BiH aspirations so far; this process must continue to improve as BiH engages further with NATO/PfP.
The achievement of credible candidacy for NATO membership will be a challenging process, requiring co-operation, co-ordination, communication, and synergy between all BiH actors. 
BiH is not alone in this task and NATO will continue to support BiH in its efforts to progress within the Alliance.
SETimes: Do tensions with Kosovo and Serbia have any influence on the security situation in BiH?
Wightman: We have always been clear on the fact that there is no comparison to be made between Kosovo and BiH. 
At the time of the declaration of independence by Kosovo there were attempts by radicals and nationalists to provoke emotional reactions and to create regional tension. 
These attempts failed. 
As we have seen in Belgrade with the arrest of Karadzic there is a new and progressive mood in Serbia that is looking forward to a European future.
