21/02/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 21/02/05
Last month, retired Serbian General Vladimir Lazarevic surrendered to The Hague tribunal to face war crimes charges.
They stem from his role as the commander of Yugoslav troops in Kosovo in 1999.
He stands accused of overseeing the expulsion of 800,000 refugees and the killings of at least 700 people.
Although the Serbian government has hailed the surrender as the beginning of a new era of co-operation with The Hague, critics say the way the surrender came about hardly signals a fundamental shift in attitude.
Though Lazarevic is charged with serious crimes, the government rewarded him with the pomp and circumstance usually afforded officials or noted citizens.
When Lazarevic eventually flew to The Hague, the Serbian justice minister accompanied him.
Politicians within the Serbian government say the treatment given to Lazarevic -- and promised to three other retired generals wanted by The Hague -- is the most effective way of securing their surrender.
"If the generals had been extradited by force, the government would have fallen," said Serbia-Montenegro Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic, who is the head of the country's Committee for Co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
Kostunica's cabinet is dependent on the silent support of Slobodan Milosevic's Socialists, who have vowed to withdraw their backing should any arrests and extraditions take place.
Yet Serbian authorities are aware that reluctance to co-operate with the UN court has had enormous financial and political costs.
Bulgaria and Romania -- countries which most Serbs used to regard as their poorer and less developed neighbours -- are approaching EU membership, while Serbia-Montenegro is only undergoing a feasibility study.
Citing lack of co-operation, the United States suspended $10m in aid to Serbia last month.
Although Serbia's economy grew about 6 per cent last year, analysts say the rate of economic growth and foreign investment could have been greater if the government were co-operating with the court.
"The Hague is a sort of sword at our throats," said Capital Investments Minister Velimir Ilic.
Many foreign companies are unwilling to make long-term commitments in Serbia while co-operation with The Hague remains unfulfilled.
Former Serbian Minister of Foreign Affairs Goran Svilanovic -- who is a staunch supporter of extraditions to The Hague -- said Washington's decision is a sharp reminder that international obligations must be fulfilled.
"The government needs to stop looking for excuses for the fact that it is not enforcing its own law on co-operation with The Hague tribunal," he said.
The OSCE's mission chief in Serbia-Montenegro, Mauricio Massari, has told the authorities in Serbia that the issue cannot be postponed.
"I know that there are anxieties about possible security issues, but the real question is whether Serbia will be better off with partial co-operation and outstanding arrests of persons indicted of war crimes or with this problem resolved and with fast joining of the EU," Massari said.
"Co-operation with The Hague tribunal is a political condition that must be fulfilled."
