19/01/2005
(Athens News Agency - 19/01/05; AFP, AP, VOA, EUobserver, Athens News Agency, EU - 18/01/05)
While welcoming Greece's efforts to rein in its excessive budget deficit, the EU Finance Ministers Council (ECOFIN) said Tuesday (18 January) the country was still in breach of fiscal rules applied in the eurozone countries. 
Anticipating that the Greek deficit will remain above the 3 per cent of GDP limit in 2005, the ministers agreed on the need to launch a formal warning process against the country.
"The Council acknowledged that the Greek government implemented measures in 2004 aimed at curbing the rising deficit and that the 2005 budget projects measures leading to a significant budgetary adjustment," ECOFIN said in a statement Tuesday, following a two-day meeting in Brussels. 
However, Greece is still not in compliance with the fiscal rules, the ministers said.
Recent revelations showed that Greece provided flawed data on its economic performance between 1997 and 1999, and that the country's actual performance would not have allowed it to join the eurozone. 
The European Commission (EC) put Greece's 2004 budget deficit at 5.5 per cent of GDP and has said the government's current projections of a 2.8 per cent deficit during 2005 are overly optimistic.
According to EU Finance Commissioner Joaquin Almunia, the deficit will more likely be around 3.6 per cent -- again exceeding the 3 per cent ceiling.
Statistical revisions, expenditure over-runs associated with organising the Athens Olympics and other spending items, and revenue shortfalls have been blamed for the budget gap. 
Given the high deficit in 2004 and other budgetary risks, the excessive deficit may persist in 2005, the ECOFIN statement said.
Welcoming the Greek authorities' commitment to implement "with the utmost rigour the 2005 budget", however, the ministers concluded that the budgetary consolidation measures undertaken should secure a lasting improvement in the general government balance.
Meanwhile, Almunia is due to propose new austerity measures next month to help Greece rectify its finances. 
Those measures will be subject to ECOFIN's approval.
Hailing the EU recognition of Greece's efforts to rein in its budget deficit, Finance Minister George Alogoskoufis said Tuesday the EC wanted to see "greater speed in implementation of these measures". 
But he also stressed that the budget over-run was largely the result of actions taken by previous governments.
"On the basis of the finance ministry's assessments, it would be feasible to shrink the deficit to the Community's legally accepted level within 2005, but the Commission believes that this hypothesis is very optimistic, and that the adoption of fiscal adaptation measures will also be needed in 2006," Alogoskoufis said at a news conference in Brussels after the ECOFIN meeting. 
"The government is willing to strike at the root of the problem, taking the necessary structural measures and curbing wasteful spending in the public sector."
