24/06/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/06/05
The Macedonian government has concluded a protocol with the Slovenia's Turbo Institute, calling for the construction of 20 small hydropower plants.
Because this type of plant does not require a dam, completion is planned within two years.
The Slovenian firm alone will invest in the 100m-worth project.
Economy Minister Fatmir Besimi and Turbo Institute CEO Vladimir Kerco signed the deal on 17 June.
Following the ceremony, Besimi hailed the project as an important development for the economy, particularly in the energy sphere.
It will have positive effects on intensifying the investment cycle and engagement of Macedonian construction firms, Besimi said.
Under terms of the protocol, 70 per cent of the investment value should be executed through the engagement of Macedonian firms.
Turbo Institute will be responsible for preparing the papers, as well as constructing and maintaining the plants.
After the 30-year concession term expires, the plants are to be handed over to the state without compensation.
The mini-plants will have a total power capacity of 20 MW and will produce 300 million kWh of electricity.
Studies have shown that Macedonia has enough hydro potential to support more than 400 small plants.
According to the environment ministry, this kind of plant is the best choice for protecting the environment, because it does not emit pollutants and does not require construction of a dam and the creation of large lakes, which disturb plant and animal habitats.
Such lakes also influence the microclimate.
Currently, annual production of electricity in Macedonia is 1.5 billion kWh.
Most of this -- 1.01 billion kWh -- is supplied by two thermo-power plants, and another 10 per cent to 12 per cent is provided from hydro energy.
Macedonia also imports around 1 billion kWh annually for its needs.
Experts anticipate the total production of electricity will be around 7 billion kWh by the end of this year.
Demand, meanwhile, could rise to 11 billion kWh.
That would leave a shortfall of about 4.0 billion kWh annually.
