21/02/2005
(Various sources -- 18/02/05 - 21/02/05)
Belgium has launched a massive security operation for the visit of US President George Bush, who arrived Sunday (20 February) in Brussels, the first stop of his five-day European tour. 
He will join heads of state and government Tuesday for a high-level discussion on transatlantic issues.
Bush will hold separate talks with EU leaders Tuesday to discuss strengthening ties. 
The situation in the Balkans is expected to be one of the many issues raised in Brussels.
In Monday's keynote speech, the text of which was made available to the press in advance, Bush describes the alliance of Europe and North America as "the main pillar of our security in a new century".
"Our robust trade is one of the engines of the world economy. 
Our example of economic and political freedom gives hope to millions who are weary of poverty and oppression. 
In all these ways, our strong friendship is essential to peace and prosperity across the globe and no temporary debate, no passing disagreement of governments, no power on earth will ever divide us," the prepared text of the speech reads.
Voicing his country's support for a "strong Europe", Bush is also expected to urge European leaders to work with the United States on the basis of common values, to advance the cause of freedom and democracy across the globe.
"Today, America and Europe face a moment of consequence and opportunity. 
Together we can once again set history on a hopeful course away from poverty and despair, and towards development and the dignity of self-rule, away from resentment and violence, and towards justice and the peaceful settlement of differences," the speech reads. 
"As past debates fade, and great duties become clear, let us begin a new era of trans-Atlantic unity."
Meanwhile, EU foreign ministers are expected to discuss a range of issues, including the situation in the Balkans, alongside preparations for Tuesday's meeting with Bush. 
According to Belgrade-based B92 Radio, UNMIK chief Soeren Jessen-Petersen will attend the EU ministers' consultations Monday, reporting on the situation in Kosovo.
The bloc's top diplomats are expected to draw up the Union's position on the province. 
Observers say it is likely to emphasise that UN Security Council Resolution 1244 is the basic international legal document for defining Kosovo's future.
Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schuessel will reportedly brief Bush about the situation in the Balkans, with the goal of obtaining Washington's continued support for the Union's policy in the region.
French President Jacques Chirac is expected to outline briefly the current state of play in European integration. 
Bulgaria and Romania are slated to join the EU in January 2007, while Croatia and Turkey are scheduled to begin their accession talks this year.
After the talks in Brussels, Bush is scheduled to visit Germany on Wednesday to meet with Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder. 
He will conclude the first trip abroad of his second term in Bratislava on Thursday, meeting there with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
