18/03/2005
(The Guardian - 18/03/05; AFP, HINA, VOA, BBC Monitoring - 17/03/05; Bloomberg, BBC - 16/03/05)
Downplaying the effect of the EU's decision to put his country's entry talks on hold, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said neither Euro-sceptics nor Euro-enthusiasts within his country benefited from the move.
"We should not be discouraged," Sanader told Croatian lawmakers on Thursday (17 March), assuring them that the preparations for the accession negotiations would continue. 
He appeared confident that the process would soon be unblocked and Croatia would move ahead on its path to membership in the Union.
On Wednesday, EU foreign ministers decided to postpone launching the talks, which had been scheduled to start the next day. 
The ministers made it clear that the process would only begin after retired General Ante Gotovina, one of the UN war crimes tribunal's most-wanted indictees, has been delivered to The Hague court.
Chief UN prosecutor Carla del Ponte has repeatedly said that Gotovina is within the reach of Croatian authorities, despite their statements to the contrary.
Voicing regret that the talks had not begun as scheduled, Foreign Minister Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic told reporters in Brussels on Thursday that this was "neither a triumph nor a failure" for her country, "but a normal process" that would not significantly slow down Croatia's progress.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic also sought to downplay the impact of the delay. 
"I believe that in a short time we will prove our credibility and show that we have done everything, that co-operation is full," he said.
"This is only a temporary glitch," said an unnamed government official quoted by Reuters, adding that authorities would be able to prove their credibility soon. 
"We are an EU-oriented government and there is no going back," the official said.
A decision giving the green light for the talks needs the unanimous support of all 25 EU member nations. 
On Wednesday, only Austria, Hungary, Slovenia and Slovakia were in favour of starting talks as planned.
Support for EU entry has not changed much within Croatia as a result of the delay, a new poll found. 
The number of people who are enthusiastic about membership fell from 47.3 per cent in February to 43.8 per cent in the past several days, while the number of skeptics rose 1.7 per cent, to 38 per cent. 
The poll, conducted by the Metro Ventura agency and published in Vecernji List, found that 38.8 per cent of Croatians attributed the delay to del Ponte and the EU, while 32 per cent blamed the government. 
Another 7.3 per cent said Britain was responsible.
