18/03/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 18/03/05
When it comes to surprises, the Romanian political scene is hard to beat. 
Last November's general elections were won by the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD), but opposition candidate Traian Basescu pulled off a stunning victory two weeks later in the presidential poll. 
Basescu used his new position to create a governmental coalition, excluding PSD. 
Defying most expectations, Basescu has now come out strongly in favour of early elections.
"I believe we need to organise [parliament] after signing the EU accession treaty in April, this summer or at least this fall. 
The early elections could clarify the relationships within the cabinet and confer stability to a pretty delicate political coalition," Basescu said in February.
Recent opinion polls show the ruling Justice and Truth (DA) Alliance, consisting of the Democratic Party (PD) and National Liberal Party (PNL), could almost double the votes it received in the 2004 elections, putting it in a much stronger position that it is in now. 
Currently, the DA has only 161 out of the 469 seats in parliament. 
To pass any law, it needs the support of the 63 senators and deputies of the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians (UDMR) and the Humanist Party (PUR) -- both of which have a track record of backing the opposition Socialists -- plus the 17 deputies of the other national minorities.
The PUR and the UDMR are less than enthusiastic about the idea of an early vote. 
"In this particular moment we have a lot of things to do, it's a difficult period and we need a coherent and stable governmental coalition, said Deputy Prime Minister and UDMR chairman Marko Bela.
Opinion polls show both parties could experience difficulties in surpassing the 5 per cent threshold.
Opposition parties have also rejected early elections, arguing that they could lead to a snag in the EU accession process.
Within the governing alliance, it is the PD which has shown the most determination to press ahead with the idea. 
"The early elections solution is extremely viable and beneficial for the Romanian political system," said PD interim president Eugen Nicolaescu.
The PNL, meanwhile, has downplayed the idea, saying it is not a priority. 
"In case the political stability couldn't be insured, this would be a democratic and responsible alternative," a party spokesman said.
