23/06/2005
(The New York Times, i-Newswire - 23/06/05;
UN News Centre, AP, The Scotsman, Cyprus News Agency - 22/06/05)
A senior UN official told the Security Council on Wednesday (22 June) that although both the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots want a settlement ending Cyprus's division, he could not recommend a new round of talks.
"Launching an intensive new process prematurely would be inadvisable," UN Undersecretary General for Political Affairs Kieran Prendergast said, briefing the Council on his stops in Cyprus, Greece and Turkey earlier this month.
"Nothing positive would be served by a new effort that ended, as the previous two efforts did, in high-profile failure, or else in a frustrating stalemate."
The latest international effort to unify Cyprus collapsed in April last year, when the Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected a UN-sponsored plan for a settlement.
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots supported the proposed deal, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the Mediterranean island eventually joined the EU on 1 May 2004.
Prendergast noted there have been positive developments since then, including "cordial contacts" maintained between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot politicians in a bid to promote mutual understanding.
"There are useful contacts at other levels too, whether among experts on particular subjects or among ordinary people now that they are able cross to the other side," Prendergast added.
On the other hand, he said, there appears to be a wide gap between the stated positions of the two parties, and mutual confidence is low.
Although the two parties say they want a solution, the prerequisites for achieving a deal are missing, he said.
"Outsiders can help, but it is the parties who must summon the vision, courage and political will needed to make a settlement, with all that this implies by way of compromise," said Prendergast.
"Leaders have to lead, not just follow their supporters."
Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos believes the plan finalised by UN General Secretary Kofi Annan last year gave the Turkish Cypriot side and Turkey "nearly everything they wanted, more than they needed, and more than was fair," Prendergast told the Council.
Turkish Cypriot President Mehmet Ali Talat, meanwhile, said that his side would be "prepared to entertain minor changes within the parameters of the plan, but he believed that it was very important to have a clear and final list of demands from the Greek Cypriot side," according to the UN envoy.
Talat also expressed disappointment with the Security Council's failure to react to Annan's good offices report of 28 May last year and ease restrictions on the Turkish Cypriots.
Annan has indicated that he intends to move "very carefully" in the search of a solution, given the situation.
