20/12/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 20/12/04
Macedonia's Parliament approved Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski's new government on Friday (17 December) after a three-day debate.
MPs from the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia, the Democratic Union of Integration and the Liberal Democrats voted in favour, while those from the VMRO-DPMNE, the Liberal Party and the Democratic Party of Albanians voted "no".
The cabinet is the third to take office since the For Macedonia Together Coalition won the 2002 parliamentary elections.
"After a long but not futile debate, the parliament approved the new government which is now facing major challenges," said Buckovski after the voting in a statement for Southeast European Times.
"I am convinced that we will fulfil what I emphasised in my address.
Macedonia will carry through the reforms and receive an invitation for NATO membership and will become a candidate for EU membership.
I hope that, afterwards, Macedonia will be a prosperous, stable and safe country."
In his address to lawmakers, Buckovski pointed to completing the implementation of the Ohrid Agreement as one of the new government's priorities, noting that two major items of legislation -- the laws on use of minority languages and symbols -- are still awaiting passage.
Another priority, he said, would be improving the economy.
"We will propose measures for improvement of competitiveness and strategies for development of export-oriented sectors in the industrial areas.
This should affect … the living standards of all," Buckovski said.
The cabinet has 19 members.
A newly established fourth deputy prime ministerial office has been given to businessman Minco Jordanov.
He has been tasked with co-ordinating economic policy.
Ilinka Mitreva will remain as foreign minister, Radmila Sekerinska is still deputy prime minister for European integration;
Nikola Popovski remains at the helm of the finance ministry, and Blagoja Stefanovski is keeping her post as culture minister
Musa Xhaferi is the deputy prime minister charged with implementation of the Ohrid Agreement.
Azis Polozani remains minister of education and science, while Vlado Popovski will again serve as minister without portfolio.
Jovan Manasievski is the new defence minister, taking the post previously held by Buckovski.
Ljubomir Mihajlovski is the interior minister, and Meri Mladenovska-Gjorgjievska is the minister of justice.
Fatmir Besimi will head the economy ministry and Vlado Dimov the health ministry.
Sadula Duraku is the minister of agriculture and forestry and Stevco Jakimovski will head the labour and welfare policy ministry.
Newcomers to the cabinet also include Rizvan Sulejmani as local self-government minister, Xhemali Mehasi as transport minister, and Zoran Sapuric as the new environment minister.
