22/06/2005
(Office of the High Representative - 22/06/05; Council of Europe, AP, FENA, SEE Security Monitor - 21/06/05)
The main priority of the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is to bring the country's legislation in line with European conventions, particularly the European Charter on Protection of Human Rights, Prime Minister Adnan Terzic said Tuesday (21 June).
"The only way to have a stable BiH is to integrate into the big European family," he said, addressing the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) in Strasbourg. 
Citing poll results, Terzic noted that 80 per cent of BiH's population "supports the idea of an EU future" for their country.
"We expect European leadership to avoid having second thoughts about future enlargements, after the double "no" to the European constitution," the prime minister also told the 46-nation top human rights watchdog.
Membership in the Council of Europe (CoE) has helped BiH to move "from Dayton towards Brussels," Terzic said, referring to the 1995 peace accords that ended the conflict in the BiH. 
In the past three years, since joining the CoE, the country made greater progress in the areas of reintegration and state building than it did during the first seven years after the end of the 1992-1995 conflict, the prime minister noted.
In his speech to PACE, less than a month before the 10th anniversary of the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys, Terzic also painted his vision for BiH's future. 
"The European Bosnia and Herzegovina I stand for will have a single economic space, Schengen-like borders, an independent judiciary, efficient police, professional media and before all, functional democratic institutions that guarantee full equality and an equal starting point for all."
Before it can make further progress on the path towards EU integration, BiH must sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU. 
That, in turn, requires meeting 16 conditions set by Brussels.
"There are two things standing in the way of BiH in terms of launching the SAA negotiations: police reforms and the law on Public Broadcasting Service (PBS)," Terzic said, adding that "we must do everything possible not to lose this chance".
Following a preliminary political agreement in April, BiH's Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), rejected the EU-backed police reform proposal last month, objecting to the idea of allowing police to cross interentity boundaries.
In his comments Tuesday, Terzic countered Bosnian Serb arguments that the proposal was a step towards abolishing RS. 
"Police reform is not a project which will bring down RS, but introduce better standards of security for all citizens in BiH," he said.
