20/12/2004
(Various sources -- 17/12/04 - 19/12/04)
Taking a major step towards further EU expansion, European leaders have given the green light for the signing of entry treaties with Bulgaria and Romania and for the launch of membership talks with Croatia and Turkey in 2005.
"We have reached important conclusions for the future of Europe," European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso said Friday (17 December) at the end of a two-day EU summit in Brussels.
The summit was largely dominated by negotiations between the current Dutch EU presidency and Turkish officials over Cyprus.
Originally, Ankara was offered a deal that would have required it to sign a protocol expanding a customs union agreement to include Cyprus and the other nine new EU members -- a move that would, in effect, constitute recognition of Cyprus.
However, the two sides struck a last-minute compromise, under which Turkey will issue a declaration stating its commitment to signing the protocol prior to the start of accession talks and after "finalising the adaptations which are necessary in view of the current membership of the EU".
EU leaders, in their concluding statement, voiced confidence that Turkey would sustain the reform process and ensure respect for fundamental freedoms and human rights.
The negotiations process, expected to last up to 15 years, will include safeguards allowing the EU to suspend talks if Turkey falters in its commitments.
Addressing thousands of cheering supporters in Ankara on Saturday, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said the deal reached in Brussels paved the way for stronger democracy in the country and better economic performance.
"We did not obtain all that we wanted, 100 per cent, but we can say that it was a success," he said.
"We have reached a point where Turkey is rewarded for 41 years of efforts."
In another significant step towards the Union's further expansion, European leaders set 17 March 2005 for the launch of Croatia's accession talks, making it conditional on the country's full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
Urging Zagreb to take the necessary steps towards that end, the EU stressed that fugitive Croatian General Ante Gotovina, one of the tribunal's most wanted indictees, "must be located and transferred to The Hague as soon as possible".
Croatia's earlier stated goal was to join the EU in 2007, along with Bulgaria and Romania.
However, experts believe 2009 is a more likely date.
Bulgaria and Romania are on track to join the EU in January 2007, the 25-nation Union leaders said Friday, setting April 2005 as the date for the signing of their accession treaties.
Both countries have also agreed to safeguard clauses allowing membership to be put off if they fail to implement reforms.
