21/06/2005
(EU, AFP, UPI, Rompres - 20/05/06)
Dismissing claims that the deep crisis facing the EU poses a threat to the bloc's further expansion, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Monday (20 June) that the Union would stick to its commitment to take in more countries.
But those hoping to join the EU one day must first meet the strict political and economic criteria for membership, he stressed.
Bulgaria and Romania are scheduled to make their entry into the Union on 1 January 2007 and Turkey's accession talks are due to begin on 3 October.
Albania and all former the Yugoslav republics -- except for Slovenia, which is already an EU member -- are also hoping for admission into the 25-nation club one day.
Croatia is the only officially recognised EU candidate country among them;
the others are in different stages of the EU accession process.
In a referendum in late May, voters in France rejected the Union's proposed constitutional treaty, with Dutch voters doing the same shortly afterwards.
Addressing a conference at the European Policy Centre in Brussels on Monday, Rehn cautioned against overemphasising the role the enlargement issue may have played in influencing those votes.
"The perception of enlargement and its consequences was there in the French debate, but it would be a misinterpretation to highlight this issue as the decisive cause of the "no" vote, when the sense of insecurity and social discontent stemming from high unemployment played a much bigger role," Rehn said.
Last week, the bloc's troubles took a further turn, when a two-day EU summit in Brussels ended without agreement on the 2007-2013 budget.
Although the EU leaders reiterated their commitment to earlier decisions on enlargement, the crisis -- described by some as the worst in EU history -- has fuelled concerns about prospects for further expansion.
"Certainly we need to pace ourselves after last year's big bang," Rehn said, referring to the May 2004 expansion that brought in ten new Central and East European countries.
"But it would be irresponsible to disrupt a valuable process that is helping to build stable and effective partners in the most unstable parts of Europe."
At the same time, Rehn made it clear that the EU hopefuls will not be able to join the Union before they have fully met the requirements for membership.
"While I hope Bulgaria and Romania will make it in time [1 January 2007], I am prepared to postpone their membership if they do not implement essential reforms," said Rehn.
For Turkey to begin accession talks in October, it must first enforce legislation aimed at significantly improving human rights in the country and sign a protocol extending its existing customs agreement with the EU to all new member states, including Cyprus.
Talks with Croatia, originally set to begin earlier this year, have been postponed due to its failure to extradite one of the UN war crimes tribunal's top three indictees, Ante Gotovina.
"I would like to start negotiations with Croatia, but that will only be possible once the country is co-operating fully with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague," Rehn said.
Rehn also outlined the requirements the other Balkan countries must meet to make progress en route to EU integration.
For Macedonia it is implementation of economic reforms;
for Serbia-Montenegro it is full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
Bosnia and Herzegovina should focus on police and media reforms, and Albania must make sure that the 3 July parliamentary elections are fair and free.
