19/04/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 19/04/05
Less than three months before parliamentary elections take place on 25 June, Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov has signed legislation amending the country's election laws.
He did so on Monday (11 April) after the ruling National Movement for Simeon II (NMS-II) introduced changes to the initial draft.
The amendments provide for establishing a participation deposit for political parties and candidates and changes to the type of ballot used.
Parvanov had earlier threatened to veto the bill, voicing disagreement with some of its provisions.
To be registered for participation in the upcoming vote, parties and coalitions will have to pay deposits of about 10,000 euros and 20,000 euros, respectively.
Individual candidates will have to pay a deposit of about 2,500 euros.
All three categories of participants will be refunded the money, provided they win more than 1 per cent of the vote.
NMS-II reportedly proposed the deposit requirement in a bid to ensure that only serious players from among the more than 200 parties registered in Bulgaria take part in the vote.
Recent polls suggest only six parties and coalitions, including the NMS-II, will be able to pass the 4 per cent threshold required for entry in the 240-seat parliament.
To be registered for the parliamentary vote, parties and coalitions are also required to submit a list with the signatures of at least 5,000 supporters.
Another major change in the electoral legislation is the introduction of a single integral white ballot to replace the traditional coloured ballot papers representing the different parties.
The list of all parties, coalitions and individual candidates running for parliament will be printed on the integral ballot, on which voters will indicate their choices.
Unlike previous elections, the ballot paper will not be placed in an envelope, but will be stamped twice -- first, before the voter enters the voting booth, and a second time before it is cast in the ballot box.
The amended law also stipulates that Bulgarians living abroad can vote for parties and coalitions, but not for individual candidates.
In addition, Bulgarian lawmakers approved a provision under which the State Commission on Information Security will have to verify that none of the candidates for parliament has been linked to the communist-era state security service or the intelligence units of the army general staff or border troops.
The results of the checks will not be publicly disclosed -- they will be revealed only to the leadership of the party, coalition or initiative committee that nominated the candidate.
This particular provision is in line with commitments stemming from Bulgaria's NATO entry in April 2004 -- specifically, the need to ensure that former secret service agents do not have access to classified information.
