19/04/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 19/04/05
The European Commission has approved 34.5m euros for Macedonia as part of the Community Assistance for Reconstruction, Development and Stabilisation Programme (CARDS).
The funds will go towards supporting the country's reform efforts as it progresses towards integration in the EU.
By providing this assistance, Brussels aims to enable realisation of the priorities set forth in Macedonia's Stablisation and Association Agreement with the Union, as well as to support implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement.
The largest tranche, 18.5m euros, will be spent on building up institutions and the establishment of best practices and rules of conduct.
This includes the areas of justice and internal affairs, as well as public administration.
The focus will be on reforms in the police and judiciary sectors and on the fight against organised crime -- segments that are of the utmost importance for the country's integration into the EU and NATO.
Part of the funds will be spent on reforms in statistics and telecommunications, as well as to support decentralisation.
Assistance will also go towards the customs and taxation services.
Around 10.6m euros will be allotted to economic and social development.
In this area, improvement of the investment climate in the country, currently one of the biggest problems, will receive the greatest support.
Reforms in transport, communications and environmental protection will be assisted via joint projects with the EBRD and the European Investment Bank.
In addition, funds are being earmarked for employment policy support.
Community programmes will receive approximately 2m euros, with the same figure going towards efforts to stabilise democracy in Macedonia, especially through implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement.
The emphasis will be placed on two areas:
increasing the representation levels of minority ethnic communities in public administration, and developing a new government sector in charge of implementation of the agreement.
As in previous years, 1.4m euros will be used for general technical assistance.
