21/06/2005
(AFP - 14/06/05;
The Scotsman - 27/05/05;
BBC - 12/06/05;
23/05/05;
28/04/05)
It was a drama that played out over the course of seven weeks:
a trio of Romanian journalists and their translator were seized by militants in a Baghdad suburb and threatened with execution.
The hostage taking sparked vigils in Bucharest's University Square and elsewhere, appeals from the Muslim community in Romania, and intensive negotiations.
And in the end, prosecutors say, it turned out to be an elaborate hoax of sorts with twists that some say involved agents from the long-dismantled Securitate, or secret police.
It all began on 28 March when Romanian President Traian Basescu was paying a visit to Baghdad.
Marie Jeanne Ion, Sorin Dumitru Miscoci and Ovidiu Ohanesian, as well as their Iraqi-American translator, Mohammed Monaf, were abducted after interviewing Iraq's interim prime minister at the time, Iyad Allawi, and others.
The four hostages would later appear in a few scattered videos broadcast by the Arabic network al-Jazeera.
First the kidnappers demanded Romania's 800 troops leave Iraq.
In time their demands turned to large sums of cash.
From beginning to end, Bucharest insisted it would not negotiate.
In all, 55 days passed before the journalists were freed and returned home to noisy crowds of well-wishers.
That was on 22 May.
Less than a week later, Romanian prosecutors announced that the kidnapping was orchestrated by Monaf and his Syrian-born business partner, Omar Hayssam, one of the richest men in Romania.
Arrest warrants were issued, charging each with terrorism.
Prosecutors say Hayssam was already under investigation for financial wrongdoing, and had hoped that he would receive leniency if he "negotiated" the safe release of the hostages.
Hayssam denies anything of the sort.
He says Monaf discovered a business opportunity in Baghdad and suggested taking some journalists along to generate publicity.
After the abductions, Hayssam says the kidnappers contacted him, demanding ransom.
He says early on, President Basescu asked him to use his contacts in Baghdad to save the hostages.
But Romanian intelligence became involved early on as well.
There are unconfirmed reports the government worked with Arabs cultivated years ago by former dictator Nicolae Ceausescu's Securitate, and asked them to talk to their old contacts in the Middle East.
In Paris last week, Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu confirmed that the country's intelligence agency had helped secure the release of another journalist abducted in Iraq months ago, Florence Aubenas.
She and her Iraqi translator were finally released on 11 June.
While the Romanian journalists say they were held with her in Iraq for weeks, Aubenas ducked questions about them during a 14 June press conference.
"The situation is delicate … I cannot speak about the Romanians, " she said.
Some in Bucharest doubt any involvement by former members of the Securitate, theorising instead that Syria played a decisive role in the hostages' release.
Asked whether Damascus had been involved, Tariceanu said only that it was a "pity" Bucharest had in recent years "neglected" the close ties Ceausescu had forged with the Arab world.
