20/05/2005
(UNESCO, Christian Science Monitor, UNMIK, UN News Centre, BBC, Kosovareport, AKI, Radio B92, All American Patriots - 13/05/05; One World Southeast Europe - 12/05/05)
UNESCO hosted the first international donors' conference on Kosovo's cultural heritage on 13 May, in a bid to raise 40m euros for the restoration and preservation of dozens of religious monuments and historic sites in the province.
The meeting in Paris was organised in co-operation with UNMIK, the Council of Europe and the European Commission (EC). 
It was attended by representatives of more than 50 member states, as well as 15 foundations and NGOs.
The conference ended with commitments for 8.2m euros in financial support. 
The main donors include the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Sweden and Turkey. 
The United States pledged $1m. 
The country contributions, according to a statement UNESCO issued after the meeting, will be added to the 2m euros already allotted by the EC and the 5.7m euros set aside by the Kosovo provisional institutions.
The support promised by countries such as Albania, Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Netherlands and Portugal, as well as by three NGOs, will come in the form of technical, expert and institutional assistance. 
Other potential donors said they were ready to contribute financial resources for the initiative, but would first study the working paper proposals.
The document lists 75 cultural and religious monuments that were destroyed or damaged during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo and subsequent violence, or which have simply fallen into disrepair, UNESCO said. 
They include 48 Orthodox monuments, 14 Islamic/Ottoman monuments and 13 examples of vernacular architecture and other historic sites.
"Respect for preservation and reconstruction of cultural and religious sites is an integral part of the process of improving and consolidating relations between the different communities in Kosovo, particularly between the Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb communities," UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen said at the conference.
One of the sites on the list is the Serbian Orthodox Decani monastery, a UNESCO World Heritage site since last year, located at the foot of Mount Prokletije in western Kosovo. 
The compound, UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura wrote in an editorial published in the Christian Science Monitor on 13 May, is "universally recognized as a fine example of medieval religious architecture in Europe". 
It includes a 14th-century church, described as a jewel of Byzantine architecture, which houses about 60 icons. 
The church walls are almost entirely covered with remarkable frescos depicting more than 1,000 saints.
"There can be no lasting peace without solid foundations," Matsuura wrote in his article ahead of the conference. 
"Tolerance, mutual understanding, and respect for the rule of law, minority rights, and cultural diversity are such basics. 
They are the "soft" ingredients for peace-building, a long-term process that must start in the mind of each of the citizens of Kosovo and its neighbours."
He also called for strengthening of education for democratic citizenship, continuing work on the revision of history textbooks and promoting a better understanding of cultural heritage protection and preservation.
