22/11/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 22/11/04
Following the September local elections in Serbia, advocates of media independence have once again raised concerns about the practice of making political appointments at major media organisations.
Typically, changes in local government are accompanied by top-level changes at all public enteprises.
Problems arise, however, when a member of a political party is appointed to head a local radio or TV station with a view to exerting control over information flow and news content.
Politicians generally want to use the media to promote their political ideas and interests, says Nebojsa Bugarinovic, the president of the Association of Independent Journalists of Serbia, adding that the announced privatisation of the media will partially clear the air.
But even then, he cautions, it could become possible for a small group of owners -- affiliated with particular political forces -- to monopolise the reporting of information.
"One of the ideas that is being mentioned at numerous meetings of media workers these days is that regional public services should be established, radio and television, which in turn would have their own mini-broadcasting councils that would also be entitled to a portion of the subscription income.
I think that this would better protect the interests of citizens of certain regions for timely and truthful reporting," Bugarinovic says.
Meanwhile, the Association of Independent Electronic Media has announced over B92 Radio and Television that it will apply to international organisations for support of independent media that are owned by municipal governments, with a view to maintaining existing structures, trained staff and editorial policy following the changes of power that occurred in the local elections.
Such support is also in the interest of maintaining continuity during the privatisation process, the organisation says.
According to Predrag Petkovic, the director of Radio-television Kragujevac, local media are "subject to pressures and influence from politicians in power, most often for economic reasons.
Local radio and TV stations are largely not independent financially and get money from municipal budgets."
In Petkovic's view, a quick and efficient solution to this problem could be hard to find.
"It is only with the regulation of the media market, enforcement of the Law on Broadcasting, signing of tenders for frequencies, that this will become regulated," he says.
"At present there is really no apparent political will for regulating this by appointing a Broadcasting Council and passing the Law on Broadcasting."
Changes in management and in editorial offices could influence the process of privatisation, Petkovic warns.
"There is real danger that the media could be brought back to the period of 1996 when they were under single political control.
This would annul everything that has been done in the previous period," he says.
