18/04/2005
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 18/04/05
Last week, the European Parliament (EP) approved the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU in 2007, paving the way for the signing of the accession treaty on 25 April.
MPs and top EU officials cautioned, however, that much must be accomplished in the 21 months leading up to the 1 January 2007 accession date.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn reassured the EP he would not hesitate "to recommend the use of the remedial tools" -- including the safeguard clause allowing the delay of the accession until 2008 -- if either Romania or Bulgaria fails to meet its commitments.
"The clock is ticking.
Every day, every week, every month counts," Rehn said.
At the same time, he sought to reassure EU lawmakers about the political will of the new administration in Bucharest.
"Romania has started to seriously tackle the accession requirements, in particular in the field of justice reform and the fight against corruption," he said.
Romanian President Traian Basescu echoed that statement in an interview with the French newspaper Le Figaro.
"We'll meet our commitments," Basescu said, inviting sceptics to come to Romania and "see with their own eyes that they are wrong".
The new administration is serious about fighting high-level corruption, the president said.
"A certain number of big [suspects] are under justice scrutiny -- people believed to have been beyond any suspicion.
The ongoing investigations will allow us to reveal their connections with the political circles backing them."
In addition to reforming the judiciary and public administration, Romanian authorities also need to follow through on commitments made during the accession negotiations, on protecting the environment and boosting competition.
"We do not have the right to relax in the following months," acknowledged Foreign Minister Mihai Razvan Ungureanu.
For Romania, the EP's 497-93 vote -- with 71 abstentions -- came as a relief, as the preceding weeks had seen considerable uncertainty about the outcome.
Markus Ferber, leader of the Bavarian CSU group and an influential MEP of the European Peoples Party (EPP), publicly expressed his reluctance to allow Romania to join the European club in 2007, charging that corruption is still rampant.
Together with the EPP, the Greens -- led by the French MEP Daniel Cohn-Bendit -- asked the EP to postpone its vote until November.
Eventually, both blocs agreed with the European Council that the vote should go ahead, while calling for EP involvement in the monitoring process as well as the allocation of funding.
