18/04/2005
(AP, The Guardian, International Herald Tribune, Cyprus News Agency - 18/04/05; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, CNN, UPI, VOA, The Scotsman, USA Today - 17/04/05)
Turkish Cypriot Prime Minister Mehmet Ali Talat was elected president of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) on Sunday (17 April). 
He succeeds veteran politician Rauf Denktash, 81, who is stepping down after more than three decades at the helm.
Talat defeated eight other contenders for the presidency, winning 56 per cent of the vote. 
His main rival, Dervis Eroglu, received 23 per cent. 
Turnout was high, with nearly 70 per cent of the 148,000 registered Turkish Cypriot voters going to the polls.
"For all of those who want peace ... 
the (presidential) palace is now yours," Talat said Sunday, addressing some 2,000 flag-waving supporters who cheered him at a square in Cyprus's divided capital, Nicosia.
A strong supporter of the UN peace plan that formed the basis of last year's talks on resolving the Cyprus issue, Talat made reunification and full participation in the EU the focal points of his presidential campaign. 
His views are said to have become particularly popular among young people in the Turkish-run north, where the economy is lagging behind that of the Greek Cypriot south.
After the election results were announced, the 53-year-old leader of the centre-left Republican Turkish Party said Sunday's victory gave him a mandate to push for reunification. 
Talat called on Greek Cypriots to join him in efforts towards ending the island's 31-year division and expressed readiness to meet with their president, Tassos Papadopoulos. 
He also appealed to the EU and the UN to take steps towards the resumption of reunification talks.
"I want to extend my hand to the Greek Cypriot people and the Greek Cypriot leadership for peace, to find a solution to our problem and reunify our island," Talat said Sunday.
Papadopoulos, who campaigned against the UN plan ahead of last year's referendum, welcomed the change of leadership and voiced hope that Talat and those around him would show a sincere will to renew negotiations.
The international community also welcomed Talat's victory. 
The European Commission's representation in Nicosia said it expected the win to create favourable conditions for the relaunch of UN-sponsored talks, the Cyprus News Agency reported. 
The Commission also voiced readiness to "play a more active role in this respect".
Congratulating Talat on his victory, the US Department of State issued a statement on Sunday, welcoming the Turkish Cypriots' reaffirmation of "their commitment to a comprehensive solution and reunification of the island".
"The United States will continue to support the efforts of the UN Secretary General to promote a solution to the long-standing division of the island, based on the UN Secretary General's settlement plan and in a manner acceptable to majorities on both sides of the island," the statement said."The United States will also continue to work to ease the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community and to reduce economic disparities between the two communities through economic development in the north."
