20/05/2005
(OSCE, Reuters, Fena, Hina - 19/05/05)
A meeting of the OSCE Permanent Council agreed Thursday (19 May) to start working together with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in monitoring domestic war crimes trials.
The terms of the agreement involve the existing OSCE missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro, which will monitor war crimes trials transferred from the ICTY to the judiciaries of their respective host countries, the OSCE said in a statement.
Thursday's agreement followed a proposal chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte made to OSCE Chairman-in-Office, Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel.
Speaking at Thursday's meeting, del Ponte praised the 55-nation organisation for its efforts to promote justice and the rule of law throughout the former Yugoslav republics.
"
The OSCE is best-equipped to co-operate closely with the office of the prosecutor in the fulfilment of this important task and would thus play an important role in a key aspect of the completion strategy endorsed by the UN Security Council," del Ponte said.
The completion strategy sets 2008 as the deadline for the completion of all first-instance trials and 2010 as the date for completing appeals and winding up all remaining activities of the Hague-based court.
"The relevant OSCE field missions are already involved in monitoring war crimes trials," the prosecutor noted.
"I have observed that the OSCE has the capabilities to provide the kind of robust monitoring that the ICTY will need.
In fact, the ICTY has already cited OSCE monitoring reports in several of its proceedings."
Seeking to meet the deadlines set out in its UN-endorsed completion strategy, the ICTY has decided on various measures that would both help speed up trials, as well as free up courtroom space for other trials.
One such step is the UN tribunal's decision to refer some mid-and lower-level war crimes cases to domestic courts.
The first ruling in this regard was issued on Tuesday, when UN judges granted del Ponte's motion for the referral of the case of a former Bosnian Serb paramilitary to the war crimes chamber at the BiH state court.
The prosecutor said her office had filed another 10 motions involving 18 accused for such transfers of cases in the past months".
Subject to UN judges' approval, seven war crimes cases would be sent to BiH, one to Croatia, one to Serbia-Montenegro, and one to either Croatia or Serbia-Montenegro.
In addition, del Ponte's office has also started the process of referring over 60 non-indicted cases to the national jurisdictions of BiH, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro.
While voicing confidence that "a basic framework for the conduct of fair trials has been established" throughout the region, del Ponte cautioned that domestic proceedings would still need to be monitored.
Efforts would also have to be made to ensure the effective implementation of bilateral agreements and European conventions on judicial co-operation and of legislation on witness protection.
"The national authorities throughout the region should, with the assistance of the international community and specialised NGOs, work out comprehensive strategies to address this complex, but vital issue.
Tolerating impunity for any war crime is creating a liability for the future generations," del Ponte said.
