06/10/2008
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 06/10/08
The Turkish government has launched an investigation after 13 newborn babies died within 24 hours in a state hospital in Izmir late last month. 
It was only a few weeks after another health scandal in Ankara, where 27 newborn babies died at the Zekai Tahir Burak Hospital -- most from infection.
The initial results of the recent investigation showed an infection spread by intravenous fluids caused the babies' deaths at the Tepecik Research and Education Hospital in Izmir -- also the case in the Ankara hospital. 
The head of the investigation, Professor Recep Ozturk of the Istanbul Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, said the team has identified the bacterium that caused the infection. 
After reviewing the past records of the Izmir hospital, the investigators ruled out possible negligence by the doctors or the hospital team and said the deaths could best be described as an "accident".
Despite the team's findings, the public has demanded the resignation of Health Minister Recep Akdag. 
Local media have said that the tragic deaths illustrate the deterioration of the country's health system. 
A columnist from Milliyet, Ece Temelkuran, criticised allegedly mismanaged privatisation in the health sector, the delegation of responsibility to unprofessional firms, the lack of adequate health facilities and the failure to train new personnel. 
Temelkuran says that Akdag shoulders the responsibility and should resign. 
But her call, joined by those of many other critics, fell on deaf ears.
Although Akdag acknowledged the problem of hospital infections in Turkey, he claims success in efforts to reduce infant mortality at birth. 
"We are saddened by the death of any newborn baby or mother, but we should also look at the statistics," Akdag said.
"The number of children who die at birth was 29 [of every] 1,000 live births in the year 2003. 
This has decreased to 17 to 18 deaths in each 1,000 live births this year. 
That means we have managed to save the lives of thousands of babies," he said, conceding the number of children who die at birth was still high and pledging continued efforts to decrease this number.
According to the minister, the rate of infant mortality in Turkey is relatively low, compared with that of other developing nations. 
But the EU has long criticised candidate country Turkey's health system. 
In its 2007 Progress Report, the Union said that the percentage of infants who die at birth is "still high".
According to UN statistics, the infant mortality rate in EU member countries averages 5.84 deaths per 1,000 live births. 
In Turkey, estimates differing with Akdag's claims put infant mortality at around 36.98 deaths per every 1,000 live births.
Officials at the Izmir Medical Chamber blamed the health ministry and health policies for the recent increase in newborn deaths. 
"In Izmir, maternity hospitals are overloaded. 
Throughout Turkey, we do not have enough maternity hospitals or maternity experts," chamber director Suat Kaptaner said. 
He also blasted the government's controversial call for families to bear "at least three children".
"Under today's conditions, where we lack adequate health services and have widespread poverty, how one can expect people to have at least three children? 
... 
We do not have adequate personnel," Kaptaner said.
The opposition has filed written questions to parliament on the tragedies. 
Republican People's Party Izmir representative Selcuk Ayhan asked whether political appointments to the high positions at the health ministry may have contributed to the recent events.
Increasing political and public pressure on the government has forced officials to consider reform in maternity hospitals. 
The health ministry has organised a meeting for representatives of state and private hospitals for later in October. 
The meeting will focus on identifying the basic needs of the hospitals -- such as personnel levels and the number of beds, incubators and other medical items. 
The ministry plans to meet the demands of the health centers, redistribute the assigned personnel and co-ordinate the flow of patients among public and private hospitals.
