21/02/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 21/02/05
Military expert James Locher recently stepped down as the international co-chairman of the Defence Reform Commission (DRC), which is responsible for the military reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Starting at the end of last year, responsibility for leading the work of the DRC has been transferred to the new NATO Headquarters in Sarajevo, and Locher's position has been assumed by US diplomat Raffi Gregorian.
As he prepared to leave BiH, Locher answered some questions for Southeast European Times.
Southeast European Times:
Do you expect any changes in the work of the DRC now that NATO Headquarters in Sarajevo has become involved?
James Locher:
I do not expect a change in the way the DRC works.
But I do expect defence reform will accelerate this year, for a couple of reasons.
One is that most of the hard issues are behind us.
We have to address military intelligence reform, reform of personnel systems and the establishment of a common personnel system.
But the state-level institutions will be fully formed.
Soon we will be very close to full manning in the defence ministry, the joint staff and the operational command.
So we will have all of those capabilities that are needed to prepare the country for additional reforms.
In addition, NATO is going to provide more resources to assist the DRC.
They are going to devote a much larger portion of the NATO HQ Sarajevo, maybe as many as 30 people, to work alongside the DRC.
SE Times:
What has the hardest part of BiH defence reform been so far?
Locher:
The really tough work was done in 2003, when we were looking at the amendments to the constitution and various laws, and writing the state law on defence.
Then we developed the concept paper.
This was the most difficult chapter.
SE Times:
Why is it so hard to fill the BiH Ministry of Defence with at least 65 per cent of personnel?
Locher:
I think this is an experience that we have seen in all of the state-level ministries.
There are a lot of technical obstacles that have to be overcome, such as the Book of Rules, or the transfer of people from entity institutions to the state level.
I wish that this was done faster, that we would have the defence, the joint staff and the operational command with more people, so they could do more work and make progress on defence reform.
SE Times:
What is the greatest benefit of defence reform?
Locher:
I think the greatest benefit is improved security in BiH.
There is just one defence establishment now.
Entity ministers of defence work for the state minister of defence.
We have just one BiH Armed Forces.
I think this tremendously improves stability and security.
And it is also moving BiH much closer to the Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme and to working with NATO.
Also the burden on BiH's resources has been reduced:
reduction by 40 per cent of the active forces, reduction of the reserve, cutting the number of conscripts in half.
You know, the defence budget from last year has come down 20 per cent.
There is also a further reduction slated for this year.
All of this is a major plus.
SE Times:
How have the BiH Armed Forces improved compared to the years immediately after the conflict?
Locher:
Well, the military in BiH is much smaller than it was right after the war.
And the budget was not large enough for the size of the military that was retained, so much of the money has gone into personnel.
I think that last year about 90 per cent of the military budgets of the Federation of BiH and the Republika Srpska were spent on personnel.
So there was almost no money for training, to maintain equipment, or to conduct operations to improve capabilities.
At the same time, BiH now has much better democratic control of the armed forces.
Moreover, the security situation in BiH and the region has changed tremendously.
There are no longer the threats that existed in the past.
And BiH is moving towards being a part of collective security arrangements.
BiH wants to become a member of PfP.
It already has some of the benefits of PfP, since it has been permitted to participate in many activities of PfP countries.
Joining PfP and moving forward on its path to NATO means real security for BiH.
And there is a clear understanding that a smaller force is all that BiH needs.
But it has to be a professional force.
It has to have the skills to work with NATO and PfP countries.
SE Times:
Is the BiH military capable of accomplishing its three basic missions -- to protect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of BiH, to participate in UN peace-support operations and to support local authorities in humanitarian relief in the event of a natural disaster?
Locher:
I think protecting BiH's territorial integrity and assisting during natural disasters are the tasks that the military is best prepared to undertake, because they have been ongoing missions.
The mission of participating in peace-support operations is a new mission for BiH.
It will require deployments elsewhere, and will require working with NATO or in other systems and command arrangements.
And that takes some work.
There is the Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) unit that will be going to Iraq.
That will be a start.
SE Times:
Do you expect that BiH’s EOD unit will be up to the task when it is deployed to Iraq?
Locher:
I am sure it will be!
Very determined efforts have been made to prepare the unit and ensure it has the necessary support.
Most of that work has been done bilaterally by BiH and the United States.
SE Times:
What is the hardest challenge facing the BiH defence establishment on its way to PfP membership?
Locher:
The budget issue will be a challenge, because there will continue to be downsizing pressure on defence budgets.
There aren't sufficient resources.
How to professionalise the military while continuing to trim the defence budget will be the major issue.
