18/01/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 18/01/05
The latest poll by the International Republican Institute (IRI), commissioned last month by USAID, found that Macedonian citizens are mainly concerned about the country's economic development. 
Moreover, a majority of respondents -- 51 per cent of the 1,108 polled -- think unemployment is a major problem.
"This poll asks Macedonian citizens what is most important to them. 
We are pleased to make this information available to the people and political leaders of Macedonia," said USAID Mission Director for Macedonia Dick Goldman.
About 46 per cent of those polled responded "no" when asked if they thought Macedonia was moving in the right direction, compared to 18 per cent who think the country is on the right track. 
As many as 94 per cent believe foreign investments are key to economic progress.
Thirty-one per cent said they are optimistic about future prospects, while 36 per cent said they believe the economic situation will worsen in coming years. 
Around 29 per cent think things will remain as they are.
The poll also asked about views concerning EU and NATO integration. 
It found stronger support (97 per cent) for joining the EU, though support for NATO membership was also high (88 per cent). 
Only 19 per cent, however, said Euro-Atlantic integration was the most important issue facing Macedonia; by contrast, 29 per cent cited elimination of the visa regime.
A majority (52 per cent) thinks their family economic situation has worsened, while 13 per cent see it as having improved during the past four years.
IRI also assessed the public's view of political parties. 
When voters were asked who they would vote for if elections were held tomorrow, 19 per cent chose the incumbent Social Democratic Union for Macedonia. 
Thirteen per cent said they would vote for the main opposition VMRO-DPMNE, while 10 per cent favour the Democratic Union for Integration, the junior partner in the ruling coalition.
