22/11/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 22/11/04
Bosnia and Herzegovina's Police Restructuring Commission (PRC) met at the Institutions of the EU in Brussels last month and issued a declaration reaffirming its commitment to proposing a single police force for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
"Of all governmental functions, the police are one of the most visible and closely connected services to the citizens," the declaration read.
"The PRC believes it is essential that policing in BiH is professional, effective, efficient, fair, apolitical, and impartial.
Policing must be accountable to the law and to the community, and must be representative of the society it serves.
We are determined to ensure that it is."
The panel, which includes top local security officials, was launched by High Representative Paddy Ashdown in July 2004 with a mandate to identify the operational, financial, constitutional and legislative obstacles to creating an effective state-wide police structure and to propose solutions.
International expert Wilfred Martens serves as chairman.
Police forces in BiH are currently divided between the interior ministries of the two entities -- the Federation of BiH (FBiH) and Republika Srpska (RS).
Within FBiH, moreover, each of the ten cantons has its own interior ministry and police force.
The state-level minister of security has no operational authority over the police.
According to experts, such a structure is expensive and inefficient, hindering the fight against organised crime.
State Minister of Security Barisa Colak, FBiH Interior Minister Mevludin Halilovic and RS Interior Minister Darko Matijasevic headed the PRC delegation to Brussels.
Commission members held talks with European Commissioner for External Relations Chris Patten and the EU foreign policy and security chief Javier Solana, both of whom highlighted the importance of the Justice and Home Affairs agenda for BiH as a key condition for closer EU association.
"Political oversight should be exercised by the ministry of security at the state level, which must maintain full responsibility for all legislation relating to police, and for funding the police," said Solana.
"You must be guided by what is needed for effective law enforcement, not by politics -- in the modern world we cannot afford anything less."
Media reports say the commission continues to be deadlocked over Republika Srpska's insistence on maintaining its entity-level interior ministry.
FBiH officials, meanwhile, are calling for a more centralised structure.
