22/11/2004
(The New York Times - 22/11/04;
AFP - 21/11/04;
Reuters, VOA, Institute for War and Peace Reporting, Radio B92, Tanjug - 19/11/04)
The prospect of Ramush Haradinaj's possible appointment as Kosovo prime minister has sparked concern among Western officials.
The former key KLA member, who now leads the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), is widely believed to be under investigation by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
A possible war crimes indictment against Haradinaj could derail the process of determining the province's future, diplomats caution.
"Haradinaj is only one of several possibilities," EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana was quoted as saying Friday (19 November), two days after the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) announced a government coalition agreement with Haradinaj's party.
In the 23 October parliamentary elections, Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova's LDK won 47 of the 120 seats in the province's assembly, 14 short of an absolute majority that would have allowed it to govern on its own.
The AAK, the third-largest party in Kosovo, won nine parliamentary seats.
It made participation in a coalition with the LDK conditional on Haradinaj's appointment as prime minister.
On Thursday, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen held talks with the four largest parties in Kosovo -- the LDK, the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK), the AAK and the civic initiative ORA.
He approved the coalition agreement the following day, stressing the need for the new Kosovo provisional institutions to be in place as soon as possible, so that the province stays on track for the talks on its final status, expected to begin in mid-2005.
The agreement came about a week after the AAK leader was interviewed by ICTY investigators in Pristina about his role in the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo, when he served as a regional KLA commander.
Last month, chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte told NATO officials that she would issue new indictments against members of the now disbanded KLA by the end of this year.
"International sources in Pristina said the fact that Haradinaj is considered as a suspect by (the ICTY) is sufficient for a poor perception of his appointment to the top of the government," the Kosovo daily Koha Ditore reported on Friday.
Solana's spokeswoman said it is critical for the prime minister to be capable of working with the international community and facilitating the political process towards negotiations on Kosovo's future.
"The key thing is that government appoints a prime minister who ensures that the policy of standards moves forward," The New York Times quoted Cristina Gallach as saying.
