18/01/2005
(The Times, Blic - 18/01/05; The Scotsman, AP, Reuters, Radio B92, BBC Monitoring, Radio B92 - 17/01/05)
Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic assured British officials Monday (17 January) that Belgrade authorities are ready to step up their co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
Some of the tribunal's indictees could be extradited to The Hague by the end of this month, he said.
In a report to the UN Security Council in November, chief ICTY prosecutor Carla del Ponte said that out of the 20 tribunal indictees who are still at large, about a dozen are living in Serbia. 
Among them are four retired army and police generals -- Nebojsa Pavkovic, Sreten Lukic, Vlastimir Djordjevic and Vladimir Lazarevic -- wanted for their alleged involvement in war crimes committed during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo. 
Two of the ICTY's most wanted fugitives -- wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander Ratko Mladic -- are believed to be traveling between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska.
After talks with British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw in London, Marovic said that ICTY indictees whose whereabouts are known could be extradited to The Hague in the coming weeks, but added international assistance would be needed to locate and apprehend Mladic. 
Leaders in Belgrade, he said, have agreed that they must take steps by the end of January or early February to fulfil the country's obligations to the tribunal.
"It is very important for Serbia-Montenegro to co-operate with the international community to find these people and extradite them to The Hague," Marovic said, warning that continued non-fulfilment of the country's obligations "would mean Serbia-Montenegro would shut down".
"We think 2005 can be the year when we move forward towards the road to the EU but in order to do this we have to make some very important and decisive moves," he said.
Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, who is accompanying the president on his three-day visit to Britain, also called for the arrest of indictees.
"Slobodan Milosevic, his generals, commanders and supporters are a disgrace to our history and traditions," Belgrade-based radio B92 quoted the minister as saying. 
"Transferring the indictees to The Hague is our moral and national duty. 
The future of the nation can't be held hostage to a few suspects."
Following his talks with Marovic, Straw pointed out Monday that co-operation with the ICTY, a constructive stance on the UN-led efforts in Kosovo and a "helpful" approach towards BiH were the requirements Belgrade should meet for Britain to support Serbia-Montenegro's European integration aspirations.
"Once we see appropriate action being made in these areas, the UK and, I know, our European partners will ensure that Serbia-Montenegro is not left behind and is able to take her rightful place within Europe with our very active help and co-operation," he said.
Marovic's visit to Britain comes days after Washington's decision to withhold $10m of planned assistance for the Serbian government in 2005 due to its failure to co-operate with the ICTY. 
Other sanctions include withdrawing a number of US advisers stationed in Belgrade and a refusal to give JAT Airways landing rights in the United States.
Voicing concern about the impact of the latest US sanctions, Serbian President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DS) urged Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) to step down so that the country does not end up in international isolation again. 
Kostunica has continued to oppose arresting indictees, maintaining that they should instead surrender.
"The DS expresses a deep concern about the politics of the Serbian government which are taking eight million citizens into isolation and threatening to take Serbia back into the hell of the Milosevic era," DS representative Dusan Petrovic said, urging the other three parties in the DSS-led coalition to withdraw their support for the government.
But representatives of coalition member G17 Plus said the party would do so only in the event of a negative feasibility study to assess whether Serbia-Montenegro is a suitable candidate for EU membership.
"The party will do that because after that decision the Serbia government would not be able to carry out reforms, not because of the DS," G17 Plus board member Cedomir Antic was quoted as saying.
