20/06/2005
(Institute for War and Peace Reporting, Koha Vision - 09/06/05;
Kosovareport -- 07/06/05 - 08/06/05)
Representatives of the four main Kosovo Albanian parties assembled earlier this month for the first meeting of a new structure intended to help the key political forces in the province reach consensus on vital issues concerning Kosovo's future.
Its primary aim is to create a platform for negotiations on Kosovo's future status, expected to begin later this year.
The panel, dubbed Political Forum, was established at the initiative of UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen.
It includes President Ibrahim Rugova, the leader of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), the party's deputy chairman, Kole Berisha, Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi, who is vice chairman of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), and the leaders of the two opposition parties -- Hashim Thaci of the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) and Veton Surroi of ORA.
"The Kosovo forum is an initiative that enables all political parties to meet and discuss key issues about the future of Kosovo," Jessen-Petersen told Kosovo television Koha Vision at the end of May.
It will play the role of an advisory panel, with its proposals and decisions then sent to parliament for approval.
Meetings will be held every two weeks.
Status talks are widely expected to open in September or October.
However, the launch of negotiations depends on the results of a UN-led review of Kosovo's progress in meeting a set of internationally set standards in areas such as democratic institutions, the rule of law, minority rights, economy and the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue.
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's special envoy for the review, Norwegian Ambassador Kai Eide, arrived in Kosovo this month.
As the process gets under way, the participants in the forum will need to iron out some remaining differences.
According to the Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR), one of the points of contention involves the role of the PDK and ORA in the talks.
"There are fundamental disagreements on the negotiations team," the IWPR quoted ORA's Surroi as saying.
The two main opposition parties are said to be insisting that they play an equal role in the talks alongside the ruling LDK-AAK coalition.
The status talks, expected to be chaired by a representative of an EU member state, will involve Kosovo, Serbia, and the six-nation Contact Group for Kosovo, including Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States.
During a visit to Pristina on 8 June, US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns said that, in Washington's view, Kosovo has made "enough progress" in meeting standards.
Should Eide come to the same conclusion, the diplomat added, the US administration would encourage Annan "to call negotiations on the final status this autumn".
