20/06/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 20/06/05
After a heated discussion, the Serbian government last month adopted a national anti-corruption strategy. 
The decision meets one of Serbia's obligations on its road to EU membership, Serbian Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic told reporters.
A code of ethics for MPs and parliamentary employees, limitations on immunity enjoyed by public officials, consistent application of regulations on free access to information, and establishment of programmes to educate people about corruption are among the measures being envisioned. 
An action plan will be drafted once parliament adopts the strategy, authorities say.
Also planned is the establishment of an independent panel to spearhead anti-corruption efforts. 
At the same time, the plan would also disband the existing Council for Combating Corruption, which has frequently accused the government of failing to co-operate or provide needed information.
The president of the Council, Verica Barac, recently issued a blistering assessment of anti-corruption efforts in the republic. 
Not a single piece of key legislation has yet been adopted, and politicians appear to lack the political will needed to fight corruption, she said.
"The basic conditions for an independent, competent and effective judiciary do not exist. 
The executive authority still holds the administration of justice in complete dependence and the judiciary itself can't take the burden of independence and responsibility," the Novi Sad-based daily Dnevnik quoted her as saying.
Furthermore, authorities have failed to fully investigate a number of corruption cases, Barac said. 
These include suspect government contracts, questionable energy imports, and the use and sale of state-owned commercial office space.
According to Barac, the new national strategy originally called for a new panel to be established alongside the existing one. 
That, however, was changed in the latest draft, which only mentions the new body. 
"The Council is being abolished on the basis of the personal interests of certain ministers," she said.
