19/05/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 19/05/05
Romanians living in small- and medium-size towns are expecting to soon see an influx of supermarkets and hypermarkets, giving them alternatives to the little street corner stores or the traditional open-air markets.
The new stores are bound to change shopping habits, as consumers will now have access to more modern and cheaper goods.
One of the most significant newcomers to the discount arena this year is German giant Tengelmann, which will open 15 to 20 Plus Discount supermarkets this year and plans 120 locations by 2008, with a total investment of 200m euros.
MiniMAX Discount has launched three supermarkets, and plans to open 100 stores in Romania by 2010.
The German REWE group wants to invest 100m euros into 50 stores under the Penny Market brand.
Kaufland hypermarkets, a brand of the German Lidl & Schwartz group, will be soon available in Romania with one location in each of the country's 41 counties.
Other retailers have also turned their eyes towards Romania.
According to British retail consultant Brian Moore, world giants Tesco and Wal-Mart are preparing to invest in the country within two years.
"The market is ready for them and the only reason they are not here yet is the interest they showed lately for Chinese and Indian markets," he said.
Meanwhile, those who are already in the market are working hard to expand.
French hypermarket chain Carrefour, which already has four stores in Romania, is planning to launch another four.
Its main competitor, Cora, of the Belgium Louis Delhaize group, will open a second location in Bucharest this year, and a third in Cluj in 2006.
Profi, another Louis Delhaize brand, plans to add eight supermarkets to the 25 they have in the country, while REWE will inject 200m euros to extend their Billa, Selgros and XXL networks.
This investors' rush is no accident, especially when it comes to discounters.
Studies by GFK, a German marketing group, show only 1 per cent of shopping in Romania takes place in such stores.
In the Czech Republic, 20 per cent of retail is discount, and in Germany the figure is more than 50 per cent.
"The discount area [in Romania] will receive investments of about 400m euros this year and will significantly grow -- from 29 stores last year to over 160 at the end of 2006," Anca Ioan, managing partner at Roland Berger Romania, told the weekly Saptamina Financiara.
Investors’ eyes are also turning to the Balkans because of the saturation of the retail sector in the Central European countries.
Romania is an inviting prospect not only because of its 22 million citizens or its future EU membership, but also because of the rapid increment of the average revenue.
In the last four months, for example, there was a 20 per cent growth of the monthly medium wage due to the new taxation system.
The total investment being considered by the large retail players exceeds 1 billion euros, but the returns could be considerable.
Recent studies have found that Romanians spend an average of 50 euros during each visit to a hypermarket -- almost as much as Westerners do.
