16/03/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 16/03/05
The Hague-based International Criminal Tribunal for Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has indicted former Macedonian Interior Minister Ljube Boskovski and former security chief Johan Tarculovski on charges of violating the laws and customs of war, the justice ministry announced earlier this week.
The charges stem from an incident that took place during the 2001 interethnic conflict in Macedonia.
In August of that year, Macedonian forces entered the village of Ljuboten outside Skopje, after shelling it for two days.
Prosecutors contend that seven civilians were killed during the house-to-house searches that followed.
Boskovski and Tarculovski each face three counts of murder, cruel treatment and wanton destruction for their alleged roles in the violence.
Boskovski, who holds dual Macedonian and Croatian citizenship, is currently jailed in Pula, Croatia.
He was arrested there, at the request of Macedonian authorities.
He fled to Croatia in 2004 after authorities in Skopje charged him and other former members of the security forces with the murder of seven migrants three years ago.
Prosecutors say Boskovski and his collaborators staged the killings, disguising them as an anti-terrorist raid, in an effort to gain international support.
Boskovski has denied all allegations.
Macedonian police arrested Tarculovski on Monday (14 March) and sent him to Skopje prison to await further action.
It is unclear whether a Croatian law barring extraditions to other countries will pose an obstacle to transferring Boskovski to The Hague.
His lawyer, Zvonimir Hodak, said Monday that he has not been officially notified of The Hague indictment.
"Croatia can deliver Boskovski to The Hague," Hodak said.
"The proceeding is such that the District Court in Zagreb decides whether the indictment is correct.
We have the right to appeal against a decision on Boskovski's delivery to The Hague with the Croatian Supreme Court."
Hague prosecutors have heard testimony from around 120 former and current state-level officials in the five cases related to the 2001 conflict in Macedonia.
They include current Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, former Prime Minister Ljubco Georgievski, former Army Chief of Staff Metodij Stamboliski and Police General Risto Galevski.
UN tribunal spokeswoman Florence Hartmann announced that the latest indictment would be the last to be issued by the UN court in connection with the wars in the former Yugoslavia.
Other alleged war criminals will be tried in local courts in the region.
But during a visit to Belgrade on Tuesday, tribunal president Theodor Meron noted that the court would remain open until top fugitives Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic are brought to justice.
