19/05/2005
(Cyprus News Agency - 19/05/05; Reuters, Xinhua, Cyprus News Agency, Journal of Turkish Weekly - 18/05/05)
UN Undersecretary for Political Affairs Kieran Prendergast is expected to travel to Cyprus in early June to assess the prospects for the resumption of talks to end the island's more than 30-year division.
During his trip to the region, the UN official will hold consultations on the issue with representatives from the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities, as well as from Greece and Turkey, Reuters reported Wednesday (18 May). 
However, it would be up to UN Secretary General Kofi Annan to eventually decide whether the peace negotiations should be renewed.
"Everyone wants to make sure that if the talks resume, that they get off on a good footing," a UN official told Reuters.
The latest effort to reunite Cyprus collapsed in April 2004, when the Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected a UN proposal for a settlement. 
Although the majority of the Turkish Cypriots supported the plan, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the island eventually joined the EU on 1 May 2004.
Annan has asked both sides to spell out their objections to the existing plan, which is expected to again serve as a basis for any future talks. 
The proposed deal envisions the reunification of Cyprus into a loose federation of two constituent states.
Prendergast's proposed visit to Cyprus would follow the exploratory talks on the chances for initiating a new round of peace negotiations that he is holding this week in New York with Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos's envoy, Tasos Tzonis.
While details on the talks have not been revealed, part of Tzionis's mission reportedly is to get assurances that the UN will not insist on arbitration or time constraints. 
The Greek Cypriot authorities are believed to also be seeking to ensure that there will be no conditions, restrictions or other predetermined issues at any stage of the negotiations.
Speaking in Nicosia, Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister George Iacovou said Wednesday that the discussions at the UN, which began Monday and are due to end Friday, focused largely on procedural issues.
While cautioning that any conclusions could prove premature in this early phase of the talks, the Speaker of the Greek Cypriot House of Representatives, Demetris Christofias, said he was "cautiously optimistic" about their outcome.
"It is hard for anyone to evaluate the outcome of the current meetings in New York when they have only just begun," Christofias said Wednesday. 
"Our hope is that through our efforts a dialogue will resume on the correct foundations, with respect to UN principles and the inalienable rights of the people of Cyprus in order to find a solution that will be acceptable to both communities."
Cyprus has been partitioned along ethnic lines since 1974, when Turkish troops invaded the island's north in the wake of a coup, backed by Athens, that sought to unite the island with Greece. 
Turkey is scheduled to begin accession talks with the EU in October, and many believe a settlement to the Cyprus issue could boost Ankara's prospects
