17/01/2005
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 17/01/05
Analysts are predicting continued economic challenges for Serbia during 2005. 
Standards of living are half what they were in 1989, the public is increasingly preoccupied with economic issues, and many say that the level of discontent is high enough to trigger a political crisis if problems are not addressed.
Some economists predict that the already high unemployment rate could jump by as much as 21 per cent this year, in part due to the planned restructuring of eight public companies, which together account for about 130,000 jobs. 
As of December 2004, the official unemployment rate stood at 25.79 per cent.
Last fall, a survey conducted by the Factor Plus Agency found that poverty and unemployment were the top concerns among Serbs. 
A total of 40.6 per cent said they were worried about poverty, while 31.5 said unemployment was their most serious concern. 
Another 16.5 per cent listed crime. 
By contrast, only a small percentage -- 2.6 per cent -- said they worried about war.
Research by the Centre for Alternative Studies, meanwhile, has found that social dissatisfaction continues to grow -- not only because Serbs are concerned about the economic situation, but also because they feel the problem is not being addressed.
"The Serbian government lacks any strategy or concept in waging economic and social policy," analyst Milan Nikolic says. 
As an example, he cites the decision to halt postponed payment cheques.
"Cheques were used by citizens as an instrument of the bicycle economy -- they transferred their expenses to the next month, and spent more than they earned. 
In this way, the standard of living was higher than true income. 
By discontinuing postponed payment checks, the standard of living of citizens is being reduced to their actual income," Nikolic says.
According to Vladimir Vuletic of Belgrade University, Serbia has become "the Third World of Europe". 
Even if it achieves EU membership one day, he says, many will be continue to be excluded from the benefits, unless Serbia is prepared to fully modernise its society and economy.
"The majority of the population of Serbia is excluded from European and world financial trends, industries and information technologies," Vuletic says.
Moreover, the lack of a political outlet for expressing frustrations about hardship and lack of opportunity could endanger stability, analysts say.
At the same time, the majority believe it is not too late for Serbia to move in the right direction, towards development and further reforms. 
That step must be taken, they say, before Euro-Atlantic integration can even be considered.
