12/05/2008
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 12/05/08
As summer approaches, Albanians have good reason for optimism concerning the country's emerging tourism industry.
Not only has the sector experienced continuous growth, but the government and industry leaders have been working to develop a unified strategy.
Despite these positive signs, some key problems still must be overcome.
In particular, visitors may still be deterred by inadequate transportation infrastructure and the state of Albanian hotels.
Authorities speak in glowing terms about the country's potential.
"Tourism holds a key position in ensuring the country's success," says Tourism Minister Ylli Pango.
"Within this framework, we are working to have a specific regional model that aims to make Albanian tourism a leading force and contribute towards understanding among cultures, races, religions and civilizations."
Those are lofty goals, and it may take many years to achieve them.
Nevertheless, visitors are indeed coming at an ever faster pace.
According to official statistics, the country attracted 2,100,000 tourists last year -- 19% more than in 2006 and 46% more than 2005.
Adventure and mountain tourism is the biggest draw, followed by cultural and heritage tourism and finally sand and sea tourism, according to the data.
This may seem unusual for a small country with a lot of coastline -- up to 362km, much of it unspoiled beach.
One reason, according to Kristi Andoni, is the oversaturated regional market;
people have an enormous array of choices when they want a week in the sun.
Andoni, an advisor at the tourism, culture and sport ministry, also points out that demand for the first two types of tourism is on the rise.
Moreover, they allow for a year-round tourism season instead of one concentrated on the summer months.
"Albania has multiple and unique opportunities to distinguish itself from its neighbours," he says.
Although third on the list, sand and sea tourism still has great significance, especially for ethnic Albanians coming from Kosovo, Macedonia or around the world.
For these groups, Albania is a preferred destination for summer holidays, and that usually means the beach.
"Further development of tourism in our country is a fact," Andoni declares.
The country, he points out, has great natural potential, as well as a wide range of historical and cultural attractions of interest to foreign visitors.
Albania is becoming safer, and it also has a certain mystique as a relatively unknown part of Europe.
During the decades of communist rule, it was practically sealed off.
Albania's first official tourism strategy was drafted in 2004, with the assistance of the German Technical Co-operation Agency (GTZ).
This strategy aimed to market Albania as "Europe's Last Secret".
As visitor numbers picked up, the Albanian government switched to a new slogan:
Albania -- Yours to Discover.
It decided to focus on the theme of generosity as a core historical and cultural virtue of the Albanian people.
In terms of cultural monuments per capita, Albania may well be the richest country in Europe.
The ministry has sought to highlight this fact, increasing the appeal to an older demographic.
Albania is certainly a memorable place to visit.
Travellers often leave with good impressions about cultural heritage, natural scenery, the warmth of the people and especially the food.
At the same time, though, they are also apt to remember the poor state of many roads and the less than stellar hotels.
"To a Japanese tourist, it seems nonsensical that it takes 11 hours to travel from Ohrid to Sarande, a distance of only 353km, when it should not take more than 4 hours," says Stavri Cifligu, product manager at Albania Experience.
According to Andoni, meanwhile, "the biggest challenge is to keep the surroundings clean" and to make society understand the importance of this and to co-operate.
At the institutional level, a short-term solution consists of working with communities and schools to boost awareness.
For the long run, the ministry is drawing up a strategy.
Another problem to be addressed is the improvement and diversification of the services provided to tourists.
"We have found a solution for our tourists by highlighting those few places that are able to offer good-quality services, but if a tourist visits the country independently he will feel the existence of this gap," Cifligu says.
Officials say earlier problems related to water and electricity shortages have been addressed for the 2008 season.
Meanwhile, the environment ministry is monitoring the safety of the beaches.
In its latest report, the ministry found that 11 out of 72 beaches do not meet the standards.
It is advising people to stay far away from them.
The government has designated 2008 as the year of tourism, a move that could spur further increases in the number of visitors.
Special efforts are being made to promote the country's potential.
For the first time, an expected audience of 340m will be able to see via CNN what Albania can offer.
Today, Cifligu says, "Albanian tourism" and "growth" are synonymous.
But only further improvements, together with diversification of services, will allow the country to move past the obstacles this sector could face in the long run
