18/05/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 18/05/05
On 7 May and 8 May, responsibility for securing Macedonia's border with Serbia-Montenegro, including Kosovo, was officially handed over from the army to the border police. 
The changeover, part of the Integrated Border Management Project, is in line with European standards, under which border security should be the task of police rather than military forces.
The border police now have responsibility for the country's northern, southern and eastern boundaries with, respectively, Serbia-Montenegro, Greece and Bulgaria. 
In September, they will also assume control of the west border with Albania.
The 221km border with Serbia-Montenegro is Macedonia's longest, and includes six crossing points, as well as Petrovec Airport. 
It is considered the most difficult to control, thanks to its high mountain ranges, and is often used as a corridor for smuggling drugs, cigarettes and weapons.
Securing it are 1,000 specially trained border police officers, 400 of whom are former army members. 
To meet international standards, three to four border police officers should be deployed on each kilometre of the border.
For better co-ordination of control, the Macedonian police and KFOR -- which has responsibility for the Kosovo side of the border -- have established communication and will exchange liaison officers. 
Authorities in Serbia-Montenegro have been formally informed about the change.
"I am expecting good co-operation with the local population and authorities to continue and improve [border control] in line with the expanded competences of municipalities through the decentralisation process," Macedonian Minister of Defence Jovan Manasijevski said. 
"Strengthening the confidence of the local population is a priority for successful fulfilment of border securing tasks."
The handover of border control took place without any problems, starting in the Tetovo area, then in Kumanovo and finally in Skopje. 
Though areas along this border were involved in the 2001 interethnic conflict, the government -- with the help of international organisations and NGOs, has conducted a series of activities aimed at reconciliation, confidence-building and revitalisation.
