18/05/2005
(Angus-reid.com, Sofia News Agency - 14/05/05; Mediapool, Vseki Den, Sofia News Agency, Alpha Research - 13/05/05)
The bill for the 25 June parliamentary elections in Bulgaria will reach 7.5m euros, instead of the initially planned 5.5m euros, State Administration Minister Dimitar Kalchev said Friday (13 May). 
The difference will be covered with budget surplus money, he added.
According to Kalchev, the amount needed by the foreign ministry to organise the voting of Bulgarians living abroad has more than tripled. 
That, he says, is one of the main reasons for the higher overall cost. 
Instead of the approximately 450,000 euros initially set aside, the ministry is now expected to get about 1.5m euros to pay for the establishment of polling stations in Europe, the United States and other parts of the world.
Expatriate Bulgarians are showing a heightened interest in the June elections, said Kalchev, adding that their votes could have a significant impact on the final results. 
At least 500,000 Bulgarians are believed to have left the country during the last 15 years alone.
The interior ministry will also get extra money as a result of recent election law changes, which entitle police officers to receive overtime pay for providing security on Election Day.
At the same time, another amendment is expected to help Bulgaria save 30 per cent to 40 per cent on its expenses for paper. 
The names of parties, coalitions and independent candidates will now be listed on a single, integral ballot. 
Its size will depend on the number of political forces and candidates registered for the vote. 
The Central Electoral Commission (CEC) has thus far refused to register six parties and coalitions, including a communist party and the Bulgarian Revolutionary Youth Party. 
Thus far, 20 parties and coalitions, including all those currently represented in parliament, have ensured their participation in next month's elections, while seven other formations are still awaiting the CEC's decision.
New polls again show the Bulgarian Socialist Party ahead, with 25 per cent voter support. 
The ruling National Movement for Simeon II (NMS-II) trails with 15 per cent to nearly 19 per cent, according to the latest polls conducted by Alpha Research polling agency and the Risk Assessment Foundation. 
The other parties likely to surpass the 4 per cent threshold for winning parliamentary seats include the right-wing Union of Democratic Forces and Democrats for Strong Bulgaria, as well as the Movement for Rights and Freedoms, the junior partner in the current NMS II-led government coalition.
According to the Alpha Research poll, nearly 22 per cent of the respondents were still undecided, while another 19 per cent said they would not vote, down 5 per cent compared to an April survey.
Meanwhile, the CEC ruled that no opinion poll results are to be announced on 24 June. 
On election day, the disclosure of voting results will only be possible after 8 p.m. 
Strategies for circumventing this rule -- such as releasing pop charts that rank the songs associated with specific parties -- will entail fines of anywhere from 250 to 2,500 euros.
