17/12/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 17/12/04
Reacting in part to news that one of the region's most wanted war crimes fugitives had been raising toasts to his comrades in a Bosnian Serb military shelter as recently as June, Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) top international official on Thursday (16 December) sacked nine Bosnian Serb officials and ordered the abolition of BiH's two entity defence ministries by next year.
High Representative Paddy Ashdown's measures were prompted by NATO's "no" last week to BiH membership in the Alliance's Partnership for Peace programme.
It was the second time this year that NATO rejected the country over the failure of BiH's Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), to arrest a single war crimes suspect since the end of the 1992-1995 conflict.
Ashdown noted that if NATO rejects BiH a third time over the same issue in April, he will not only recommend that NATO adopt a "three strikes and you're out" stance towards the country, but he also hinted that he would severely constrain RS.
"I will not hesitate to take measures that deal, directly and powerfully, with the assets and the institutions of the Republika Srpska so far as I am able to do so, and no options are ruled out," he told a news conference in Sarajevo.
Until Thursday, BiH military reforms -- which involve putting its former warring entity militaries under a single, state-level command -- foresaw the slow dissolution of the entity defence ministries over the next three years.
Ashdown announced Thursday that the ministries would instead be abolished by summer or fall 2005.
Thursday's moves came six months after Ashdown sacked 59 Bosnian Serb officials over failing to arrest suspects indicted by the UN war crimes tribunal, and two weeks after press reports based on former Bosnian Serb General Ratko Mladic's leaked personnel file showed that Mladic was discharged from the RS Army (VRS) in 2002 -- seven years after the tribunal indicted him for genocide.
It was also recently revealed that Mladic left neighbouring Serbia in June, slipped over the border into BiH and celebrated a holiday at an underground VRS installation near Han Pijesak, in eastern BiH.
"While the [RS] authorities … were telling anyone who would listen of their efforts to apprehend war criminals, members of their own army sat in their own military base, celebrating VRS Day with Ratko Mladic," Ashdown said.
In addition, Ashdown:
Dovetailing with Ashdown's actions was Thursday's announcement by EUFOR peacekeepers that they were inspecting military sites -- including the one near Han Pijesak -- and would close facilities with no legitimate functions.
The US government also announced Thursday that it was imposing travel bans on the leadership of two RS political parties, one of which is led by BiH Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic.
