18/02/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 18/02/05
Earlier this week, Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, heading a delegation to Brussels, presented the answers to the EU Questionnaire to European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barosso. 
Comprising 1,921 questions and as many sub-questions, the EU document is meant to assess the country's readiness to start the accession process.
As he submitted the answers, which add up to 14,000 pages of printed material, plus a CD-ROM, Buckovski voiced hope that the EC would issue an avis, or official opinion, on Macedonia's readiness for candidate status, in September.
If that happens, the prime minister noted, the European Council could decide about candidate status by December.
"We believe the decision in the avis will be affirmative and Macedonia will gain the candidate status upon which negotiations for membership may start in 2006," Buckovski said. 
"We are also confident that that full commitment and continuing endeavour will lead Macedonia to concluding the talks and we will work on becoming a EU member by 2010."
Barosso said Macedonia has done an impressive job in the past four months, and that the EC's avis would be based on that fact. 
"The European Commission is committed to close co-operation with the Western Balkans with the ultimate goal of its full EU membership if the necessary conditions are met," Barosso said.
The way to the EU will not be easy and will take time, reform and work if Macedonia wants to move further, Barosso said, adding that it is still too early to speak of dates.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, however, confirmed that the EC plans to present its avis during the autumn, enabling the European Council to discuss it in December.
"Today is a great day for you, and there will be many more great days," Rehn said. 
He warned, however, that Macedonia must continue to press ahead with judicial reforms, successfully conduct fair and democratic local elections -- scheduled for March -- and improve the business climate for foreign investors.
After the ceremony, Buckovski met with European Parliament President Josep Borrell, EU security chief Javier Solana and NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer.
In a sign of political solidarity, Liberal Party leader Stojan Andov took part in the Brussels meetings as the representative of Macedonia's opposition parties. 
The ruling coalition and opposition have established an informal "Coalition for Europe" to demonstrate that all the country's political forces are united behind joining the EU.
