18/02/2005
(AFP, EUobserver, AP, Reuters, Athens News Agency - 17/02/05;
Dow Jones - 16/02/05)
EU finance ministers decided on Thursday (17 February) to give Greece until the end of 2006 to bring its budget deficit under the 3 per cent of GDP ceiling applicable for Eurozone countries.
If it fails to do so, the country could face fines amounting to half a billion euros.
"Acknowledging that the budgetary adjustment necessary to correct fully the situation in 2005 may prove economically costly, the council (of EU finance ministers) decided to extend the deadline of 2005 ...
to 2006," the finance ministers said in a statement after meeting in Brussels.
Greece has also been asked to present a report in March on measures it plans to reduce its budget deficit, which stood at an estimated 5.5 per cent of GDP in 2004.
EU Finance Commissioner Joaquin Almunia told reporters Thursday that Greece would strive to bring its deficit down to 3.6 per cent this year and that it had pledged to take additional measures to ensure that its 2006 fiscal gap does not exceed the 3 per cent Eurozone limit.
In their statement, the EU finance ministers hailed the Greek authorities' commitment to continue with fiscal consolidation and to stick rigorously to the 2005 budget approved by parliament.
Quoting one EU official, the Brussels-based online news edition Euobserver said the ministers had agreed that Greece's finances would be monitored this year to ensure authorities abide by their commitments.
Greek Economy and Finance Minister George Alogoskoufis welcomed his European counterparts' decision to give his country two years, rather than one, to slash public spending and rein in its budget deficit.
"Today's decision essentially adopts the entire strategy of Greece to fulfil its obligation to bring the deficit under 3 per cent within two years," Reuters quoted Alogoskoufis as telling reporters in Brussels.
"We have got the extra year we have been seeking from the start.
We have the extra time we need in case we don't succeed in bringing the deficit under control in 2005."
Thursday's decision, however, is the harshest action the EU has taken against a member state.
If Greece fails to bring its 2006 budget deficit below 3 per cent, it would likely face a lawsuit and fines of up to 0.5 per cent of GDP, equalling about 500m euros.
It would thus become the first EU country to be punished for breaking the bloc's Stability and Growth Pact, the rules underpinning the euro.
Greece's problems began after revelations last year indicating that Athens presented flawed economic statistics for several years prior to the introduction of the euro in 2002.
A revision of the budget data showed the country's deficits would not have allowed it to join the Eurozone.
In other news, a new PricewaterhouseCoopers analysis released on Wednesday predicts the Greek economy will slow this year, with GDP growth estimated at 2.75 per cent.
The slowdown would partly be the result of structural measures the government has adopted to lower the budget deficit, the report said.
