17/05/2005
(AFP, AFX, BTA, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik, Mediapool - 16/05/05)
As Bulgaria finalised the ratification of its EU accession treaty, a senior Union official praised the country Monday (16 May) for the great strides it has taken towards European integration.
He warned, however, that the commitments made during entry talks with the EU must be fully met.
"Bulgaria has done huge work to adjust legislation ...
but the latest stage must be taken very seriously," said Siim Kallas, European Commission (EC) Vice President for Administrative Affairs, Audit and Anti-fraud, during a brief visit to Sofia.
Bulgaria and Romania signed their accession treaty with the EU on 25 April, ahead of their scheduled entry into the Union on 1 January 2007.
However, both still need to meet a number of their reform commitments.
Should they fail to do so, Brussels could invoke safeguard clauses included in the treaty, postponing either country's entry by one year.
While in Sofia, Kallas urged the authorities to focus on dealing with financial crimes, corruption and fraud in particular.
"The main message is to address these issues very seriously because protection of financial interests, fighting fraud and corruption are ...
of great importance and great sensitivity inside the EU," the AFP quoted the EU official as saying.
"If the commission estimates that the level of corruption in Bulgaria is still high, it definitely can seriously affect the accession."
Meanwhile, after signing the ratification documents of Bulgaria's EU accession treaty along with Parliamentary Speaker Borislav Velikov, Foreign Minister Solomon Passy acknowledged Monday that the next 18 months will require a lot of hard work.
Besides tackling corruption and fraud, judicial reform is also among the measures Bulgaria is expected to carry out before joining the EU.
Its successful implementation should be made a top priority, the Bulgarian News Agency (BTA) reported Monday quoting a statement by EC President Jose Manuel Barroso due to be published in the next issue of the magazine Bulgarian Diplomatic Review.
In the piece that the magazine has made available to the BTA, the EC chief reportedly also urges Bulgaria to complete other outstanding tasks on its EU agenda.
These include modernising the police force, bringing the public administration in line with EU standards and eradicating all forms of discrimination and artificial bureaucratic barriers.
Voicing optimism that the Balkan country will take the required steps to avoid the triggering of the safeguard clause, Barroso said he expects the Bulgarians to take their place in the EU soon, where they will be on an equal footing with the rest of the bloc's 500 million citizens, the BTA reported.
Meanwhile, Bulgaria's European Affairs Minister Meglena Kuneva warned on Monday that if the country's EU entry is delayed by a year, it could cost the country up to 800m euros.
The longer a country stays outside the Union, the bigger the difference between it and the member states grows, the minister said.
