17/06/2005
By Sagita Muco for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 17/06/05
The Tirana Activism Festival took place in the Albanian capital from 3 June to 5 June, bringing together representatives from organisations that have fought autocratic regimes and abuse of power. 
Participants from Albania, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Croatia, Georgia, Lebanon, Macedonia, Russia, Serbia-Montenegro and Kosovo, Ukraine and Uzebekistan came together to demonstrate that they share the same vision and that, regardless of their names or the countries in which they operate, everyone has a unique goal: democracy.
Many of the participating organisations are well-known for their resistance to oppression. 
They included Serbia's OTPOR, which buried the Milosevic regime, the Belarus group ZUBR, which is still struggling against the last remaining European dictatorship, Georgia's KMARA, Albania's MJAFT, the Kosovo youth movement KAN, Croatia's GONG, Russia's Youth Human Rights Movement, the Youth Initiative for Human Rights in Serbia, and PORA, which played an important role in Ukraine's "orange revolution". 
Such movements have been driving forces for democratic change in many post-communist countries.
In Tirana, the local MJAFT (Enough!) movement is preparing for the country's 3 July general elections. 
The race is expected to be tight, and Albania's ability to conduct a free and fair vote is widely considered a key test of its democratisation process. 
MJAFT and other civic organisations have called for international community support to ensure that the elections and their aftermath go smoothly.
The three-day festival drew thousands of young people to its events, which included the screening of documentaries, forums and debates, and exhibitions of pictures and posters documenting efforts to push for democracy. 
The Albanian capital was transformed into a capital of activism. 
"It is very important for organisations and movements like ours to meet together and share best practices. 
It is interesting to see where we are and how we can learn from the processes of development of the different organisations," said Vanja Skoric of Croatia's GONG.
The activities culminated in the signing of a Solidarity Document, which inaugurated a network that will enable all activist movements to support each other in acts of civil resistance against dictatorship, power abuses and the violation of democratic principles. 
As Albin Kurti from the Kosovo Action Network said, "Non-democratic systems and the injustices that are being generated from them are very much similar, therefore we as activists have a lot of similarities and it is absurd if we act only individually. 
The Tirana Activism Festival was very important as it helped us to communicate and identify different points where we are going to co-operate in the future."
MJAFT, the festival organiser, aims to transform the event into a yearly tradition, with successive festivals to be held in different capitals across Europe.
Sagita Muco is the Policy Co-ordinator at the Mjaft Movement in Tirana.
