17/05/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 17/05/05
Political talks on police reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) collapsed Monday (16 May) in Sarajevo when representatives of the Serb entity -- the Republika Srpska -- refused to discuss maps in which Local Police Areas (LPA) would cross inter-entity boundary line (IEBL).
It was the first day of the last phase of negotiations among 11 parliamentary parties on police reform, a key requirement for BiH's progress towards EU accession.
In the first phase, which took place at Mt Vlasic at the end of April, the parties agreed on establishing a single police structure at the state level, to be funded from the state budget and kept free of political interference.
But RS President Dragan Cavic, who leads the hardline Serb Democratic Party (SDS), has since insisted that the RS National Assembly had not given negotiators a mandate to accept a map in which LPAs would erase IEBL.
"The great opportunity is lost.
The price will be paid by citizens, including the citizens of RS," said High Representative Paddy Ashown, adding that the talks might still continue if the RS National Assembly revises its position.
He stressed that the EU requirements for reform of the BiH police sector would not change.
According to local press reports, meanwhile, RS representatives have asked for a seven-day delay so that entity lawmakers can consider the new situation.
Three alternative plans for the territorial organisation of the police force had been discussed at previous talks.
Representatives of the Federation of BiH (FBiH) favoured a map consisting of five LPAs, while Ashdown proposed one establishing nine police areas plus one for Sarajevo.
The third map was the one submitted by RS Interior Minister Darko Matijasevic and his team.
It keeps all LPAs within the entity borders.
Earlier this month, Ashdown hailed the progress achieved at Mt Vlasic, which resulted in an agreement on the core principles of reform.
Under that agreement -- which the SDS subsequently backed away from -- political control would be exercised by the state-level ministry of security via a police committee consisting of the BiH Security Minister, two representatives from the RS and three from the FBiH.
They would participate in the appointment of a police director, who would be responsible for the operational conduct of the forces in the LPAs.
Every LPA would have its own police commissioner and a Community Oversight Council that would make decisions on local police budgets and participate in establishing the local police plan.
The negotiations on police reform had to be completed by Thursday, when a European Commission team is due to arrive in Sarajevo for a review of BiH's progress in meeting the 16 requirements set out in the EU feasibility study.
A positive assessment would pave the way for BiH to start talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Brussels.
Monday's failure, however, probably rules that out for the time being, Ashdown stressed.
