17/05/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 17/05/05
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has proposed that he and Kosovo counterpart Bajram Kosumi hold their first meeting in the Kosovo town of Prizren on 25 May. 
He had earlier suggested 24 May, but the proposal was turned down by Kosumi because he will be on a visit to Germany at that time.
Ruling out the earlier date, Kosovo government spokesman Daut Dauti made it clear that Kosumi was not rejecting the idea of holding talks. 
"Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi is ready and believes that he will meet with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica in late May or early June," Dauti told Belgrade media. 
However, he added, details of the time and place would have to be worked out between the two of them.
Speaking on Monday (16 May), Kostunica told reporters that the Serbian government is finalising preparations. 
"We think that a political dialogue is very important and that no problem can be solved without talks," Kostunica said, adding that discussion topics would include political issues and problems facing the people of Kosovo.
The success of Kosovo authorities in meeting internationally-set standards will be evaluated this summer, with talks on the province's final status to follow if a positive assessment is made. 
While Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority favours outright independence, Serbian leaders are seeking to maintain some form of nominal sovereignty, though they acknowledge that actual governance from Belgrade is out of the question. 
They are also calling for the return of Serbs who left Kosovo after the 1998-1999 conflict and for measures guaranteeing the security of minorities.
In late April, Serbian President Boris Tadic invited his Kosovo counterpart Ibrahim Rugova for talks, but Rugova turned the invitation down -- later indicating that he would only talk with Tadic within the framework of an international meeting. 
An upcoming conference in Switzerland, sponsored by the US-based Project for Ethnic Relations, could provide that opportunity, Beta news agency reported.
