14/03/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 14/03/05
The first round of local elections went smoothly in Macedonia on Sunday (13 March), without any serious irregularities. 
Some 400 candidates from dozens of political parties participated in mayoral races in 85 municipalities. 
The State Election Commission reported a voter turnout of 55 per cent.
An overall assessment is expected Monday, when the monitoring mission of the OSCE/ODIHR presents its first report.
Although ahead in most races, the ruling coalition "For Macedonia Together" lost the Skopje mayoral race, according to preliminary data released separately by the main parties and MOST, a local association that observed the vote.
Independent candidate Trifun Kostovski, who had the support of opposition parties, will be the new Skopje mayor. 
He received 53.76 per cent of the vote, compared to 31.02 per cent for the ruling coalition's candidate, incumbent Risto Penov.
The main ruling party, the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), said its candidates won mayoral races in 14 municipalities. 
The opposition VMRO-DPMNE, meanwhile, claimed first-round victories in four municipalities.
The preliminary data also shows that the ethnic Albanian government partner Democratic Union of Integration (DUI) took the lead in most municipalities populated predominantly by ethnic Albanians. 
The DUI said it won mayoral seats in Bogovinje, Gostivar, Zajas and Oslomej. 
In Tetovo, DUI candidate Hazbi Lika leads his rival from the Democratic Party of Albanians, Vebi Bexheti, by about 3,000 votes. 
The two will face each other in the second round.
In the race for Skopje's city council, the ruling coalition won 16 seats compared to 13 seats for the opposition alliance led by VMRO-DPMNE.
"I would like to express my happiness for the democratic and fair election we have had today," SDSM leader and Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski said, adding that the vote demonstrates Macedonia is moving in the right direction. 
VMRO-DPMNE leader Nikola Gruevski said he is pleased with the results. 
"We have done a good job today," Gruevski said. 
"We have the second round ahead in which we will defeat the SDSM."
"Most importantly for Macedonia and all of us today is to have peaceful, fair and democratic elections," President Branko Crvenkovski said, "so that we get new local authorities which will assume their responsible offices with full credibility and legitimacy in order to start solving the citizens' problems."
DPA leader Arben Xhaferi also praised the peaceful conduct of the elections. 
"In line with the democratic system, we are starting from the popular saying that 'people give and people take'. 
Personally, my expectation is that we will return to normalcy in order that society can return to its values."
