17/02/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 17/02/05
Central Bucharest will soon become a huge building site as an ambitious renovation plan is put into effect.
When the project is complete, the 57-hectare city centre -- believed to have considerable commercial potential -- will boast refurbished buildings, new water, gas and sewer lines, pothole-free streets, pedestrian-only areas, better parking facilities, and much more in the way of stores, bars and restaurants.
Work is scheduled to start this summer and will last 18 months.
The deadline is 1 January 2007, the day Romania is scheduled to enter the EU.
The cost of the project, about 28m euros, will come mainly from foreign sources, including a credit from the EBRD and a grant from the EU's PHARE programme, as well as from Bucharest's mayoral budget.
According to municipal officials, the reconstruction aims to "recreate the former aspect of the area, but with modern facilities", conserving the city's archeological and architectural heritage while spurring the restoration of privately owned buildings.
Local authorities have pledged a tax exemption to those renovating their houses in the historical centre.
"It should be a support for those investing in renovation works," said Liviu Negoita, Bucharest's 3rd district mayor.
Other goals include reducing pollution and congestion, and helping to revitalise traditional businesses in the area.
During the communist era, the historical centre -- which contains apartment buildings that are hundreds of years old, the ruins of the royal court built more than five centuries ago by Vlad the Impaler, and medieval churches and inns -- was neglected.
The apartments were nationalised and turned into social houses.
The shops, restaurants and offices were also confiscated and the area lost its old-time charm.
After the regime fell in 1989, little changed."The standard of the commercial activities in the area continuously decreased, the only notable element being the opening of some leisure spaces in the vaulted basements of the 19th century buildings," says architect Vladimir Vinea.
"Most of Bucharest's housing problems are in the historical centre -- physical degradation, uncertain juridical status, or the abusive occupation of some buildings or apartments".
Moreover, the poor state of transportation, utilities, and communication infrastructure has discouraged any major investment in the area.
This will change dramatically for the better within the next two years, officials promise.
"We have to start the works as soon as possible in order to stop the degradation of the historical centre.
This area is Bucharest's business card," Romanian President Traian Basescu has said.
