17/02/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 17/02/05
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan completed a two-day official visit to Tirana on Wednesday (16 February). 
Leading a delegation of businessmen and parliament members, he met with Albanian President Alfred Moisiu, Prime Minister Fatos Nano and other top officials.
The countries of Southeast Europe, especially Albania, are a priority for Turkish foreign policy, Erdogan said, pledging his country's support for Albania's goal of joining NATO.
"NATO membership of Albania will be very important for Balkan countries," he said, adding that Euro-Atlantic integration would provide the region with a "strategic advantage".
Erdogan also announced that a Turkish university would be opened in Tirana, with the goal of boosting awareness about relations between the two countries.
After his meeting with the Turkish prime minister, Nano hailed the visit, saying it demonstrated the high level of bilateral relations. 
Albania is interested in Turkey's experiences with the tourist sector, Nano said, urging Turkish entrepreneurs to invest in tourist facilities planned for Albania's coastline.
'There are perfect relations in the political and military arenas between Turkey and Albania. 
These relations should be developed in the economic arena as well," Nano said.
The two leaders agreed on the need for participation by Turkish firms in the privatisation of strategic sectors of the Albanian economy. 
To that end, Turkish Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim and Albanian Transport and Telecommunications Minister Spartak Poci signed a maritime co-operation agreement.
Erdogan's meeting with Moisiu focused on bilateral co-operation, the development of economic relations, and regional issues. 
Moisiu congratulated him on the EU's recent decision to launch accession talks with Turkey.
Erdogan also met with Parliament Speaker Servet Pellumbi and Tirana Mayor Edi Rama, and addressed the Albanian Parliament. 
He then headed for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the second and final stop on his mini-tour of the Balkans.
