15/04/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 15/04/05
The International Commission on the Balkans released a 65-page report Tuesday (12 April) that describes Macedonia as a success story in the region.
The Commission, led by former Italian Prime Minister Giuliano Amato, is comprised of renowned statesmen and political analysts, including former German President Richard von Weizsaecker, former Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt, former US Assistant Secretary of State Avis Bohlen, Project on Transitional Democracies President Bruce Jackson, European Commission member Janez Potocnik, former Romanian Foreign Affairs Minister Mircea Geoana, former Albanian Prime Minister Ilir Meta and other former high officials from SEE countries.
Over the past 12 months, commission members visited all the countries that are the subject matter of their report and met with senior officials in the region.
"Macedonia has survived all manner of threats, doggedly pursuing its goal of European integration.
In contrast to several other territories, Macedonia was able to prevent a full-scale civil war through a process of negotiation between the parties and with the assistance of the EU and the United States," the report says.
Writing on the crisis the country underwent, the authors say, "Although in theory, Macedonia should not exist, it is actually a modest but significant success story.
The country illustrates our thesis that a final and clear constitutional arrangement and the institutionalisation of European perspectives are the two instruments that can work apparent miracles in the Balkans."
The report stresses that Macedonia's achievement in overcoming its crisis and its determination to apply for EU membership should have a powerful symbolic impact elsewhere in the region -- it demonstrates how the solving of constitutional issues and a realistic, carefully calibrated EU perspective has the capacity to transform Balkan societies.
The Commission's recommendation is that the international community should address the major problems facing Macedonia, such as the need for economic growth and new jobs.
"The combination of cuts in the public administration and the appointment of ethnic Albanians to public sector jobs in accordance with the quotas agreed at Ohrid may lead to renewed tensions between the two communities if the unemployed are not absorbed elsewhere."
The authors, however, believe that despite all the risks and misgivings, Macedonia's progress since 2001 demonstrates that if the constitutional questions are resolved and if a tangible European perspective is on the table, then Balkan societies have the potential to escape the cycle of instability and uncertainty.
"We should clearly bring the region into the EU.
We need policies so that the region can get on, get in and catch up with the rest of Europe," the report concludes.
