16/05/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/05/05
A new centre in Serbia-Montenegro for retraining former military personnel is due to open in several months, giving discharged members of the armed forces the chance to learn skills that will help them land jobs at civilian institutions and companies.
Located in Nis, the centre is being financed entirely by the Netherlands, which is providing as much as 700,000 euros. 
The Dutch government considers the Balkans, and particularly Serbia-Montenegro, a high priority region, says Dutch military attaché Jan van den Elsen. 
"Peace is very important for everyone. 
[The] Balkans are a part of Europe, and we do not want a repeat of what was happening ten years ago," he says.
Former military personnel from all over the country will be eligible to enroll for training in industrial management, information systems, environmental protection and other subjects. 
Two pilot courses will be offered this year.
"We are asking the industry what its problems are. 
Then from their problems we create project tasks and we will assign these tasks to officers, but we will also assign a mentor to each officer who will assist him through the training in accomplishing the project task, and with this project task to approach a potential employer and tell him -- here, I have the knowledge which will help you solve your problems," says the manager of the centre, Miroslav Trajanovic.
This year, the Serbia-Montenegro Army will discharge 9,300 people. 
That number likely will rise to between 20,000 and 25,000 by the year 2010. 
Many of the newly retired personnel will face challenges, as the specialised knowledge they acquired at military schools may not be applicable in civilian life. 
One person who understands this situation well is Lieutenant Slobodan Tadic, the head of the Human Resources Directorate. 
"I am a trained artillery officer and there are many of my colleagues who received similar training -- these people need to be allowed equal opportunity," Tadic says.
Military leaders have acknowledged the importance of addressing this growing problem. 
With the aid of donations, the defence ministry has established a retraining programme of its own, to further help its discharged personnel make the transition.
