14/01/2005
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 14/01/05
Two regional airlines -- Croatian Airlines and Slovenia's Adria Airways -- signed on as regional members of the Star Alliance Association in December.
Star Alliance will now offer 1,750 flights per week to 21 destinations in the new EU member countries.
Established in 1997 with the aim of providing access to locations all over the globe, the association includes Air Canada, Air New Zealand, Brazilian Airlines, Lufthansa, Austrian Airlines, Singapore Airlines, Spanair, US Airways, Asiana Airlines, LOT Polish Airlines and Thai Airways International.
In all, carriers in the association offer over 14,000 daily flights to 755 destinations in 132 countries.
Croatian travelers can now fly from joint terminals and will soon be able to consult a joint Star Alliance Web page to find out about flight schedules.
Check-in procedures have been simplified:
boarding passes are now being given at the starting destination, while luggage can be checked through to the final destination.
In addition, travelers now have the option of purchasing tickets at joint Star Alliance ticket outlets, while bonus miles can accrue as part of the frequent flyer programme on any flight of a Star Alliance member airline.
Regional members of the Alliance are required to have a patron -- an existing member of the association -- to help make integration into the association faster and simpler.
Lufthansa has assumed this role for Croatian Airlines and Adria.
According to international press reports, Star Alliance expects a 25 per cent increase in sales from corporate customers this year.
Together, the group's member airlines are projected to generate more than 1.5 billion euros in sales from 35 corporate customers -- a 1.2 billion euro increase compared to last year.
Joining Star Alliance was a major strategic objective of Croatian Airlines, which has been in operation since 1990.
With a fleet of 11 planes, the airline currently covers 26 European destinations with 430 flights per week.
Hailing the move, airline officials have compared joining the Alliance to Croatia's anticipated entry into the EU.
