15/04/2005
(FT - 15/04/05; Reuters, BBC, AFP, HINA, UPI - 14/04/05)
Croatian President Stipe Mesic voiced confidence Thursday (14 April) that his country will start EU entry talks soon. 
According to Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, the negotiations process is likely to begin before the end of June, enabling Croatia to join the Union in 2009.
"I am confident we shall start negotiations before the end of Luxembourg's EU presidency [on 30 June]," Sanader said Thursday. 
"Our strategic goal is to take part in European Parliament elections in 2009," he added in a speech at the Crans Montana Forum.
In December, EU leaders gave the green light for the start of Croatia's membership talks on 17 March, making it conditional, however, on Zagreb's full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), particularly the handover of retired Croat General Ante Gotovina. 
As the authorities failed to deliver the fugitive to The Hague court before the scheduled start of the negotiations, Brussels decided to put the talks on hold.
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte has said that she could not verify Croatia's full co-operation with the ICTY while Gotovina remains at large. 
Prior to the EU's decision to postpone the start of membership talks, she also said Gotovina was within reach of the authorities, who had not done everything in their power to hand him over.
Croatian authorities insist that Gotovina is not in the country, making it impossible for them to arrest and transfer him to The Hague. 
On Wednesday, Mesic said there was new evidence proving that the fugitive is not in Croatia. 
He believes it should satisfy the special EU working group set up to assess Zagreb's level of co-operation with the ICTY, which is scheduled to visit Croatia next week, ahead of a meeting of EU officials in Brussels on 26 April.
"Croatia is fully committed to full co-operation with the tribunal on the last outstanding case of Gotovina," Sanader said Thursday. 
"We hope we can, in co-operation with member states and the chief prosecutor, resolve this issue or at least, if the general is not in Croatia, that we can convince our partners we are taking all measures to resolve this," he said.
However some diplomats have voiced scepticism that Croatia's talks can begin before the end of Luxembourg's presidency.
"If Gotovina is delivered by the end of June, definitely the case is over. 
If not, for whatever reason, the EU would like to take more time to assess the situation," Reuters quoted the head of the European Commission (EC) delegation in Croatia, Jacques Wunenberger, as saying Wednesday.
Meanwhile, Fabrizio Barbaso, the head of the EC Directorate General for Enlargement and head of the EU negotiating team for Croatia, said Thursday that opening membership talks with a country that has failed to hand over all its war crimes indictees would send the wrong signal.
"If we allow Croatia to start negotiations without full co-operation, what message would we send to Serbia about the seriousness of the EU?" Barbaso said. 
He said he hopes that by 2007, when Bulgaria and Romania are expected to join the Union, Croatia's accession talks will be "well under way".
Meanwhile, Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany, whose country was among the few that wanted to proceed with Croatia's talks, criticised member states that backed the decision to postpone them.
"I do not believe a whole nation can be punished for one person. 
I believe the Croatian government did what they could [to catch Gotovina]," Gyurcsany said Thursday.
