18/11/2004
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens – 18/11/04
The Greek government is calling for dialogue on ways to improve the educational system, which currently holds last place among education indices in the eurozone.
This year's EU report indicated Greece, in comparison to the rest of the countries in the Union, has been left behind in realising the goals of the Lisbon Strategy -- a programme to transform Europe into a knowledge economy by 2010.
Greece has yet to establish a system for equipping young people to respond to the challenges and needs of the globalisation era, officials say.
Nor does the existing system provide a solid general education.
To address these problems, the education ministry is studying educational systems and reforms in other countries, and has chosen the Finnish system -- which has enjoyed great success in implementation -- as a working model.
According to officials, the Finnish system provides both a general foundation of knowledge and the specific professional skills needed to compete in the marketplace.
Overhauling Greek education will require a number of interventions, experts say.
Curricula must be modernised, with new textbooks and concepts.
The latest technology must be introduced.
Foreign language education should be introduced.
Finally, the education system needs a reliable method for testing results and getting feedback.
Every stage -- be it a nursery, primary or secondary school -- should be continuously evaluated.
One of the thorniest issues is mandatory education, which must be expanded from 9 to 12 years to meet international criteria.
This is not a problem for urban areas.
In rural parts of Greece, however, many children do not stay in school for more than six years, in order to help their families.
Greece needs to adopt an effective system of educational administration and control, the ministry says.
At the same time, the government plans to introduce changes gradually, to make the transition process less disruptive.
