16/05/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 16/05/05
As part of the Macedonian government's push for easing the EU visa regime, new passports featuring advanced technology are being introduced.
A tender for the project was launched last month.
Last month, the Macedonian government launched a tender for a new digital passport system that will feature advanced technology currently in use in the EU and the United States.
The successful bidder will be chosen by August, enabling citizens to receive their new passports early next year.
Among the many safeguards designed to protect against identity theft, the passports will include a digital code recording the holder's biometric characteristics, such as eye colour.
Customs authorities will able to instantly access the digital file without special assistance from the police.
The upgrade is part of the government's push for a relaxation of the Schengen visa regime for Macedonian citizens, something it hopes will happen after the country receives a positive European Commission (EC) avis on its EU questionnaire and is granted EU candidate status.
That could happen around the start of next year.
"The government has made a decision to announce a tender for new passports because it is the final missing link to be connected if we want loosening of the Schengen visa regime by early 2006," Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski said after the announcement of the bid.
The 15m to 20m euros needed for the project will come from various sources, including the telecommunications company Makedonski Telekomunikacii, as well as public funds.
"The most adequate way of funding the new passports is from dividend money Makedonski Telekomunikacii should pay the government," Buckovski said.
"Then, commodity credits, money for investment in other segments, and money anticipated for capital costs that are not normally invested may be taken into account."
The public funds would be earmarked in the 2006 budget and subsequently refunded with the money collected from each owner of the new passports.
Twelve firms have passed the prequalification stage, allowing them to participate in the tender, according to the interior ministry.
Their bids will be officially opened at a meeting in July.
Other steps Macedonia will need to take include signing an agreement on readmission with the EC by 2006 and completing the turnover of border control from the Macedonian Army to the interior ministry.
