16/02/2005
(BTA, BNN, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Bulgarian President Official Web Site - 15/02/05)
Bulgaria's Consultative Council for National Security (CCNS) met on Tuesday (15 February) to discuss a draft security strategy paper which is expected to be adopted by parliament before its four-year mandate ends in June.
The new National Security Strategy (NSS) will replace the one in effect since 1998 and will determine the country's policies in a number of key areas in the next decade.
The Council assessed the proposed strategy in positive terms, President Georgi Parvanov, who chairs the CCNS, was quoted as saying after Tuesday's meeting.
Generally, the draft strategy for security is in line with a number of NATO and EU documents and shows the possibilities for an integrated national response to the risks, threats and challenges of the new century, the CCNS said in a statement.
The Council is an advisory body composed of key government ministers and officials, security agency chiefs, military commanders and the leaders of parties represented in parliament.
However, Parvanov and other participants in the meeting also highlighted certain deficiencies and omissions in the draft, approved by the government on 6 January, that need to be addressed before it is put to the vote.
The Council also agreed that the final NSS document should focus more strongly on issues of significant public interest and concern, including demographics, ethnic issues, the integration of minority communities and the prevention of intolerance and xenophobia.
According to the CCNS, the strategy should "pay more attention to counteracting conventional crime that threatens ordinary people, their lives, health and property".
The body also cited the need for bridging the economic and digital divide between Bulgaria and the industrial countries, raising the standard of living, halting "brain drain" and modernising science and education.
Once approved, the document will serve as a basis for legislation and policies in the domain of national security, including Bulgaria's military doctrine and participation in military operations abroad, and other important areas.
Parvanov urged politicians to reach political consensus.
"This is necessary as such a document will be implemented by more than one future cabinet," Parvanov said.
Opposition Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) leader Nadezhda Mihailova agreed with Parvanov and said her party plans to call a meeting of experts of different political parties to discuss the document.
The adoption of the Bulgarian security strategy should be based on consensus, because only on this condition could it ensure that the country's national interests as a NATO member and future EU member will be protected, she said.
