18/11/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 18/11/04
Ten US companies have shown interest in investing in Serbia and participating in the privatisation of Serbian companies.
Representatives of the firms -- all based in Illinois -- visited Belgrade in late October and early November, holding talks with Serbian President Boris Tadic, government representatives, the mayor of Belgrade, and numerous members of the business community.
Vladimir Petrovic, deputy director of the Illinois trade mission, said the Americans were very satisfied with the visit, and that several joint investment ventures would soon be realised.
The largest company in the delegation was the air traffic firm AAR, which is discussing joint investment deals with JAT Airways.
The group met representatives of JAT, Belgrade Rail, Belgrade Airport and other Serbian enterprises.
Agreement was reached on opening a Serbian Chamber of Commerce office in Illinois.
The US state will reciprocate by opening a trade mission in Belgrade, which would become a centre for business deals in Southeast Europe.
US companies have been the leading foreign investors in Serbia since the beginning of mass privatisation in 2001.
Philip Morris alone has invested 518m euros in the Serbian tobacco industry.
More recently, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has sought to encourage investment in Serbia by guaranteeing the security of invested funds.
Addressing the American Chamber of Commerce in Belgrade earlier this year, Kostunica said Serbia was rapidly working on reforming its legislation to ensure that foreigners feel confident about investing in the republic.
The outlook for Serbia has also been boosted by the credit rating agency Standard and Poor's decision to give a B+ rating to long-term Serbian state bonds and a B rating for short-term credits.
This is the first time in years that Serbia has received an international credit rating.
Business representatives have cautioned, however, that the risk of investing in Serbia remains high due to political instability and a large foreign debt, totaling about $9 billion.
Earlier this month, representatives from Bechtel visited Belgrade for talks with Serbian Minister for Foreign Economic Relations Milan Parivodic on a project to construct a highway from Serbia to Bulgaria.
One of the world's major construction companies, Bechtel is building road networks in Croatia and Romania.
