18/11/2004
(AP, RFE/RL, UN News Centre, Radio B92 - 17/11/04)
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen has welcomed an agreement between the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) on forming a coalition government.
"Immediately after the elections, I urged the political parties to act on the voices of the voters by moving quickly, and they have done so, without international involvement," Jessen-Petersen said Wednesday (17 November) after LDK spokesman Lulzim Zeneli announced the deal.
The UNMIK chief voiced confidence "that the new custodians of the provisional institutions will honour their commitment to work closely with the representatives of minority communities, and towards our common goal of building a stable multiethnic society".
The agreement was reached more than three weeks after Kosovo held the second parliamentary elections since it came under UN administration in 1999. 
According to Zeneli, several other smaller parties would join the coalition.
Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova's LDK won the 23 October poll with 45 per cent of the vote, but failed to muster an outright majority. 
The AAK finished third with 8 per cent of the vote.
According to the AP, some international officials had suggested they would prefer a broader coalition, including the second-largest Kosovo Albanian party -- Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK), which won 29 per cent of the vote. 
Instead, it will join the opposition parties. 
"
The PDK has proposed its leader Hashim Thaci for the post of prime minister, and in case this offer isn't accepted, we will go in the opposition," Xhavit Haliti, a member of the PDK chairmanship told a Kosovo daily earlier this month.
The AAK delivered a similar message, insisting it would not enter a government coalition unless it was given the prime minister post.
Although Wednesday's announcement did not confirm this, Haradinaj is widely expected to head the cabinet, while Rugova is likely to continue as president.
The new coalition government is expected to be in office during talks on Kosovo's final status, which could begin in mid-2005 if the province achieves substantial progress in meeting UN-set benchmarks in areas such as the rule of law, minority rights and dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
As prime minister, Haradinaj -- a former KLA commander -- would represent the province in status negotiations. 
Last week, however, he was interviewed by investigators with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague about his role in the 1998-1999 conflict in the province. 
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte has said she will issue new indictments against members of the now-disbanded KLA by the end of the year. 
An indictment against Haradinaj could lead to a government crisis, analysts say.
