16/05/2005
(Rompres -- 15/05/05 - 16/05/05;
EurActiv - 13/05/05;
Bloomberg, AFX - 12/05/05)
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu urged the members of his cabinet Sunday (15 May) to make EU entry requirements their top priority.
''The key topics all ministries have to insist on are the commitments related to the process of EU accession, preventing and fighting corruption, the absorption of European funds, the firm implementation of the set policies, the carrying out and finalisation of the programmes scheduled for this year, in line with the government programme,'' the government press office quoted Tariceanu as saying Sunday.
The prime minister summoned the state secretaries and ministers to a meeting in Snagov, about 30km from Bucharest, to review the government's work since its appointment in late December and the priorities for the next six months.
Each state secretary was asked to outline the main obstacles encountered so far and the priorities and initiatives related to EU entry.
Romania and Bulgaria signed their accession treaty with the EU on 25 April.
Both countries are scheduled to join the Union on 1 January 2007.
But safeguard clauses included in the treaty allow the EU to postpone either country's entry by one year, if commitments made during the accession talks are not met.
Besides fighting corruption, Romania has pledged to implement judiciary and public administration reforms.
It has also been asked to reduce state subsidies to the steel sector, in line with EU rules governing competition.
Tariceanu warned that he would not hesitate to fire ministers if Romania's entry is delayed for failing to fulfil its commitments.
"The most difficult exam is due this autumn, when the European Commission will analyse the monitoring report and decide whether the safeguarding clause will be applied or not," the prime minister said.
"I remind you that our main priority is the country's EU integration on 1 January 2007.
To accomplish that, my main priority is to fulfil the pledges taken within the safeguarding clause and the community acquis.
I will not hesitate to resort to dismissals in case of delays in observing the European timetable."
One of the decisions the cabinet took Sunday was to set up an inter-ministerial committee, including all the state secretaries in charge of liaison with parliament, to ensure good communication and exchange of information about the ministries' political initiatives, the Romanian state news agency Rompres reported.
The meeting in Snagov followed a warning by EU Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes on Thursday that Romania's entry may be postponed unless authorities act quickly to bring legislation in line with that of the 25-nation bloc.
"Of course, we all hope -- and I trust -- that we will not need to use this option,'' Kroes said during a visit to Bucharest.
"But it is my responsibility and duty to make it very clear, in no uncertain terms, that should Romania's performance not improve, the [European] commission would have no other option than to propose postponement."
Citing state subsidies and the restructuring of the steel sector as areas of particular concern for Brussels, Kroes warned all state aid granting agencies that they should play by the rules or face serious consequences.
"If Romania wants to join us soon, it must act now," the commissioner said.
"The clock is ticking, and in real terms there is little time left to complete the reforms."
