15/12/2004
(EurActiv - 15/12/04; AFP, EUpolitix, EUobserver, HINA, Radio B92 - 14/12/04; VOA, Irish Examiner, The Scotsman, Deutsche Welle, HINA - 13/12/04)
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader urged EU leaders Tuesday (14 December) to set a starting date for Zagreb's accession talks with the Union without introducing new conditions.
His call came ahead of the two-day EU summit, opening in Brussels on Thursday, at which the leaders of the 25 member states are expected to endorse a decision on Croatia's bid to join the Union.
EU foreign ministers met Monday to examine draft conclusions presented by the current Dutch EU presidency in preparation for the summit. 
At a press conference after the meeting, Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot indicated that Croatia would be told it could begin entry talks "around April 2005", provided it co-operates fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The EU, which has told Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia-Montenegro that their prospects for future membership depend on full co-operation with the ICTY, has been voicing concern over Croatia's failure to arrest and hand over retired General Ante Gotovina -- the UN tribunal's third most-wanted indictee after Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic.
However, the foreign ministers' draft statement, which the EU leaders are expected to approve during the upcoming summit, reportedly offers no details as to how Croatia's co-operation would be confirmed.
Gotovina went into hiding in June 2001, weeks after the ICTY indicted him over his alleged role in war crimes committed by troops under his command in 1995, including the killings of at least 150 Krajina Serbs. 
Last month, chief UN prosecutor Carla del Ponte said he represented "the only remaining obstacle to the co-operation of Croatia with the ICTY".
She insists that Gotovina has been sighted in Croatia and is being protected by a well-organised support network, including within state structures. 
While maintaining that Gotovina has fled the country, authorities in Zagreb have pledged that he would be arrested if found.
"We have to solve the case of Gotovina in the sense that he stands trial at The Hague," Sanader told the AFP on Tuesday, stressing his government's commitment to meeting its obligations to the ICTY. 
If Croatia can prove its full co-operation with the ICTY and begin its accession talks next spring, it is expected to join the EU in 2008 or 2009.
In other news, the Croatian National Security Council held a closed-door meeting Tuesday, called by Sanader and President Stipe Mesic. 
Co-operation with the ICTY and international co-operation with secret services were among the items on the agenda, according to the Croatian news agency HINA.
