01/09/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb –01/09/08
Summer in Croatia is not only about sea and sun.
As an increasingly popular summer destination, Croatia is becoming a magnet for artists, musicians, painters, actors and sculptors who seek to combine holidays with an opportunity to present their work.
For the tourist industry, this is a welcome trend.
Local municipalities are coming to realize that natural beauty and hearty cuisine isn't always enough for the sophisticated modern tourist, who demands a rich experience in return for the considerable cost of a foreign holiday.
As in other tourism-oriented countries such as Italy and Spain, Croatia aims to keep guests happy by combining the country's natural assets with diverse cultural offerings.
Festivals and concerts have mushroomed, with some becoming significant parts of the European cultural scene.
Art exhibits, concerts and film festivals have become a vital part of summer life.
Croats looked forward to a planned Zagreb appearance by Judas Priest, the veteran hard rockers.
But the show was cancelled because of the bass player's health issues.
Another disappointment occurred when rumours of a Madonna concert proved false.
The pop queen chose Montenegro instead.
Nevertheless, Croatia is starting to find a regular place on the tour lists of international stars.
Manu Chao played Pula on July 8th, while Whitesnake and Chuck Berry performed for audiences in, respectively, Osijek and Opatija.
Hollywood actress and singer Juliette Lewis had two concerts in Croatia, in Zagreb and in Rab, while Joan Baez held a concert in the capital on July 15th, and Lenny Kravitz was in Zadar on August 6th.
The biggest summer season attraction, however, was Iron Maiden.
On August 10th, Split was the place to be for headbangers, as the metal legends played a sold out concert at Poljud stadium, which has a capacity of 40,000.
It's only recently that the Croatian music scene has started to take off;
in the years immediately following independence, the pickings were slim.
For years, film has been a mainstay of summer life.
Croatia boasts the storied Pula festival, which dates back to the Yugoslav era.
Indeed, it celebrated its 55th anniversary this year, screening the latest works by Croatian directors.
A newer event, the Motovun Film Festival, passed the 10-year mark this summer.
And Dubrovnik hosted yet another movie festival, this one called Libertas.
Theatre, dance and folklore are also well represented.
June saw the Eurokaz festival, which showcases modern and alternative drama.
This year, the focus was on the American theatre tradition, particularly the New York scene.
Ulysses Theatre, founded by Rade Serbedzija, staged a series of plays inspired by the year 1968 and the events of that turbulent period.
At the beginning of August, actors gathered in Zagvozd, as they have done for more than a decade now.
A unique event known as Actors in Zagvozd was originally organized and promoted by Vedran Mlikota, a Croatian actor born in the town.
He wanted colleagues and friends from around the country to get to know his hometown better.
Actors liked Mlikota's idea and started coming to Zagvozd each year.
There, they hang around with their fans, enjoy the local cuisine and fresh air and get a lot of fun and sun.
Zagvozd is not far from the coast, so they can go to beaches also.
Last but not least, folk music remains a strong presence.
One of the most important festivals honouring the Croatian musical tradition is held in Omis in July.
It centres on Dalmatian klapa, a form of a capella singing practiced by both men and women.
The beauty and clarity of this singing style astonishes those who have not had the chance to hear it before.
Just as Croatians may thrill at an international act coming to their capital, for visitors the Omis festival offers a chance to see something memorable which they are unlikely to encounter at home.
