14/04/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/04/05
An agreement creating conditions for amending Serbia-Montenegro's Constitutional Charter was signed on 7 April in Belgrade by Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, the presidents of the member republics -- Boris Tadic and Filip Vujanovic -- and their prime ministers, Vojislav Kostunica and Milo Djukanovic. 
EU security chief Javier Solana also signed the agreement.
Speaking at a news conference, Solana and Marovic said the agreement would enable the Serbia-Montenegro Parliament to function. 
According to the Constitutional Charter, the mandate of the current members of parliament expired at the beginning of March. 
But new elections were never held.
They said the agreement was an important step towards continuing Serbia- Montenegro's integration into the EU, but pointed out the state union's international obligations -- primarily towards The Hague tribunal -- have not been met. 
Solana said recent co-operation with the tribunal has been successful, and that he hoped it would continue "with the same firm resolve".
Djukanovic said that the amendment of the Constitutional Charter represented "a rational solution", and added that political efforts can now be directed towards European integration. 
Djukanovic said it was "not necessary" for Montenegro to make any concessions in connection with amending the Constitutional Charter.
Slobodan Samardzic, an adviser to the Serbian prime minister, said the agreement could not have been reached without help from Brussels. 
Last year, he said, Montenegrin officials decided to "unilaterally break" the Constitutional Charter and not hold elections for the union's parliament.
Saying that the agreement should be ratified as soon as possible in the parliaments of Serbia, Montenegro and the state union, he said he hoped this process would be completed "in a couple of weeks". 
Samardzic also said the agreement introduced new rules for the organisation of independence referendums in the constitutent republics, in view of the fact that an additional control mechanism of the EU was introduced.
According to the agreement, direct elections to the parliament will be held separately, in both republics, once elections for the republican legislatures are held. 
The terms of office of the present members of parliament will be extended until those elections take place.
