15/02/2005
(Xinhua - 15/02/05;
Reuters, AFP, HINA, Croatian Information Centre - 14/02/05)
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader announced on Monday (14 February) a decision by the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) on structural and personnel changes in the government.
The proposed changes are expected to take effect later in the week, pending parliamentary approval.
To streamline foreign affairs activities and avoid "duplication of work", the current foreign and EU integration ministries will be merged, Sanader said.
Incumbent European Integration Minister and head of the country's EU negotiating team Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic was named Monday as the country's new foreign minister.
She will replace Miomir Zuzul, who resigned recently amid corruption allegations.
According to the Croatian news agency HINA, Damir Polanca will be named as deputy prime minister in charge of the economic sector.
A member of the managing board of the Podravka company, he will succeed Andrija Hebrang, who stepped down for health reasons.
Hebrang's other post -- minister of health and social welfare -- will be taken up by one of his deputies, Neven Ljubicic.
The bill on the new foreign ministry is likely to be adopted Wednesday, according to Parliament Speaker Vladimir Seks, who is also a senior member of the HDZ.
Lawmakers are scheduled to discuss the new ministerial appointments the next day, he told reporters Monday.
The changes occur about a month before the scheduled start of Croatia's EU accession talks on 17 March.
Brussels has made it clear that the launch of talks depends on Croatia's full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and particularly the arrest and handover of fugitive General Ante Gotovina.
He faces charges stemming from his alleged role in war crimes committed during the 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia, including the killings of at least 150 Krajina Serbs.
EU officials have warned that accession talks could be postponed if Gotovina is not in The Hague by mid-March.
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte's upcoming report to the EU on Croatian co-operation is expected to play a key role in the decision to go ahead with the talks as scheduled.
Del Ponte is expected to submit her report on 21 February.
Croatia recently stepped up its efforts to track down and arrest the fugitive, but maintains that he is not in the country and his whereabouts remain unknown.
"
By 17 March we want to prove to the EU that Croatia has done the maximum possible in this domain," Grabar-Kitarovic said during a visit to Bratislava on Monday.
President Stipe Mesic, who is scheduled to officially begin his second term in office on Friday, meanwhile pledged again that Gotovina would be captured, if found.
"We have redoubled our efforts in order to find his whereabouts.
If we establish that he is in Croatia, he will be arrested," said Mesic.
"If he is not here, we must have credible and convincing evidence to prove it, and the negotiations should not be postponed."
