14/04/2005
(The Guardian, The Scotsman - 14/04/05; AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, VOA, RFE/RL, EUobserver, EurActiv, European Parliament - 13/04/05)
An overwhelming majority of the members of the European Parliament (MEPs) supported Bulgaria and Romania's EU entry Wednesday (13 April). 
This was the last approval the two countries needed in order to sign their accession treaty with the Union on 25 April. 
Bulgaria and Romania are now set to join the EU in January 2007, provided they have fulfilled all the commitments made during the negotiation process.
In the two separate ballots on Wednesday, MEPs voted 522-70 with 69 abstentions in support of Bulgaria's accession. 
Romania's entry was approved by a 497-93 vote with 71 abstentions.
MEPs from the European People's Party and the Greens wanted the vote to be postponed until November, when the European Commission (EC) is due to issue its reports on the two countries' progress.
The voting took place after a last-minute deal between the EP and the European Council, guaranteeing the EU legislature's involvement in the procedures concerning the funding to be allocated to Bulgaria and Romania until 2009. 
MEPs also reached an agreement with the EC, allowing them to be involved in the process of monitoring of the two countries' progress in meeting membership requirements.
Safeguard clauses introduced in Bulgaria and Romania's accession treaty provide that the EC may decide to propose to the Council that each or both countries' entry is postponed by one year if the required measures are not implemented in time.
"Romania and Bulgaria must deliver on key reforms," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Wednesday. 
"We won't hesitate to use safeguard clauses. 
If they fall too far behind, accession may be delayed."
Geoffrey van Orden, the EP's rapporteur for Bulgaria, welcomed the EU lawmakers' approval, saying, "Bulgaria is well on course for accession on 1 January 2007. 
There is much to be done, but today we've had an overwhelmingly positive signal from the parliament. 
And that's good for all of us."
An EP political resolution accompanying its assent for Bulgaria welcomed the country's excellent progress so far, but noted that there were still a number of steps Sofia is expected to take. 
The document criticised the Bulgarian Parliament for its failure to adopt a new anti-corruption penal code and stressed the need for stronger efforts in combating organised crime. 
While welcoming the recent launch of the Decade of Roma Inclusion initiative, MEPs urged the country to do more to end segregation of Roma children in schools. 
It also needs more efforts to reduce unemployment and provide better health care.
In a similar resolution on Romania, MEPs praised the country for the reforms it has introduced and for additional commitments, including increasing media freedom -- a commitment Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu has pressed since taking office. 
The document also welcomed Romania's participation in the Decade of Roma Inclusion initiative, but -- as in the case with Bulgaria -- pointed out some serious shortcomings that Bucharest must address in the run-up to accession.
These include effective implementation of administrative and judicial reforms, further efforts in the fight against corruption, and eradication of all violence and discrimination against minority groups. 
Romania, which is seen as less prepared for EU entry than its southern neighbour, is also urged to improve the treatment of psychiatric patients, to improve border control efficiency, reduce industrial state subsidies and strengthen environmental protection.
"We will consolidate the rule of law. 
We will prepare the administration so that EU laws will be applied in Romania. 
European integration remains the top goal of my cabinet," Tariceanu said Wednesday in Bucharest after the EP vote.
