14/04/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 14/04/05
Greek Foreign Affairs Minister Petros Molyviatis announced UN Special Representative for Macedonia Matthew Nimitz's proposal of a new name for Macedonia on 8 April, sparking a public outcry in Macedonia. 
The proposed solution, Republika Makedonija-Skopje, written in the Cyrillic alphabet, was to be a compromise to solve the ongoing Macedonia name dispute with Greece.
The Macedonian government rejected the proposal. 
"Our position is clear -- the double formula is on the table," said Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski immediately after Molyviatis announced the proposal. 
"We believe it is a compromise much bigger than the compromise Greece is making."
The so-called double formula is Skopje's official compromise proposal. 
Macedonia agrees with the idea of using a special name in bilateral relations with Greece, but wants its constitutional name -- Republic of Macedonia -- to be used in communications with other countries.
The two sides agree with the international community that dialogue, compromise and a solution are necessary, though they have differences on the proposals. 
Greek President Karolos Papoulias was quoted as saying that the Nimitz proposal is a good foundation for continuing talks and an opportunity Macedonia should use. 
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski said the proposal is a good basis for constructive talks on the name, but only in the part on bilateral relations with Greece.
Greece's opposition to its northern neighbour's using the name Republic of Macedonia -- which was also its official name within former Yugoslavia-- started after the breakup of Yugoslavia. 
Due to Greek opposition, in 1993 Macedonia agreed to join the UN as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. 
The country changed its flag and incorporated a new article in the constitution, saying that it has no territorial, or any other, claims on its neighbours.
Skopje's negotiating position improved after the United States also recognised the country under its constitutional name last year. 
Three -- the United States, China and Russia -- of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, along with 90 other countries, now recognise Macedonia by its constitutional name.
