15/02/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/02/05
The latest Human Rights Watch (HRW) world report concludes that Serbia-Montenegro has made incremental steps in advancing human rights.
However, it criticises authorities for their failure to co-operate with the UN war crimes tribunal and characterises efforts to prosecute war crimes indictees before domestic courts as "inadequate".
According to HRW, co-operation with the tribunal "took a marked turn for the worse after the December 2003 parliamentary elections and the establishment of a new Serbian government dominated by the nationalistic Democratic Party of Serbia".
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has openly opposed the arrest and extradition of war crimes indictees, saying he favours voluntary surrenders instead.
As many as 15 people indicted by The Hague are either living in Serbia-Montenegro, or traveling between Serbia, Montenegro and Republika Srpska, the organisation alleges.
They include two of the UN court's three most-wanted fugitives -- Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic -- as well as former army and police generals Nebojsa Pavkovic and Sreten Lukic.
A third indicted general, Vladimir Lazarevic, has surrendered to the tribunal, while a fourth is believed to be hiding in Russia.
While Kostunica has pushed for prosecuting indictees at home, the report says, the domestic political climate and lack of an independent judiciary "make the chances of a credible prosecution being mounted against them in Serbia very slim".
According to HRW, authorities have not shown the political will needed to make domestic trials feasible, and police remain unprepared to secure evidence for the prosecution.
"The creation of a special war crimes chamber in 2003 appeared to signal an increased seriousness of purpose.
But during 2004 the chamber heard only one trial," the report says, noting also that only "rudimentary" witness protection mechanisms currently exist in Serbia-Montenegro.
Moreover, HRW adds, the office of the special war crimes prosecutor as well as the special war crimes unit within the Serbian police are severely understaffed, making it difficult to proceed with cases.
In addition to the war crimes issue, the report faults Serbian authorities for failing to respond adequately to a flare-up of ethnic violence in March 2004, as well as for their inadequate response to "a year-long wave of low-level violence against non-Serbs in the Vojvodina region in northern Serbia"
