14/12/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 14/12/04
Last week's regional summit in Tirana aimed at strengthening dialogue to ensure that the ethnic animosities and violence that wracked the region during the 1990s remain in the past.
The presidents of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro -- countries that share a common aspiration to join Euro-Atlantic structures -- gathered from 9 December to 10 December to discuss ethnic and religious tolerance.
Hosted by Albanian President Alfred Moisiu, the summit signalled Tirana's determination to play a key role in regional efforts to promote stability.
Like its neighbours, Albania seeks to maintain peace and enhance co-operation to realise its long-term goal of integration.
"In the past decade, conflicts and wars sowed the seed of divisions and hatred among the ethnicities and religions that got involved in them," Moisiu said.
"In this post-conflict period in the Balkans, our challenge is to educate and raise a new European generation that does not reconcile with old mentalities that keep alive the spirit of exclusion and of 'the hostile neighbour', and which is capable of building a new spirit that accepts and respects the other who is different," he said.
Praising Albania's experience in inter-religious and interethnic co-existence, Moisiu added that this experience could be shared with other nations.
Prime Minister Fatos Nano met with regional leaders within the framework of the summit, including Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozvar Marovic, with whom he discussed Kosovo.
Both agreed that such talks were crucial and should be maintained in the future.
In addition to leaders of Southeast European countries, the event was attended by Norwegian Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik and UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura.
Summit participants said dialogue would help them in the joint fight against terrorism, as well as helping to resolve regional issues.
"We are all committed to making use of dialogue as the only way to achieve full stability and overall progress in Southeast Europe, leading to a successful completion of the European integration process," a final statement of the summit said, citing practical steps that can be taken, such as guaranteeing freedom of movement and working with minorities.
"Reconciliation of religious views is an increasingly significant challenge of our age … Regional co-operation is becoming the natural way to tackle shared problems and to move towards progress," the statement said.
