07/07/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 07/07/08
After three weeks of exciting games, unpredictable results and ecstatic fans, EURO 2008 ended on June 29th.
The Spanish team, one of the all time favorites, won the championship, defeating Germany in the final match 1-0.
Four teams from the Southeast European region participated;
Turkey, the most successful team, reached the semi-finals;
Croatia lost to Turkey in a nerve-wracking match;
and Romania and Greece, neither of which made the championship's second phase, left their fans disappointed.
Romania's performance at the EURO 2008 was confined to the "Death Group" stage where it faced the powerful Group C teams of France, Italy and the Netherlands (Romania-France 0-0, Romania-Italy 1-1 and Romania-the Netherlands 0-2).
Romania's one point lead in the standings against Italy and France before the last game was not enough when the team lost their final match to the Netherlands.
The Romanian team's defensive strategy in the crucial match sealed its fate.
"Too much in the back, too little in the front," Romanian sports daily Gazeta Sporturilor said about the match.
"We forgot that the essence of football is the attack."
"We lost against a good team, but we leave with our chin up," Romanian coach Victor Piturca said.
"The boys found out Italy led by 1-0 in the other game and probably gave in psychologically," he added, referring to the game that decided the second positioned team in the group.
Romanian fans, unhappy with the outcome, began an online petition for Piturca's removal.
According to the EURO 2008 statistics, Romania was among the teams that scored the least goals, had the least shots on target and corners.
Piturca was ranked eighth in the coaches' standings.
The first and the second positions were held by Spain's Louios Aragon and Turkey's Fatih Terim.
International sports newspapers and television channels unanimously agreed that Greece was among the worst teams of the championship.
In 2004, Greece unexpectedly won the tournament, tantalising fans for this year.
However, the team left Austria and Switzerland without winning a single match.
Greece scored only one goal in its Group D matches.
The goal, scored against eventual tournament champion Spain, was about the only source of satisfaction for Greece.
As for Turkey, players were plagued from the beginning with injuries and suspensions.
Under Terim's direction, the Group A team reached the semi-finals, finally losing to Germany, 3-2, in the last minute of the match.
Brushing aside rumours of retirement, Terim said he will stay with the team through at least 2010.
Turkey is considered a respectable yet unpredictable team.
They fight hard and are persistent.
Croatia was praised as being the "true revelation of Euro 2008", according to international media.
But coach Slaven Bilic's squad failed to reach the semi-finals, losing to Turkey.
Croatia won all three matches in Group B, including the one against championship favourite Germany, but luck was not on their side in the extra time against Turkey.
Bilic will have to rebuild his team's confidence in the months ahead.
"It was the ending that you could expect to happen only in football.
We have won games against much better opponents.
The last two minutes of the match against the Turkish team will haunt me for the rest of my life.
This is something you remember for good," Bilic said upon his team's return to Croatia.
Bilic, a former player for England's West Ham and Everton, was a key player for Croatia in 1998 when they won the bronze medal at the World Cup in France.
He plans to remain with the team.
Although regional teams did not make it as far as they wanted, they are already eying the next big championship -- the World Cup in 2010, hosted by South Africa.
Southeast European Times contributor Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest contributed to this report.
