15/06/2005
(US State Department, Reuters - 14/06/05)
The United States views Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Kosovo and Serbia-Montenegro as critical to the stability of Europe and will be actively engaged in diplomatic efforts this year and next, aimed at helping them move forward, according to Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns.
"If our largest strategic objective is a peaceful, secure, united Europe… that objective cannot be attained as long as the Balkans are unstable and as long as the Balkans are not connected to the rest of Europe," a State Department transcript released Tuesday (14 June) quoted Burns as saying, following his trip to Sarajevo, Pristina and Belgrade last week.
Cautioning that the countries of the former Yugoslavia still need to deal with the tragic legacies of the conflicts in the 1990s, Burns cited the arrest and handover of war crimes indictees and achievement of ethnic reconciliation in Kosovo as some of the main problems.
"If [Ratko] Mladic and [Radovan] Karadzic can end up in The Hague, if there can be ethnic reconciliation in Kosovo, then there's every reason to believe that these countries have a future with the EU and a future with NATO and that they can enjoy the advantages that all their neighbours have now from around the Balkans and Central Europe," Burns said.
During his trip to the region, he made clear to authorities in both Sarajevo and Belgrade that it would be impossible for the United States to have a normal relationship with either government until Karadzic and Mladic are brought to justice. 
"There could be nothing more appropriate" than Mladic being apprehended before 11 July, the tenth anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre, Burns said.
Noting "a new attitude and a new sense of purpose in Belgrade about making sure that Mladic ends up in The Hague," Burns commended Serbian authorities for improving their co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal by facilitating the transfer of 12 war crimes indictees during the past six months.
"It's a very impressive record," said Burns. 
"It's more progress in three to four months than we've seen in ten years." In response to the improved co-operation, Washington last week resumed its assistance to Serbia-Montenegro, unblocking more than $10m in aid.
Turning to BiH, Burns said the country has "made a lot of progress over the last ten years" and "does have a future". 
However, he criticised Bosnian Serb authorities for dragging their feet on defence reform and blocking police reform, and said they have been unhelpful in locating Karadzic and Mladic.
As to Kosovo, Burns said the United States believes 2005 should be "a year of change and a year of decision". 
Washington supports the diplomatic process that could lead to final status talks by this autumn, he said.
The United States is planning to be very actively involved throughout the process, Burns said, adding that Washington's position is that the Serbian government, the Kosovo Serbs and the other minorities, and the Kosovo Albanian majority should sit down and agree on what their future is."We have not said that we favour any specific outcome because that would be inappropriate."
