17/11/2004
(AFP, Sofia News Agency, BNN, Mediapool, Dnevnik, bTV, Bulgarian Ministry of Interior - 16/11/04; Forbes, CNET, Sofia News Agency, bTV - 28/10/04; Europol)
Bulgaria broke up 17 counterfeiting gangs with 68 participants and dismantled eight clandestine mints during the first nine months of this year, Interior Minister Georgi Petkanov said Tuesday (16 November). 
He was speaking at the start of a two-day international conference in Sofia on the fight against currency counterfeiting. 
Sixteen new groups, involving 98 people, have been detected over the same period, he added, noting that some of the gangs were engaged in multiple types of crime.
In all, police have conducted more than 40 anti-mafia operations since the beginning of this year, the head of the country's special police unit dealing with organised crime, General Valentin Petrov, told the conference. 
"All operations were co-ordinated and carried out jointly with the US Secret Service and Europol," Petrov said.
During the raids, police seized fake US dollars and euro notes worth $117,000 and nearly 526,000 euros respectively, according to the interior ministry.
Bulgarian and Europol officials say that the amount of counterfeit US dollars in circulation around the world appears to be declining, while the number of euros is rising.
The head of Europol's Forgery of Money Unit, Winfried Preuss, tells AFP there are several reasons for this trend, one of which is the rapid spread of the euro as the second global legal tender after the dollar.
The euro currency, said Preuss, "is very secure but people outside the EU do not know the security features, so it is very easy for potential counterfeiters to distribute the new currency there".
"European police usually manage to seize about 30 per cent to 40 per cent of all counterfeit euro bills before they enter circulation," he said, adding that the rest of the bogus money would have to be detected and confiscated by commercial banks.
Another emerging trend, according to Bulgarian police officials, is a rise in credit card forgery. 
In late October, authorities announced the arrest of a 22-year old student who "issued" a fake credit card bearing the name of Microsoft chairman Bill Gates. 
Investigators say the student, identified by the pseudonym "Alexey K.", belonged to an international gang involved in the manufacture of counterfeit driving licenses, passports and euro banknotes in more than 25 countries.
The counterfeiting gangs in Bulgaria manufacture anything in demand on the "market", Petrov told the Sofia conference.
An international police operation codenamed Firewall, involving law enforcement agencies from several countries including Bulgaria, Britain and Canada, has so far led to the arrest of 85 people in the countries involved, according to Bulgaria's Interior Chief Secretary, Lieutenant General Boyko Borissov.
