15/06/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 15/06/05
Earlier this month, 630 of the 685 Romanian workers employed by the builder of the Transylvania Motorway were sent home for a 90-day period, during which they will receive only 75 per cent of their salary.
The contractor, the US-based firm Bechtel, says it made the decision after failing to receive payment from the transportation ministry.
"We notified our partners regarding the lack of money, leaving it to their consideration whether to go on with the works or not," said Bogdan Sgarcitu, the communications manager of Bechtel Romania.
"It is regrettable that we are forced to do this, but it is not possible to advance the work without money ...
We are confident the Romanian government acts for insuring predictable and sure payments, the Mediafax news agency quoted project external affairs manager Francis Canavan as saying.
The 415km motorway is meant to link the cities of Brasov, Targu Mures, Cluj and Oradea, cutting across Transylvania and connecting central Romania with the EU.
Construction began one year ago and was scheduled for completion in 2012, at a total cost of about $2.7 billion.
However, the deadline might have to be extended due to slowdowns such as this.
The 90-day work stoppage has sparked protests.
One hundred workers rallied in front of the Cluj county governor's office, and subcontractors complain that their business plans have been thrown into disarray.
"To be able to meet all the project's requests, we haven't contracted other works," the daily Gandul quoted Cornel Martincu, the general manager of the Iptana company, as saying.
"So now we are left doing nothing."
According to the Romanian government, the payment delays are due to a lack of money in the state budget.
In addition, officials say, the EU did not agree to the project, because the builder was selected directly, without a tender, and because the motorway does not follow the route of the Pan-European corridors.
"That's why the project of a motorway along the fourth corridor, connecting Bucharest with Sibiu, Deva, Lugoj, Timisoara, Arad and the Hungarian border, will have priority," said Prime Minister Calin Popescu-Tariceanu.
Confronted with the possibility that the Transylvania Motorway might not be completed until 2015, the government has softened its stance.
"We'll build both motorways in the same time and we decided to unblock the funding for Bechtel," announced Laszlo Borbely, the minister for public works.
He stressed, however, that the amount of money to be allocated for the project in 2005 has been reduced, from $360m to $213m.
Authorities have paid off about $12m in bills owed to Bechtel, but $95m remain.
"We'll be paying these arrears and some other bills by contracting a $122m external loan", Transportation Minister Gheorghe Dobre pledged during a press conference.
Romania currently has about 228km of usable motorways and another 200km in various stages of construction.
Those figures put the country near the bottom in Europe in terms of motorway networks.
Many observers believe the lack of modern transportation infrastructure is an obstacle to foreign tourists and investors.
