16/11/2004
(Office of the High Representative - 16/11/04; AP, Reuters, AFP, VOA, Fena - 15/11/04)
Authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Serb-controlled entity, Republika Srpska (RS) have arrested eight people charged with committing war crimes against Bosnian Muslims during the 1992-1995 conflict. 
Monday's (15 November) action marked the entity's first step towards the capture of war crimes suspects.
However, none of the detainees is among the 21 fugitives being sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Acting on an order of the Sarajevo cantonal court, RS special police forces arrested Jovan Skobo, Svetko Novakovic, Momir Glisic, Goran Vasic, Zeljko Mitrovic, Veselin Cancar, Dragoje Radovanovic and Momir Skakavac. 
Two of them, Skobo and Novakovic, have been charged with genocide, while the others are accused of committing crimes against civilians and prisoners of war, said court official Slobodan Nikolic.
According to local media reports, the men were arrested in the towns of Pale, Lukavica and Foca during raids conducted by RS special police forces. 
According to Nikolic, all eight suspects have been transferred to the court in Sarajevo. 
Local press reports Tuesday suggested they would remain in custody for a month.
The ICTY has agreed that the suspects should be tried locally, according to Judge Sreto Crnjak, with the Sarajevo cantonal court.
The arrests came amid strong pressure from the international community for RS authorities to start handing over indictees wanted by the ICTY, including wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic.
During a briefing at the UN Security Council last week, High Representative Paddy Ashdown again criticised RS authorities for their failure in this regard. 
He warned it could jeopardise BiH's chances for joining the EU and NATO.
The chief spokesperson in Ashdown's office welcomed Monday's arrests as a positive first step, but stressed the distinction between domestic and international indictments. 
"Although the alleged crimes of those arrested are serious, they are small fry in comparison to those indicted by The Hague tribunal," the BiH daily Dnevni Avaz quoted Irena Guzelova as saying. 
"The RS authorities will ultimately be judged on their record with regard to the arrest of Hague indicted war criminals," she added.
RS officials said Monday the arrests were an indication of the commitment to co-operate with the ICTY. 
RS Interior Minister Darko Matijasevic pledged further steps towards meeting the entity's obligations to the tribunal.
In other news, the Council of the EU reportedly decided Monday to expand a freeze on all funds and economic resources of persons indicted by the ICTY, adding 18 new names of indictees to the list, which originally included Karadzic, Mladic and Croatian fugitive Ante Gotovina. 
The newly added names include 17 ethnic Serbs, as well as Miroslav Bralo, a Bosnian Croat who was recently transferred to The Hague following his surrender. 
All but Bralo are also barred from entering the EU, newspapers in BiH reported Tuesday.
"We welcome the EU decision. 
It represents another step that will limit space for manoeuvre to those avoiding and obstructing justice," Guzelova said. 
"We expect BiH authorities to do the similar thing and freeze assets belonging to the 18 Hague indictees."
