16/11/2004
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 16/11/04
Montenegro is seeking to boost Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) dramatically during 2005, following disappointing numbers this year. 
According to European Integration Minister Gordana Djurovic, the government hopes privatisation campaigns, greenfield investments and other development projects will result in an FDI inflow of 150m euros.
Because competition on the global capital market is fierce, Djurovic says, authorities will need to work hard to promote Montenegro through campaigns targeting potential investors, as well as through bilateral negotiations. 
Next year is considered crucial, since many international experts believe FDI will begin to decrease in 2006 and 2007. 
Therefore, Djurovic says, Montenegro must quickly finish up structural changes in areas of legislation and capital market administration.
This year, an Agency for Investment Promotion was established. 
It is expected to soon start playing an important role, especially in light of the upcoming privatisations of large enterprises, such as the state-owned telecom and aluminium factory.
FDI is a key instrument for increasing production, lowering unemployment, enhancing infrastructure and improving the standard of living. 
Despite the ongoing privatisation process, Serbia-Montenegro and other Balkan countries have so far not been able to attract foreign capital to the same degree as countries like Poland and the Czech Republic -- a fact which officials chalk up to the SEE countries' small markets and late transition process.
International indicators suggest that Serbia-Montenegro does not have a significant investment rating. 
Among regional countries, it lags behind Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania. 
Responding to this problem, Podgorica has hired foreign consultants to assess the overall investment environment and possibilities for business development.
A recent Foreign Investment Advisory Service's (FIAS) report, "Diagnoses of Investment Environment in Montenegro", highlighted some of the challenges the government faces in attracting FDI. 
In addition to the small, low-revenue market and late transition, the republic is also hampered by structurally weak industries, shortcomings in the administrative system, macroeconomic instability and corruption.
However, FIAS experts also pointed to a number of advantages that Montenegro enjoys -- a good geographic location, fast-paced economic reforms, a qualified workforce and rapid privatisation.
According to the FIAS, Montenegro's potential has yet to be promoted fully through governmental activities. 
Thus, according to Djurovic, the government must formulate a long-term plan and a clear strategy to tap this potential
