13/12/2004
By Mark Lucas for Southeast European Times in Ljubljana, Slovenia -- 13/12/04
The inaugural Southeast Europe Clearinghouse conference, held from 30 November to 1 December in Ljubljana, Slovenia, was considered a resounding success. 
The Slovenian Defence Ministry, in co-operation with the US European Command (EUCOM), sponsored the conference. 
More than 65 representatives from 35 countries and international organisations, including NATO and the Nordic Initiative, attended.
The main focus of the conference was on security assistance and country-specific issues for five of the focus nations in the Southeast European region: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia, Macedonia, and Serbia-Montenegro. 
The conference also aimed to help accelerate the process of NATO membership for Albania, Croatia and Macedonia, and help BiH and Serbia-Montenegro join the alliance's Partnership for Peace programme -- a necessary step in Euro-Atlantic integration.
Dialogue and exchange of information took place throughout the event, which was mediated by the United States’ Colonel Michael Anderson and Slovenian Defence Policy Directorate Acting Director Uros Krek. 
Each of the nations delivered presentations, and participating countries and organisations discussed the specific issues raised during the briefings. 
Participants exchanged information regarding defence systems and security co-operation among the target countries in the region. 
Nations that had attended similar conferences -- such as the South Caucasus Clearinghouse conference -- shared their experiences.
A key issue among the presentations was the importance of collectively ending conflict in assistance areas. 
Many nations were found to have similar programmes within the same country. 
Suggestions were made to develop a database system to track such programmes to provide a means of reducing conflict and duplication.
The issue of land mine removal and explosive ordnance disposal in the region was of particular importance. 
Solutions are needed to establish regional security and peace. 
These topics will be discussed in-depth at future conferences.
The conference concluded with a consensus that participants should meet again in six months to discuss the progress of events. 
The idea of small working groups focused on country-specific topics under the supervision of a lead nation was accepted. 
The attendees and focus nations also adopted a vision statement to act as the binding force behind the conference.
Officials say that with continued co-operation, dialogue and information sharing, the path to regional stability will be easier to follow. 
The success of the Southeast Europe Clearinghouse conference suggests that the nations are ready to take responsibility in maintaining the progress already made.
