13/04/2005
(AFP, VOA, Turkish Press, Athens News Agency, The Hellenic Radio, Macedonian Press Agency, NTV MSNBC - 12/04/05)
Greece and Turkey have decided to establish direct communications between two air force bases in a bid to defuse tension resulting from mutual accusations of air space violations over the Aegean Sea.
Following talks in Ankara on Tuesday (12 April), foreign ministers Petros Molyviatis of Greece and Abdullah Gul of Turkey said the measures would affect the Greek Air Force Operations Centre in Larissa and the Turkish air base in Eskisehir.
A joint statement issued after talks between Greek and Turkish foreign ministry delegations said the decision was an important step towards avoiding incidents in the Aegean Sea.
Territorial disputes have previously brought the two NATO member states to the brink of conflict. 
Greece insists that its national airspace extends over a 16km zone around its coastline. 
But according to Turkey, it should only run 10km, coinciding with Greek territorial waters.
In a gesture of goodwill to the neighbouring country, Turkish Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc last week called for the abolition of a 1995 parliamentary resolution, qualifying a possible attempt by Greece to extend its territorial waters beyond the 10km zone as casus belli, (cause for war), and authorising the government to take action. 
Athens welcomed the move.
Molyviatis said Tuesday's agreement was a reflection of the two countries' common will to boost mutual confidence and enhance bilateral ties. 
"We are convinced that this move will contribute constructively to the general effort to improve our relations," the Greek minister said at a joint press conference with his Turkish counterpart.
"The improvement in our relations must also be reflected in certain military activities in the Aegean, activities which are having a negative effect in the climate between our countries."
During Tuesday's talks, the sides also agreed on three new confidence-building measures, in addition to the 11 points already in effect. 
According to Gul, these include co-operation between the two countries' emergency disaster management units for dealing with natural disasters, as well as organising joint training exercises; participation of military staff in training programmes and language courses in the two countries' military academies; and organising sports competitions between the Greek and Turkish military academies.
Expressing his country's support for Turkey's EU bid, Molyviatis said the Greek vision was "to turn our neighbourhood into a region such as the rest of Europe … a region of peace, democracy, prosperity and stability with absolute respect for human rights, religious freedom and the protection of minorities".
The two also reportedly discussed the Cyprus issue. 
At the press conference, Molyviatis said that the goal shared by all sides was the island's reunification.
The Greek and Turkish officials also discussed ways to improve bilateral trade and economic co-operation.
Following talks with Gul, Molyviatis met with Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer. 
Molyviatis meets with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and others on Wednesday.
