14/06/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/06/05
With the arrival of Kai Eide, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's special envoy, in Pristina on Monday (13 June), the process of evaluating the implementation of democratic standards in Kosovo has been launched. 
The internationally set standards are a prerequisite for the start of talks on the province's final status.
In late May, the Security Council made the decision to approve starting the review, with most members of the Council concluding that the time is right for a more detailed report on the implementation of standards.
Eide is expected to complete his report on the situation in Kosovo in about two months. 
He and his team will also put together a report on the development of political processes in Kosovo, focusing on relations between ethnic communities and the process of decentralisation.
A positive report would clear the way for initiating the resolution of Kosovo's final status, probably in late September.
"The implementation of standards is just one component and I will also carry out a wider evaluation of the state of things in Kosovo, as requested by [Annan]," Eide said in Pristina. 
"I will travel around Kosovo to see different regions and to listen to people, so that I can get the best possible picture of what is happening on the field," the Norwegian diplomat added.
After visiting Pristina and talking with Albanian leaders and UNMIK representatives, Eide will travel to Belgrade on Wednesday to meet with top Serbian officials.
Also on Monday, EU ministers meeting in Luxembourg adopted a document defining the Union's future role in Kosovo. 
It emphasises that the province's future status must be based on multiethnicity, the protection of minorities and monuments of culture, and an efficient fight against organised crime. 
There is to be "no division" of the territory or joining with another country, the document adds.
The Union has announced that it will appoint its own envoy for Kosovo, who will co-operate with other diplomats handling the issue. 
"We need co-operation from Pristina and Belgrade. 
When we talk about standards, we talk about minorities' rights in different ways. 
That is why these issues will be under the EU's watchful eye," said EU security chief Javier Solana.
Kosovo has been under UN protection since June 1999, when NATO forced former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to withdraw his army and police from the province, following a three-month bombing campaign.
