14/06/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 14/06/05
Serbian lawmakers are in the process of drafting a collective condemnation of all war crimes committed on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
An outline is scheduled to be completed Tuesday (14 June), allowing the declaration to be discussed at extraordinary parliamentary sessions later this week.
However, the parties are still at odds over the exact contents of the declaration.
President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party insists that it contain text specifically condemning the 1995 Srebrenica massacre.
Others argue that war crimes committed against Serbs also be mentioned, according to Radio B92.
During a meeting last week, party representatives had agreed on a declaration that "condemns every crime committed during wars in former Yugoslavia and requests all competent bodies and services in the Republic of Serbia to urgently and efficiently investigate and bring to justice all individuals believed to have committed war crimes on the basis of grounded suspicion".
Crimes against civilians, "such as those committed in Srebrenica and Bratunac", should not only be commemorated at anniversaries, because a "crime is a crime forever and it must not be forgotten … The Serbian Parliament expects that parliaments of all countries in the region condemn war crimes committed during wars in former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia," the draft reads.
According to Serbian Parliament Speaker Predrag Markovic, the goal is "to get the highest state officials to condemn war crimes, and to change the climate in which individuals are talking about crimes".
"I believe now we're close to achieving it," Markovic added.
Slobodan Vucetic, the president of Serbian Constitutional Court, says the declaration is a political act and won't have any actual legal influence on the Serbian judicial system, or any concrete effect on the work of investigative panels.
Nevertheless, he says, it would provide a "strong political and moral message".
Response to the debate is mixed.
Some NGOs and activists say the text falls short of what is needed.
Speaking Saturday during a conference on the Srebrenica massacre, Humanitarian Law Centre Director Natasa Kandic characterised the draft as "mild", adding that it demonstrates that institutions still aren't ready to face the past.
Law professor Vojin Dimitrijevic, meanwhile, criticises the parliamentary initiative as "late".
Such a declaration should have been adopted five years ago, he says.
Parliament's move follows the broadcast on Serbian television of video footage showing the execution of six Bosnian Muslims from Srebenica.
On Tuesday, Croatian police announced they have detained a man believed to be among the Scorpions paramilitary unit members seen in the video.
The Serbian government has also arrested several ex-Scorpions members in connection with the killings.
