10/03/2005
(AP, AFP, BBC - 09/03/05)
Wednesday's (9 March) opening ceremony of the war crimes court in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) was attended by International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) President Theodor Meron and chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte. 
Heavy security was in place as the court opened in an old barracks of the former Yugoslav Army in Sarajevo.
"Clearly there will be numerous challenges and obstacles, however, you will have a luxury of no deadlines to complete the task," del Ponte said Wednesday. 
She warned that "enormous efforts and crystal clear fairness are needed to destroy suspicion, prejudice and the lack of confidence" in the local judiciary.
"In many ways your task will be more difficult as you don't have the powers of the international tribunal. 
However, your power and authority is even greater as this is your country," she added.
The international community's High Representative to BiH, Paddy Ashdown, said the local court is "a major step forward to full statehood," proving the country is finally able to try serious war crimes cases. 
"We mark a huge step forward in equipping BiH with the practical capacity to dispense justice," said Ashdown. 
"What The Hague began, BiH will finish."
Until now, local courts in the region were only allowed to try smaller cases with the prior approval of the UN tribunal. 
As of Wednesday, the BiH court will be the first in the region to conduct the entire process domestically. 
The BiH war crimes chamber is expected to ease the burden of the ICTY by taking some of its caseload, allowing the UN court -- which is scheduled to close its doors in 2010 -- to concentrate on the highest-ranking suspects.
Initially, the chamber will be staffed mainly by international judges and prosecutors, with local legal officers gradually taking over. 
Next month, the UNDP and the Japanese government will begin training legal professionals and law enforcement officials within the new structure. 
Serbia and Croatia hope to follow BiH's lead in the future.
The transfer of the first cases to the new court in Sarajevo is expected soon. 
"This could be a cure for our society," said Mirsad Tokaca, the head of the state commission for Gathering Facts on War Crimes in BiH. 
"The Hague tribunal was physically too far away from the victims," he said.
