15/11/2004
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 15/11/04
On 28 November, Romanians will vote for a new parliament and president, choosing from 12 presidential candidates and 57 parties and national minorities' organisations. 
Polls show that two candidates -- Prime Minister Adrian Nastase and Bucharest Mayor Traian Basescu -- are leading in the presidential race, while four parties are likely to win parliamentary seats.
Nastase, who heads the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD), is running as the candidate of a coalition between the PSD and the Humanist Party (PUR). 
With support from about 44 per cent of voters, he continues to be the frontrunner, according to a recent poll by the Institute for Social Studies (ISS). 
However, Basescu -- the president of the Democratic Party (PD) and the candidate designated by the Justice and Truth Alliance (DA), composed of the PD and the National Liberal Party -- is trailing by only 3 per cent to 7 per cent.
Corneliu Vadim Tudor, president of the nationalist Greater Romania Party (PRM), qualified for the second round in the 2000 elections. 
Currently, he is well behind Nastase and Basescu and looks likely to receive between 9 per cent and 15 per cent of the vote. 
The remaining candidates are under the 2 per cent line, except for Marko Bela of the Democratic Alliance of the Hungarians (UDMR) candidate. 
Polls suggest he could receive about 4 per cent of the vote.
The parliamentary standings appear to mirror the presidential race. 
The PSD/PUR coalition leads with between 39 per cent and 43 per cent of voter support, followed by the DA, with between 35 per cent and 39 per cent. 
The PRM is third, with between 11 per cent and 13 per cent. 
According to the polls, the UMDR may -- for the first time since 1989 -- not reach the 5 per cent electoral threshold, even though the Hungarian minority represents 7 per cent of the population.
Because the election is close, the leading political forces are pulling out all the stops in a bid to gain extra votes. 
Nastase, for example, is seeking to boost his image by shopping in rural markets and making frequent references to his hometown of Colentina. 
Mudslinging has also been on the rise. 
And President Ion Iliescu -- obliged by the constitution to remain impartial -- ignited a controversy by making statements that, according to the opposition, constitute indirect advertising for the PSD/PUR coalition. 
The opposition has also accused the government of increasing social protections ahead of the vote.
The most dramatic controversy of the campaign, however, resulted from an initiative by the Coalition for a Clean Parliament, formed by the main NGOs in the political arena. 
In October, the group announced that more than 200 candidates failed to meet its criteria. 
Over the next few weeks, a quarter of these were removed from the lists, in what many are calling an unprecedented success for civil society.
