15/11/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje --15/11/04
Starting on 1 January, political parties in Macedonia will be funded from the state budget, as a result of recently adopted legislation. 
Seventy per cent of the approximately 500,000 euros available will be granted to parliamentary parties according to the number of seats won in the last general elections. 
The rest will go to parties that did not win seats but garnered at least 1 per cent of the vote.
"Transparency of the parties in politics is the key to democracy," says Andrej Zernovski, an MP for the Liberal Democrats, one of the sponsors of the new legislation. 
"Many countries are worried that money dominates politics and money buys politicians. 
This is not excluded in Macedonia either."
The law enables rational distribution of public and private funding and defines strict criteria for private donations, Zernovski says. 
"Party funding has to be subject to complete scrutiny by the citizens and a body responsible for control of the financial operating. 
Every citizen of the country or member of a political party has the right to equal access to the way of funding of their political party."
Parties will still be able to fund themselves via membership fees, donations, gifts, and sales of promotional and advertising material. 
However, caps on donations have been established -- 35,000 euros from private sources and 17,500 euros from individuals. 
Parties will also be required to keep public records and conduct proper accounting. 
They will have to submit an annual financial report by 31 March at the latest. 
The ministry of finance and the state-auditing bureau will supervise their financial operations.
Except for the money provided in the state budget, the legislation prohibits parties from receiving public funds. 
Also prohibited is financing from international institutions, state-owned enterprises (including enterprises in which the state has at least a 20 per cent share), religious communities, and anonymous and unidentified sources.
