10/03/2005
By Robert Herschbach for Southeast European Times – 10/03/05
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn struck a mostly positive tone during his three-day visit to Turkey earlier this week, assuring the country that its goal of joining the Union is attainable.
But he also warned against a lull in the reform process, urging the government to press ahead with changes needed to meet EU criteria.
"In the reform process the critical thing will be the change of mentalities which will entrench and anchor the legal and political reforms in Turkey," Rehn told reporters as he prepared to depart Ankara Tuesday (8 March), wrapping up his first official visit to the country since succeeding Guenther Verheugen in the commissioner's post.
He led a delegation of the so-called "EU Troika", which included Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn and British Minister for Europe Denis McShane.
Addressing the Turkish Industrialists and Businessmen's Association earlier the same day, he said Ankara needs to do more to fulfil its commitments to the EU on economic questions -- particularly by preventing breaches of intellectual property law and removing restrictions on free trade in areas such as ceramics, textiles, meat products and telecommunications.
"The EU is not just a rose garden, it is also a level playing field for all European companies," Rehn said.
Trade relations between Turkey and EU member states are presently covered by a 1996 customs agreement.
To secure a date for launching accession talks, however, the country pledged to sign a new deal with the Union.
In doing so, it will take a step it has long resisted -- recognising Cyprus, which joined the EU in the latest enlargement.
Turkey's accession talks are set to begin in October.
A month later, the EU is scheduled to issue a report on the country's progress in meeting the membership criteria.
Although its candidacy has received strong support from Britain and many EU leaders, including German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, it also faces potential opposition within a number of EU member states.
Overcoming this opposition may well depend on how successfully Turkey convinces Europe that it is not only implementing changes on paper, but also putting them into action.
Rehn's visit began amid an uproar over the breakup by Istanbul police of an unauthorised demonstration marking International Womens' Day -- an incident that resulted in criticism from Brussels.
The commissioner made human rights a focal point of his trip, paying a visit to an Ankara centre for the rehabilitation of torture victims and calling for authorities to follow a "zero tolerance" policy towards the practice.
Political leaders have shown the will for reforms, Rehn said, but this needs to be "translated fully also into the mentality of law enforcement agencies and state administration".
While in Turkey, he met with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and other top officials, as well as with representatives of NGOs.
