15/11/2004
(FT, BBC, AP - 15/11/04; International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia - 11/11/04)
The first war crimes trial of Kosovo Albanians started at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on Monday (15 November). 
Three former members of the now disbanded Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) are facing charges of involvement in war crimes during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo.
According to UN prosecutors, the three indictees -- Fatmir Limaj, Haradin Bala and Isak Musliu -- engaged in torture, inhumane acts, murders and other atrocities committed against Serb and Albanian civilians at the KLA-run Lapusnik prison camp between May and August of 1998. 
The joint indictment charges Limaj and Bala each with five counts of crimes against humanity and five counts of violations of the laws or customs of war. 
Musliu faces four counts of crimes against humanity and four counts of violations of the laws or customs of war.
The three "participated in maintaining and enforcing the inhumane conditions at the camp", prosecutors said, and took part in aiding and abetting the torture and beating of detainees.
Limaj, 33, is a former KLA commander and was the highest ranking officer of the three at the time. 
He later became a co-founder of Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK). 
When he was arrested in Slovenia in February 2003, Limaj was a member of Kosovo's Parliament and head of the PDK's public relations department, acting also as party spokesman.
Musliu, 34, was a commander at the Lapusnik prison camp, at times acting as a guard. 
Bala, 44, served as commander and guard at the camp. 
They were arrested by KFOR troops in Kosovo in mid-February 2003, and then transferred to The Hague.
On Thursday, an ICTY press statement announcing the start of the trial quoted the indictment as saying that Limaj and Musliu exercised full command and control over KLA members running the Lapusnik camp. 
A total of 35 people, including Serb civilians, as well as Kosovo Albanians perceived by the rebels either as refusing to co-operate with or resisting the KLA, were kept at the improvised detention facility. 
A number of the inmates were allegedly beaten, tortured and murdered in the month prior to 26 July 1998, when KLA forces abandoned the camp as Serb forces retook the area. 
The indictment holds Limaj and Musliu responsible for operation of the Lapusnik camp, including the failure to prevent alleged atrocities.
"It is alleged that they knew or had reason to know that the crimes alleged in the indictment were about to be committed or had been committed by their subordinates and they failed to take the necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such acts or to punish the perpetrators," the ICTY statement said.
In addition, Bala stands accused in connection with another incident that led to the death of 10 people. 
After the KLA abandoned the prison camp, he -- together with another guard and a KLA soldier -- led a group of 12 detainees to a clearing in the woods. 
They met Limaj on their way, who gave orders to Bala. 
Eventually, 10 of the detainees were shot dead.
Appearing before The Hague-based tribunal last year, all three pleaded not guilty to the charges.
