12/01/2005
(OSCE, AP, Washington File, The Centre for Southeast European Studies, Radio B92 - 11/01/05; UNMIK - 10/01/05)
The active involvement of all ethnic groups in the political process in Kosovo is essential to the establishment of a stable, multiethnic society in the province, the new OSCE Chairman-in-Office (CiO), Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, said Tuesday (11 January). 
The diplomat urged the Kosovo Serb community in particular to participate in public life so that its rights are better protected.
"It is necessary that Kosovo Serbs should get back into the political process," Rupel said during a visit to Pristina, less than two weeks after assuming the post of CiO. 
"Only in this way will they be able to shape their own future and ensure better protection of their rights."
Citing security concerns and demanding greater local autonomy, the majority of Kosovo Serbs boycotted the 23 October general elections, held seven months after the worst ethnic clashes in the province since 1999. 
As a result, the community has been left without adequate representation in the newly formed institutions.
During his visit, Rupel also urged the province's leadership to make stronger efforts towards the inclusion of Kosovo Serbs in political life.
"I also appeal to Kosovo Albanian politicians to reach out to the Serb community," the Slovenian diplomat said, stressing that this should now be "the key priority" for the province's institutions.
Rupel's visit comes at a time of preparations for a review of Kosovo's progress in meeting a set of internationally endorsed standards, especially in the areas of security, rule of law, protection of minorities, freedom of movement, return of displaced persons and decentralisation. 
The review has been scheduled for mid-2005 and a positive assessment could eventually lead to the launch of talks on the province's final status.
"This will provide the indispensable roadmap for the future of Kosovo and is necessary for its integration into European structures, irrespective of discussions on its future status," Rupel said, referring to the upcoming review. 
"The proper implementation of standards and the Europeanisation of Kosovo represent two sides of the same coin."
In Pristina, Rupel held talks with UNMIK head Soren Jessen-Petersen, Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova, Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj, Parliament Speaker Nexhat Daci, and representatives of the Kosovo Serb community.
The visit is his second foreign trip since Slovenia assumed the rotating one-year OSCE chairmanship from Bulgaria on 1 January. 
The fact that he came to Kosovo early on reflects the importance the OSCE attaches to its work in Kosovo, an OSCE statement quoted Rupel as saying. 
The organisation's presence in Kosovo is the largest of its 18 field missions.
"The OSCE will remain an integral part of the international mission in Kosovo and remains committed to assisting the province through institution- and capacity-building," Rupel said.
