23/05/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 23/05/05
On 9 May 1950, France's then-Foreign Minister Robert Schuman proposed creating a common coal and steel market in Europe, thus launching a process that culminated in the establishment of the EU. 
Member states commemorate the date every year as Europe Day. 
Buoyed by signals from Brussels that the Union's doors remain open to all countries that meet the membership requirements, countries in the Western Balkans celebrated the day as well.
Croatia, Macedonia, Albania and Serbia-Montenegro are at differing stages along their road to accession, but all four countries have emphasised their determination to complete the process and undertake the reforms needed to do so. 
Meanwhile, they are counting on the EU's continued adherence to the open-door policy affirmed at the Thessaloniki Summit in June 2003.
Croatia has already been granted membership candidate status. 
But the start of its accession talks has been delayed because of insufficient co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal -- and, in particular, by the failure of retired General Ante Gotovina to appear before The Hague court.
Macedonia was the first country in the West Balkans to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU. 
It has responded to the EU Questionnaire and anticipates being granted candidate status at the EU Summit in December. 
Last February, the Macedonian political leadership pledged the country would be ready to join the EU by 2010.
Albania, which is currently negotiating an SAA, must convince Brussels that it has made progress on two fronts -- holding free and fair elections, and battling crime and corruption. 
"The [European] Commission will only be able to propose the conclusion of negotiations … if parliamentary elections this summer are conducted in accordance with international standards," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said in Strasbourg on 13 April. 
"Tangible achievements must also be made in fighting corruption and organised crime."
Last month, Serbia-Montenegro received a positive Feasibility Report, paving the way for the next phase in the process. 
"We consider that the country is now sufficiently prepared to negotiate a SAA with the EU," said Rehn in his speech in Strasbourg. 
"Negotiating a SAA is different from negotiating accession to the Union. 
We will demand more as Serbia-Montenegro moves forward."
The range of Europe Day activities in the Western Balkans, as well as the strong degree of public interest in them, suggests that new attitudes have emerged in countries recently engulfed in conflicts. 
In this post-conflict period, EU member nations and the Union itself are actively participating in the Stabilisation and Association Process, which has replaced so-called EU Agreements as the method of achieving membership. 
At the Thessaloniki summit, Western Balkan states were given access to part of the TAIEX aid mechanism programme and the Twinning and Community Programmes, which are aimed at capacity building of institutions, counseling measures and exchanges of experience.
Croatia held its main Europe Day celebration in Split. 
On 5 May and 6 May, events were organised at the Zagreb Faculty of Economics, including lectures, workshops and information activities on topics concerning European integration. 
The winners of two contests in primary and secondary education were announced, while in Zagreb, an educational ride on the EU Tram was organised for primary school students.
In Macedonia, Europe Day celebrations involved several non-governmental organisations, the government-run Sector for European Integration, and the European Commission delegation. 
One hundred students took part in a Youth Educational European Seminar in Bitola; panel discussions and workshops were held in Kumanovo, Gostivar, and Kocani; and a seminar and day-long social event took place in Tetovo, with around 150 students from the three universities in Macedonia participating. 
A multimedia performance attended by thousands was held in Skopje. 
All the embassies of EU member countries in Macedonia put up stands in the main city square, presenting aspects of their history and culture. 
On 9 May, a group of mountaineers raised the European flag at the summit of Mt Vodno, near Skopje. 
The same day, the Macedonian Parliament opened its doors to citizens who sat in with parliamentary groups and students organising a parliamentary session.
Lidija Nedelkovska, Secretary General of the European Movement for Macedonia said in a press conference on the Day of Europe that these activities are aimed at acquainting the public with European values and involving all social groups, particularly young people.
The EC Delegation in Albania organised an exhibition entitled "The Story of the EU in Posters." Embassies of EU member countries participated in European Film Week as well as in sponsoring concerts, art exhibitions, debates and lectures. 
A seminar on the European Constitution was also organised.
"Along with the euro, the EU flag, and the European anthem, Europe Day has become a symbol of European unity. 
The cultural events and celebrations on Europe Day bring the Union closer to its citizens -- and citizens closer to one another," said a press release of the European Commission delegation in Albania.
The European Movement of Serbia organised a week of activities, including photo exhibits, debates and workshops, under the motto "Europe in Hand".
Meanwhile, Brussels continues to indicate its openness to further enlargement. 
"The first anniversary of the 5th enlargement which has re-unified Europe is a happy event for all Europeans," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said on 1 May. 
"It reminds us that the EU is not a closed club and how much its power of attraction is important. 
It is a forceful reminder that openness towards others -- and not isolationism -- is what drives the EU and yields results. 
This enlargement has brought new quality to Community life and a new vision of Europe."
