13/06/2005
(Reuters, Bloomberg, AFP, Athens News Agency - 13/06/05;
The Hellenic Radio - 12/06/05;
Athens News Agency, Macedonian Press Agency, Kathimerini - 11/06/05;
Bloomberg - 10/06/05;
Reuters - 08/06/05)
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis has easily won a parliamentary vote of confidence that will allow his government to carry out its social and economic reform plans.
Following three days of debate, all 165 lawmakers of the ruling conservative New Democracy (ND) party in Greece's 300-seat parliament voted in favour of the government in an open ballot held in the early hours of Monday (13 June).
Of the 285 deputies attending the session, 120 voted against, while the 12 Communist Party MPs boycotted the vote.
"We want and can change the country," Karamanlis told lawmakers at the end of Sunday night's parliamentary debate, adding that the government has emerged "stronger in order to serve the citizens and the interests of the country".
The prime minister and ND leader requested a vote of confidence in his government on Wednesday after the main opposition Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) called for a censure vote against Economy and Finance Minister George Alogoskoufis, saying he had misled the legislature when drafting the 2005 budget.
The government is seeking to revamp labour relations at some state-run companies and make working hours more flexible in a bid to increase private companies' competitiveness and to boost the economy.
It also wants to reduce pension benefits and raise retirement ages.
Karamanlis says the pensions system and the power that labour unions enjoy are stifling the Greek economy.
"We do not compromise with problems," Karamanlis said.
"The citizens demand that we proceed even faster, more strongly and decisively and this is what we are doing," he added, pledging that the government would seek the "broadest possible consensus" and would make no "surprise moves" on the path of reforms.
Opposing the government's reform plans, unions have announced strikes in the coming days.
According to them, the envisioned measures would effectively abolish the eight-hour work day in some sectors and would leave thousands of civil servants and state company workers without jobs.
The unemployment rate already tops 10 per cent.
The general confederation of Greek workers (GSEE) is organising a 24-hour strike of civil servants and workers at private companies on Thursday.
Greek bank workers, who were on strike for four days last week, are planning more stoppages on Monday and Tuesday, Reuters reported.
The GSEE has also called for a nationwide workers' referendum on the government plans on 13 July.
But Karamanlis indicated that his government, which came to power in March 2004 pledging to fight unemployment and slash the budget deficit, would stay firm on the road of reform.
"The challenges are great," Karamanlis said Sunday.
"However, we will win them because the changes we are planning ...
are supported by the citizens and serve the citizens."
