13/06/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/06/05
Last month, the Belgrade District Court withdrew an arrest warrant against Mirjana Markovic, head of the Yugoslav Left party and the wife of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic. 
It had been issued after she failed to appear in court in April 2004 to face charges of abuse of power. 
She is believed, however, to have left Serbia in February 2003 and to have been living in Moscow since that time.
The international warrant stemmed from allegations that Markovic used her influence to secure the unauthorised distribution of Serbian government apartments, one of which was given to her grandson's nanny. 
Police later named her as a suspect in a far more serious case -- the murder of former Serbian Communist Party leader Ivan Stambolic.
Considered Milosevic's political mentor, Stambolic was dumped by his protege in 1987, then abducted and murdered in the summer of 2000. 
His body was not found until the assassination in 2003 of former Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
The withdrawal of the international warrant, many believe, is not simply a stroke of luck for Markovic. 
The minority government of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica recently faced the possibility of a no-confidence vote. 
It requires the "silent support" of the Socialist Party -- still headed by Milosevic -- to stay in power. 
Opposition politicians, and some within the ruling coalition itself, have accused Kostunica of agreeing to give Markovic freedom to return to Serbia, in exchange for the needed votes.
According to Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, it's no surprise the warrant was withdrawn.
"If Serbia really nurtured European values, Mirjana Markovic would have been proven guilty of murder," Draskovic says, citing several cases -- the assassination of journalist and newspaper owner Slavko Curuvija, that of four members of Draskovic's party, and Stambolic's murder -- in which the Milosevic couple has been implicated. 
"And Russia would, in that case, extradite her to Serbia".
The Belgrade Court's decision was made in response to a promise by Markovic's lawyer, Zdenko Tomanovic, who said she would appear at the next scheduled court hearing, set for 15 September. 
It is "unusual" for a court to withdraw a warrant based on a lawyer's pledge, says the President of the Serbian Constitutional Court, Slobodan Vucetic.
It remains unclear, however, whether Markovic is actually free to return to Serbia, since she still faces a domestic police warrant there in relation to the Stambolic killing.
Ivana Ramic, Belgrade District court spokesman, has said that Markovic would be arrested, then released on bail pending the outcome of her trial.
Markovic is widely considered to have strongly influenced her husband, who she first met in high school. 
A former sociology professor at Belgrade University, she has been a busy publicist, producing a vast number of newspaper columns and books, which -- during the regime's years in power -- were printed in mass quantities but enjoyed only modest sales.
