13/06/2005
By Zoran Nikolic for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 13/06/05
Because of its possible implications for the enlargement process, the rejection by French and Dutch voters of the EU's proposed constitution has many in the Balkans worried. 
This is certainly the case in Macedonia, which is second after Croatia in terms of the accession process. 
Skopje expects a European Commission avis to be issued on 9 November, followed by a European Council (EC) decision on whether to grant the country membership candidate status as early as December.
For 15 years, Macedonia and the region have been looking ahead to the promise of a European future, Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska told a conference on EU integration, organised by Germany's Bertelsmann Foundation, in Zagreb on 4 June. 
"Possible delay or stoppage of the enlargement will lead to delays in and complication of reforms, discouragement of home and foreign investors and re-strengthening of populists in the region," she told participants.
A second round of EC-Macedonia political dialogue took place in Brussels only days after the French referendum. 
According to EC Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, the best message Macedonia and other potential candidates can send to Brussels at the moment is that of meeting the membership preconditions. 
The EC, he indicated, will rigorously monitor the progress of the reforms in Macedonia over the next four months.
Following his meeting with Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski in Helsinki on 3 June and 4 June, Rehn struck an optimistic note. 
"In the past years [Macedonia] has made significant progress in stabilising and reforming itself and therefore I give it a positive assessment and praise," he said.
Macedonia was also buoyed by a 6 June statement from EC President Jose Manuel Barroso, who told reporters in Brussels that the EU would not slow down the enlargement process, and that no EU member has requested doing so.
The fact that procedures are continuing on schedule is seen as a positive sign. 
On 10 June, the second meeting of the Committee for Stabilisation and Association between the EC and Macedonia took place, with Skopje officials presenting the results achieved so far.
