13/05/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 13/05/05
Greece will soon have a Fiscal Investigators Force (FIF), a panel that will work independently and with full authority to investigate financial matters without going through the usual bureaucratic channels. 
The FIF will report directly to the Finance Ministry, bypassing all intermediary services.
The FIF will audit all public organisations that are financed by the government -- including ministries, local NGOs, public utility companies, the church and parliament.
According to Deputy Finance Minister Petros Doukas, the agency will have the ability to suspend anyone who refuses to produce documents establishing that their service or organisation is being run in a financially transparent and responsible manner. 
The same applies to civil employees at all levels who refuse to provide evidence and information for active investigations.
The FIF will only need circumstantial evidence of fraud, gross negligence, mismanagement or insufficient documentation of past transactions in order temporarily suspend employees. 
Should it find a basis for bringing criminal charges against an employee, it will submit the evidence to the Fraud Prosecution Directorate.
Auditors will have the power to investigate past as well as current activities. 
One area that is almost certain to come under scrutiny is the 2004 Summer Olympics, and especially Olympic-related construction projects. 
Many of them were not completed until the last minute. 
In this rushed atmosphere, contractors frequently asked for higher fees to complete projects on time. 
If the state had failed to provide the necessary licenses in time for the project deadline, these additional fees could be justified.
However, there were instances in which contractors submitted requests for more money even if the state had provided the licenses. 
Cases where these costs were approved and paid will become the primary target of the FIF -- and those responsible will have to account for their actions.
Also subject to investigation will be cases in which public organisations held up the issuing of licenses or other key decisions affecting projects under their management. 
Because contractor agreements usually include a penalty clause for delays, corrupt officials may have had an incentive to intentionally slow progress. 
The FIF will review projects that were not completed on time and cost the state revenue.
Finally, the FIF will be empowered to investigate organisations under liquidation, members of management boards that may or may not be civil employees, the management of property in the hands of trusts and public utility companies, lapsed debts that favoured the state, and bank accounts of private individuals
