12/04/2005
(Office of the High Representative -- 31/01/05 - 01/04/05; BBC - 01/02/05; Fena - 31/01/05; AP - 14/01/05; EU Police Mission)
High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Paddy Ashdown announced 1 April the launch of the next phase in a public information campaign seeking to raise people's awareness about the creation of a single structure of policing in the country.
In the first stage of the campaign, which has been under way since February, EU Police Mission (EUPM) experts and officials from the Office of the High Representative (OHR) have been travelling around the country to explain the benefits of police reform through public meetings and debates. 
Describing this part of the initiative as successful, the EUPM said in a statement on 22 March that the road show had "seen good participation and lively discussions and debates".
The new phase targets a larger audience by using video spots, which will run on BiH's main TV networks, and posters linked to the campaign. 
At the end of the month, parties will be convened to start formal negotiations about police restructuring, Ashdown said.
In its feasibility study on BiH, the EU has listed the creation of a single police force as one of the 16 conditions the country must meet to be able to start negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the Union.
Ashdown said that EU experts would arrive in BiH in mid-May to assess its progress in fulfilling the conditions set out in the study. 
Full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is also on the list of requirements.
"It is worth pointing out that we have seen ICTY co-operation in BiH developing," said Ashdown. 
He welcomed the fact that "after nine years of inactivity and obstruction" the country's Serb-run entity Republika Srpska (RS) has transferred five war crimes indictees to the ICTY this year.
"Of course only when all outstanding indictees, including Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, are transferred will this process be complete -- but these are encouraging signs of progress for the EU," Ashdown said. 
"If this progress continues it means that police reform could remain the one last big issue that needs to be addressed before BiH begins SAA negotiations."
In line with EU requirements, the police reform aims to place exclusive competence for police legislation and budget at the state level and help protect it from improper political interference. 
It is also designed to map out regional police areas on the basis of functional criteria to prevent criminals from escaping arrest by hiding behind entity and canton border lines.
The current policing system in BiH, according to Ashdown, is too expensive, too complicated and not sufficiently effective in fighting crime.
