13/05/2005
(AP, AFP, Radio B92, Serbian Government - 12/05/05;
SEE Security Monitor - 11/05/05;
Kosovareport - 08/05/05)
Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials met in Belgrade on Thursday (12 May) for their first face-to-face talks on the return of thousands of refugees to the UN-run province.
"I think the process took off well and we are looking forward within the next few weeks to have a second meeting," the AFP quoted Gottfried Koefner, a representative of the UNHCR, who chaired the meeting, as saying.
During a high-level meeting in Vienna in October 2003, Serbian and Kosovo Albanian leaders agreed to launch working-group talks on technical matters of mutual concern, such as energy, missing people and refugee returns.
The ensuing expert talks largely focused on the question of missing persons and were fairly successful.
Interrupted in March 2004, when Kosovo saw its worst outbreak of interethnic violence in the last five years, the meetings resumed earlier this year.
"We are not here to talk politics but to focus on a humanitarian problem which needs to be resolved quickly so that the displaced can return home," Koefner said without offering any details.
"This is just the beginning of a long process."
The agenda for the next meeting will be defined in the next few days, the Serbian government said in a statement Thursday, citing Koefner.
Both the Serbian and Kosovo Albanian representatives have singled out the issue of property as a question of particular importance, so Koefner expects detailed discussions on it during subsequent meetings.
The number of Serbs who fled Kosovo following the 1998-1999 conflict has been estimated at 200,000.
Kosovo Albanian officials dispute that figure, however, insisting the actual number is closer to 70,000.
Only about 12,500 refugees have since returned to the province, which is under UN administration though technically still part of Serbia.
Negotiations on its final status could begin this autumn, if an upcoming review finds that enough progress has been made in meeting UN-set benchmarks -- including refugee returns.
"Members of all communities must be able to participate fully in the economic, political and social life of Kosovo, and must not face threats to their security and well-being based on their ethnicity.
All refugees and displaced persons who wish to return to Kosovo must be able to do so in safety and dignity," reads the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan, released on 31 March 2004.
In Thursday's talks, Vladimir Cucic, a representative of Serbia's Kosovo co-ordination centre, led the Belgrade delegation.
The Pristina delegation included representatives of UNMIK and of the Kosovo provisional institutions.
