11/01/2005
(Standartnews, Novinar - 11/01/05;
Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Veski Den, BTA, Bulgarian National Radio - 10/01/05;
BNN, Sofia News Agency - 09/01/05)
The main political forces in Bulgaria condemned the country's Socialists Monday (10 January) for their leader's pledge to pull all Bulgarian troops out of Iraq should his party win the upcoming parliamentary elections.
"We are confident that the Bulgarian society will support us to end this unpopular and costly adventure," Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) leader Sergey Stanishev told party members on Sunday, referring to the country's involvement in Iraq.
Representatives of the ruling National Movement for Simeon II (NMS) and its junior coalition partner, the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), said the party's move was a partisan one that could damage Bulgaria's international reputation.
"I don't want to comment on populist statements of party leaders aiming at cheap sensationalism," Bulgarian Defence Minister Nickolay Svinarov, a member of the NMS leadership, said Sunday.
Bulgaria should make sure that its reputation as a loyal partner of NATO and the EU remains untarnished, Deputy Prime Minister Plamen Panayotov told Bulgarian National Radio on Monday.
"Bulgaria's participation in the anti-terrorist coalition is a result of a decision by the Bulgarian government, approved by the Bulgarian Parliament … with the support of the BSP parliamentary group," he said.
While Bulgaria is free to make sovereign decisions, any change in the Bulgarian position could only occur after consultations with the partners in the anti-terrorist coalition, Panayotov said.
Only four lawmakers of the BSP-led Coalition for Bulgaria voted against the parliamentary decision to deploy an infantry contingent, numbering about 450, as part of the international coalition in Iraq.
Stanishev was not among those who opposed Bulgaria's involvement.
Statements such as his could put the Bulgarian troops at risk and turn Bulgaria into a potential target of terrorist attacks, said representatives of the MRF and the two main right-wing opposition parties, the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) and Democrats for Strong Bulgaria (DSB).
Accusing the Socialists of inconsistency and lack of "maturity, vision, courage and leadership", UDF leader Nadezhda Mihailova said Stanishev's statement demonstrated that the former communists are not fit to govern the country.
"They never had any problems with sending Bulgarian troops abroad," she added, citing the country's participation in the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968.
Both the UDF and DSB urged President Georgi Parvanov, who led the BSP until assuming his post, to announce his position on the issue.
As commander-in-chief of the Bulgarian Army, Parvanov should develop a careful and clear-cut position on this issue, said Venko Aleksandrov, the chairman of the Parliamentary Foreign Policy, Defence and Security Committee, in an interview on Monday.
"I expect Parvanov's position to be close to that of the consensus decision passed by parliament," he said.
