11/02/2005
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 11/02/05
B92 Radio said Friday (11 February) that it is investigating a claim that the head of security for the Serbia-Montenegro Guards Brigade is the former head of security for fugitive war crimes indictee Ratko Mladic.
The allegation was made during a recent interview with the former head of the Serbian Communications Bureau, Vladimir Popovic, who said the army is continuing to protect Mladic.
The brigade in question is stationed at the Topcider barracks, the site of a shooting incident last October which left two sentries dead.
A military investigation claimed that one of the soldiers opened fire on the other after a quarrel and then committed suicide.
However, there have been persistent rumours that the two men were murdered, possibly because they knew of the presence of a high-level UN war crimes indictee within the Topcider complex.
An independent inquiry ordered by federal President Svetozar Marovic contradicted the military's version and pointed to third-party involvement.
The case, which remains unresolved, has shaken public confidence in the military.
A poll conducted by the agency Strategic Marketing found the level of trust dropped from 57 per cent in September 2004 to 35 per cent in November.
Strategic Marketing director Srdjan Bogosavljevic says the agency has examined several reasons for the steep decline.
"Of all the hypothesis that we tested, the only one that clearly stands out is the Topcider barracks and the murders," he said.
"We even introduced several red herrings -- such as asking 'do you think the army is connected with the former regime, with crime and corruption?' -- and all the responses were insignificant in terms of percentages, compared to this.
The affair has dramatically shifted trust in the army."
Commenting on the poll results, President of the Forum for Security and Democracy General Ninoslav Krstic said that the responsibility rests with the leadership.
"The damage was done following the Topcider affair, and it is very difficult to correct, particularly as the people who caused the damage are not only in the top positions in the army, but also in the ministry of defence," he said.
Krstic believes that clearing up the Topcider affair and establishing responsibility for what happened is the only way to restore public confidence.
"The army … has to do this and to say:
'Here, people, this is what really happened.' Without this, there will be no regaining of trust."
