03/03/2008
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 03/03/08
Stock market and investment funds have become a popular vehicle for long-term investments in Croatia.
After a seventh straight year of continued growth, however, the market began to stagnate at the end of 2007.
Miroslav Jelicic Purko, who founded the Aureus Invest fund with Kristijan Floricic, spoke with Southeast European Times about his expectations regarding Croatia's investment future.
Southeast European Times:
Has the morale of investors waned since the stagnation of Croatian investment funds at the end of 2007?
Miroslav Jelicic Purko:
Morale does not apply to the world of investment.
There are only common sense and patience as characteristics essential to realize planned investment goals.
The stagnation of Croatian investment funds that you've mentioned was expected after seven years of growth in two-digit percentages on a yearly level.
Let's call it a normal situation at the market.
In Croatia, it smashes down the perception of non-experienced investors about a stock exchange as a panacea for fast and easy earning.
SE Times:
What do you see as the main cause of the stagnation in growth of the market at the end of 2007?
Purko:
When talking about the region, there are multiple reasons for stagnation:
the Kosovo problem, a slow transition process, adapting to EU standards and a market that was not transparent enough.
One can also find a reason in the fast growth of papers of value that cause the realization of a profit.
SE Times:
Were the November 2007 parliamentary elections in Croatia one of the factors attributing to the situation?
Purko:
Parliamentary elections almost always cause instability because of certain political options that would create future developments.
Therefore, all the causes mentioned contributed to the stagnation and influenced the change of positive to negative sentiment.
It happened together with the stagnation of the world's largest economy, that of the United States.
SE Times:
Do you think that, generally speaking, people in Croatia have more, less or equal knowledge of the stock market and investment funds industry in comparison with EU nations?
Purko:
Every day, more and more people in Croatia recognize stock shares as a mode of long-term investment.
The syndrome of mass euphoria characterizes the behaviour of Croatian investors.
You can take that mass euphoria in positive or negative context, but in most cases, it ends with a stampede.
You can't say whether investors in Croatia know more or less than investors in EU, because the market is still very young.
There is no doubt that every new situation experienced in the market, especially in young markets like the Croatian one, educates investors and makes them prepared for future activities.
SE Times:
Has the Croatian market launched preparations to enter the EU as planned in 2009?
How will that reflect on investment funds industry?
Purko:
When observing the development of the market through levels of transparency, pension systems, the funds industry, and regulative activities, one can say that Croatia is getting closer to EU standards.
Over the past five years, the changes have been quality ones.
That makes me say that for sure Croatia would be positioned as an example for eastern European countries.
SE Times:
What Croatian companies or industries do you think would profit from joining the EU?
Purko:
I would put the agriculture and energy sectors before the rest of the economic areas.
Croatian companies should orientate towards the EU because the food and energy sectors have problems there, as in the rest of the world.
Croatian resources are huge and the country would need to use then in that sense.
Of course, without quality reforms, it would not be possible to achieve the wanted results.
The future and the prosperity of the Croatian economy depend on executive authorities.
Their task has to be to create a system that would be a platform for development of Croatian companies and country's economy.
SE Times:
Do you believe that Croatian investment funds will continue conquering the market of other former Yugoslav republics?
Purko:
Croatian investment funds have allocated a big part of their portfolios to the region.
However, I think that Croatian funds were a bit late because Slovenian and Nordic funds recognized the region much earlier.
When talking about that market we need to say that the market risk should be calculated in a price.
SE Times:
What was your experience with Aureus Invest in that market?
Purko:
We faced problems of solvency, inadequate transparency and a big price volatility that led to increased caution when investing.
Aureus Invest will continue searching for opportunities in regional markets with increased caution, taking into consideration the above-mentioned facts.
Prices in the regional market should be backed by the faster development of corporate culture and adaptation to EU standards.
