12/11/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 12/11/04
Following a positive report that gave the green light for Croatia to begin negotiations on joining the EU, the European Commission has published an Accession Strategy for the country.
The document, presented in Brussels by European Commission (EC) President Romano Prodi last month, says that progress in accession talks -- expected to begin next year -- will depend exclusively on "the sustainability of political reforms in the country and its fulfillment of international obligations".
While the strategy for Croatia closely resembles those outlined for the newest EU members, it also includes a significant innovation -- namely, a provision allowing negotiations to be suspended if Croatia "persistently and seriously violates the principles of freedom, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and of the rule of law on which the Union is based".
A similar clause has been included in other documents which the EC has published concerning Romania's and Bulgaria's progress towards EU membership.
The new document has fueled speculation about the timeframe for the start of negotiations. 
"We are expecting that [the talks will start] in the first few months of the year, even though we still do not have the exact date," said Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader.
Jacques Wunenburger, the head of the EC's Zagreb office, agreed that talks would likely be launched in early 2005, adding that technically they would not be conducted with the EC but rather with Union member states.
The Accession Strategy focuses on three elements: co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, minority rights and the return of refugees, and judicial reform and anti-corruption efforts. 
"Croatia will have the same Copenhagen criteria applied to it as to the other candidate countries," Wunenburger said.
Beginning next autumn, the EC will start publishing regular annual reports on Croatia's progress, as was done for former candidate countries.
"The period of negotiations with the EU will be exceptionally important, as it will largely determine the future of Croatia and of its international position," Sanader said. 
"That is why we are interested in achieving the best possible results for Croatia in the negotiations, for our citizens, our children and the future generations that will enjoy all the benefits of full EU membership."
Along with its official candidate status, Croatia received access to EU pre-accession funds. 
In the next two years, on the basis of the EC proposal, Croatia should receive 245m euros from three programmes -- PHARE, ISPA and SAPARD. 
Next year, 105m euros will be available. 
In 2006, Croatia will be able to access 140m euros in funds
