10/12/2004
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 10/12/04
During the past year, Romania has seen a decrease of nearly 50 per cent in the amount of debt owed by the country's largest taxpayers. 
In September 2003, there were 552 debtors owing more than 2.3 billion euros; currently, 414 debtors owe 1.3 billion euros. 
Seven state-owned mining and energy companies are 478.3m euros behind, while two privatised companies -- Romanian Tobacco and Carom -- have 279m euros in debts. 
Altogether, the balance owed by large companies amounts to as much as a third of the state budget.
About 129 big companies were allowed to stagger their payments, while 38 state-owned firms have been placed under a special management regime. 
Around 232 firms are being forced to pay through legal action. 
In addition, authorities have brought proceedings against 51 other public and private debtors, who may be required to declare bankruptcy.
By the end of this year, according to an agreement with the IMF, the figure should decrease by another 79.7m euros.
"The economic restructuring and the privatisation process will lead to a more aggressive decrease of the debts," Romanian Finance Minister Mihai Tanasescu told the daily Cotidianul.
However, not all debtors have been required to pay the revenues that they owe. 
Some companies' debts have been written off, while in other cases, the arrears were converted into stock. 
As a result, some critics argue, the decrease in public debt has been mostly artificial.
According to economic analyst Mircea Cosea, "arrears' reduction is not possible now, because it is not based on a restructured economy, on fiscal reform or on legislative changes. 
That's why I tend to believe the arrears level is the same."
In addition to large firms, small and medium-sized companies also owe around 1.8 billion euros to the public budget. 
So far, the government has not initiated many lawsuits against such firms, as officials are confident that a summons and the threat of penalties is, in most cases, enough to get them to pay.
When a firm fails to pay its tax debt, authorities block its bank accounts, and may even sell off its assets. 
At the resulting auctions, people can buy almost anything, including cars, pipes, bearings, Diesel locomotives, chairs, industrial buildings, TV sets, buses and microwave ovens.
Analysts say that if the total debt was collected, the money would be enough to finance, until 2012, the 600km motorway Romania plans to build from Bucharest to the Hungarian border, or fund a 33 per cent increase in pensions during the next two years.
