10/12/2004
(AP, ATA, HINA, FENA, BTA, MIA, Tanjug - 09/12/04;
UNESCO)
Noting that dialogue is the key to reconciliation and lasting peace, six Southeast European (SEE) leaders have pledged to work together so the region will not see a repeat of the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s.
The presidents of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro arrived in Tirana on Thursday (9 December) for a two-day summit, sponsored by Albanian President Alfred Moisiu, on interethnic and inter-religious dialogue in SEE.
The forum, organised by UNESCO and the Albanian government, was also attended by about 100 political officials, experts, spiritual leaders and representatives of international and regional organisations.
Dialogue is the only means for overcoming prejudices and meeting the standards of modern society, Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski said in his address Thursday.
"Even when our starting points in future communication are totally different, we must talk.
Differences of the positions we represent do not grant amnesty from the responsibility we bear for being unable to communicate," he said.
Referring to the trilateral co-operation between Albania, Croatia and Macedonia in efforts to join the EU and NATO, Moisiu said it proved that "integration joins the values of countries, despite religious and ethnic affiliations."
According to Croatian President Stipe Mesic, truth is a critical factor for productive dialogue.
The people involved should be brave enough to face the truth, whatever it is, he said.
"We must send a clear message from this meeting that we are sincerely committed to building good relations between us, that we accept dialogue on the platform of democracy, the rule of law and promotion of human rights protection as the only form of communication between our countries, and that ultimately we will remove all forms of totalitarianism, because it is not compatible with dialogue, and condemn all attempts of historical revisionism aimed at rehabilitating defeated and rejected ideas and ideologies," Mesic said.
To fulfil its functions, Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov said, interethnic and inter-religious dialogue must be public in nature and independent of the vicissitudes of political life.
It must also seek the achievement of sustainable results, rather than unscrupulous compromises.
Addressing the forum, Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic touched on the Kosovo issue.
A European solution for Kosovo can be reached through patient and tolerant dialogue among all Kosovo citizens, he said, adding that agreement reached through dialogue would demonstrate that a lasting solution is possible.
"It is not enough for only governments to speak to each other," Albanian Prime Minister Fatos Nano said in a statement.
"Their communities should also talk to each other in a democratic Kosovo that has its place in the region," he added, agreeing that contacts between Belgrade and Pristina should intensify.
"I am confidant that dialogue between peoples and religions in these areas is the key factor for the establishment of lasting peace, stability and progress," BiH Presidency Chairman Borislav Paravac said.
"The tragic experiences of BiH during the past decade prove this."
Praising the SEE leaders for their efforts to promote regional co-operation, UNESCO Director-General Koichiro Matsuura urged them to maintain peaceful relations.
The motto in this region, he said, should be "Never again".
