11/11/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 11/11/04
In a joint declaration Wednesday (10 November), representatives of Macedonian political parties reaffirmed their commitment to ethnic peace, EU and NATO integration, and friendship with Greece.
"We firmly stand by the sovereign, integrated, unitary and multiethnic character of Macedonia," they said in the declaration, which was signed during a conference held at the Biljana Villa in Ohrid.
The conference, called by President Branko Crvenkovski, was meant to demonstrate unity on key domestic and international issues, following the opposition's failed bid to overturn the country's new decentralisation laws in a referendum held Sunday.
EU Special Representative to Macedonia Michael Sahlin and US Ambassador to Macedonia Lawrence Butler also attended the conference.
Sahlin described the meeting as a successful step towards normalisation.
Butler, meanwhile, affirmed Washington's support for efforts to implement the Ohrid Agreement.
"There will be a lot to do now that the referendum is over," he said.
The leader of the opposition VMRO-DPMNE party, Nikola Gruevski, stayed away from the event.
Instead, he and the leaders of 28 small political parties that backed the referendum signed a similar declaration in Skopje.
At the conference, Crvenkovski said, "We have successfully entered the final phase of the implementation of the Ohrid Agreement and encircled the post-conflict period.
The Framework Macedonia project has progressed to a European Macedonia project."
The next major step along reform path would be the organisation of peaceful, fair and democratic local elections, the president added.
He also said a state-level council would be established to monitor progress towards integration in the EU and NATO.
Wednesday's declaration was a "clear message that we will work together … on the ways major steps should be taken to finalise the implementation of the Ohrid Agreement," according to Democratic Union of Integration leader Ali Ahmeti.
"
Menduh Taci, vice-chairman of the Democratic Party of Albanians, said signing the document demonstrates his party's commitment to Macedonia's strategic goals, which he said were "in the Albanians' interest and in the interest of all the citizens of Macedonia".
