11/11/2004
(AP, Radio B92, Tanjug, Fena - 10/11/04)
A former top Serbian official has called for an investigation to determine if suspects wanted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) are being protected by the army. 
An independent commission should be set up to conduct the probe, said Zarko Korac, who served as deputy prime minister in the cabinet of Serbia's late reformist leader, Zoran Djindjic.
According to Korac, there is evidence that suggests "powerful structures" within the Serbian Army have provided protection to fugitives. 
He cited a secret police photograph that showed war crimes indictee Veselin Sljivancanin at a military barracks when the ICTY and Serbian police were both actively searching for him. 
Sljivancanin was arrested in June 2003 and is expected to stand trial early next year.
Speaking on Tuesday (9 November), Serbian President Boris Tadic said he might have seen a photograph of a war crimes suspect while he was serving as Serbia-Montenegro's defence minister, though he could not confirm Korac's claims.
"I received one photograph of one man as an element for investigation. 
The picture was taken from the back and it was believed to be of a Hague suspect, but in this photograph there was no way that I could have identified him for sure," Belgrade-based Radio B92 quoted Tadic as saying.
Korac's remarks coincided with a visit to Belgrade by a delegation of US senators, who urged authorities to improve relations with the ICTY -- a key condition for Serbia-Montenegro's integration into Euro-Atlantic structures.
Serbia-Montenegro is currently at a crossroads, US Senator George Voinovich said Wednesday. 
Until the problem of co-operation with the UN tribunal is resolved, the country would have little chance of joining either the EU or NATO, he added.
International pressure has been mounting on Belgrade to comply with its obligations towards the ICTY and hand over some 15 war crimes suspects, including one of the court's top indictees, wartime Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic. 
The UN tribunal has charged him with genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the siege of Sarajevo.
Western officials insist Mladic is hiding on Serbian territory, but Belgrade claims otherwise, adding that the fugitive stopped receiving military protection following the overthrow of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic in October 2000.
After his meeting with Voinovich, Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic agreed that full co-operation with the ICTY would open doors for the country's quick admission to NATO's Partnership for Peace programme and the conclusion of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU.
Meanwhile, a Bosnian daily reports that Republika Srpska (RS) authorities have provided Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica with vital information concerning war crimes suspects. 
The report, published Wednesday in Nezavisne Novine, says Kostunica was given nine addresses where Bosnian Serb fugitives were known to be hiding. 
It also said the officials asked to have the suspects delivered to the Bosnian border so that RS forces could arrest them and hand them over to the ICTY.
