11/04/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 11/04/05
As the summer fast approaches, people in the tourism industry are preparing for their big season. 
Southern Europe is the predominant choice for most Europeans -- with Spain, Italy, Greece and Turkey being the strongest players.
Tourism traffic has steadily risen in the Balkans in the last few years, after the region combated the problem of political instability. 
It had affected perceptions of the whole area, rather than specific countries.
Although Greece received overwhelming media attention last year during the Olympics in Athens, and the government quadrupled the advertising budget for tourism from 7.5m euros to 30m euros, the growth of tourism has been less than expected.
While Turkey has managed to attract large contracts with the big European tour operators, Greece has a long way to go. 
Last year, a ministry of tourism was established for the first time. 
Tourism Minister Dimitris Avramopoulos -- the former mayor of Athens -- is scheduled to meet with representatives of the big European tour operators like TUI, Neckerman, Thomas Cook and First Choice, in order to understand their needs for next season.
Turkey, on the other hand, is doing quite well. 
With an annual rate of increase of as much as 23 per cent for inbound tourism, it is expected that the country may overtake Spain as the leading holiday destination for Europeans. 
Turkey spent 117m euros for tourism in 2004, compared to nearly 176m euros spent by Spain.
Most of the European tourists come from the UK and Germany. 
Nearly a fifth of those tourists visited Greece in 2003, but Turkey waged an impressive campaign in 2004 and swept tourists away from both Greece and Spain.
More price-conscious tourists from Central Europe are choosing Greece and Turkey over Spain, causing double-digit increase rates for both countries. 
While Spain is starting to feel the need to rebrand itself, Turkey is enjoying the full benefits of having low wages and well-developed beaches along its coastline.
Greece has been testing the waters, looking to next year. 
While local associations try to further improve the service quality and communication of their offerings, a study from the Athens University of Economics and Business (AUEB) suggests that the overwhelming majority of visitors are just looking for sea and sun. 
Greece is able to capitalise on this for three months of the year, but is losing out during the other nine months.
The government is doing everything it can to promote the development of alternative tourism on all sides. 
There are grants available to individuals for building agrotourism accommodations in rural areas, there are low-interest loans for hotels to expand and renovate, and there are efforts to reach the high end of the market by promoting the construction of golf courses. 
According to the AUEB study, however, these efforts are too new to affect the market much before 2006.
