10/06/2005
(International Herald Tribune, The Guardian, The Independent, VOA, Blic - 10/06/05;
Reuters, AP, AFP, BBC, CNN, Washington File, Radio B92, Serbian Government Web Site - 09/06/05)
Voicing confidence that former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic will be captured soon, a senior US official announced Thursday (9 June) the resumption of US aid to Serbia-Montenegro.
"More than $10m of US assistance will be unfrozen and will now proceed," the AFP quoted US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns as saying during a visit to Belgrade.
The aid was blocked in January due to Serbia's lack of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Since then, 12 war crimes suspects sought by the UN tribunal have been transferred to The Hague.
While praising Belgrade for persuading the fugitives to surrender, Burns voiced Washington's hope that the authorities would take the "final steps" to deliver Mladic to the UN tribunal as well.
"My strong impression from my discussions in Belgrade is that the government is working very seriously to find General Mladic and there will be a sincere attempt to capture him or to have him voluntarily surrender and to send him to The Hague," Reuters quoted Burns as telling reporters in Belgrade.
"We are confident that his days in relative freedom are numbered," he added.
Burns had met with Serbian President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, among others.
Mladic was originally indicted in 1995 with wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
Both face counts of genocide for their alleged roles in the 1995 massacre in Srebrenica of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys, the single worst atrocity in Europe since the end of World War II.
Citing the newly released videotape showing the executions of six Bosnian Muslim prisoners from Srebrenica, Burns told reporters he "cannot imagine a more appropriate initiative than to see General Mladic in The Hague" for the massacre's 10th anniversary on 11 July.
"If Ratko Mladic is sent to The Hague and put on trial for war crimes ...
then the future is limitless for what our two countries can do together," Burns said on the last day of his three-day tour of the Balkans.
In Washington, meanwhile, State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said the United States expects all leaders in the region to arrest and transfer to The Hague the remaining fugitive indictees, including Karadzic and Croatia's Ante Gotovina.
Following the meeting with Burns, the Serbian government issued a statement reiterating its readiness "to meet all its international obligations in full".
Authorities have denied recent local media reports suggesting that the government is negotiating Mladic's surrender.
Nevertheless, Serbian Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic has said he shares Burns's "optimism" that a solution will soon be found.
"The government is trying everything possible to find General Mladic and to resolve this issue and our obligation to The Hague," Stojkovic added.
