10/01/2005
(International Herald Tribune, Blic - 10/01/05; AP, BBC, CNN, Radio B92 - 09/01/05; AP, Reuters, BBC - 08/01/05)
Appealing for calm in Serbia's Presevo Valley, the OSCE voiced concern Sunday (9 January) over the situation in the volatile region following the killing of an ethnic Albanian teenager by Serbian border guards. 
The incident has triggered protests, raising concerns about a potential renewal of tensions in Serbia's restive south.
"Stability in south Serbia should remain the key priority of all," Maurizio Massari, the head of the OSCE mission in Serbia-Montenegro, said in a statement on Sunday, stressing the need for further efforts towards democracy and multiethnic stability in the area. 
Calling for a "full and thorough investigation" into the young man's death, the official also urged all those involved to show restraint.
Dashnim Hajrullahu, 16, was fatally shot Friday about 300km southeast of Belgrade as he tried to cross illegally into Serbia from Macedonia, Serbian authorities said. 
Quoting police sources, the BBC said the teenager was shot after ignoring repeated commands to stop.
A relative said the youth was returning from a visit to his mother and that this was not the first time he had illegally crossed the border.
About 200 people staged a protest in Hajrullahu's home village of Mitrovac, about 500m from the border between Serbia-Montenegro and Macedonia, on Friday evening, claiming that the boy was shot well away from the border line.
Hundreds of ethnic Albanians joined a demonstration in the town of Presevo on Saturday afternoon demanding that those who shot Hajrullahu be punished. 
According to Reuters, some 1,500 protesters forced their way into City Hall and called on local deputies, who were holding an extraordinary session to discuss the incident, to take action.
More than 10,000 people, including local political leaders, attended Hajrullahu's funeral on Sunday, pausing briefly in front of City hall in Presevo in a show of protest over the death. 
A new rally was scheduled for Monday, when the local deputies were due to continue their discussions.
Seeking to defuse tensions, Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic visited the region on Saturday. 
Expressing his condolences to the family, he said initial findings suggested the border troops had acted within their authority. 
A thorough investigation is under way, Davinic said, promising that if it showed any wrongdoing, those responsible would be punished.
Members of the Presevo municipal assembly have, however, voiced scepticism about the sincerity of the army's statements and intentions. 
Some are calling for international troops to be deployed in the area to prevent any potential outbreak of violence.
Refusing to comment on such suggestions, Presevo Assembly President Ragmi Mustafa told Belgrade-based Radio B92 on Sunday that the situation was largely calm.
Davinic made similar statements to the daily <I>Blic</I> on Monday, saying "The situation in the south of Serbia is stable and under control. 
" Ahead of a meeting next week with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica on progress towards the transfer of from the Serbia-Montenegro Army to Serbian police in the border area, he said there was a proposal for that area to be reduced to 300 meters. 
"This, however, does not mean that the army is going to withdraw from the south of central Serbia," Davinic said.
Serbia-Montenegro Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic plans to visit Presevo Monday in a bid to prevent what he described as political exploitation of Hajrullahu's death.
The region, which borders Kosovo, was the scene of months of ethnic tension in 2000-2001, which ended after a Western-brokered peace plan was reached. 
Under that agreement, the ethnic Albanian population was granted more rights in exchange for disarming the rebels.
