10/05/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/05/05
After coming to power in 2000, Serbia's democratic reformers promised to pass all legislation needed to align the media with European standards. 
Even though many laws were postponed for several years, the majority were ultimately adopted. 
However, one significant law still awaits passage by the Serbian Parliament. 
This month, the law on public advertising will finally enter parliamentary procedure.
According to Trade Minister Bojan Dimitrijevic, the new legislation will protect the public from advertising overload, while at the same time benefiting manufacturers and advertisers. 
Among other things, the law introduces restrictions on alcohol and tobacco advertising.
It also prohibits ads that call for a boycott, make use of banned symbols, or contain pornographic or violent content. 
In addition, the law will regulate television advertising -- commercial stations will have their advertising time limited to 20 per cent of total daily programming. 
Films, series and sports broadcasts will not be curtailed by lengthy commercial breaks the way they are now. 
Public media advertising, meanwhile, will be limited to 10 per cent.
"All of us together should benefit from organised media, the way they are in the EU -- everyone who makes a living from advertising will be able to continue doing so, while citizens will be protected from terrorisation," Dimitrijevic told local reporters.
The legislation also includes provisions meant to discourage false advertising. 
According to Radio B92, it stipulates that if discounts are offered in commercials, they must actually be available. 
"We've often as customers been in a situation where we see that there's an 80 per cent discount, but when you go to the shop you find that it's 10 or 15 per cent, with one single product at 80 per cent. 
This artificial pressure on consumers, to buy under some better conditions which don't exist, will be absolutely banned and rigorously controlled," Deputy Trade Minister Vlajko Senic was quoted as saying.
Although the proposed measures enjoy strong public support, they have not been welcomed by tobacco and alcohol advertisers, who say that not enough dialogue has taken place and that the measures are being imposed too suddenly. 
Restrictions should be introduced gradually, they argue.
Criticism has also come from other sources. 
Sasa Gajin, a co-author of an earlier draft of the law, says the current version lacks an efficient mechanism for protecting end users in the event that an advertiser infringes upon their rights. 
"Provisions of the draft law which stipulate that it is possible to request the removal of [an advertisement] poster, or a ban on further showing of a poster have been erased."
Backers of the legislation say it is in line with Serbia's hopes for eventual EU integration, noting that 90 per cent of its provisions were drafted according to EU standards and directives. 
In addition to serving the public interest, they say, the legislation also seeks to introduce equality among companies and other participants in advertising, guaranteeing competition and preventing illegal or unfair practices.
