10/02/2005
(AFP, Anadolu Agency, Cyprus News Agency - 09/02/05)
Voicing confidence that dialogue and mutual understanding can help end the more than 30-year division of Cyprus, the leader of a major Greek Cypriot opposition party has urged Ankara and Nicosia to work harder towards achieving that goal. 
At the start of an historic visit to Turkey on Wednesday (9 February), Nicos Anastassiades, who heads the Democratic Rally Party (DISY), also expressed support for Ankara's bid to join the EU.
The most recent effort to reach a settlement on the basis of a UN-sponsored peace plan ended in failure last April, when Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected the deal in a referendum. 
DISY was the only Greek Cypriot political force that supported the reunification plan. 
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots voted in favour of the plan, only the Greek Cypriot-led part of the island joined the EU on 1 May.
"Europe has been successful in bridging differences and in healing the wounds of the past ... 
Cyprus cannot be an exception. 
It is high time to close this traumatic and painful chapter once and for all," Anastassiades said in a speech at Sabanci University in Istanbul on Wednesday. 
The Greek Cypriots' rejection of the UN plan did not imply overall opposition to a deal, he said.
The DISY delegation is in Turkey at the invitation of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's Justice and Development Party (AKP). 
Anastassiades, reportedly the first Greek Cypriot leader to visit the country, meets with Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul and other AKP officials in Ankara on Thursday and with Erdogan in Istanbul on Saturday. 
A meeting with Greek Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomew I has been scheduled for Sunday.
Ahead of his talks with Turkish officials, Anastassiades said security issues -- including the "existence of military units in Cyprus, intervention right of third countries and return of migrants" -- were what triggered the Greek Cypriot "no" vote in last year's referendum.
"The Cyprus issue is loaded with much pain and distrust, with acts of violence and hate. 
But the past belongs to the historians ... 
I'm truly confident that we can together win the future through a new win-win situation concept," the AFP quoted him as saying Wednesday.
In December, the EU gave the green light for the launch of Turkey's accession talks on 3 October, provided it agreed to extend a 1963 association agreement with the European Economic Council -- the predecessor of the EU -- to include all current member states, including the Greek Cypriot state, which is not recognised by Ankara.
"We are ready to talk to the Greek Cypriots, we will not shy away from dialogue if this can contribute to a settlement," Gul said Wednesday.
Meanwhile, former British envoy for Cyprus Lord David Hannay was quoted as saying in Nicosia on Wednesday that he saw no viable alternative to the UN plan. 
The choice, he said, was between that plan "with some adjustments" or no solution at all. 
''I hope that nobody on either side of the island would opt for no settlement at all,'' he said.
