11/04/2005
(Blic - 11/04/05;
BBC Monitoring, Fena, Radio B92 - 10/04/05;
AP - 09/04/05;
Reuters, BBC, Institute for War and Peace Reporting - 08/04/05)
Nearly a decade after the July 1995 massacre of more than 7,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys, at least two questions -- who made the decision for the slaughter and when -- remain unanswered.
The pending trials against several close associates of wartime Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic may help uncover the final pieces of the Srebrenica puzzle, the <I>Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR) </I> reported Friday (8 April).
Former Bosnian Serb Army (VRS) Security Chief Ljubisa Beara, said to have been Mladic's right-hand man, was extradited to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in October 2004.
Six others charged with war crimes in connection with the Srebrenica massacre have also been transferred to The Hague:
Milan Gvero, a former VRS morale officer and an unofficial Mladic spokesman, and three former members of the VRS's Zvornik Brigade -- Vinko Pandurevic, Drago Nikolic and Milorad Trbic.
Two others -- former VRS main staff officer Radivoje Miletic and former military police General Ljubomir Borovcanin -- are already in the ICTY detention centre.
The Serbian government said Friday that Vujadin Popovic, former assistant security commander of the VRS's Drina Corps, would be transferred to The Hague this week.
In addition to other counts of war crimes brought against them, Beara, Pandurevic, Nikolic and Popovic have been charged with genocide or complicity in genocide.
Borovcanin has also been accused of complicity in genocide.
Like Gvero and Miletic, he faces four counts of crimes against humanity and one count of violations of the laws or customs of war.
Beara and Gvero have pleaded not guilty to all charges against them, while those who have already made their first appearance before UN judges have used their right to defer their pleas for 30 days.
Borovcanin and Beara's transfers to The Hague could prove particularly important, Dr Jan Willem Honig, a senior lecturer in war studies at King's College in London, told the IWPR.
"They are the key players that provide a link between the VRS regular military units and Mladic, and maybe, by implication, [former Bosnian Serb President Radovan] Karadzic," said Honig, who is also the co-author of the book "Srebrenica:
Record of a War Crime".
Citing a source from Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) intelligence agency, the Sarajevo-based daily Dnevni Avaz reported Saturday that Mladic was currently in a military facility in Pancevo, northeast of Belgrade.
He had arrived there recently, after hiding in the vicinity of Niksic, Montenegro.
According to the report, three people, including an army officer on active duty, were protecting him.
The source says it was Mladic's arrival in Pancevo that prompted Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic's sharp remarks last week, when he accused the Serbian intelligence agency of shielding Mladic.
With the approach of the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre -- often described as the single worst atrocity in European history since World War II -- Serbia and BiH's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska, have come under increasing pressure to arrest and hand over the fugitive.
