10/05/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 10/05/05
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic announced on Friday (6 May) that 11 officials and members of the military will be disciplined for their behaviour at a 16 April oath-taking ceremony in the Republika Srpska (RS). 
The ceremony, at the Manjaca recruiting centre, marked the first time that recruits were required to pledge their allegiance to "Bosnia and Herzegovina" (BiH), instead of "Republika Srpska" (RS), according to a 2003 state defence law.
While repeating the text of the oath, however, the majority of the 550 recruits said "Republika Srpska" instead of "Bosnia and Herzegovina", and several thousand visiting members complained about the BiH flag and anthem.
Following an investigation by the BiH Ministry of Defence and the RS Ministry of Defence, conducted at the request of the international Office of the High Representative in BiH (OHR), disciplinary action was initiated against RS Defence Ministry Secretary Mikan Davidovic for his failure to react properly to the situation.
Under the 2003 defence reform, BiH has one ministry of defence at the state level and one for each of two BiH entities -- RS and the Federation of BiH (FBiH). 
In the administrative chain of command, the entity ministries are responsible for recruiting and training of military personnel, including the performing of oath ceremonies.
RS Ministry of Defence spokesman Branko Trkulja was removed from duty for having made inappropriate public statements after the incident, while RS Army Deputy Chief of Staff Colonel Dragan Vukovic and Chief of the Civil-Military Co-operation Department Lieutenant Colonel Borislav Vukicevic were disciplined for improper conduct. 
Two officers -- a major and a captain -- as well as one non-commissioned officer are also being disciplined. 
Four platoon and company leaders were removed from duty and will face a military-disciplinary court.
"We could not find evidence of the initiators of the incident," said RS Defence Minister Milovan Stankovic. 
"There was a political and media climate that produced that event."
Stankovic has suggested that further conscript contingents in RS should be terminated for 2005, an idea supported by Radovanovic. 
"The conscript contingents are inefficient and too expensive, anyway," he said. 
By law, such a decision would be made by the BiH presidency.
After the disciplinary measures were announced, the OHR said they did not go far enough. 
OHR will meet with NATO and EUFOR to assess further steps.
"Given the fact that NATO and the EU are going to decide on BiH's readiness to join Euro-Atlantic integration in the next weeks, the announced measures are less than appropriate. 
The seriousness of the events is underestimated," said OHR spokesperson Sanela Tunovic.
