10/11/2004
(Bloomberg - 10/11/04; EBRD, FT, RFE/RL, AFX, Dnevnik.bg, World Bank - 09/11/04)
Many countries of the former Soviet bloc have made commendable progress in their transition to a market economy and pluralist democracy, the EBRD said its Transition Report for 2004, released Tuesday (9 November). 
Cautioning against reform fatigue, however, the report said the scope for further progress exists even in the most successful countries.
This will be the fourth year in a row that GDP growth in the 27 countries stretching from Central Europe to Central Asia will outpace that of Western Europe, said the EBRD, forecasting a rise in the region's overall growth rate from 5.6 per cent in 2003 to an estimated 6.1 per cent in 2004, and a slide back to 5.5 per cent in 2005.
In 2004, growth is expected to be highest in the Commonwealth of Independent States, at 7.4 per cent, compared with 5 per cent in Southeastern Europe and 4.9 per cent in Central Europe and the Baltic states.
In many countries across the region, sharp increases in local bank lending are boosting consumption and investment. 
In all but a handful of countries, years of strong growth and modest inflation have contributed to higher living standards. 
If sustained, such a dynamic growth performance holds out the prospect of eventual convergence with the more advanced industrial economies.
The prospect of EU membership has proved to be a key stimulus to reform, the report said, noting that the greatest progress in economic reform has been made by EU candidates Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania. 
All three countries have made significant gains in overhauling their banking sector and infrastructure, while Bulgaria and Romania have both undertaken large-scale privatisations.
Despite some remarkable successes, however, the commitment to reform appears to be wavering in much of the region, according to the EBRD -- even in countries that have made sweeping changes as part of their EU accession efforts. 
Ultimately, delaying reforms could affect the region's long-term growth prospects, the EBRD warned.
"Last year's absence of structural reform will be next year's lag in growth," said EBRD chief economist Willem Buiter.
Reducing spending and subsidies to ailing industries presents a particularly stiff challenge in a region where unemployment remains high, the report said. 
Poverty rates, while declining, remain high, leaving political leaders with little room for manoeuvre. 
While foreign direct investment has risen dramatically during the past year, many Western Balkan countries still rely heavily on donor support, which may not be as readily available in the future.
The report's release coincided with the 15th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall on 9 November 1989, a date that symbolises the beginning of communism's collapse across the region. 
In comments to The Wall Street Journal Europe, Buiter stressed that seeing the transition process through would require further efforts.
