09/06/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 09/06/05
During her most recent visit to Belgrade, UN tribunal chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte had words of praise for the government of Vojislav Kostunica, describing as "a brilliant action" the government's move to arrest former members of the Scorpions paramilitary unit following the release of a video showing the execution of Bosnian Muslims from Srebrenica.
At the same time, however, she reiterated that Serbia-Montenegro authorities must fully co-operate with the tribunal by handing over all remaining war crimes indictees, including former Bosnian Serb military chief Ratko Mladic.
The arrests of Mladic and former Republika Srpska leader Radovan Karadzic would be the best way to commemorate the upcoming 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre, del Ponte said.
The prosecutor's uncompromising stance has often raised hackles in the region, but appears to be paying off. 
After years of incremental progress and frustration, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is now going through a period of unprecedented success in bringing indictees to justice, London's The Guardian reported Thursday (9 June). 
Many have been fugitives for years, and some -- including Serbia's Nebojsa Pavic -- had sworn never to surrender.
"More war crimes suspects are currently arriving in The Hague every month as the tribunal finally reaches critical mass," the newspaper said, noting that the detainees include a former head of state, a former prime minister, a former interior minister, a former defence minister, and former army chiefs of staffs and intelligence chiefs. 
Despite their differing nationalities, they have something in common -- all are alleged to have played significant roles in the worst violence to wrack Europe since World War II.
"This is without doubt the most active and productive period in the life of the tribunal thus far, a period full of challenges, stresses and strains," tribunal president Theodor Meron told the UN Security Council in a letter earlier this week.
According to del Ponte, ten indictees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro are still at large, including the three most-wanted fugitives -- Karadzic, Mladic, and retired Croatian General Ante Gotovina. 
While in Belgrade, she secured pledges of co-operation from Kostunica and other top officials, who vowed they are committed to ending the policy of letting war criminals go unpunished.
Authorities are aware that full co-operation with The Hague tribunal means "the solving of all remaining cases", Kostunica said, adding that "every step will be taken".
Del Ponte also talked with Serbian President Boris Tadic, national council for ICTY co-operation chief Rasim Ljajic and Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic.
After the meeting, Ljajic said del Ponte had set no deadlines, but expects to see Mladic in The Hague "in a few weeks or a few months at the latest".
