09/02/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 09/02/05
Macedonia will submit 14,000 pages of answers to the European Commission (EC) Questionnaire on Monday (14 February), after four months of work.
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski will hand the document to EC President Jose Manuel Barosso in a formal ceremony.
The answers, Buckovski said, provide an in-depth representation of Macedonia, outlining the country's background, policies and plans.
The questionnaire is an official tool used by the EU to examine an applicant country's readiness to begin the accession process.
Former EC President Romano Prodi gave the questionnaire -- containing 1,921 questions, and as many sub-questions -- to Macedonia on 1 October 2004.
Showing two CDs with Macedonian and English versions of the answers in an address on 31 January, Buckovski said they reflect the intensive work done during the four-month period.
"We have completed the job of answering the questionnaire and are expecting a fair approach, chance and candidate status from our partners and friends in Europe," Buckovski said.
"The guarantee that it will be so is our previous co-operation.
Macedonia has been a constructive friend of the EU for better and for worse."
The prime minister said Balkan countries need a good example, which demonstrates that tolerance between ethnic communities combined with exertion, endeavour and reform leads to EU membership.
"Such is the example of Macedonia.
Macedonia can and will be the country through which the Western Balkan countries will look through the open door at the EU.
This government will prove that not only because of Macedonian citizens but the region and regional stability and progress," Buckovski said.
Addressing the European Parliament Foreign Affairs Committee on 28 January, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said an opinion on Macedonia's bid could be adopted later this year, allowing it to be placed on the agenda of the December European Council.
"If political development in Macedonia continues positively, we may have another candidate country and sound benchmark for the Western Balkans," Rehn said.
His statement was welcomed in Macedonia.
Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska, who is in charge of the European integration process, said her country is now on an express track for candidate status.
Sekerinska said Macedonia has shown in the past four months that it can work in a focused manner even under strong pressure and in emergency circumstances.
The questionnaire was answered during a transition period between two governments and at a time when a major referendum on territorial organisation was held.
"By answering the questionnaire, Macedonia has increased its chances for EU membership and accelerated the pace of the process," Sekerinska said.
