09/12/2004
(Rompres, EUpolitix, Seeurope.net - 09/12/04;
AFP, AP, RTE, EurActiv, Mediafax, Rompres - 08/12/04)
Romania has completed its accession talks with the EU, Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana said Wednesday (8 December) evening, voicing confidence that his country would join the Union on 1 January 2007, along with Bulgaria.
"The negotiations for joining the EU are closed...This is an historic day for Romania," the AFP quoted Geoana as saying in Brussels following the technical closure of the last two chapters, on competition and justice and home affairs.
The minister acknowledged, however, that completing the talks necessitated making some additional commitments.
Romania has agreed to cut back state subsidies to the steel sector, step up the fight against corruption, and implement "strict measures to strengthen the competencies and independence of the competition council", Geoana said.
The country has also reportedly pledged to take further steps in the areas of border control, asylum policy and migration.
EU foreign ministers are expected to officially announce the completion of negotiations with Romania during a meeting on 14 December.
A key two-day EU summit opens in Brussels on 16 December, during which the leaders of the 25-nation bloc are expected to set a date for the signing of the accession treaties with Bulgaria and Romania, ahead of their effective entry into the Union on 1 January 2007.
Making a personal commitment to further implement the reforms, Geoana voiced hope that the signing would be scheduled for late April or early May.
"This is a moment of joy, but also a moment of responsibility for Romania," he said.
"There is work to be done ...
We have the first interest to correct some things that are still not as it should be in our country."
The completion of the accession negotiations clears a major hurdle on a candidate country's path towards EU membership.
However, both Bulgaria, which wrapped its talks in June, and Romania will be under tough monitoring in the period before entry.
A so-called safeguard clause, expected to be included in the two countries' accession treaties, will allow the EU to postpone accession by one year, if they are seen as failing to abide by the commitments made during the negotiation process.
Under Wednesday's deal, Romania has reportedly agreed to further monitoring, as Bulgaria did in June.
European lawmakers recently voiced criticism over some delays in implementing reforms in Romania, voicing particular concerns over judicial and media independence and allegations of corruption.
In other news, commenting on the possibility of changes after Sunday's presidential runoff in Romania, the head of the independent Pro Democratia Association, Cristian Parvulescu, said any reshaping of the political landscape would "not imply in any way a policy transformation concerning European integration".
