08/06/2005
(Office of the High Representative - 08/06/05;
Reuters, Fena, Office of the High Representative - 07/06/05)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Prime Minister Adnan Terzic dismissed Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic on Tuesday (7 June), accepting an offer of resignation that Ivanic submitted about six months ago.
The move stemmed from a disagreement over who should become chief of the State Investigation and Protection Agency (SIPA).
"I have signed today a decision accepting the resignation … because he has forced me with his obstruction to request the High Representative to do our job for us," BiH's Fena news agency quoted Terzic as saying at a press conference in Sarajevo.
Ivanic's dismissal followed weeks of bickering within the government over who should head the SIPA.
An agreement signed by the BiH presidency envisioned the top post going to a member of the Bosnian Croat community.
Ivanic, however, opposed the appointment of Dragan Lukac, insisting that the post be filled by Sredoje Novic, a Bosnian Serb.
He scored highest in an open competition for the post.
At Terzic's request, Ashdown decided Tuesday to appoint Novic as SIPA director, saying it ended seven months of uncertainty over the appointment.
"In appointing Novic, the High Representative has upheld the European principal of removing politics from policing, nominating the candidate who was rated to be the best qualified by the BiH Council of Ministers' own selection committee," Ashdown's office said in a statement.
The government's failure to reach a decision for more than a month, the statement added, had created a vacuum that "threatened to undermine SIPA's work in its crucial fight against organised crime, illegal immigration, international terrorism, money laundering, serious economic crime and undermine its efforts to apprehend indicted war criminals".
Terzic, however, argued that the situation was not the result of the members of his government failing to reach a deal.
He instead blamed Ivanic's obstructionist behaviour.
"Since 22 April, when Ivanic was the only one to vote in the BiH Council of Ministers against the appointment of the SIPA director, deputy director and assistant, I have left enough space for the possibility of reaching a political agreement," Terzic said.
"This is not a case of inability to reach an agreement between me and my deputies, but inability to implement a political agreement which they themselves developed."
Describing the prime minister's decision to accept a resignation he filed six months earlier as "total political rubbish", Ivanic, the leader of the Bosnian Serb Party of Democratic Progress, said he would not leave his post until a parliamentary debate on the issue.
"The Office of the High Representative's statement that it has chosen the best candidate is proof that I am right," the minister told SRNA news agency.
Terzic has asked the foreign ministry's secretary, Adnan Hadzikapetanovic, to act as foreign minister until Ivanic's successor is appointed.
