09/12/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/12/04
Macedonia's Interior Ministry has started issuing new bilingual travel documents. 
More than 1,000 applications were submitted between 2 December -- the first day citizens could apply for new documents -- and Monday (6 December), when the issuance process officially began.
Out of about 600 applications submitted in Skopje, Tetovo, Gostivar, Kumanovo and Debar, 220 were for bilingual Macedonian-Albanian passports, the ministry said.
"Only Macedonian-Albanian bilingual passports are available so far," said Interior Ministry State Secretary Sali Ramadani. 
"We have technical difficulties with the scripts of other ethnic communities in the country, and we are working busily on overcoming them so that they can get their bilingual travel documents."
Information on citizens belonging to the ethnic Macedonian community will be printed both in Macedonian and in the basic Latin alphabet, Ramadani said. 
"For the citizens who speak an official language other than Macedonian, information will also be printed in the official language and the script the respective citizens use."
Changes in the bilingual passports are of a technical nature. 
"The first page of the passport now has the coat of arms imprinted on it," says Deputy Minister of Administration Affairs at the Interior Ministry Erol Salih. 
"There is a special place left for putting down the current dwelling place of a person who lives outside the country for more than three months and has registered his/her stay."
There is one more innovation: children under 14 who were formerly put on their parents' passports are now getting their own passports. 
"For children under 4, the passport is valid for two years, for persons between 4 and 27 it is valid for five years, and the validity of the passports for those older than 27 is ten years," Salih says.
The issuance of bilingual passports is a part of the Ohrid Framework Agreement and derives from the constitutional changes and amendments to the Law on Travel Documents. 
This is the second document, besides ID cards, that is being issued in the languages of the members of ethnic communities. 
Other personal documents, including driving and traffic licenses and all record book certificates, will also be bilingual.
The application forms for bilingual passports have been delivered to every section of the interior ministry in the country, as well as to Macedonia's diplomatic and consular branch offices around the world.
