08/06/2005
(Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 03/06/05;
World Bank - 02/06/05)
Bulgaria signed an agreement Monday (6 June) with the World Bank for a $150m loan.
The financing will underpin the country's reform efforts and is expected to improve its prospects for successful EU integration.
"After years of sustained reforms, Bulgaria is on the verge of joining the EU in 2007," the Bank's country director for Bulgaria, Anand Seth, said after he and Bulgarian Finance Minister Milen Velchev signed the agreement in Sofia.
"The real challenge for Bulgaria now is to use the time till the accession to keep the focus on reforms necessary for enhancing economic growth and improve living standards for all Bulgarians."
The Third Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL 3) marks the completion of the PAL programme, which amounts to a total of $425m.
The funds are not disbursed upfront, but are released after the government has undertaken key actions in the implementation of its own strategy to boost economic growth and reduce poverty.
The first of the two loans under the programme, the $150m PAL 1, was approved in February 2003.
It supported measures for improving the business climate, the restructuring of infrastructure sectors and further strengthening of the financial sector.
The focus of the $125m PAL 2 was on public administration reform.
The Bank expects PAL 3 to play an important role in advancing Bulgaria's reform agenda and thus enhance the country's prospects for successful EU accession.
"Even though the PAL programme has been completed successfully, Bulgaria still faces a number of important challenges ahead for successful EU integration," it said in a statement Thursday, announcing the loan's approval.
The statement pointed out the need for further action in the areas of judicial reform and the fight against corruption.
The EU, which supports the Bulgarian government's programme in partnership with the World Bank, is also pushing for substantial progress in both areas ahead of the country's scheduled entry into the Union on 1 January 2007.
According to the Bank, Bulgaria should also work to enhance the quality of public services delivered to citizens at both the national and local levels.
Furthermore, it should boost reforms in the education and health sectors, improve transport and water services, enact further social sector reforms and take steps to increase employment opportunities, the statement said.
The PAL programme has achieved significant results, according to the Bank.
With the help of the loans, 98 per cent of Bulgarian banks have been privatised.
The insurance sector is entirely in private hands, while 80 per cent of the remaining small state-owned enterprises as of 2002 have found buyers.
Other achievements include the improved efficiency of the energy sector and the railways.
