09/11/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 09/11/04
Local and international organisations in Albania have joined forces to help Albanian migrants who are returning to their homeland. 
In September, the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and seven Albanian NGOs signed an agreement -- covering Albania, Kosovo and Macedonia -- intended to boost their ability to provide professional reintegration services to the returned migrants.
Local organisations will be responsible for delivering the assistance. 
Their staff are receiving extensive training in communication, job brokering, training needs identification and assistance in starting a small business.
"The goal of this project is to contribute in welcoming migrants home by providing them opportunities and assistance to harness opportunities available to them for a better future in their country of origin. 
It is a very important that an increasing amount of such assistance is being provided by local organisations," said Maurizio Busatti, chief of the IOM Mission in Albania.
Albanian NGOs participating in the project include Hope for the Future, Centre for Migration Support, Young Intellectuals, Hope, Vlora Youth Centre, Professional and Businesswomen's Association, Forum for Cultural Social and Economic Integration and the Albanian Red Cross.
Meanwhile, the Albanian government is discussing a national strategy on migration, to be financed by the EU and the IOM. 
"This document fulfils an important need for the country's development, and it is in line with the government's programme," Deputy Prime Minister Namik Dokle said at an October meeting of the interministerial commission on migration.
"Migration covers nearly 20 per cent of the population that left Albania for countries of the EU and other countries during the last decade. 
The management of migration fluxes is part of Albania's Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU," Dokle added.
Through the national strategy, Albania hopes to address issues such as the protection of migrants' rights, the establishment of Albanian communities abroad, employment and the free movement of people.
