08/12/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 08/12/04
During his first official visit to Sarajevo, Serbian President Boris Tadic offered an apology Monday (6 December) to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) for war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict.
His statement came during a press conference following a meeting with the tripartite BiH presidency.
It was prompted by a question from a local journalist, who asked whether an apology would ever come.
"I do apologise to all citizens of BiH against whom crimes have been committed in the name of the Serbian people," Tadic said.
He added, however, that Serbs were not collectively responsible for them.
"War criminals are individual persons.
The same crimes were committed also against our people.
And in that sense, we all need to apologise to each other."
Tadic, who was born in Sarajevo, is the first Serbian president to visit the Bosnian capital since the country became independent from the former Yugoslavia.
During the first day of his three-day trip, he met with BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic and leaders of the BiH Federation.
On Tuesday, he visited Banja Luka and met with RS counterpart Dragan Cavic.
They jointly urged all those wanted by the UN tribunal to surrender or face arrest.
Tadic called on the fugitives to give up to "remove the burden from Serbia and RS".
He visits Mostar on Wednesday.
Tadic's apology in Sarajevo was billed as top news -- presented on prime time TV and on front pages -- but received a mixed reaction.
Kresimir Zubak, a former Croat member of the BiH presidency, said the statement was meant primarily to satisfy the international community and to try and avoid the threat of sanctions against Serbia and RS for their lack of co-operation.
However, former Bosniak member of the BiH presidency Beriz Belkic said he supports Tadic's apology.
"I do welcome his words," Belkic said.
"Political leaders of Serbia-Montenegro and RS have to show that attitude.
It is good for the stability of the region."
The head of the office of the Bosnian Serb member of the BiH presidency, Drago Vukovic, said there is moral ground for the apology.
He added, however, that discovering the truth about the BiH conflict is the main priority.
"We are not favouring any huge wave of apologies to each other…we are more interested to see that everybody is held accountable for their own crimes," Vukovic said.
