08/02/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 08/02/05
In an international competition held in mid-January, Danish studio Henning Larsens Tegnestue (HLT) was selected to undertake a major renovation of central Tirana, based on a plan drawn up by a French firm.
The project will include construction of an 85m-high white building in the shape of a tulip flower -- connected with an urban complex of nine floors, with a 12m-high front building.
Both new buildings will be connected to Skanderbeg Square, through bridges and an underground passage.
Parks, a swimming pool and a cinema complex are also planned as part of the renovation.
"The location of the towers is defined as an alternation in the two sides of Skanderbeg Square, to free the square and create a nice view," said Tirana Mayor Edi Rama.
In the summer of 2003 the French firm Architecture Studio won an international competition for a plan to redesign the city centre, with the aim of bringing a more European and modern style to Tirana.
Another competition was then held to determine who would implement the plan.
There were four entrants:
the Dutch architect Eric Van Egeraat, the Spanish studio MAP, Albania's Edil al-il and HLT.
An international jury of experts in contemporary architecture selected the winning company.
Founded in 1959, HTL has undertaken projects in Norway, Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the Middle East and Africa.
For the Albanian capital, it submitted a project titled "Tirana's Eyes".
The name was chosen because the central building will offer a view of the square, surrounding mountains and sky, a representative of the firm explained.
After the fall of communism in 1990, buildings went up in Tirana in a haphazard manner, and no one bothered to fix the roads, the power cables and the sewage system.
Local authorities, headed by Rama, cleaned up avenues and repaired roads and public buildings.
City buildings were repainted with colourful geometric patterns, while illegally built structures were removed from parks and riverbanks.
A project is under way to name streets.
Albanians have welcomed what they see as a needed step to boost the country's image in the world.
"It is important to make foreigners think that Tirana is like any other Western capital.
It is important that foreigners see the best parts of it," a student told Southeast European Times.
