08/02/2005
(Athens News Agency, Macedonian Press Agency, Kathimerini - 07/02/05; The New York Times, Telegraph - 05/02/05; AP, BBC - 04/02/05)
An opinion poll conducted amid a corruption scandal in Greece suggests most of the public support the government's plans to fight graft within the judicial system. 
The scandal has shaken public confidence in two key institutions, the Church and the judiciary, according to the survey by Athens-based Kappa research agency.
Last week, Justice Minister Anastasios Papaligouras announced a set of 12 measures aimed at tackling corruption within the judicial system. 
They include prison sentences of up to ten years and hefty fines for corrupt judges. 
Anyone offering gifts or money to a judicial official would face felony charges.
His announcement came shortly after an investigative news programme revealed cases of first-instance judges, trial attorneys and court employees taking bribes to parole felons, mainly convicted drug dealers. 
Subsequent reports also implicated the Church, with senior clergymen linked to attempts to influence the outcome of trials, including through bribery.
In his first public remarks after the scandal erupted, Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis highlighted the need for greater transparency and improvements in the justice system, stressing his government's "unwavering" resolve to eradicate corruption in the country. 
He also urged Greece's independent judiciary to expel the corrupt judges from the system.
An investigation to determine the extent of the problem is under way. 
Meanwhile, several judges have already been dismissed for allegedly taking bribes to fix trials and grant parole to convicted felons, the Athens News Agency said. 
A BBC report last week said charges of serious disciplinary offences had been raised against four judges.
The Church is also looking into allegations against several clerics. 
The Holy Synod, the Greek Orthodox Church's governing body, has suspended the bishop of Attica, Panteleimon, for six months pending an investigation. 
Another cleric, Theoklitos, Bishop of Thessaliotis, was reportedly detained by police in a nightclub for suspected drug offences. 
A third cleric, Iakovos Yiossakis, was arrested last week on suspicion of embezzlement and antiquities smuggling. 
He has also been implicated in a scandal involving judges bribed to release drug dealers.
A total of 67.4 per cent of poll respondents said recent statements by senior government officials pledging to fight judicial corruption were positive or "probably positive". 
Just over a quarter shared the opposite view.
The poll found that Greeks are split in their views about the factors that allow corruption to thrive. 
According to 26.3 per cent, individual officials are to blame. 
Another 22.6 percent cited a general crisis in morality, while 21 per cent said the problem is due to "tolerance" shown by the state towards corrupt practices. 
For 13 per cent, the problem is rooted in the operation of the public sector during the last decade, while another 11.4 per cent attributed corruption to loopholes in the legal system.
