09/11/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 09/11/04
When Croatia enters the EU, it will have to introduce visas for a range of countries, including Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia-Montenegro. 
The visa requirements are part of the Schengen Agreement, which is automatically applied to any country in the EU.
"Croatia will have to introduce visas for all states that, according to the Decree of the Council of Europe, fall under the visa regimen. 
In the event that at the time Croatia enters the EU -- BiH, Serbia-Montenegro, Macedonia and Turkey are on that list -- visas will have to be applied against them," the foreign ministry said. 
Until that time, bilateral talks will make it possible to secure appropriate exemptions.
The Schengen Agreement -- signed by 13 EU member countries as well as European Free Trade Agreement members Iceland and Norway -- lifts border controls among signatory states, with the aim of promoting the free movement of people and creating a unified market. 
At the same time, participating states are required to maintain the Schengen area's external boundaries by adhering to a common visa policy.
Several months ago, EU candidate Romania introduced a visa regime for nationals coming from Russia, Turkey, Serbia-Montenegro and Ukraine. 
Although the EU may allow Croatia to maintain its current, visa-free regimen until it formally signs onto the Schengen Agreement, change will have to come sooner or later.
According to former European Integration Minister Neven Mimica, the only way to prevent the introduction of visas for citizens of other Southeast European countries is if those countries make it onto the Schengen "white list" -- that is, the list of states exempted from visa requirements -- by the time Croatia joins the Union.
Under the EU's criteria, every 1km of border territory must be covered on a permanent basis by one policeman. 
That means, for example, that Croatia's border with BiH will be patrolled by about 3,000 policemen. 
Entry into Schengen could constitute the hardest part of negotiations between Zagreb and the EU, analysts say.
Preparations for introducing Schengen are under way. 
With assistance from the CARDS programme, Croatia and the EU are working to develop an integrated border management system, including a national computer system. 
Germany has provided Croatia with terrain vehicles, motors, handheld heat sensor binoculars and other equipment. 
Additional equipment is being obtained by the internal affairs ministry.
