08/03/2005
(AFP, Turkish Press, Turkish Daily News - 07/03/05; AFP - 06/03/05; Reuters - 05/03/05)
Turkish Cypriot Prime Minister Mehmet Ali Talat pledged on Monday (7 March) to defend the interests of his community in the international arena, if he wins the 17 April presidential election in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC).
"I take responsibility to present the will of the Turkish Cypriot people to the international community," the leader of the Republican Turkish Party (CTP) told reporters Monday after his party named him as its presidential candidate.
If he wins next month's vote, Talat would replace 81-year-old Rauf Denktash and would then become the TRNC's chief negotiator in any future peace talks with the Greek Cypriots.
Last year, the CTP leader was a vocal supporter of a UN reunification plan for Cyprus, which Denktash strongly opposed. 
The effort to end the Mediterranean island's more than 30-year division ended in failure, however, as Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected the plan in an April referendum. 
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots supported the proposed peace deal, only the Greek Cypriots eventually joined the EU on 1 May 2004, as the TRNC is not internationally recognised.
Talat's earlier governing coalition with the Democratic Party (DP) of Serdar Denktash, the son of the incumbent Turkish Cypriot president, collapsed in October. 
However, he emerged in a stronger position after leading his party to victory in the TRNC's early parliamentary elections on 20 February.
The CTP won 24 seats in the 50-member parliament, a net gain of seven seats. 
With Talat pledging to work for the renewal of peace talks during the campaign, his victory was viewed as an indication of the Turkish Cypriot community's strong support for Cyprus's reunification and EU membership.
Talat, who was given the mandate to form the next Turkish Cypriot government on Friday, is now expected to head a new CTP-DP coalition cabinet. 
Under the provisional power-sharing deal reached late Sunday, the CTP would take seven ministerial seats. 
Three seats would go to the DP.
The final agreement was to be submitted for ratification to party leaders Monday evening, with finalisation expected on Tuesday. 
The list of ministerial nominees would then be submitted to Denktash on Tuesday or Wednesday, according to reports.
