08/03/2005
By Gary Dean for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 08/03/05
The two governments most often vilified for their lack of co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal -- Serbia-Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Republika Srpska (RS) -- have, in recent weeks, taken baby steps towards meeting their obligations to turn over indictees.
Meeting those obligations, however, has not meant police kicking in doors during late-night raids. 
Rather, it has taken the form of voluntary surrenders, such as last week's announcement by former Serbian Army General Momcilo Perisic that he would turn himself in. 
Perisic, wanted in connection with atrocities committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Kosovo between 1993 and 1998, arrived in The Hague on Monday (7 March).
Authorities view such surrenders as a way to respond to international pressure without destroying their own political futures, said one analyst.
"It is providing them with the least number of enemies, since they do not want to create too many political enemies and endanger their positions and future electoral prospects," said BBC Southeast Europe analyst Gabriel Partos.
At issue is the leverage that the international community -- in the form of the EU, the US government and NATO -- have on BiH and on Serbia-Montenegro. 
Serbia faces dual messages from the EU and the United States: Arrest your war crimes indictees or forget about moving closer to the EU or receiving US aid.
Retired General Vladimir Lazarevic, who faces charges of crimes against humanity and of violating the rules and customs of war during the 1998-1999 Kosovo conflict, is now in The Hague after surrendering -- just weeks after Washington suspended $10m in aid to Serbia, saying Belgrade had failed to co-operate with the tribunal. 
Washington also withdrew a number of its experts providing technical support to the Serbian government.
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, meanwhile, cancelled a trip to Belgrade, indicating there was nothing new to discuss while indictees were still free in Serbia.
BiH has twice been denied invitations to NATO's Partnership for Peace programme (PfP) over the issue, prompting top international administrator in BiH Paddy Ashdown to sack dozens of RS officials. 
That was in response to the entity's failure to arrest a single war crimes suspect since the 1992-1995 conflict ended.
Though the most recent round of sackings in December 2004 prompted the RS prime minister to resign, Ashdown maintains that the entity will be held responsible if BiH is again denied PfP membership in April.
The surrenders of Savo Todorovic and Boban Simic in January to RS police and EU peacekeepers respectively, indicate a way that RS politicians can bow to the pressure without being branded as traitors by their constituents.
"Ideally [RS leaders] would like to have their cake and eat it too -- they want to keep the powers of the entity as much as they can, and they want to avoid being seen as being directly implicated in forcing indictees to go to The Hague by arresting them," Partos said. 
"They are now offering [indictees] incentives to surrender and encouraging them in every possible way. 
It's a sign of remarkable progress in some sense, but it needs to be sealed by actual action."
