08/11/2004
By Vahit Bora for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 08/11/04
Representatives of the Greens/European Free Alliance group in the European Parliament met in Istanbul from 19 October to 22 October to discuss Turkey's EU accession.
The conference, the first held by a European party on Turkish soil, focused on the challenges facing the country as it seeks to fulfil the Union's criteria for membership.
"After … intense debate with Turkish politicians, representatives of Turkish civil society, media representatives, artists and scientists, we have gained a clearer picture of what is at stake from the question of Turkey's entry into the EU," the group, which focuses on environmental issues and democratic rights, said in a press statement.
Describing Franco-German reconciliation and post-communist integration -- the "miracles of the Rhine and the Oder" -- as the cornerstones of Europe's postwar development, Greens/EFA group Co-president Daniel Cohn-Bendit suggested Turkish accession would be an equally important landmark.
"I hope that in 10 or 15 years we will have witnessed a third miracle;
the miracle of the Bosphorus," he said.
At the same time, Cohn-Bendit said, Turkish politicians should acknowledge that the country requires special treatment by the EU.
"Turkey is a country of 70 million people and of great importance to Europe.
But its integration into the EU is not comparable to that of Malta or Bulgaria or Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It will be difficult both for Turkey and for the EU and both sides should be honest," he said.
Conferences and roundtable talks addressed a broad range of issues facing Turkey, including women's rights, civil liberties, freedom of the press, environmental concerns, torture and the treatment of the Kurdish, Armenian and Christian communities.
Nearly all agreed that Turkey has made sweeping changes over the past two years, but many argued that implementation of reforms remains a problem.
The chairman of the Joint Parliamentary delegation for the EU and Turkey, Joost Lagendijk, said that reforms and trust are the keys to Turkey's accession.
Although the conditions for opening of the negotiations have been met, he said, that does not mean the criteria have been completely fulfilled.
While affirming its support for Turkey's accession bid, the Greens/EFA group said it would continue to monitor Turkey's progress, with special attention to issues of human rights, democratisation and the position of women in society.
