07/06/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times -- 07/06/05
A new pipeline which will carry 50 million tonnes of petrol yearly from Baku to the Turkish Mediterranean port of Ceyhan was officially opened at a ceremony last month.
The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline -- a $3.2 billion project with a capacity of 1 million barrels a day -- is the first direct oil link between the landlocked Caspian, which is thought to contain the world's third-largest oil and gas reserves, and the Mediterranean. 
Under the 40-year agreement governing the pipeline, Turkey will receive some $200m in transportation fees annually.
The 1,768km transport system will occur in stages over a six-month period. 
Loading of the first tanker at the Ceyhan marine terminal is expected to happen by the fourth quarter of this year, according to project officials.
The pipeline is widely seen as having considerable economic, geographic and strategic importance because of its potential to reduce the West's dependence on Middle Eastern oil. 
In addition, it could spur economic development and foreign investment in the countries along its route: Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan and Turkey.
The agreement to construct a pipeline between Baku and Ceyhan was first secured in 1992, and construction started in 2002. 
Most Caspian oil exports previously moved through Russian pipelines, often adding to the congestion in the Bosporus Strait.
The 25 May inaugural ceremony was attended by Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev, Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili, Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev, US Secretary of Energy Samuel Bodman and the chief executive of British Petroleum (BP), Lord John Browne.
BP is one of the BTC consortium members. 
Browne hailed the project as a heroic engineering achievement, just as groundbreaking in its day as were Prudhoe Bay and the Trans-Alaskan pipeline 30 years ago. 
"The BTC pipeline opens up massive new fields in the Caspian Sea to world markets, enhancing security of supply for decades to come. 
And it does so in a way that avoids the transit of large numbers of tankers through the narrow and congested Bosporus," Browne said.
The BTC project is of vital importance to regional stability and economic development, Sezer said at the ceremony, adding that it is a telling example of Turkey's good relations with its neighbours.
"The United States has consistently supported [the pipeline project] because we believe in the project's ability to bolster energy security, strengthen participating countries' energy diversity, enhance regional co-operation and expand international investment opportunities," US President George W. 
Bush said in a letter read at the ceremony.
