08/11/2004
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 08/11/04
Since 1 January, Montenegro has had the right to freely export fish to EU member countries.
So far, however, only small quantities of fish have been caught and exported.
Moreover, there is considerable disagreement about the industry's potential.
While marine biologists insist Montenegro could export as much as 1.5m euros worth of fish, many fishermen say that goal is unrealistic.
Experts from the Marine Biology Institute in Kotor, working with counterparts from Ancona, Italy, estimate that Montenegro's territorial waters are home to about 130,000 tonnes of bluefish.
Sreten Mandic, the institute's director, says that means 30,000 tonnes could be fished annually.
This year's quota is 29,000 tonnes, which adds up to 36 permits.
However, the actual amount of fish being brought in remains well below that amount.
According to the Montenegrin and Italian experts, research shows that the possibilities for fishing far exceed the current canning capacity.
To address this problem, the Ribarstvo fish production and canning factory plans a series of projects designed to increase capacity ten fold.
These include building a factory for bluefish production.
It would initially employ about 300 people, with the number rising to 1,200 over the course of three to four years.
Montenegro's Agriculture Ministry, meanwhile, has earmarked 97,000 euros for the development of fishing this year.
The major problem is the lack of a development strategy, according to the president of the Association of Professional Fishermen, Marko Kise.
Currently, he says, Montenegro is simply not capable of earning 1.5m euros annually through fish exports, and some fishermen have purchased expensive boats only to find the amount of fish available isn't enough to turn a profit.
Moreover, Kise adds, Montenegrin fishermen face hurdles such as high registration fees and a lack of repair shipyards.
Even if it were possible to catch 30,000 tonnes of bluefish annually, fishing industry representatives warn that figure would come dangerously close to overfishing the species.
Moreover, Montenegro must locate markets.
Although Italy can be reached overnight, fishermen who have tried to enter the Belgrade market have been stymied by transportation problems -- it can take up to 48 hours for the fish to reach the capital.
With Montenegrin fish exporting still in an early phase, all sides agree that research and experimental projects are needed to assess the industry's potential and develop ways to fulfil it.
