08/04/2005
(Various sources -- 07/04/05 - 08/04/05)
Royalty, political and religious leaders joined a multitude of mourners in St. Peter's Square in Rome on Friday (8 April) to bid a final farewell to Pope John Paul II.
The pontiff, who led the Roman Catholic Church for the last 26 years of his life, passed away on 2 April.
The open-air service began at 10:00 am local time, as the plain cypress coffin containing the pope's body was carried out of St. Peter's Basilica and placed on the stone steps in front.
The arrival of the casket in the windswept square was met with applause, but many of the hundreds of thousands of mourners began weeping while a choir sang Gregorian chants.
"Today we bury his remains in the earth as a seed of immortality -- our hearts are full of sadness, yet at the same time of joyful hope and profound gratitude," Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, dean of the Sacred College of Cardinals, said in his sermon.
After the service, the coffin was placed inside two other coffins, one zinc and one oak, and was then taken to the pope's final resting place in the grotto below St Peter's Basilica under a simple stone slab.
Over 200 royal figures, presidents and prime ministers from more than 80 countries, as well as leaders of major international organisations, including the UN and EU, arrived in Rome for the funeral.
They joined an estimated four million pilgrims and mourners from around the world who flooded the Italian capital this week.
Karol Wojtyla of Poland began his papacy on 16 October 1978, taking the name of John Paul II.
He will be remembered for his immense contribution to the overthrow of communism in Eastern Europe, and for efforts to improve inter-religious dialogue.
He was the first pope to enter a synagogue and a mosque.
On the eve of the funeral, the Vatican released John Paul's will and final testament, which shows that in 2000, when he reached 80 and was becoming increasingly ill, he had considered resigning.
"I hope that He [God] will help me to recognise until when I must continue this service," the pope wrote.
"I ask Him to recall me when He himself wants to."
At that time he also thanked Providence for the fact that the cold war had ended without nuclear war.
In his writings, he also praised leaders of different religions he had met, including the rabbi of Rome and many other non-Christian figures.
Heads of state from Albania, Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Greece, Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia, Serbia-Montenegro and Turkey attended Friday's ceremony.
They joined religious leaders from around the region, including Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, Greek Orthodox Archbishop Christodoulos, Turkey's Armenian Patriarch Mesrob II, Romanian Orthodox Patriarch Teoctist, and Bishops Neofit and Domitian of Bulgaria, as well as representatives of Albania's religious communities -- Catholic Archbishop Rrok Mirdita, Selim Muca of the (Sunni) Muslim community, Haxhi Dede Reshat Bardhi of the (Shi'ite) Bektashi Muslim community and Orthodox Archbishop Anastasios.
