07/02/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 02/07/05
Romanian President Traian Basescu's blunt, direct style proved to be a vote-getter in the recent election and may even have been key to his surprise victory.
With other politicians now seeking to emulate his approach, Romanians are beginning to talk of a new style in politics.
Basescu doesn't mince words.
He has publicly said that the Romanian Football Association should replace its president.
He told prosecutors they should quit if they can't do their job.
He startled voters by announcing his support for gay marriage -- a taboo topic in Romania.
In contrast to the distant demeanor of traditional politicians, Basescu builds a warm rapport with his supporters, and wears his heart on his sleeve.
When Theodor Stolojan, who Basescu succeeded as the presidential candidate of the Justice and Truth Alliance (DA), had to withdraw from the race for health reasons, Basescu broke into tears in front of the cameras.
After assuming office, Basescu became the first Romanian president to deliver his New Year's Eve speech live.
At midnight, Basescu spoke to the thousands of people gathered in University Square in central Bucharest and opened a bottle of champagne.
Now other politicians are adopting a more spontaneous, populist manner.
Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu convoked his first cabinet setting on New Year's Day, in the informal setting of a Carpathian resort.
Agriculture Minister Gheorghe Flutur named a 72-year-old farmer as his adviser.
On the other side of the political divide, the leader of the Social Democratic Party's youth organisation, Victor Ponta, has a reputation for being straightforward.
He was among the first to publicly recognise his party's problems and to call for reform.
Not everyone is happy with the new style.
Some have complained that it demeans politicians;
others accuse Basescu of seeking too much authority.
"We appreciate that Traian Basescu wants to pressure public institutions in order to eradicate corruption and poverty.
But we shouldn't allow him to improperly expand the presidential competencies," wrote Cristian Tudor Popescu, editor of the daily Adevarul.
The president's defenders, however, say his strong leadership and charismatic style will help push through the reforms needed for Romania to enter the EU in 2007.
Basescu has launched a major campaign to crack down on corruption and organised crime.
At the same time, he has vowed to free state institutions from political interference and "put them to work on behalf of the citizens".
