07/06/2005
(RFE/RL, FT, Transitions Online, Sofia News Agency, Rompres, BTA, Euro-reporters.com, Reporter.gr - 06/06/05;
FT, BTA, AFP - 05/06/05)
The recent rejections of the EU constitutional treaty by the majority of French and Dutch voters have left many people in the Balkans less optimistic about their countries' chances for joining the 25-nation club within the expected timeframe.
"Enlargement fatigue" has been described as one of the reasons for the "no" votes in referendums held in the two countries.
"The sharp worsening of the European climate in the last few weeks -- the referendums in France and the Netherlands and the trends in Germany -- does not benefit the further development of the European idea at the moment," Bulgarian Foreign Minister Solomon Passy said Sunday (5 June).
Following the Union's big bang expansion last year, which brought in ten new members, Bulgaria and Romania are the next countries scheduled to join the EU.
While accession is scheduled for 1 January 2007, their accession treaties include "safeguard clauses" that can lead to a delay should Brussels determine that they are not making sufficient progress in meeting their commitments.
"We will be scrutinised under a microscope," said Passy, whose country, as well as Romania, still must fulfil a number of requirements.
Even with the possibility of a delay, Bulgaria and Romania's EU entry is considered assured.
The same cannot be said, however, of other countries in the region.
Croatia is recognised as a formal EU candidate, but its accession talks were delayed in March due to its failure to extradite fugitive war crimes indictee Ante Gotovina.
Macedonia has not yet received recognition.
Albania's negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Brussels began more than a year ago, but progress has been slow.
Serbia-Montenegro only recently received the green light for starting SAA talks.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which lacks any formal legal agreement with the EU, is hampered by internal disagreements over police reform, a key precondition.
"We must meet the standards and fulfil the preconditions awaiting our attention, and I hope that we will succeed in this," Croatian President Stipe Mesic said during a visit to Zagreb by Macedonian counterpart Branko Crvenkovski on 1 June, two days after the French "no" vote.
For his part, Crvenkovski said, "It is not in our interest that countries of the region stagnate or stop in the process of [European] integration."
Serbian President Boris Tadic, meanwhile, said he expects the integration process to slow, but not come to a halt.
"Europe will not be complete without the Balkans," Tadic said, adding "The French referendum...
does not mean the end of integration but possibly a change of pace." If the Balkan countries' prospects for EU membership were cancelled, "All outstanding issues in our region would be much more difficult to resolve," he warned.
