08/11/2004
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 08/11/04
A referendum seeking to block decentralisation reforms in Macedonia failed Sunday (7 November) due to low turnout. 
According to provisional results announced by the State Election Commission, only 436,202 (26.24 per cent) out of 1,709,536 eligible voters went to the polls. 
Around 855,000 voters needed to cast ballots for the referendum to be successful.
The decentralisation legislation is a critical final element of the 2001 Ohrid Peace Accords that ended a six-month conflict in the country between government forces and ethnic Albanian rebels pushing for greater rights for their community. 
Its implementation is one of the political criteria for Macedonia's membership in NATO and the EU.
Adopted by the Macedonian Parliament in August, the reforms provide for a redrawing of municipal boundaries that would reduce the number of districts from 123 to 84. 
In 16 of those districts, ethnic Albanians -- who make up about 25 per cent of the country's population -- would become the largest political force. 
Furthermore, in areas where ethnic Albanians constitute at least 20 per cent of the population, their tongue would be recognised as an official language.
"Macedonia has sent today a powerful message to the European Union and NATO that the people of this country know the path for the future of their country," Defence Minister Vlado Buckovski said Sunday. 
"There were no winners and losers today. 
Macedonia is more united than ever."
Emira Mehmeti, a spokeswoman for the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), a ruling coalition member, also welcomed the results.
"The people have demonstrated they are willing to live in a multiethnic state which promotes European values and concepts," Mehmeti said.
Stojan Andov, leader of the opposition Liberal Party which was among the backers of the referendum, conceded defeat, but urged the government to listen to all those opposed to the new law.
International officials, including British Minister for Europe Denis MacShane, praised Macedonians for choosing to proceed with reforms.
"The leadership of the government and responsible Macedonian and Albanian leaders sent a clear signal that Macedonia would not turn back the clock to a past of ethnic tension," MacShane said in a statement. 
"I warmly welcome today's decision."
