07/04/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times – 07/04/05
The UNHCR announced last month that it has reached a landmark deal with the Council of Europe (CoE) Development Bank, under which more than 2,300 people in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia-Montenegro would be able to move out of collective centres and into individual accommodations.
"This is the first agreement of its kind with a major European development bank, and marks a big step forward in the effort to bring more development funding into the picture when it comes to providing solutions for refugees and displaced persons," UNHCR spokesman Rupert Colville told reporters in Geneva on 15 March, one day after the deal was finalised.
The CoE bank has agreed to provide over 10m euros for the construction and reconstruction of homes for displaced people in BiH and Serbia-Montenegro. 
The envisioned funding instruments include grants to the UNHCR totalling around 2.25m euros over a five-year period. 
Out of this, about a third was released by the bank in 2004 to provide permanent housing for more than 600 residents of collective centres in the two countries. 
The UNHCR has said a new tranche would likely be approved soon.
The Memorandum of Understanding signed in Paris on 14 March also envisions an 8m-euro soft loan to the BiH government, which will contribute 4m euros in matching funds from its own resources. 
"
This has proved to be excellent assistance to extremely vulnerable beneficiaries who would not be able to establish a coping mechanism once they left the security of collective centres," said Guido Ambroso, UNHCR senior desk officer for Southeast Europe. 
If the planned 2005 grant for Serbia-Montenegro is approved by the bank, he added, it would be used for the construction component of the local integration and in-kind assistance kits for refugees living in poor private accommodation, as well as for those leaving collective centres that the Serbian Commissioner for Refugees plans to close this year.
Thousands of refugees in Serbia are expected to benefit also from another programme with UN involvement. 
On 11 March, the UN Human Settlement Programme, known as UN-HABITAT, announced a 15m-euro initiative, funded by Italy, which is expected to provide some 670 new homes for 3,000 refugees and vulnerable people. 
In co-operation with the Serbian capital investments ministry, UN-HABITAT will be implementing the programme with the municipalities of Cacak, Kragujevac, Kraljevo, Nis, Pancevo, Stara Pazova and Valjevo, the agency said.
The new initiatives follow a landmark agreement signed by the governments of BiH, Serbia-Montenegro and Croatia in January, pledging to close the refugee chapter in the region by the end of 2006 through joint or individual action.
The three countries were involved in conflicts in the early 1990s that forced an estimated three million people to flee their homes.
