07/12/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 07/12/04
Earlier this year, the Croatian Telecommunications Council annulled the results of a tender for the country's third mobile phone license, rejecting a bid by a Swedish-Croatian consortium. 
As a result, prospects for increased competition in the mobile phone market have been delayed, while the failed tender has raised further questions about the transparency of Croatian regulatory institutions.
The Treca Sreca (Third Luck) consortium, consisting of Sweden's Tele2 and nine Croatian firms, was the sole bidder for the license. 
According to state telecommunications agency chief Gaspar Gacina, its bid was denied because the consortium didn't show sufficient interest in helping the Croatian economy, and because it applied only for a GMS network, not UMTS.
"The main weakness in their bid was in its planned contribution to the development of the national economy," Gacina told local media.
But Tele2 and its Croatian partners are crying foul. 
"This is sheer fraud and larceny," a representative of the consortium said, describing the bidding process as a farce.
According to Tomislav Matic, an attorney for the group, the telecommunications agency's move was a clear signal to investors, whether foreign or domestic, that they are not welcome to enter the Croatian market. 
Furthermore, Matic alleged, authorities are aiming to limit competition by prohibiting the third mobile operator -- whenever it is selected -- from lowering prices.
"The third operator will not lower prices, and citizens will be duped," Matic said. 
Tele2 has filed complaints with two EU institutions -- the General Directorate for Expansion and the General Directorate for Telecommunications -- and sent a letter of protest to the Croatian government.
About 55 per cent of Croatia's population of 4.4 million uses mobile phones. 
The market is currently split between T-Croatian Mobile, owned by Deutsche Telecom, and VIPnet, an Austrian-led group that obtained a license in 1998.
Nearly 80 per cent of mobile telephone users in Croatia think that the current price of services is too high, according to a recent survey conducted by the monthly magazine Moj Moby. 
About 87 per cent believe that a third mobile operator is needed on the Croatian market. 
Nevertheless a majority of respondents -- 65 per cent -- said they would stay with their current carrier, even if a third choice becomes available.
Around 35 per cent said that they are planning to change to the new network, once it appears.
