07/12/2004
(Office of the High Representative, The Scotsman, Blic - 07/12/04; Reuters, AP, RFE/RL, FENA, BBC Monitoring, Radio B92 - 06/12/04)
Serbian President Boris Tadic has said that Ratko Mladic, one of the world's most wanted war crimes fugitives, is receiving his pension from the Serbia-Montenegro military on a regular basis. 
That situation would not change even if the former Bosnian Serb military chief were to be sentenced for war crimes, Tadic said Monday (6 December) at the start of a three-day visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"Even if Ratko Mladic were convicted right now for war crimes, members of his family would have the right to the pension," Tadic told the Banja Luka daily <I>Nezavisne Novine</I>. 
The former general is legally entitled to it, just like any other Bosnian Serb army officer, and that right could not be cancelled, he said.
The Bosnian Serb army was created from units of the former Yugoslav National Army that the regime in Belgrade sent to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) when the 1992-1995 conflict began.
Chief UN prosecutor Carla del Ponte has insisted that Mladic, who has been on the run since 1996, has found shelter in Serbia, but Belgrade officials continue to deny this. 
In his comments Monday, Tadic said he was unaware of the fugitive's whereabouts, adding that he believed the pension -- reportedly amounting to about 385 euros a month -- was being collected by a family member, probably his son.
The statement came days after the Sarajevo daily <I>Dnevni Avaz</I> published leaked copies of Mladic's personnel military file, showing he had only been discharged from the Serbian army in 2001 and from the army of BiH's Serb-run entity Republika Srpska (RS) a year later.
The revelations come amid mounting international pressure on both Serbia and RS to arrest and hand over all indictees, particularly Mladic and wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
On Monday, the leader of the RS Association of Independent Social Democrats, Milorad Dodik, accused structures within the RS police of opposing co-operation with the UN tribunal and preventing the arrest of indictees.
"Karadzic must be arrested", Dodik told RS Radio-Television, calling for a "general search party" to bring Karadzic and his supporters to justice. 
He also stressed the need for establishing a single police unit, whose sole task would be to catch indictees in RS.
While in Sarajevo, Tadic also said that all war crimes indictees should be brought before the tribunal. 
He met with High Representative Paddy Ashdown, who reiterated the vital importance of arresting war crimes suspects. 
The revelations the RS army continued to pay Mladic for seven years after he was indicted are widely expected to lead to new sanctions on RS, following those Ashdown imposed earlier this year, when lack of co-operation cost BiH an invitation to join NATO's Partnership for Peace programme. 
The issue would likely be revisited during NATO's summit on 9 December.
In related news, US Ambassador at Large for War Crimes Pierre-Richard Prosper said Monday that the mandate of the UN court might have to be extended because of Belgrade's lack of co-operation. 
During a visit to The Hague, Prosper said that the Serbian government -- and particularly Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica -- had shown "zero" co-operation with the tribunal, thus jeopardising plans to complete its work in 2008. 
The US diplomat also indicated that Washington no longer backs the idea of processing war crimes cases in Serbian courts.
