07/04/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/04/05
Following two months of talks in Belgrade and with considerable assistance from the OSCE, an agreement was reached last month on the inclusion of Albanian leaders in the Co-ordinating Body for South Serbia.
According to Movement for Democratic Progress head Jonuz Musliu, one of the signatories of the agreement, it is not the first time that Albanian political forces have sought a restructuring of the body and inclusion in its activities.
"We only got what we have been demanding all along -- to be included in the work of the Co-ordinating Body, but with considerable delay.
What the results will be, will become apparent very quickly.
As far as we are concerned, we approached the entire matter with sincerity," Musliu said.
The agreement was signed by Co-ordinating Body President Nebojsa Covic, Bujanovac Mayor Nagip Arifi, Medvedja Mayor Slobodan Draskovic, Presevo Mayor Riza Halimi, Musliu and the president of the Democratic Union of the Valley, Skender Destani.
Under the deal, each community will appoint its own representatives to the body.
OSCE mission chief in Serbia-Montenegro Maurizio Massari welcomed the agreement.
"I consider the integration of the Albanian minority in the police and courts imperative, as well as new initiatives for economic development, which currently represent the most important tasks which need to be dealt with.
Of course there is education, as well, textbooks for the Albanian minority, as well as the education of pupils and students from all minority groups in South Serbia, hence not just Albanians, but also the Roma, as well as others.
These concrete steps will be crucial for achieving multiethnic peace in South Serbia," Massari said.
The joint agreement was also welcomed by the US embassy, which congratulated the signatories.
According to reports in the Serbian media, the embassy, which has already provided $3m in assistance to the communities in South Serbia, has pledged to continue supporting efforts towards greater stability, interethnic co-operation and progress
