07/12/2004
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 07/12/04
Recent trends show that the Western Balkans have made progress in stability, sustainable development and European integration, Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic told participants at a business conference in Berlin during November. 
The two-day forum, entitled "From Stability to Growth", was organised by the German Chamber of Industry and Commerce and GTZ International Services.
Prime ministers from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Romania and Serbia-Montenegro attended. 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder addressed the conference and held a joint meeting with the visiting prime ministers.
According to Djukanovic, there has been an upward trend in regional co-operation not only in terms of political and economic issues but also in judicial and home affairs. 
He said all Western Balkan countries are aware that mutual co-operation and integration are as equally important as integration into the EU, and that the two processes must take place in parallel.
The region is by no means predestined to lag behind other countries or to be a source of corruption, Djukanovic said, adding that such problems are the consequences of undeveloped economies.
He cited Montenegro's political and macroeconomic achievements, including an upward trend in GDP -- which is expected to reach 3 per cent by the end of the year. 
The administration, he said, has also made considerable progress in combating inflation, reducing the budget deficit, and privatising strategic companies.
Developing an effective and reliable legal system, a transparent and capable public administration, and a partnership between the public and private sector continue to be priorities for Montenegro, Djukanovic said, emphasising that the republic is strongly oriented towards reform and Euro-Atlantic integration.
He cited Kosovo as the only remaining security problem in the region, adding that relations between Montenegro and Serbia were matters of democracy and development and would have no impact on regional security.
Djukanovic commended Germany for continually proving that the region remains one of its most important priorities; and said good political relations between Montenegro and Germany are constantly confirmed.
During his stay in Berlin, Djukanovic met with Schroeder and German Minister for Economic Co-operation and Development Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul. 
Djukanovic also met with Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, who expressed support for Montenegro's EU aspirations.
