06/01/2005
(Pressreview.ro - 06/01/05; Swinsinfo, NZZ, AFP, RFE/RL - 05/01/05; Pressreview.ro - 29/12/04; Kathimerini - 28/12/04; Swissinfo - 17/09/04)
Thirty-five journalists at one of Romania's most influential dailies have quit their jobs, accusing the paper's Swiss owners of interference in editorial policy. 
The resignations at Evenimentul Zilei were prompted by the employers' plans to replace key staff, news agencies reported Wednesday (5 January).
Evenimentul Zilei  is owned by Switzerland's Ringier SA group, which bought the paper in April 2004. 
The owner of more than 40 newspapers and magazines in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Romania and Serbia, the group is said to be one of the largest publishers in Central and Eastern Europe.
In a statement, the journalists who resigned said they were doing so as an act of solidarity with Evenimentul Zilei editor-in-chief Dan Turturica, one of those slated for replacement. 
In December, the company announced plans to demote Turturica, sending him on a mission to the eastern city of Bacau, ostensibly to conduct a feasibility study for a new edition.
Turturica says he has been at odds with Ringier for two to three months, after the firm accused him and former editorial manager Cornel Nistorescu of publishing too many articles critical of former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase and the then ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD).
The company says Turturica was replaced because of managerial shortcomings.
Ringier's announcement sparked a demonstration by journalists from Evenimentul Zilei and two other Romanian dailies outside the Swiss Embassy and the European Commission delegation in Bucharest."We want press freedom" and "Down with censorship," the journalists cried.
Nistorescu was replaced earlier, but stayed on as a columnist.
Turturica, 35, said Wednesday he was resigning, but would file a lawsuit against the Swiss company. 
Swissinfo quoted him as also describing his colleagues' resignations as a blow to already fragile press freedoms in Romania.
According to Reporters Without Borders, media independence there has deteriorated in the past two years. 
In the media watchdog's most recent ranking of press freedoms in 140 countries, Romania placed 70th, a drop of nearly 20 places over that period.
In its annual report for 2004, the Paris-based body voiced concern over "disturbing" events in Romania, citing the case of four journalists who were badly beaten while investigating corruption among local PSD officials.
Referring to the instances of harassment against journalists, Turturica said at a news conference Wednesday that there was a trend in Romania "of annihilating critical journalists who write about high-level corruption".
A series of articles exposing high-level corruption ahead of the 28 November elections helped bring down "the most corrupt government that Romania has had", investigative reporter Cristi Levant was quoted as saying. 
Following his election victory, President Traian Basescu pledged to restore press freedom.
In the run-up to the November elections, journalists at Evenimentul Zilei claimed that they were under pressure to soften the newspaper's critical tone to increase circulation. 
Ringier's meddling posed a threat to the paper's independence, they said.
Evenimentul Zilei's director, Cozmina Noaghea, expressed regret over the mass resignations, but denied Ringier was interfering in editorial policy.
