06/06/2005
(Amnesty International - 06/06/05)
Amnesty International urged the UN Security Council on Monday (6 June) to extend the mandate of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to provide the funding it needs to carry out its tasks. 
If the 2010 target for the ICTY to complete its activities is not extended, justice may be seriously compromised, the organisation warned.
"Thousands of people have yet to be tried for the war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide committed during the violent break-up of Yugoslavia," Amnesty International's director for Europe and Central Asia, Nicola Duckworth, said in a statement. 
"Hundreds of thousands of refugees are still not able to return to their homes and to obtain full compensation for the damage."
The statement comes ahead of a Security Council meeting next week, during which ICTY chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte and tribunal president Theodor Meron will present reports on implementation of the completion strategy. 
Under the projected timetable, all first-instance trials are to be wrapped up by 2008 and all appeals by 2010, when the court would close its doors for good.
According to Amnesty International, only 37 of all those indicted by the ICTY have received a final sentence for their roles in war crimes committed during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s, and ten key suspects remain at large. 
They include the ICTY's three most wanted indictees, former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, his military commander, Ratko Mladic, and retired Croat General Ante Gotovina.
Del Ponte has "clearly stated that if they are not arrested and transferred in the months to come, it may be necessary to revise the target dates of the completion strategy," Duckworth said.
To meet the 2010 deadline, del Ponte's office recently requested that ten lower level cases involving 18 indictees be referred to the national courts of the relevant former Yugoslav republics. 
The move is aimed at relieving the court of its caseload so that it may focus on the higher profile indictees.
"Amnesty International believes that the tribunal's completion strategy appears to be mostly dictated by financial constraints influenced by a changing geopolitical setting, and based on the assumption that local courts in former Yugoslav countries have the capacity to continue the tribunal's tasks," the rights group said.
It argues that the completion strategy ignores some "crucial facts" and should therefore be reviewed. 
These include the failure of the former Yugoslav republics to arrest and hand over indictees and the continuing lack of political will among their authorities to investigate and prosecute all war crimes stemming from the conflicts in the 1990s. 
Furthermore, Amnesty International says, domestic legislation relating to war crimes is often not in line with international law, victim and witness protection is generally nonexistent or insufficient, and provisions on reparations are inadequate.
"As long as the authorities of countries in the territory of the former Yugoslavia are unwilling or unable to tackle impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, it is the task of the international community to ensure that justice is done, both at the international level and at the national level, both within the countries of the former Yugoslavia and in other countries," Duckworth said.
