06/11/2008
WASHINGTON, United States -- Balkan countries on Wednesday (November 5th) congratulated Barack Obama on his victory in the US presidential election.
Albanian President Bamir Topi described Obama's success as a "historic day for America", adding the United States will remain a leading factor in resolving international crises.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Presidency Chairman Haris Silajdzic also sent a letter of congratulations, while High Representative Miroslav Lajcak told the German magazine Der Spiegel that the United States and other international partners should remain committed to supporting countries in the Western Balkans on their road to EU integration.
Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov congratulated Obama and said his victory signalled a wish for change and renewal.
President Stipe Mesic said that as a small European country on the road to Euro-Atlantic integration, Croatia congratulates Obama.
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias said Nicosia is waiting to see Obama fulfil his promises, noting that his election led to big expectations.
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis sent a letter telling Obama his victory over Republican John McCain comes at a "critical period", in light of the global recession.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski said in his message that the US contribution to "securing peace, stability and development of democracy is of invaluable significance".
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci wrote to Obama saying the election "displayed the best democratic values of the United States".
Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic said he is confident Obama's victory will contribute to the development of bilateral relations.
Romanian President Traian Basescu said Obama's election came at the zenith of US-Romanian co-operation.
The government of Serbia expressed hope that Obama's election will contribute to the development of tolerance in the world.
In his letter, Turkish President Abdullah Gul welcomed Obama's message of change and hope.
(DPA, Makfax, OHR, Fena, Bulgarian Post, CNA, ANA-MPA, Utrinski Vesnik, Adevarul, Hurriyet, Anadolu news agency, Zaman, RTS - 05/11/08)
