06/12/2004
(Turkish Daily News, RIA Novosti - 06/12/04;
AP, AFP, UPI, VOA, ITAR-TASS, Xinhua, Turkish Press, MosNews - 05/12/04)
Russian President Vladimir Putin arrived on a two-day official visit to Turkey on Sunday (5 December), a trip expected to help enhance bilateral economic and political co-operation and to further boost bilateral trade.
Putin, in Ankara at the invitation of Turkish counterpart Ahmet Necdet Sezer, is the first Russian leader to visit Turkey since 1972.
Security was stepped up significantly in Ankara for the visit.
Several roads were closed to traffic.
Helicopters hovered above during Putin's drive from the airport to the city, where more than 3,000 police officers were reportedly mobilised to ensure his safety.
Putin is being accompanied by a large delegation, including Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, Industry and Energy Minister Viktor Khristenko, as well as the presidents of Tatarstan and Ingushetia, Mintimer Shaimiev and Murat Zyazikov.
In addition, several members of Russia's business community arrived with the president.
"We are here to take courageous decisions," the AP quoted Putin as saying Sunday night during a reception at the Cankaya Palace, hosted by Sezer.
"The visit will give the opportunity for both economic and trade relations between Russia and Turkey to open up to new horizons," he added ahead of talks with Turkish officials and a business forum Monday.
Trade relations between Russia and Turkey have improved dramatically since the end of the Cold War.
Bilateral trade volume reached $6.8 billion in 2003 and is expected to total $10 billion this year, with a potential to rise to $25 billion in the next few years, according to Turkish officials.
Six co-operation agreements on defence, energy and finance were signed Monday, in addition to a joint friendship and partnership declaration, stressing the two countries' mutual will to improve co-operation.
Sezer voiced confidence that the visit would mark "a cornerstone in moving co-operation and relations between our two countries towards a multifaceted partnership".
Speaking ahead of his official talks with Putin on Monday, Sezer said the fight against terrorism is one particular area in which Turkey is determined to co-operate with Russia.
In an article published Sunday in the Turkish daily Milliyet, Lavrov also cited anti-terrorism efforts as a key priority for both countries.
"We wish to further strengthen our co-operation with Turkey on the issues of terrorism, separatism, discrimination on ethnic grounds, religious fundamentalism and organised crime," Lavrov wrote, stressing the importance of choking off financial support to terrorist groups and organisations.
In addition to Sezer, Putin also met on Monday with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul and Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc.
On Sunday, the Russian president said what he liked about Erdogan was his ability to keep his promises.
"Things he spoke about were hard to fulfil sometimes, but he always fulfilled them," said Putin.
