06/05/2005
(Reuters, ICTY - 05/05/05)
The UN war crimes tribunal on Thursday (5 May) sentenced a Kosovo Albanian to four months in jail for contempt. 
However, the court freed him because the time he has already spent in detention exceeds the length of his sentence.
Beqa Beqaj, 51, was indicted in October on charges of "contempt, attempted contempt and incitement to contempt" of the UN tribunal. 
Prosecutors alleged that on six occasions between June and October 2004, Beqaj interfered with a witness and a potential witness, referred to as B1 and B2 respectively, in the case against former Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) members Fatmir Limaj, Haradin Bala and Isak Musliu. 
In doing so he "knowingly and wilfully interfered with the administration of justice by threatening, intimidating, offering a bribe to or otherwise interfered with witnesses or potential witnesses…" in the case against Limaj and the others, the indictment read. 
Beqaj is a relative of Musliu.
The UN tribunal has indicted the three former KLA members on counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war in connection with the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo. 
They have been charged with murder, torture and inhuman acts allegedly committed against Serb and Albanian civilians held in a KLA prison camp in Lapushnik, eastern Kosovo, in 1998.
The three-member trial chamber, presided over by Judge Amin El Mahdi, ruled Thursday that there was no evidence supporting the allegations that Beqaj threatened and intimidated the two witnesses, nor that he offered a bribe to witness B1. 
According to a summary of the chamber's judgment, published on the tribunal Web site, the judges also found no evidence supporting the allegations that Beqaj "interfered with the administration of justice in relation to the potential witness B2".
"The chamber is satisfied, however, that there is evidence which establishes beyond reasonable doubt that the accused wilfully and knowingly interfered with witness B1 and the administration of justice and that that conduct constitutes contempt of the tribunal," the summary read.
A survivor of an alleged massacre at the Lapushnik prison camp, tortures and two assassination attempts, witness B1 has already testified in the case against Limaj and, together with his family, is now in a witness protection programme. 
The judges considered this as an aggravating circumstance, as Beqaj's offence was committed at a moment when the witness was particularly vulnerable.
The judges described as mitigating factors Beqaj's six children, his lack of a criminal record and his co-operation with The Hag
Taking into consideration all arguments and the evidence presented during the trial, the judges found Beqaj guilty only on the count of contempt. 
He was acquitted of incitement to contempt the tribunal, while the charge of attempted contempt was dismissed.
