06/06/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 06/06/05
A pair of oath-taking ceremonies gone awry -- and a lack of follow-up action -- have cost the Republika Srpska Army (VRS) chief of staff his job. 
On Friday (3 June), the commanders of EUFOR and NATO Headquarters in Sarajevo (NHQSa) ordered the dismissal of General Novak Djukic. 
They are empowered to do so by Annex 1A of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The firing stems from incidents that occurred during oath-taking ceremonies on 16 April at the Manjaca and Bileca recruiting centres. 
Most of the 550 recruits at Manjaca swore to defend "Republika Srpska" (RS) instead of "Bosnia and Herzegovina" (BiH), while several thousand family members and friends vocally protested the BiH flag and anthem.
At Bileca, recruits repeated the oath properly, but visitors to the ceremony complained about the BiH symbols.
It was the first time that, under the 2003 defence law, RS recruits were being asked to swear allegiance to the state of BiH instead of the Bosnian Serb entity.
"General Djukic was ultimately responsible for the failures of planning and command that allowed these events to occur," said NHQSa Commander Brigadier General Steven Schook, who personally called Djukic to inform him of the decision. 
"He was also responsible for the failure of the VRS to react promptly and effectively to restore confidence in the reliability and constitutional loyalty of the VRS."
Using his authority under Dayton, EUFOR Commander General David Leakey has requested RS Defence Minister Milovan Stankovic to suspend all recruit training at the Manjaca base until the training there can be considered adequate and reliable. 
The conscripts at Manjaca will be dismissed.
"The role of the veterans' association at the events in Manjaca was particularly inflammatory and offensive to Dayton," Leakey told the press. 
"I order that war veterans' representatives will not participate in an active role at official military ceremonies until the rulebook on such ceremonies is revised at the state level."
According to Leakey, the new rules will ensure that all military induction ceremonies throughout BiH reflect the fact that the purpose of the BiH Armed Forces and its entity armies is to defend and serve the State of BiH, and not the entities -- the RS or the Federation of BiH (FBiH).
Last month, BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic announced that 11 officials and military individuals would be disciplined because of the incidents. 
However, the Office of the High Representative, NATO and EUFOR consider the disciplinary measures to be less than appropriate, and have called on the BiH presidency to ensure that those individuals with senior command positions are held accountable.
