05/05/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 05/05/05
The number of human trafficking victims receiving assistance has declined in Southeast Europe, but that may not mean the problem is easing, according to a new report by UNICEF, the Office of the UNHCR and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR). 
Presented in Skopje last month, the study provides an overview of the human trafficking situation in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Moldova, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and Kosovo.
"The report looks at the efforts of governments and international and local NGOs for hampering human trafficking and elevating the awareness and assistance to the victims," said UNICEF Representative in Macedonia Hongwei Gao, adding that the presentation in Skopje was intended to boost anti-trafficking efforts there.
According to Gao, researchers found "two seemingly contradictory scenarios. 
The first one sees illegal trade in the region declining as the number of victims that have received assistance has dramatically decreased. 
According to the second scenario, trade in people has not decreased at all; rather, it has become less visible with the victims not seeking assistance because of fear of repatriation, deportation or public condemnation."
Governments should strengthen protection for victims, conduct more flexible anti-trafficking programmes that take into account the changing nature of the problem, and consider the wider context of economic development, gender issues and the welfare protection system, concludes the report, titled "Trade in People in South East Europe 2004: Focus on Preventive Measures".
Geraldine Bjolstred of OSCE/ODIHR said Macedonia is a leader in hampering human trafficking in the region, citing a rating list made by the Stability Agreement Task Group. 
"The assessment is based on US State Department reports based on the conditions with legal regulations, the preventive measures that have been taken and education and training of the police and judiciary in succumbing human trafficking," she said.
According to interior ministry statistics, 132 female foreign nationals were reported victims of human trafficking in Macedonia in 2003, with 19 per cent of them being under 18 years old. 
UNICEF statistics show that in a few cases in 2003 and 2004, Roma children were the victims of trade in Gostivar, Bitola and Kicevo. 
Roma children are believed to be especially vulnerable to this type of crime.
"In 2004, the Foreign National Transit Centre accepted 11 female foreign nationals as the victims of trade in people," said Goran Pavlovski, a spokesman for the interior ministry, adding that four were from Moldova, two from Serbia-Montenegro and Kosovo, two from Albania, and one each from Romania, Ukraine and Bulgaria. 
"According to their age, eight were over 19 and three were between 16 and 18," he said.
The Unit for Combating Trafficking of People conducted four control operations and the ministry took part in two regional operations aimed at stemming human trafficking in 2004. 
"The operations were carried out in co-ordination with SECI Centre for Combating Cross-border Crime," Pavlovski said. 
"Mediation and financial support of the SECI Centre allowed organisation of the return of victims who were repatriated to their home countries, to appear as witnesses in trials at Macedonian courts."
