05/11/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/11/04
Kosovo authorities will not wait for decisions from Belgrade before moving ahead with democratic reforms and the implementation of standards, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen said Thursday (4 November) after a series of meetings with Serbian officials. 
He urged Serbia to continue dialogue with Pristina.
"We are going on. 
With or without you," Jessen-Petersen said, adding that "we would like it much better if, in the interest of the Kosovo Serbs, their representatives played a very active role in the entire process".
The Danish diplomat, who took office this summer, said further steps had been defined following last month's elections in Kosovo, and that their implementation would begin as soon as the new Kosovo government is formed.
"The focus will immediately shift to the implementation of standards, which are the precondition for a stable, democratic and multiethnic Kosovo. 
These standards relate especially to the position of minorities, security, the rule of law, the protection of minorities, freedom of movement, return of the displaced and decentralisation," Jessen-Petersen said.
An action plan for the rapid improvement of living conditions for Kosovo Serbs has been drawn up, the UNMIK chief said, describing their current level of freedom of movement as "unacceptable".
After his meeting with Jessen-Petersen, Serbian President Boris Tadic repeated his call for decentralisation and Serb home rule -- a demand he made last month when he urged Kosovo Serbs to take part in the province's elections. 
Tadic's stance on the elections -- coming amid calls from other leading politicians for a boycott -- set off a heated controversy. 
In the end, only 1,500 Serb voters, out of 200,000 who were eligible, cast ballots.
Jessen-Petersen also held talks with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, who insisted that Belgrade should be granted an equal position in future negotiations. 
Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, meanwhile, told Jessen-Petersen that "only the European approach of dialogue and mutual tolerance" can ensure the improvement of circumstances in Kosovo and the stability of the entire region.
Federal Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic rebuffed the idea of Kosovo independence, saying instead that reforms in the province should take place within the framework of a Europeanised Serbia-Montenegro.
Serbia's top leadership is scheduled to meet tonight to discuss the situation in Kosovo. 
According to a report in the daily Blic, Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus will propose that the international community call a conference to discuss the province's final status.
