05/05/2005
(AFP, UN News Centre, International Atomic Energy Agency - 04/05/05)
About 60 countries and seven international organisations will be involved in an exercise simulating s nuclear accident in Romania next week, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) said Wednesday (4 May).
The two-day exercise, scheduled to begin on 11 May, will be conducted at the Cernavoda nuclear power plant, approximately 165km east of Bucharest. 
Its aim is to test national and international preparedness for a possible nuclear or radiological emergency, said the IAEA, which is co-ordinating the initiative.
Similar tests are conducted every few years as part of the international plan, called the Joint Radiation Emergency Management Plan, the agency said, adding that the Cernavoda exercise will focus "primarily on testing communication networks and assessing the technical implications".
Set up in 1957 as the world's "Atoms for Peace" organisation, the IAEA is part of the UN family. 
Headed by Dr Mohamed ElBaradei of Egypt, the 138-nation body serves as the world's foremost intergovernmental forum for scientific and technical co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear technology. 
It works with multiple partners across the world to promote safe, secure and peaceful nuclear technologies.
According to IAEA Deputy Director General Tomihiro Taniguchi, the tests will allow all participating states and bodies "to gain practical experience in implementing the critical elements of the emergency plans, including communications, co-ordination of activities and emergency response".
This exercise poses no risk to the public, Taniguchi added, noting that it would also give the Cernavoda plant an opportunity to test its own internal emergency plan.
The international organisations that will participate in the exercise include the UN World Health Organisation, the UN World Meteorological Organisation and the European Commission. 
NATO's Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Co-ordination Centre will take part as an observer.
The Cernavoda plant's 705-megawatt, Canadian-designed Unit 1 began operating in December 1996 and currently meets more than 10 per cent of Romania's electricity needs. 
A second unit with the same capacity, also of the so-called CANDU type, is under construction with completion expected in 2007. 
Romania's long-term plans envision the construction of three more nuclear reactors at the Cernavoda site. 
The Romanian plant is the only one in Eastern Europe that uses Western technology.
