06/04/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 06/04/05
Last month, the US Embassy published a scorecard which tracks more than ten cases being tried before Macedonian courts.
The purpose, the embassy says, is to "present a snapshot of the current status of each case".
Titled "High Profile Corruption/Criminal Cases in the Republic of Macedonia," it is available on the embassy's Web site.
According to outgoing US Ambassador Lawrence Butler, the document "puts emphasis on corruption scandals, and takes note of how long they are stuck in the judiciary with the complaisance of judges who regularly allow defendants and lawyers not to appear for hearings without being penalised".
"The scorecard will be updated depending on whether there are cases in the future that stand long pending a ruling," Butler said.
Some major cases included in the list are:
So far, the Novi Makedonija case holds the record for duration, with 28 months having passed without a verdict.
The defendants are former company director Nikola Tasev, former Economy Minister Besnik Fetai, and Dusko Avramski of the Privatisation Agency.
According the list, there have been six court appearances and six postponements in the case.
Some within the Macedonian judicial system have objected strongly to the list.
"We have our own bodies that are supposed to initiate a legal action for corruption," says Abdulselam Kanzovski, a member of the Republic Judicial Council, which is responsible for dismissal and appointment of judges.
"That is made on a requirement from the Public Prosecutor or the National Anti-Corruption Commission.
The reasons for delays in each case are listed.
We cannot call judges to account because not always the delayed cases result from their irresponsibility."
"We are not preparing a hit list of judges," says Catherine Shallow, a spokesperson for the US State Department European Bureau."The embassy in Skopje is working on a project for monitoring the cases of corruption and we are expecting that a product of the project will be the so-called scorecard that documents for how long those cases are stuck in the judiciary pending resolution," she told the Voice of America.
According to an explanation published on the US Embassy Web site, the information on the list comes from multiple, publicly available sources.
"The scorecard is not meant in all instances to be critical of prosecutors, defence attorneys, or judges," the statement says, adding that "in some instances, the presiding judge was recently assigned to the case after previous judges failed to handle it properly or were refused for various reasons.
The scorecard also is not intended to imply the guilt or innocence of the accused -- only the Macedonian judicial system can make that judgment."
A few cases originally listed were concluded soon after the release of the scorecard, including one involving former Ministry of Defence State Secretary Ljupco Popovski.
That could be a sign that the project is having an effect, analysts say.
