20/04/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 20/04/09
Turkey's local elections, held on March 29th, have shaken up the prospects for addressing Kurdish issues. 
The Democratic Society Party (DTP), widely seen as linked to the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), won almost all the major municipalities in the primarily Kurd-populated southeast.
The result was a major blow to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his Justice and Development Party (AKP), which has sought to build support among Kurds for its policies of moderate reform.
The DTP won mayoral positions in the symbolically important city of Diyarbakir, as well as in seven other cities and 50 towns in southeast Turkey -- an increase of four cities and 18 towns from the 2004 local elections.
Erdogan's party had hoped to win 100 municipalities in eastern and southeastern Turkey, giving the prime minister a stronger mandate for his reform programme while isolating and weakening the PKK.
AKP mobilised all its forces in pursuit of a victory. 
The party recently inaugurated the first Kurdish TV channel, via the public broadcaster TRT. 
State officials delivered prizes such as refrigerators and washing machines. 
Erdogan himself visited key cities in the region and promised increased investments, jobs and better social services.
The effort, which provoked considerable criticism from the opposition in Turkey, did not yield fruit. 
The party ended up losing 15% of the vote compared to its 2007 numbers, winning only four mayoral positions.
AKP leaders blamed the PKK. 
"It was not possible to carry out a successful campaign in regions where the terrorist PKK has threatened voters and party officials," Turkey's EU chief negotiator, Egemen Bagis, told reporters.
According to Milliyet columnist Taha Akyol, the result amounts to a "strong alarm signal". 
The identity politics of the DTP, its radical approach and the feeling of Kurds that they are under pressure were important factors that led to the election results, Akoyol wrote, adding that the outcome will make it more difficult to reach a solution to the Kurdish problem in the near future.
DTP head Ahmet Turk, however, hailed the victory as a triumph of democracy and called on the AKP to change its approach.
"This is a warning for AKP's nationalist, authoritarian, one-party rule understanding. 
This is a warning for AKP, for its stalling on EU reforms, for its laying aside the debate on a new constitution and for its limited understanding of democracy, remembering democracy just for itself," Turk said.
The DTP wants radical changes to the Turkish state system -- including a new constitution that would recognise Kurdish autonomy -- and advocates general amnesty for the PKK militants.
Although the party is now on a more confident footing, most analysts do not expect it will win any major concessions from the AKP in the short term. 
To date, Erdogan has refused to consider appointing, or even holding a meeting with, any DTP member. 
Instead, he has blasted the party for refusing to acknowledge the PKK is a terrorist group and for not condemning its attacks.
Sedat Bozkurt, a senior journalist and Ankara bureau chief for Fox TV, says Erdogan's party fell into a political trap set by the DTP.
"To undermine Kurdish support for the AKP, leaders of the DTP adopted fiercer, radical rhetoric," Bozkurt told Southeast European Times. 
"They have made radical demands … leading to harsh rebuttals by Prime Minister Erdogan and AKP leaders. 
This tactic served well, again uniting Kurdish voters under the DTP."
According to Bozkurt, the AKP has to address the identity demands of Kurds if it hopes to regain their trust and votes.
Erdogan has long promised a new opening towards the southeast. 
During a key visit to Diyarbakir in 2005, he promised to recognise "the Kurdish reality", and even suggested a new definition of citizenship. 
However, renewed PKK violence in the following months stirred up outrage in Turkey and led to increased political pressure from nationalists.
For years, PKK terrorists have used the mountainous part of northern Iraq as their base for attacks against Turkey. 
The bloody insurgency has claimed almost 40,000 lives since 1984.
The DTP leadership is still far from condemning the terrorist group, and still places the burden of finding a peaceful solution on the Turkish government, rather than on the PKK.
Now, all eyes are turned towards a proposed International Kurdish Conference, scheduled for early May in the northern Iraqi city of Arbil. 
DTP is planning a meeting of all Kurdish groups from Turkey, Iraq, Syria and Iran, as well as representatives of the PKK. 
Local media have speculated about a possible announcement by the PKK of its conditions to lay down arms.
However, Akyol sees no quick end to PKK terrorism or any solution in the short term.
"What can decrease the ethnic tension in the long term is democratic reform policies that would reflect our respect for the Kurdish identity, as well as social integration policies that would strengthen our unity," he said. 
"But in order to achieve this goal, all of us, including the opposition CHP and MHP [need to] make an opening, for the sake of Turkey's future."
Complicating the situation further is the often tense relationship between Turkey's ruling party and the country's military, which sees itself as the guardian of the secular state. 
Secularists have clashed with Erodgan and his party over an alleged "Islamist" agenda, while the military has urged a tough line on Kurdish issues.
Turkey's top military commander this week expressed support for the expansion of cultural rights as long as this is done on the basis of Turkish citizenship.
Addressing the War Academy on Tuesday, General Ilker Basbug said problems such as unemployment and lack of opportunity made young Kurds susceptible to the PKK's lure, and that fighting terrorism required a "comprehensive strategy" and possible legal changes.
He ruled out, however, the idea of recognising Kurdish identity in a new constitution, stressing that Turkey is not an ethnicity-based state.
"Turkishness is a generic identity (supra-identity) referring to the all equal citizens of Turkey, regardless of their ethnic background," Basburg said.
