06/04/2005
(Blic - 06/04/05;
FT, BBC, UPI, AP, Reuters, Beta, Radio B92, FoNet - 05/04/05)
The head of Serbia's Security and Intelligence Agency (SIA), Rade Bulatovic, denied on Tuesday (5 April) that security services are helping former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic evade justice, saying the allegations -- made the previous day by a top Serbia-Montenegro official -- are "ridiculous".
"This is a very serious accusation, but it is not based on any evidence.
The evidence shows the contrary, absolutely," the Financial Times quoted Bulatovic as saying.
His comments came one day after the newspaper published an interview with Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, who said it was "only logical" that security services know where Mladic is.
"They know if he is in Serbia, and they know if he is not.
They are paid to know," Draskovic said.
"Without that kind of protection, without that kind of network, it would be impossible for Mladic to be invisible."
Mladic, along with wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, tops the list of war crimes suspects sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Mladic has been on the run since the end of the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina and is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia, though Belgrade officials have repeatedly denied this is the case.
Draskovic, whose party is a member of the Serbian coalition government led by Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, insisted that the SIA was in a position to arrest Mladic within hours, and should have apprehended him "yesterday".
Instead of arresting suspects wanted by the ICTY, Kostunica has been following a policy of persuading indictees to surrender voluntarily.
The latest to go to The Hague was retired General Sreten Lukic, whose transfer has been described as a "form of voluntary surrender".
He was the 13th indictee to be transferred since October, according to the Financial Times.
However, several others are still on the run, including Mladic and former Yugoslav Army Chief of Staff Nebojsa Pavkovic.
Full co-operation with The Hague court is a key condition for the country's Euro-Atlantic integration.
"I appreciate the positive move of General Lukic's transfer but at the same time we expect more work," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said this week.
"It's important that the current emerging trend does not stop suddenly in mid-April," he added.
The EU is scheduled to issue a feasibility study on Serbia-Montenegro's accession progress and decide on its basis on 12 April whether to open talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the country.
Pavkovic's transfer to The Hague by that date is considered crucial to receiving a positive assessment.
He disappeared recently, however, and Belgrade officials say they are unaware of his whereabouts.
On Tuesday, Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic said neither Pavkovic nor Mladic were hiding in army facilities.
"We check these facilities daily.
In the last couple of days we have checked claims that they were located in our facilities and came to the conclusion that these claims were incorrect," said the minister.
"The military security service knows where Pavkovic and Mladic are not hiding, but not where they are hiding.
If we did know, we would react in the proper fashion," Davinic added
