06/12/2004
By Seremb Gjergji for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 06/12/04
Kosovo's Parliament on Friday (3 December) approved the nomination of Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) leader Ramush Haradinaj as prime minister by a vote of 72 to 3. 
Members of the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK), which came in second in the parliamentary election, abstained.
"My government in the next term will be engaged in the realisation of the demands of the international community for the implementation of democratic standards in Kosovo," Haradinaj told MPs as he accepted the appointment. 
The formation of the new government follows a coalition deal struck nearly two weeks ago between the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), the winner of the province's general elections, and the much smaller AAK, which came in third.
The assembly also approved another term for President Ibrahim Rugova, the leader of the LDK. 
"I will defend the territorial integrity of Kosovo and work for the benefit of its people," he said.
The new government will likely represent Kosovo during negotiations aimed at resolving the province's final status. 
Those talks could begin in mid-2005 if sufficient progress is made in meeting UN benchmarks on governance, economic reforms and human rights.
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen addressed the assembly after the vote. 
"As members of the highest representative and legislative body of the Provisional Institutions of Self Government, you have a very important responsibility not only to your voters, whose trust in you must now be honoured, but also to Kosovo as a whole," Jessen-Petersen said. 
"You have the responsibility to make informed and conscientious decisions that are in the interests of all the people of Kosovo."
"The next 12 months will be crucial in determining the future of Kosovo. 
The work of the assembly, the government coalition, as well as the parliamentary opposition, will determine to a large extent whether Kosovo succeeds or fails. 
Failure, however, is not an option. 
Only hard work, real action, and progress in the interest of Kosovo will count," Jessen-Petersen said.
Ten out of 120 seats of the assembly are reserved for Kosovo Serbs, but only two attended Friday's session. 
Eight representatives of the Serb Civic Initiative for Kosovo and Metohija, led by Oliver Ivanovic, did not attend.
UNMIK on Sunday rejected calls from Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica for an annulment of Haradinaj's appointment, saying such a move would be undemocratic. 
Meanwhile, Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic said, "Everyone should be given a chance to move things ahead," adding that he would not reject Haradinaj as prime minister.
