05/04/2005
By Robert Herschbach for Southeast European Times – 05/04/05
Bulgaria, Croatia, and Serbia-Montenegro are among 12 countries that will receive assistance in the fight against human trafficking under a joint US-Swedish initiative announced by the US State Department last week.
The US and Swedish governments will each contribute $330,000 to the Prevention Project, which is being spearheaded by two organisations, the Coalition Against Trafficking in Women (CATW), and the European Women's Lobby.
"This project is unique in that both governments, which have very different policies on many other issues, have a common commitment to fight trafficking for sexual exploitation by addressing violence against women, demand and the links between prostitution and trafficking," CATW director Janice G. Raymond told SE Times.
News of the initiative came ahead of a new report, released jointly by the OSCE, UNICEF and the UNHCR, which warns that trafficking in SEE countries is on the rise.
"Preventive strategies in the fight against trafficking are few and far between," OSCE Special Representative Helga Konrad said at a news conference announcing the report, which covers 2003 and the first four months of 2004.
"The problem is not diminishing … but is going more underground.
For example, you no longer find the women victims only in brothels but also in private apartments and clubs," she said.
Poverty, unemployment and domestic violence are key factors luring people to flee their countries for what they hope will be a better life abroad, experts say.
Instead, many end up in conditions of virtual slavery, threatened with physical violence and unable to obtain help.
Bulgaria, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro are located in a pivotal zone between poorer countries to the east and the affluent nations of the EU, and function as transit points for women being trafficked elsewhere.
In addition, Bulgaria and Croatia have a more limited role as destination countries, with women being channeled to resort areas during the tourist season, while Serbia-Montenegro is also a source country.
All three nations have taken steps to address trafficking, though with mixed results, according to the US State Department Trafficking in Persons Report for 2004.
Bulgaria has passed key legislation criminalising trafficking and providing for victim assistance, but corruption has impeded law enforcement efforts, the report said.
Croatia succeeded in achieving its first trafficking-related criminal conviction and has taken other steps, including police training, allocation of funds for a victims' shelter, and creation of a national hotline.
But law enforcement remains erratic and resources scarce, and the country's laws -- while covering crimes such as abduction and rape -- do not explicitly prohibit trafficking.
Anti-trafficking efforts in Serbia have run into continuing problems with inadequate witness protection and police corruption, and penalties remain light, the State Department found.
Montenegro, meanwhile, was the site of a major scandal in 2004 involving allegations of high-level complicity in the sex trade.
In all three countries, much of the impetus for addressing the problem comes not from governments but from NGOs, such as Belgrade-based Anti Sex Trafficking Action (ASTRA).
"The situation on trafficking, at least in Serbia, is changing very fast," the organisation's co-ordinators, Marija Andjelkovic and Tamara Vukasovic, said in an e-mail to SE Times.
"Traffickers are changing their routes, modus operandi and target groups very fast." "
What ASTRA has noticed, through direct work with victims, is that more and more children are identified as victims of trafficking.
In 2003, from the whole number of victims, we had 10 per cent of children under 18, and in 2004 that percentage rose to 56 per cent.
The greater number of victims are disabled people (physically and mentally) and children from institutions, like foster homes and juvenile centres.
The Internet has become the means of recruitment more often," said Andjelkovic and Vukasovic
