04/03/2005
(Blic - 04/03/05;
Radio B92, Tanjug, RFE/RL - 03/03/05;
Beta - 01/03/05)
The extradition of former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic remains a major precondition for Serbia-Montenegro's Euro-Atlantic integration, Western officials have warned.
The country is seeking admission into the Alliance's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme, a first step towards eventual full-fledged NATO membership.
Prospects for joining the PfP will become realistic only after "the well-known individuals, General Ratko Mladic in the first place, come to their senses and turn themselves in" to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Norwegian Ambassador to Belgrade Hans Ola Urstad said in an interview with the Serbian daily Blic, published on Friday (4 March).
Norway will be in charge of co-ordinating NATO's relations with Serbia-Montenegro during the next two years.
On Thursday, Belgrade-based Radio B92 reported that the Serbian government has decided to focus again on the PfP bid.
Euro-Atlantic integration has been a top foreign policy goal for all Serbian governments since the overthrow of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's regime in October 2000.
Last year, however, NATO put the Balkan country's application for PfP admission on hold, citing lack of co-operation with the ICTY, and particularly its failure to arrest and hand over key war crimes indictees such as Mladic.
His extradition to The Hague is also a condition for Serbia-Montenegro's progress towards EU accession.
More than 15 people wanted by the ICTY for their alleged involvement in war crimes remain at large.
According to chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte, at least a dozen of them are in Serbia.
She has repeatedly insisted that Mladic is hiding there, protected by the Serbian military.
Authorities in Belgrade have denied the claim.
However, reports this week quoted the UN prosecutor as saying "in the past few days the Serbian government has finally decided to agree with that fact" that Mladic is in Serbia, acknowledging that lack of political will is the main factor preventing his capture.
"If the Serbian government decided that it truly wanted to arrest Mladic, it would be able to do so in a matter of hours," the prosecutor said.
Together with Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan Karadzic and Croatian retired General Ante Gotovina, Mladic is one of the ICTY's three most-wanted indictees.
Echoing del Ponte's words, a NATO official indicated Thursday that Mladic's extradition to The Hague would remove the main hurdle on Serbia-Montenegro's path to PfP membership.
"When this is done and General Mladic finds his way to The Hague, the entry of Serbia-Montenegro [into the PfP] will only be a matter of time," Radio B92 quoted George Kacirdakis as saying.
"It is only a matter of the Serbian government having enough political desire to make the arrest."
Kacirdakis refuted Serbian government statements claiming that the information they have been given about Mladic's whereabouts has turned out to be unverifiable or amounted to false leads.
"Your government," the NATO official told Radio B92, "receives information regarding Mladic being hidden somewhere, and then they are afraid that his arrest might bring unrest to the country, then they allow him enough time to escape to a new location.
Then they go to the location and say:
'See, he is not here
