04/03/2005
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 04/03/05
Romanian President Traian Basescu has cited bad governance associated with corruption as one of five major threats to national security -- alongside international terrorism, proliferation of WMDs, crisis situations and frozen conflicts in Romania's vicinity, and totalitarian regimes that support terrorism. 
The government plans to present a new national security strategy, designed to address these threats, within the next 30 days.
The Supreme Council held its first session under Basescu's presidency on Monday (28 February). 
Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, cabinet members, defence officials, the heads of the secret services, the general prosecutor and the anti-corruption prosecutor, also attended the meeting.
"Romania will no longer accept being labeled a corrupt country," Basescu told reporters afterwards, referring to criticism by some within the EU. 
Markus Ferber, leader of the German Christian-Social Union group in the European Parliament, recently suggested Romania's accession should be put off until 2009 because of what he described as a widespread problem.
Western politicians should "give names when they speak about corruption" in the country, Basescu said, adding that he has discussed the issue with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn.
During visits to Bucharest, Rehn and European Parliament President Josep Borrell agreed with Basescu that it is unfair to generalise about corruption. 
However, they said it is the job of Romanian judicial authorities to identify those involved, not Europe's.
"The European Parliament is neither a private detective agency, nor a police force. 
It signals a situation and warns that these practices must be confronted and eradicated," Borrell said.
Basescu acknowledged that some Romanian officials have broken rules governing major acquisition contracts, pledging those involved would be held responsible. 
However, he also insisted that, "In some cases, companies having their head-offices in the EU countries have shown the same behaviour."
The administration has said it will investigate the former Socialist cabinet's award of major contracts to firms such as European Aeronautic Defence and Space (EADS), Vinci and Bechtel, without a public tender.
"The new government has not signed a single contract without a tender or by favouring companies supported by some politicians," said Basescu. 
However, in February 2005, Tariceanu said he would renegotiate a nearly 1 billion-euro contract with EADS on border security. 
No tender took place in 2004 when this contract was signed.
