05/11/2004
(Office of the High Representative - 05/11/04; AFP, Fena 04/11/04)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Prime Minister Adnan Terzic submitted his resignation to the country's tripartite presidency on Friday (5 November), citing parliament's decision to adopt a value-added tax (VAT) law that provides for two different tax rates. 
Terzic and the Council of Ministers had supported a single rate.
"I have asked the BiH presidency to discharge me from the prime minister's position, as I am not ready to accept responsibility for leading further the reform process, given the parliamentary majority's stance towards the Council of Ministers," Terzic told the BiH daily Dnevni Avaz.
On Thursday, lawmakers in the House of Representatives of the BiH Parliamentary Assembly passed legislation that establishes differentiated VAT rates of zero and 17 per cent for various goods. 
It envisions a zero rate for all types of bread, milk and diary products, cooking oils and margarine, as well as for books, textbooks, newspapers and magazines. 
A 17 per cent VAT would be levied on all other products.
Along with the government, the IMF and the Office of the High Representative (OHR) backed a single-rate scheme.
"The Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority, the institution that will administer the VAT, consulted with BiH parliamentary and government representatives and with BiH and international economists and concluded that the system that would suit this country best would operate at a single rate," Principal Deputy High Representative Donald Hays said in September.
"This minimises bureaucracy, minimises opportunities for fraud and tax evasion; and minimises the complications that businesspeople face when they pay VAT. 
It also maximises the revenues that the governments will receive and will thus help them implement better quality social programmes," Hays added.
Lawmakers "are not ready to support radical reforms as suggested by the Council of Ministers (CoM)," Terzic said following the parliamentary vote. 
He said other important legislation drawn up in line with European standards had also been altered by parliament, including laws on public radio and television.
"I simply cannot understand why delegates from the parliamentary majority in many cases revise what has been decided on through consensus in the CoM," the prime minister noted, stressing that his cabinet comprised the leaders of three parties. 
Terzic is vice president of the Party of Democratic Action.
The BiH presidency confirmed it had received Terzic's letter of resignation, but said it considered the prime minister's move an offer, rather than a final decision. 
Presidential adviser Drago Vukovic said the issue would be discussed on Monday afternoon as one member of the presidency -- Dragan Covic -- is currently out of the country.
