05/04/2005
(Cyprus Mail - 05/04/05; AFP, Xinhua, Cyprus News Agency - 04/04/05)
Greek Cypriot authorities suggested Monday (4 April) that they would not reveal their proposals for changes to the UN peace plan for Cyprus, as UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has requested.
"We cannot accept the demand to submit written and detailed changes to the Annan plan because we do not know how the secretary general intends to handle this," the AFP quoted Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister George Iacovou as saying Monday. 
"Would he give them to the Turkish Cypriots to consider or to reject?"
The minister's remarks came in response to a statement by US Cyprus envoy Laura Kennedy, expressing Washington's support for Annan's call to the Greek Cypriots to spell out the changes they are seeking.
The latest international effort to reunite Cyprus on the basis of a UN plan collapsed in April 2004, after two-thirds of the Greek Cypriots voted against the plan during parallel referenda held on the divided island. 
The majority of the Turkish Cypriots approved it. 
But only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the island joined the EU on 1 May, along with nine other Central and East European countries.
In recent months, the four main parties involved in the issue -- the Greek Cypriots, the Turkish Cypriots, Greece and Turkey -- have been pushing for the resumption of peace talks. 
Last week, Iacovou indicated that initial consultations could begin following the 17 April presidential election in the island's Turkish-run north.
Annan, however, has made it clear that he would not initiate a new round of talks if he saw little chance for success. 
He has asked Nicosia to outline in writing its proposals for changes to the UN plan, which is expected to again form the basis of any new talks.
"He [Annan] is waiting to receive this," the UN chief's spokesman, Fred Eckhard said last week. 
"He wants to make sure that they are on firm ground before restarting negotiations. 
He doesn't want another failure."
Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos, who campaigned against the UN plan last year, has balked at making known the changes he wants, saying this would weaken his negotiating position. 
He has also suggested he wants Annan to play the role of a mediator this time around, rather than serving as an arbitrator, as before.
