05/04/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/04/05
Another Serb general indicted by the UN war crimes tribunal was transferred to The Hague court Monday (4 April). 
Sreten Lukic, 50, is a former Serb police chief in Kosovo facing charges in connection with the 1998-1999 conflict there. 
His transfer brings Belgrade a step closer to meeting its international obligations, but could pose political difficulties at home for the government of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
A government spokesman in Belgrade said Lukic's departure for the Netherlands was "a form of voluntary surrender," adding that authorities would offer guarantees needed for his provisional release before the start of his trial. 
But the suspect's lawyer, Sinisa Simic, said that his client had been sent to The Hague "against his will".
The Socialist Party of Serbia, still led by former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, supports Kostunica's minority cabinet. 
However, it has vowed to withdraw its backing if any citizen of Serbia-Montenegro were extradited.
Serbian Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic has denied that Lukic was arrested. 
"I will not take part in any politicisation by certain groups whose apparent interest is to create political problems for the state, rather than objectively observe facts," he said.
The case of another retired general wanted by The Hague, Nebojsa Pavkovic, could pose even more serious problems. 
Through his lawyer, Pavkovic has indictated that he does not intend to travel voluntarily to The Hague by 12 April, the date on which EU officials are to present their decision on a feasibility study for Serbia-Montenegro. 
That would put authorities in the position of either having to arrest him or face a serious blow to the country's prospects of joining the EU.
"It would be best if he surrendered, but if he does not, the law will have to be implemented strictly, said the chairman of the national council for co-operation with The Hague, Rasim Ljajic.
Ljajic is visiting The Hague Tuesday to ask chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte for support in obtaining a positive feasibility study. 
Del Ponte will submit an assessment of Serbia-Montenegro's co-operation with the tribunal to the European Commission. 
According to Ljajic, the feasibility study "depends on this report".
