04/02/2005
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times -- 04/02/05
Romanian President Traian Basescu met with British Prime Minister Tony Blair on Monday (31 January), Basescu's first visit to the West since taking office in December.
The decision to go to London was meant to send a deliberate "political signal", the AP quoted Basescu as saying.
During his campaign, he pledged to place a high priority on relations with the United States and Britain.
After the meeting, Basescu and Blair reaffirmed their commitment to developing the strategic partnership -- in place since 2003 -- between the two countries.
"The two leaders decided to work for a successful integration of Romania into the EU on 1 January 2007, on the basis of the implementation of Romania's negotiated commitments.
Prime Minister Blair expressed the UK's strong continuing support," read a statement released after the meeting.
Blair was one of the most important supporters of Romania's integration into the EU.
He played a vital role in1999 when the European Council at Helsinki decided to open accession negotiations with Bucharest.
The two leaders "stressed the importance of improving the business climate in Romania, especially through a far-reaching and impartial campaign to combat corruption at all levels".
Britain has offered to support anti-corruption efforts by sending British government advisers to work with the Romanian government.
In the foreign policy arena, they discussed Romania's strategic importance at the eastern border of NATO and agreed to "work closely together to include the issue of the Greater Black Sea region on the Euro-Atlantic agenda".
Basescu has repeatedly said that developing a strategy for integrating the region is one of his policy priorities, despite criticism from political opponents who say it is a diversion from Romania's primary foreign policy goal of EU accession.
Basescu and Blair agreed on the need to expand democracy, stability, security and prosperity beyond the EU's future, and said they would join their efforts with those of other current and potential EU member states to support implementation of the EU's Action Plans in Moldova and Ukraine.
They pledged to help promote stability, security and further European integration in the Western Balkans.
The Romanian president also reaffirmed his country's commitment to maintaining its 730 troops in Iraq "until the new Iraqi institutions would be able to efficiently rule the country and to assure a peaceful climate in order to begin a sound reconstruction process"
