04/02/2005
(The Independent - 04/02/05;
EU, Reuters, HINA, FENA - 03/02/04)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro are still not co-operating fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Carla del Ponte said Thursday (3 February).
The UN tribunal's chief prosecutor, who visited the Balkans earlier this week, was in Brussels to brief EU officials about the latest developments in relations between the former Yugoslav republics and the tribunal.
This is ahead of a written report she is expected to submit later this month.
The EU has made clear that the three countries' progress towards EU integration hinges on their full co-operation with the ICTY, including the handover of war crimes indictees.
Following last month's surrender of former Bosnian Serb deputy prison commander Savo Todovic and that of top Serbian General Vladimir Lazarevic, who arrived in The Hague on Thursday, another 17 indictees sought by the ICTY remain at large.
Among them are the tribunal's three most wanted:
former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, his military commander Ratko Mladic, and retired Croatian General Ante Gotovina.
"I once again urge leaders of those countries to provide firm and fair co-operation to the ICTY.
This is an issue of respecting common values and principles," EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said Thursday after talks with del Ponte.
The Union, he added, is to make important decisions on them soon, but only after it has seen the prosecutor's assessment.
Del Ponte met separately Thursday with the European Commission President José Manuel Barroso and briefed him on the situation.
Del Ponte's report will be particularly important for Croatia, which is scheduled to start accession talks with the Union on 17 March, provided Gotovina has been handed over to the tribunal by that time.
"We will listen to del Ponte before taking any decision," Solana said, adding that her advice would be "absolutely fundamental for the final decision" on whether to launch accession talks with Croatia.
"The government of Croatia is in a position to arrange the transfer to The Hague," the British daily Independent quoted the ICTY prosecutor as saying.
She and other Western officials have repeatedly criticised Croatian authorities for failing to put pressure on a network of supporters believed to be helping the fugitive evade justice.
Welcoming Tuesday's statement by Croatian President Stipe Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, who called on the police and all other relevant parties to make every effort to arrest Gotovina, del Ponte voiced hope that this would be done "very soon".
On Thursday, the Croatian government issued a statement saying that Mesic and Sanader were summoning the National Security Council to a meeting Friday afternoon to discuss further steps towards resolving the case.
In other news Thursday, Solana met with the top international envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, to discuss BiH's co-operation with the ICTY and other issues.
The EU foreign policy chief, according to a statement by his spokeswoman, Cristina Gallach, reminded the BiH authorities that inadequate co-operation with the tribunal is now the major obstacle hindering its progress towards the EU.
He also expressed hope that, following Todovic's surrender, other indictees would be transferred to The Hague without delay.
