04/05/2005
(Deutsche Welle, DPA, AFP, Reuters, Fena, The Centre for SouthEast European Studies, Office of the High Representative - 03/05/05)
Hailing Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) progress in post-conflict reforms, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder said Tuesday (3 May) that the EU should launch talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the country soon.
"In my opinion it would be justified that the European Commission (EC) decides to kick off negotiations," the German leader said after meeting BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic in Sarajevo. 
He also met with members of the BiH presidency, High Representative Paddy Ashdown and EUFOR Commander General David Leakey.
An EC team is due to arrive in BiH on 19 May to review the country's progress in meeting a set of 16 requirements spelled out in its feasibility study. 
A positive assessment would likely lead to a decision next month by the EU to open the SAA talks, seen as a first step towards eventual membership. 
BiH is the only country in the Balkans that has not yet been given the go-ahead on the road to EU accession.
Noting BiH's achievements in the areas of judicial and administrative reform over the past two years, Schroeder also praised the country for recent positive steps in the area of police reform, a key requirement set by the EU.
Last week, the leaders of 11 parliamentary parties reached an important agreement on the core principles of police restructuring in BiH and are expected to complete negotiations on a deal before the arrival of the EC working group.
Schroeder also welcomed recent efforts to fulfil another major requirement, full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
However, he noted, "There is more to be done."
Nine Bosnian Serb war crimes indictees have surrendered to the ICTY since January. 
But two of the UN tribunal's two most wanted indictees -- wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic -- remain at large. 
BiH's entry into the EU would be unimaginable until Karadzic and Mladic are brought to justice, Germany's Deutsche Welle commented.
"The association with Europe will be a lengthy process but important because it should clearly show that it makes sense and that it is the only way forward," Schroeder said Tuesday. 
He also offered German expert assistance in drafting BiH's new constitution and economic reforms.
Welcoming Schroeder's strong backing for BiH's EU bid, Terzic pledged that his country would work actively to become a leader in securing stability in the Balkans.
"This is the strongest support for what we have done so far and an enormous stimulus for the remaining reforms," Reuters quoted Terzic as saying.
