04/05/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 04/05/05
As the momentum builds towards the launch of talks on Kosovo's final status, Serbian political figures are expressing different views on the future of the province. 
Former Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Affairs Minister Goran Svilanovic, a member of the International Commission for the Balkans, recently said it would be best for the whole region if Kosovo achieves independence with the Commission's report forseeing "strong guarantees of Serb and other minority rights," Svilanovic said.
Backing independence, however, remains a controversial stance within Serbia, and Svilanovic quickly came under attack by other political figures and the media. 
Serbian President Boris Tadic declared that while a return to Serbian rule in Kosovo was out of the question, Belgrade would continue to oppose outright independence.
"That would raise instability in the region," Tadic said, including neighbouring countries.
Certainly, a vigorous discussion is under way. 
But according to one analyst, Belgrade University political science professor Aleksandar Mitic, Serbian leaders have yet to formulate a clear platform or come up with arguments to support their position, opting instead to repeat the slogan "no independence!" A similar situation exists in Pristina, says Kosovo Albanian political leader Veton Suroi, except that the stance is reversed. 
"Our negotiating platform is not particularly brilliant -- it begins with independence and ends with independence. 
But in between not many premises have been formulated," Suroi told Radio B92 last month.
Despite their seemingly irreconcilable positions on independence, however, both sides do have areas of agreement. 
They agree, for example, that the present status quo cannot be maintained much longer, and that minority rights is a crucial issue. 
Furthermore, Serbs and Kosovo Albanians alike are looking ahead to a future within the EU.
In a recent interview with a Kosovo television station, UNMIK head Soeren Jessen-Petersen said he believes talks on Kosovo's final status could begin at the end of September or early October, and will involve Kosovo Albanian representatives, their Serbian counterparts and an international presence. 
Three principles will form the basis for discussion -- no return to the pre-March 1999 situation, no division of Kosovo, and no unification with a neighbouring territory.
"What is clear is that Belgrade and Pristina will be the most important and most active participants. 
But nobody expects Belgrade and Pristina to agree on their own. 
An international presence in the talks is necessary. 
This presence is still being discussed, but the final decision remains the UN Security Council's responsibility. 
It will adopt a resolution that will define the final status of Kosovo," Jessen-Petersen told Koha Vision TV on 27 April.
