03/02/2005
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 03/02/05
In the wake of last year's EU progress report on Turkey, the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has reopened a long-standing debate on the country's political structure, calling for the current parliamentary system to be replaced by a US-style presidential system.
Such a change would help bring political stability to Turkey, in turn allowing EU accession targets to be met, Justice Minister Cemil Cicek told lawmakers last month. 
According to Erdogan and other leaders of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), the current 75-year-old system amounts to an inefficient and bureaucratic oligarchy that should be scrapped.
The idea is not new. 
In 1989, during the presidency of Turgut Ozal, it was discussed but eventually rejected on the grounds that Turkey was not ready for a US-style system. 
Critics of the new proposal -- including some AKP deputies -- say Turkey must first strengthen its judicial system. 
Without such reforms, they argue, a presidential system would undermine democracy, concentrating too much power in one branch of government and paving the way for authoritarian rule.
The main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) has blasted the plan as an attempt by international groups to shape Turkish politics. 
Meanwhile, the head of the Turkish Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association, Omer Sabanci, has said that a presidential system is not suitable for the country, calling on the government to strengthen the existing parliamentary system instead.
The earliest a presidential system could be adopted would be April 2007, when the term of current President Ahmet Necdet Sezer ends. 
Erdogan is seen as a possible candidate to replace Sezer, regardless of which system is in place by then.
Meanwhile, Turkey is also considering an EU proposal that the electoral threshold be decreased from 10 per cent to 5 per cent, to increase the number of minorities represented. 
During the November 2002 elections, many parties failed to meet the existing threshold.
The AKP won those elections, receiving 35 per cent of the vote and absorbing some of the votes from parties that fell short of the 10 per cent margin. 
So far, the government has acknowledged that better representation is needed, but resists lowering the threshold.
"If we keep a parliamentary system, the electoral threshold should be preserved," Cicek said. 
"Another formula can be found for representation of political parties, which could not have seats at the parliament," he added, arguing that a lower threshold would divide the parliament and endanger stability.
At least nine parties would likely gain seats under the change, leading to the emergence of coalitions and blocs, analysts say.
