03/12/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 03/12/04
A ceremony held Thursday (2 December) at Camp Butmir in Sarajevo officially marked the handover of the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) from NATO's SFOR to the EU's EUFOR, as well as the opening of a permanent NATO Headquarters in Sarajevo (NHQSa).
US Army Brigadier General Steven Schook -- the last commander of SFOR and the first commander of NHQSa -- covered the SFOR flag and uncovered the NATO flag as the first EUFOR commander, British Royal Army Major General David Leakey, uncovered the EU flag. 
The BiH Armed Forces Honour Unit took part in the ceremony, making its first official public appearance.
The ceremony was attended by dignitaries from BiH, NATO and the EU, including NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and EU security chief Javier Solana. 
Both said that SFOR had fulfilled its Dayton Agreement task of ensuring a safe and secure environment in BiH.
At the press conference following the ceremony, Solana said BiH would eventually join EU institutions. 
When that will happen, he added, depends on the people of BiH. 
"Today the EU assumed a new responsibility in your country ... 
that will be done with the same spirit and with the same efficiency as our predecessors from NATO," Solana said. 
"We gather here to look to the future but without forgetting the lessons of the past."
"Today is truly a day for celebration -- for BiH, and also for the wider international community," de Hoop Scheffer said. 
He added that the country has made significant progress
NATO's longest-running peacekeeping mission lasted nine years and included more than 500,000 troops from 43 countries. 
The force has been assisting the BiH authorities with disarmament, the destruction of illegal weapons, and the hunt for war crimes indictees.
With 150 officers in Camp Butmir, the NHQSa will continue to support BiH defence reforms and undertake operational supporting tasks, including counterterrorism activities and the detention of persons wanted by UN war crimes tribunal.
EUFOR's mission, code-named Althea, will include 7,000 troops from 33 countries, of which 22 are EU member states. 
It will have the same mandate as SFOR. 
Lord Paddy Ashdown, whose duties as international community high representative are being transferred to the post of EU Special Representative in BiH, will be the political head of the EU's engagement in BiH. 
EUFOR's primary responsibility will be to ensure a secure environment. 
Its peacekeepers will support BiH authorities in countering organised crime and detaining war crimes indictees.
Chairman of the BiH presidency Borislav Paravac expressed his gratitude to NATO troops and his support for EU forces. 
He said their help is necessary given the country's effort to join Euro-Atlantic institutions.
