03/03/2005
(Reuters - 03/03/05; AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, VOA, CNN, The Scotsman, Radio B92 - 02/03/05; ICTY - 25/02/05)
Former top Serbian Army General Momcilo Perisic said late Wednesday (2 March) that he would surrender to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) next week. 
He is expected to leave for The Hague on Monday.
The ICTY has not yet revealed the charges he faces. 
However, Serbian media are linking his indictment to the shelling of the Croat coastal town of Zadar in 1991, for which the neighbouring country sentenced him in absentia to 20 years in prison.
The indictment is also believed to cover the 1992 shelling of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) western town of Mostar by troops under the general's command.
Perisic, 60, was Yugoslav Army Chief of Staff from 1993 until 1998, when former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic dismissed him for opposing Belgrade's policy in Kosovo. 
He then founded a political party and joined the opposition forces which toppled the Milosevic regime in October 2000, bringing a democratic government to power.
Perisic served as deputy prime minister until March 2002, when late Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic asked him to resign following a brief detention for suspected espionage. 
The general, who was also a member of the federal legislature at the time, claimed parliamentary immunity from prosecution and has never been indicted over the spying allegations.
Perisic's expected surrender on Monday would make him the fourth ICTY indictee to go voluntarily to The Hague in less than four weeks, and the sixth in five months. 
According to Reuters, another recently indicted war crimes suspect, former Bosnian Serb intelligence and security commander Zdravko Tolimir, is also likely to surrender soon. 
Former Serbian Police General Sreten Lukic, who has been indicted over the Kosovo conflict, is also reportedly considering whether to take the step.
A former aide of wartime Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, Tolimir faces a joint indictment with two other former Bosnian Serb generals, Milan Gvero and Radivoje Miletic, who surrendered to The Hague on Monday. 
The three have been indicted over their alleged involvement in war crimes committed during the BiH conflict, particularly the Srebrenica massacre.
In his first appearance before The Hague court on Wednesday, Gvero pleaded innocent to the charges pressed against him. 
Miletic invoked his right not to enter a plea.
The surrenders come amid mounting international pressure on the Serbian authorities to arrest and hand over all indicted war crimes suspects still at large, including Mladic and former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic. 
Instead of arresting indictees, the government of Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has been trying to persuade them to surrender through negotiations.
The surrenders come ahead of an EU Feasibility Study that could eventually allow Serbia to build closer ties with the Union. 
Brussels is due to announce the results of the assessment towards the end of this month.
