03/02/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 03/02/05
Goran Hadzic, the former president of a breakaway Serbian entity in Croatia during the war in the former Yugoslavia, still evades justice.
Hadzic was charged with 14 counts of violations of the laws or customs of war by The Hague on 13 July 2004.
In the three days before the indictment was made public on 16 July, Hadzic fled his home in Novi Sad, and remains a fugitive.
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte has accused Serbian authorities of warning Hadzic that he was about to be arrested.
Rasim Ljajic, head of the Serbia-Montenegro Committee for Co-operation with The Hague Tribunal, says state officials haven't had contact with Hadzic since September 2004.
At that time, Ljajic said, they were in touch with Hadzic's family and there were some indications that Hadzic might surrender, but nothing happened.
Ljajic said contact with the family no longer exists -- and the Serbian government has no information on whether Hadzic remains in the country.
Local media have speculated that he may be hiding out in an Orthodox monastery in Irig in the mountains of Fruska Gora, or in his apartment in Bijela -- near the Montenegrin coastal town of Herceg Novi -- but police there say they have not found him.
According to The Hague indictment, Hadzic was engaged in a joint criminal enterprise with a number of other indictees, including former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, Serbian Radical Party leader Vojislav Seselj, former chief of Serbian State Security Jovica Stanisic, Red Berets founder Franko Simatovic, former chief of Serbian Public Security Radovan Stojicic, and paramilitary gang leader Zeljko "Arkan" Raznatovic.
Although he isn't among the most famous Hague indictees, the charges against Hadzic are grave.
Thousands of Croat and other non-Serb civilians were murdered, tortured, and beaten in the breakaway Republika Srpska Krajina.
Hadzic allegedly participated in the creation, organisation, financing and direction of the entity's police and defence forces, and is reported to have personally committed some of the crimes.
Amid growing domestic and international pressure to co-operate with The Hague, his whereabouts are again becoming the subject of heated discussion in Serbia.
