23/02/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -23/02/09
Disarray in the global financial markets is being felt keenly in the Balkans. 
The crisis has forced the postponement of many big financial projects, and a number of companies announced that they will have to start laying off employees. 
Vital economic sectors such as tourism have been hit hard. 
Countries that depend heavily on reimbursements from abroad have seen those funds diminish.
Political leaders face the twin challenge of reassuring public anxiety while taking steps to cushion the economic blows. 
Across the region, governments have adopted anti-crisis plans that should help the fragile economies survive.
For weeks, the Croatian public has been amused by official efforts aimed at analyzing whether or not the country is in a recession. 
All laughter has ceased now that the statistics are in which show the deadening effect on tourism. 
Preliminary bookings for the summer have slid 10% and could decrease by up to 30%, analysts say.
Economy Institute experts have submitted a rescue plan for the government's review. 
The plan includes five measures for immediate implementation: keeping the budget deficit under 450m euros; refusing to abandon national infrastructure projects subsidised by foreign investment; increasing exports while cutting imports; preserving the currency's exchange rate; and protecting the most vulnerable members of the population -- those who lost their jobs or survive on financial aid coming from the state -- from being affected.
To date, there are no estimates on how many people might lose their jobs and no identification of which industries or companies could go bankrupt because of the crisis.
Other countries in the region have adopted their own plans for staving off hardship. 
The Serbian government adopted measures late last month envisioning a 1.3-billion-euro investment to increase production and export growth this year. 
The government has asked the European Commission for 400m euros in macroeconomic assistance and the World Bank for 235m euros to bolster its budget. 
The country is already sitting on a 407m-euro standby loan from the IMF.
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic said the authorities will set priorities and mark the economic sectors that will receive the emergency funds. 
The National Bank of Serbia will define criteria for the selection of commercial banks that will distribute the loans.
The first loans to individual companies -- Belgrade is aiding exporters in an effort to reduce its trade deficit -- will go out this month, and the government's priority will be to retain the level of employment in Serbia and preserve the dinar's stability. 
The government has also set aside about 85m euros to halve the interest on the loans to corporations and to citizens.
The government has decided to annul taxes on bank savings in 2009 in an effort to encourage citizens to invest their money in banks and not withdraw their current deposits.
According to government projections, economic growth this year is to be around 3.5%, but as of last week, the economy has seen annualised growth of only around 1.5%, the central bank chief said.
Across the region, borrowing money to avoid further sinking into the crisis is not an uncommon strategy. 
For example, the Montenegrin government plans to borrow 44m euros from the First Bank of Montenegro to bolster the country's aluminum smelter. 
A credit line of between 8m and 10m euros will be extended. 
Plant employees are to receive tax cut, while tarifs will be reduced for imported goods that the plant needs. 
The smelter provides almost 50% of Montenegro's exports and has around 4,000 employees -- about 0.6% of the country's population.
The government is also considering how to help stabilise the tourism sector. 
Hotel owners have asked the government to persuade banks to postpone payments on credit lines and to decrease the VAT from 17 to 7%. 
Meanwhile, companies want the national airline company, Montenegro Airlines, to decrease its fares.
Other countries are focusing on the domestic front. 
The Romanian government passed a plan that calls for, among other things, allocating 20% of the country's budget to finance massive public investments in infrastructure -- transport, environment, healthcare, education, "thermal rehabilitation" (application of external insulation) to apartment buildings, and roads -- the main sector that will create jobs and ensure a certain degree of economic growth.
Other measures of the "Decalogue plan" include tax exemptions for reinvested profit, the capitalisation of CEC Bank and Exim Bank, measures meant to sustain small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), promotion of exports and the inclusion of state institutions and agencies' revenue in the budget.
Romania experienced record economic growth two years in a row, but now several major multinational companies have announced plans to relocate their Romania-based factories elsewhere and countless SMEs are going bankrupt. 
Though optimistic in the beginning about the scale of unemployment, authorities are approaching the statistics more carefully now. 
They now fear unemployment will reach 5.5% in 2009, as opposed to 4.5% in December 2008. 
Social unrest looms as the government -- which took office just two months ago -- shrinks from observing its electoral promises on salary raises for fear of wrecking the precarious state budget.
Romania, like its neighbour Bulgaria, is a member state of the EU. 
Other Balkan states, however, face the added worry that the crisis could impact their accession hopes. 
That could happen in two ways: by affecting the enlargement process itself, and by undermining the countries' efforts to meet the criteria. 
Economic disarray not only impedes growth, but could undermine hard-won political stability. 
Still, despite the worries, there is room for optimism. 
Governments -- and voters -- hope the steps being taken will keep the region on track and the long-term goals in sight.
Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade, Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest and Nedjeljko Rudovic in Podgorica contributed to this report.
