03/05/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 03/05/05
EUFOR has launched a joint operation with local authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to counter some elements of border-related organised crime. 
The peacekeeping force's commander, Major General David Leakey, announced on 15 April in Sarajevo that his troops have mounted an operation against smugglers and those who destroy forests in BiH.
"This week, EUFOR began an operation together with local law enforcement agencies, the Indirect Tax Authority, the State Border Service, the police and other government agencies to tackle organised crime," Leakey said. 
"Amongst other objectives, the operation is targeted against people who smuggle goods across the borders and those who destroy Bosnian forests illegally, so they can line their own pockets instead of generating revenue for investing in education, health and infrastructure for the good of BiH citizens."
The announcement came at a EUFOR helicopter demonstration, organised for the media at Camp Butmir. 
Ten transport and utility helicopters from Belgium, Italy, Romania and the United Kingdom performed basic assault manoeuvres and disembarked soldiers of Italy's 3rd Alpini Regiment. 
The soldiers were deployed to BiH a week before, as part of the "over-the-horizon" reserve forces, moving vehicles, equipment and weapons from Italy within just a few days. 
The manoeuvres were the second rehearsal that EUFOR conducted this year. 
An earlier one involved four battalions whose command teams came to conduct familiarisation and planning as a contingency in case they should be required on short notice.
"EUFOR has 23 helicopters, which can quickly transport up to a battalion in one lift," said Leakey. 
"These helicopters also have a wider utility than just transport: most of them have a variety of high technology surveillance devices; they can operate by day and night and, of course, many mount weapons as well. 
They are not just an air taxi for troops or an air ambulance."
Leakey said some of the EUFOR helicopters fly near the BiH border to provide video images of different organised crime activities. 
Most of the EUFOR operations are carried out in close conjunction with local law enforcement agencies.
"Organised crime and corruption is a problem which affects every person in this country," said Leakey. 
"Criminal networks and their parallel structures undermine the stability, confidence, growth and prosperity of BiH. 
They risk jeopardising this country's progress towards integration with Europe."
He also cited the role these networks have played in preventing alleged war criminals from being brought to justice, noting that BiH will not be able to enjoy the benefits of EU and NATO membership until there is full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. 
"Full co-operation means all indicted war criminals are delivered to The Hague, including Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic," Leakey said.
