02/11/2004
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens – 02/11/04
With plans to open as many as 100 branches in the region by the end of 2005, Greek banks have made boosting their presence in the Balkans the cornerstone of their international strategic development activities. 
All major expansions in Western Europe and Asia are being halted to focus on neighbouring countries.
The change was announced by the president of the National Bank of Greece (NBG), Takis Arapoglou, whose firm has decided to shut down its branches in Paris, Frankfurt and Amsterdam on the grounds that they no longer can compete with local banks. 
NBG now plans to open 32 new branches in the Balkans.
Meanwhile, the Commercial Bank of Greece has decided to limit its presence in Germany and England, while withdrawing altogether from Georgia and Armenia. 
It has already proceeded to shut down its department stores, trim staff and assign a control company to find buyers for its Asian branches. 
At the same time, the bank's strategic plans call for a dynamic expansion in the Balkan countries.
One of Greece's three largest private banking groups, EFG Eurobank Ergasias, is also expanding in the Balkans, while investing in rehabilitation and modernisation of local banks. 
The region is attractive because it offers an economic growth rate of higher than 5 per cent annually, while Bulgaria and Romania's expected admission into the EU in 2007 has provided special opportunities.
The largest five Greek banks started developing their network in the region by purchasing local banks during the 1990's. 
Today they enjoy an aggregate share of about 20 per cent in Bulgaria, 25 per cent in Macedonia, and 10 per cent in Albania, while continuing to expand their presence, mainly through independent development.
In general, Greek banks constitute the largest source of foreign investment in the Balkans when it comes to the financial and banking sector, having invested approximately 1 billion euros so far. 
Over time, they have turned to retail banking, which has seen especially rapid development during the past couple of years. 
In many markets, they are pioneers in offering new products and services.
