02/11/2004
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 02/11/04
Only 2 per cent of Romanian meat and milk industry companies would be allowed to operate in the EU under current regulations, officials say.
While the country is working to adapt, only 10 per cent of factories are likely to be in compliance by 1 January 2007 -- the target date for full EU membership.
"Many local producers that are not working according to European standards will be forced out of the market in 2007", says Liviu Harbuz, president of the National Sanitary Veterinary Authority, estimating that 56 out of 2,170 firms presently meet the Union's standards.
By 2007, Harbuz adds, that figure will reach about 200.
"It's true many producers will benefit from a derogation until 2010, but I doubt this will change things radically.
They simply don't have the money to modernise their companies in order to be allowed to sell on the EU market", Harbuz says.
EU representatives, meanwhile, have indicated they are aware of the problem.
During a visit to Romania, EU Commissioner for Agriculture Franz Fischler called for "substantial efforts" to modernise Romanian agriculture.
Mihai Visan, the executive manager of the Romanian Meat Association, believes that not all factories will desire to sell on the EU market.
"We are working with raw materials that are more expensive than in the EU, so we won't have too many chances to export there," the daily Curierul National quoted him as saying.
Small producers don't seem especially worried.
"To be honest, I don't care right now about what's going to happen in 2007.
What I'm interested in today is where I'm going to buy cheaper raw materials and how to increase my production for answering all the orders I get", Marian Tudorica, the owner of a meat processing plant near Bucharest, told Southeast European Times.
According to the National Institute for Statistics, the meat products market in Romania grew by about 30 per cent in the first half of 2004, compared with the same period in 2003.
The demand for milk products also increased.
Experts say these developments have been influenced by the country's 6.6 per cent overall economic growth during the first six months of 2004, by an almost 20 per cent increase in the monthly median wage, and by a huge rise in economic tourism in regions adjacent to Hungary, which became an EU member on 1 May and has subsequently seen large price hikes.
