02/12/2004
(Rompres - 02/12/04;
AFP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, The Scotsman, RFE/RL, Ireland Online, Mediafax - 01/12/04)
Romanian opposition leader Traian Basescu said Wednesday (1 December) he would accept the official results of Sunday's presidential and parliamentary elections and would not withdraw from the presidential race.
"If state institutions rule that the elections were valid, I will accept the decision and participate in the second round of the presidential vote," said Basescu, the presidential candidate of the major centrist National Liberal Party (PNL)-Democratic Party (PD) alliance.
On Tuesday, the alliance called for a rerun of both polls, claiming they were marred by fraud, accounting for nearly half a million votes going to the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD) of Prime Minister Adrian Nastase.
The Central Electoral Bureau (CEB) rejected the request, saying any irregularities that might have occurred were the result of calculating errors.
"Traian Basescu must admit that he lost these elections," said Nastase, the PSD candidate for president.
He accused the PD leader of tarnishing the country's image abroad.
The alliance between the PSD and the Humanist Party (PUR) won the election for the lower house with 36.61 per cent of the vote, according to final election results released Wednesday.
The PNL-PD alliance finished a close second with 31.3 per cent of the vote.
The other two parties meeting the 5 per cent threshold are Greater Romania Party (PRM) with 12.92 per cent of the vote and the Hungarian Democratic Federation of Romania (UDMR) with 6.17 per cent.
The PSD-PUR alliance is in the lead in the vote for the Senate as well, with 37.13 per cent.
The PNL-DP alliance garnered 31.77 per cent of that vote, the PRM 13.63 per cent, and the UDMR 6.23 per cent.
Nastase, who won 40.94 per cent of the presidential vote, has a seven percentage point lead over Basescu.
The turnout was 58.5 per cent of eligible voters.
Nastase and Basescu are set to face each other in a runoff on 12 December.
None of the coalition and parties participating in the parliamentary elections won a majority to be able to govern on its own, and Romania appears heading for a hung parliament.
If the PSD-PUR alliance, which is likely to take 57 seats in the 137-member Senate, forges a coalition with the UDMR, expected to take 11 seats, they would still fall one seat short of a majority, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty reported in an analysis.
As a governing coalition with the nationalist PRM will not be welcomed by the West, analysts believe the PSD is likely to try to lure lawmakers from that party into its ranks.
Another likely scenario is for the socialists to seek parliamentary support from members of Basescu's PD, as Nastase has himself reportedly hinted.
But a government can only be formed after there is an elected president.
Under the constitution, if none of the parties in parliament has a majority, the president has the right to name as prime minister anyone who has a realistic chance of forming a majority.
The PSD's candidate for the prime minister post is outgoing Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana.
The PNL-PD alliance has reportedly designated Calin Popescu-Tariceanu as its candidate for the post.
The elections occur as Bucharest races to complete its EC accession negotiations.
The AFP quoted a European Commission spokeswoman as saying Wednesday that Brussels took note of the fraud allegations.
