16/03/2009
By Ivo Scepanovic for the Southeast European Times in Split -- 16/03/09
Croatian journalist Slaven Relja is owning up to years of fabricating interviews while under the influence of heroin.
Relja, 46, used to write for the culture sections of his country's top daily newspapers, Vecernji List and Jutarnji List.
It all went wrong for him when he was 33.
He tried drugs and soon became hooked on heroin.
Years of agony followed in which he stole money from colleagues in an office, sold the "family silver'', worked while addicted to drugs and ended up in a specialised community to undergo treatment.
He tells his story in a new documentary produced by the TV channel Splitska Televizija (STV), where he now works after years of rehabilitation in Cenacolo community centres in Croatia and Italy.
Directed by Ivan Peric, A Journalist's Escape from the Hell of Drugs (http://www.splitskatelevizija.hr/index.php/novinarov-bijeg-iz-pakla-droge ) is awaiting screening at film festivals.
Relja, though, agreed to tell his story to the Southeast European Times before the film's release.
Southeast European Times:
Why have you decided to open up and tell your frightening story to everyone?
Slaven Relja:
Giving testimony about the hell we've passed through is an unwritten order we all take with ourselves when leaving the Cenacolo community.
I got used to sharing my testimony with others in the Cenacolo community, and when returning back home I decided to go for a documentary after some friends mentioned the idea.
To be honest, the filming of the documentary has forced me to break up some friendships and even to sever some family ties.
That's simply the result of the atmosphere in the society where we live.
However, those facts do not affect me, as I'm absolutely sure I'm doing a fair and good thing.
I see no harm in a true story about a man who stands back up after physically and morally heading towards the bottom.
Doesn't it also serve as a road sign to all those who keep claiming drugs always have the last word and that you can't beat them?
I've shown otherwise.
SETimes:
What's the key message you want to send with the documentary?
Relja:
My message might sound weird to some.
But what I wanted to say is that absolutely everything that happens to us, including something evil like drugs, still brings at least something positive.
However, we are not always capable of a positive outlook.
There is always a positive moment in all those tragic years.
There is no doubt that heroin destroyed everything in my life, but through life in the Cenacolo community, I've experienced some moments with my family that otherwise I might have missed forever.
Passing through Cenacolo's international community, I've got friends from all around the world.
I have to say as well that my mother gained a new sense of her life after I stopped using drugs.
It is strange to say, but I came to understand the world around me thanks only to this horrific experience.
Therefore, the message would be that someone getting up after a fall sees the world with another set of eyes.
SETimes:
Since you never even smoked a cigarette or tried alcohol, how could you become addicted to drugs at the age of 33?
Relja:
Drugs are not a thing, not a powder.
They represent a character and a mistaken way of thinking.
When you sink to the level of trying drugs, it is all over already.
You feel an empty space in your emotional life, loneliness or dissatisfaction with the world around you and decide to solve your problem with a yellow powder that gives you a phony sense of freedom.
I did that instead of bearing my cross through life.
Unfortunately, many people choose [drugs] instead of simply walking through the wide-open door of salvation.
SETimes:
How could you work as a journalist and meet deadlines for a national paper while being a drug addict?
Relja:
At the beginning, heroin still leaves you some space for your creativity before you turn into a total junkie.
The brain functions, and I believed I was still doing a great job.
Well, I can admit that I used to fabricate whole interviews.
Of course I did it only with people, artists, whom I knew well, so they would never complain.
Later, when I needed more money to buy drugs, I used to steal money from colleagues in the office.
SETimes:Did you decide by yourself to join the rehabilitation community and try to abandon drugs, or it was others who helped you?
Relja:
Very few people arrive at the rehabilitation community of their own will.
The same applied to me.
A drug addict lives under a false impression he can face the problem himself and refuses any help.
I additionally tried to avoid heading to a Christian community where you pray and work for 16 hours a day.
I strongly opposed moving to a community, but the situation at work and at home simply forced me to head to Cenacolo.
I later acknowledged the community actually saved my life.
SETimes:
What was the key to your success in abandoning drugs?
Relja:
It was faith.
Responsibility and a firm decision [to quit] helped as well, but I beat drugs only when I started to believe.
One could say there are elements of fanaticism in these words, but I tell you only that which I experienced in reality.
SETimes:
Did you run into problems when returning to journalism after years spent in a rehabilitation community?
Did you need to fight to be trusted?
Relja:
There is not much of a philosophy in that.
People can see in your eyes whether you are OK or not.
I did have problems on my return to journalism, but only with those who were so limited they did not accept one's right to fall down.
However, there were no major problems.
After abandoning drugs, I'd say it all goes in my life as if God Himself directed it all.
I really believe that a man with faith can move mountains.
SETimes:
Do you expect your documentary to help others?
Relja:
I'll do it the way that feels right to me and will leave the fate of the documentary to God and to those who were working on it.
I'm sure the film will be a 100% success, as a person who is humble and loves his contributors can be predestined only to have success.
