02/11/2004
(AP, Reuters, Radio B92, Tanjug - 01/11/04)
Serbia-Montenegro's council for co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal has said it is ready to meet its obligations to The Hague-based court.
Serbia-Montenegro's national council for co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) voiced readiness Monday (1 November) to meet its obligations to The Hague-based court.
In a statement issued after the meeting, the council said it has met practically all requests forwarded by the UN war crimes tribunal since 15 September.
According to Belgrade-based Radio B92, the council also agreed to step up its activities before the UN Security Council meeting on 23 November, when chief UN prosecutor Carla del Ponte is due to submit a report on Serbia-Montenegro's co-operation with the tribunal.
Del Ponte and other Western officials have frequently criticised Serbia-Montenegro for its failure to meet one of its chief obligations to the tribunal -- the arrest and extradition of indicted war criminals.
The tribunal is seeking the handover of about 15 indictees, including Bosnian Serb wartime leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, as well as four retired Serbian generals -- former army chief of staff Nebojsa Pavkovic and his former deputy, Vladimir Lazarevic, and police generals Vlastimir Djordjevic and Sreten Lukic.
Reuters reported on Monday that the case of Vladimir Kovacevic, an officer indicted by the UN tribunal in connection with the 1991 Serb shelling of Dubrovnik, could be transferred to a court in Serbia-Montenegro.
"The ICTY prosecutor has ascertained that Serbia-Montenegro is willing and adequately prepared to prosecute the accused in its own courts," del Ponte was quoted as saying in a request to ICTY President Theodor Meron to refer the case to the Belgrade district court, with which the prosecutor is said to have developed good working relations.
Kovacevic, nicknamed "Rambo", is charged with violation of the laws or customs of war, including murder and cruel treatment.
Finding him unfit to enter a plea because of mental illness, the ICTY decided in June to release him for six months so that he could receive psychiatric treatment in Serbia.
