03/01/2005
(HINA, Izbori.hr, FT, AFP, International Herald Tribune, Independent, The Scotsman, BBC, Focus News Agency - 03/01/05;
AP, Reuters - 02/01/05)
While taking a strong lead in Croatia's presidential election on Sunday (2 January), incumbent Stipe Mesic failed to win re-election in the first round and will face Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor in a runoff on 16 January.
Preliminary results released by the State Election Commission early Monday suggest Mesic got 48.92 per cent of the vote.
Kosor, the candidate of the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), trailed with 20.31 per cent.
Independent candidate Boris Miksic came in a surprising third, with 17.78 per cent.
The other ten contenders got less than 3 per cent each.
Of the about 4.4 million registered voters, including 400,000 Croats living abroad, 50.65 per cent cast their ballots on Sunday.
It was the first election in post-war Croatia that was not monitored by international observers.
Mesic, 70, who is supported by the main opposition parties, needed to win more than 50 per cent of the vote to be automatically re-elected to a second five-year term.
Describing the voting results as a "brilliant victory", the pro-Western reformer voiced confidence that he would win the runoff.
"I led Croatia to the doors of (mainstream) Europe, and I will lead it into it,'' the AP quoted Mesic as saying to an euphoric crowd of supporters after election officials announced preliminary results based on a 99 per cent vote count.
"Croatia must be a modern, European and democratic country with satisfied citizens," he said, speaking at his election headquarters in Zagreb.
"It will be possible only if we change many things.
We will decide where Croatia is heading, to the 21st century or back in time.
I offer the 21st century."
Mesic, who won his first presidential term in February 2000, succeeding the country's late nationalist leader, Franjo Tudjman, is credited by many in Croatia for advancing democratic reforms and helping the country come out of its international isolation following the 1991-1995 conflict.
Kosor, 51, said she had accomplished her goal to qualify for the runoff.
"I am very happy that for the first time we have two candidates of which one is a woman," she said.
"This shows the maturity of voters since the most frequent question during the campaign was whether Croatia was mature enough to have a woman for a president," the HDZ candidate added.
Anticipating a tight battle in the run-up to the second round, Kosor called for the campaigning to be based on "arguments and programmes", urging Mesic also to submit a report on every action he had taken during in his first term in office to promote Croatia's state and national interests.
"I am going to the second round calmly and full of self-confidence and I believe that turnout will be higher," the Croatian news agency HINA quoted Kosor as saying.
The election campaign was largely dominated by the prospect of Croatia's future EU membership, which is supported by both the ruling and opposition parties.
Croatia is due to open entry talks with the Union in March, provided it has demonstrated full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague by that time.
Brussels is pushing in particular for the arrest and handover of retired General Ante Gotovina, one of the most wanted fugitives from the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s.
He has been indicted in connection with atrocities committed against Krajina Serbs in 1995.
