03/05/2005
(FT, Journal of Turkish Weekly - 03/05/05;
AFP, Deutsche Press Agentur, Dunya - 02/05/05)
Turkey must change its way of thinking if it wants to succeed in its EU membership bid, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder told the Turkish daily Milliyet in an interview published Monday (2 May), on the eve of his two-day visit to the country.
Accession talks between Ankara and the EU are due to begin on 3 October.
Brussels has made it clear that the country will only be able to join the 25-nation bloc after it has met all requirements for membership, particularly the political criteria.
The measures Turkey must implement before entering the Union include improving freedom of expression, religious freedom and minority rights, and eradication of torture and ill treatment.
Noting that the negotiations would neither be short nor easy, the German leader stressed that their outcome would hinge on Ankara's efforts to ensure that the required reforms are effective and lasting.
While praised for its progress in passing the required legislation, Turkey has been criticised for dragging its feet in terms of effective implementation.
"Turkey has taken important steps since last December's EU summit, when it was decided to begin Ankara's accession talks on 3 October," said Schroeder, whose government supports Turkey's EU bid.
"The talks will be difficult and will last long, and Ankara's reforms will determine the course of talks."
Human rights and other basic freedoms must be guaranteed, Deutsche Press Agentur quoted the German leader as saying.
To ensure that the reform process is irreversible, the new legislation must become part of the daily lives of ordinary people, he added.
Schroeder arrives in Ankara late Tuesday, after a brief stop in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He is scheduled to meet with President Ahmet Necdet Sezer and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Wednesday before proceeding to Istanbul to attend a Turkish-German economic forum.
Last week, IMF Managing Director Rodrigo Rato also called for ensuring the irreversibility of Turkish reforms, saying this is a key step the country must take for the expansion of foreign direct investment to be sustained.
"Turkey needs to entrench its economic reforms," Rato said Friday at a meeting of Turkey's Investment Advisory Council -- a high-powered group that includes foreign business leaders, heads of international institutions and senior Turkish government officials and business executives.
"In this regard, I am encouraged by the government's resolve to put in place landmark banking and social security laws.
Delivering on the promise of EU accession and successfully implementing the government's new policy agenda should help make the reform process irreversible."
