03/01/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 03/01/05
Attracting foreign investors to Macedonia was the topic of a special forum held late last month in Skopje.
Organised by the economy ministry and the UNDP, the event attracted Macedonian and foreign experts.
Participants concluded that Macedonia must do more to provide the necessary conditions for foreign investment, as current levels of domestic savings do not promise greater economic development.
"Direct foreign investments are an important component of the economic development of a country," said Economy Minister Fatmir Besimi.
"Attracting them will alleviate the problem of unemployment and will enable additional achievements such as transfer of new technologies and creation of capital in respect to expert staff."
In Besimi's view, co-ordination of state institutions and the private sector is a crucial step.
"The economy ministry calls for partnership among all parties concerned in attracting foreign investments and accelerating economic growth," he said.
UNDP Resident Representative in Macedonia Frode Mauring told forum participants that unemployment is the single greatest cause of poverty in the country, adding that direct foreign investments are crucial to overcoming joblessness and promoting economic growth.
"The unemployment rate in Macedonia was 36.7 per cent last year, which is disastrous under any standards," he said.
"Most recent UNDP reports show that in 2004, almost one fourth of the population has lived under the poverty line."
According to Vladimir Gligorov of the Vienna Institute for International Studies, there are two key obstacles preventing foreign direct investments from coming to Macedonia.
"First, there is the rigid macroeconomic policy, and secondly, inadequate market structure with poor institutions," he said.
Macedonian Labour and Social Affairs Minister Stevco Jakimovski said political stability, an efficient judiciary and improved administration are the keys to attracting foreign direct investment.
Bankruptcy procedures -- which last an average of three years to five years -- have been a serious obstacle in the past, he said.
Nevertheless, Macedonia has made progress, Jakimovski noted.
"Last year, direct foreign investments in the country amounted to $96m, and they topped $106m by September this year," he said.
"I expect that they will reach $130m by the end of 2004
