02/03/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/03/05
Montenegrin officials unveiled a proposal on 23 February to transform the state union of Serbia-Montenegro into a union of independent states.
The proposal was sent to Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, Serbian President Boris Tadic and Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic and President Filip Vujanovic, who signed the proposal, said they anticipate reaching an agreement with Belgrade on an alternative to the present state union, which they say is dysfunctional and inefficient.
According to the Montenegrin leaders, two independent, internationally recognised countries would achieve better results.
Maintaining Serbia-Montenegro is expensive, they say, and the union's shortcomings jeopardise diplomacy and the functioning of the military.
Continuing the status quo would only lead to further deficiencies and slow Montenegro's and Serbia's integration into the EU and international security structures, Djukanovic and Vujanovic have said.
The initial reaction from Belgrade has been less than positive.
Kostunica has described the plan as a blatant violation of the EU-brokered Belgrade Agreement and vowed to stick to the agreement signed in 2003.
"By constantly avoiding and breaching the provisions of the Constitutional Charter, [Montenegrin authorities] are trying to create an extraordinary situation that would lead to a spontaneous disassociation," Kostunica told the daily Politika in an interview published Monday (28 February).
Djukanovic's latest proposal, Kostunica said, shows that the Montenegrin prime minister is trying to avoid a referendum on independence because he fears an unfavourable outcome.
Kostunica's deputy, Miroljub Labus, also opposes the initiative, though he is known as a strong advocate of an independent Serbia, agreeing with Montenegrin leadership on all points concerning the state-union.
"We should hold two referenda and the matter should not be put off past the spring of 2006," Labus said.
Tadic is largely for preserving the state union, but insists, "Serbia's priority is to join the EU and achieve better living standards, not to maintain the joint country at all costs."
Vujanovic, meanwhile, argues that Belgrade's negative reaction is not definite, adding that he cannot see why Serbia should be against its own sovereignty and independent international status.
The international community has steered clear of involvement in Serbia-Montenegro's internal affairs.
However, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana's spokesperson, Cristina Gallach, has voiced concern over political initiatives that could push Serbia and Montenegro away from European integration and cause political tension.
The Beta news agency has quoted officials in Brussels as saying the proposal was "surprising, simply premature, and coming at an inappropriate moment".
This year should not be lost on fruitless moves, the officials said, as Serbia-Montenegro's bid for Euro-Atlantic integration has already lost two years following the assassination of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
US Ambassador to Belgrade Michael C. Polt said that Washington would support any democratic agreement on state status reached between Serbia and Montenegro.
Podgorica's proposal is a culmination of several months of constitutional crisis triggered by the failure to hold direct elections for the Serbia-Montenegro Parliament.
The republic has advocates for preserving the state union as well as for independence, and the debate will likely sharpen as 2006 approaches.
During that year, Montenegro will have the legal right -- under the Belgrade Agreement -- to organise a referendum on independence.
