02/02/2005
(AFP, HINA, EurActiv, EUpolitix, RFE/RL - 01/02/05;
AP, FT, BBC - 31/01/05)
The EU Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Croatia came into force Tuesday (1 February), six weeks before the expected start of membership talks on 17 March.
However, Brussels has warned that those talks will be put on hold unless the country demonstrates full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal -- and, in particular, hands over retired General Ante Gotovina, considered one of the tribunal's three most-wanted indictees.
"I am convinced that if the Croatian government had the political will to locate and transfer General Gotovina, it could do so," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Monday.
"Let me also say very clearly that, without full co-operation with the ICTY, the negotiations cannot start."
Responding to the warning, Croatia said Tuesday it was stepping up its efforts to track down Gotovina.
President Stipe Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader have asked "all competent bodies of the state administration, including intelligence agencies, the interior ministry and the Chief State Prosecutor's office, to continue and intensify…all necessary measures and activities" aimed at the arrest and transfer of Gotovina, the president's office said in an official news release.
An interior ministry spokesman said later that steps are being taken to gather information on the fugitive's whereabouts and those who may be supporting him.
"All police officers in Croatia are under orders to look for Gotovina," Zlatko Mehun told the HINA news agency, noting that his ministry has offered a 46,000-euro reward for information leading to the suspect's capture.
Gotovina, 49, disappeared in June 2001, soon after the ICTY indicted him for his alleged role in war crimes committed by troops under his command near the end of the 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia.
The tribunal considers him responsible for the unlawful killings of at least 150 Krajina Serbs and the expulsion of tens of thousands of others.
Chief ICTY prosecutor Carla del Ponte has said she believes Gotovina is hiding either in Croatia or in neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina.
During a brief visit to Sarajevo on Tuesday, she made clear that she would not verify Croatia's full co-operation with the ICTY as long as the general is at large.
Entry talks with the EU could not begin as scheduled "without Gotovina in The Hague", del Ponte added.
A decision endorsing the launch of the negotiations with Croatia must be approved by all 25 EU member states.
On Tuesday, Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, told a visiting Croatian parliamentary delegation that while he believed that the Zagreb authorities were committed to full co-operation with the ICTY, they would need to prove this in a way that everybody can understand.
Gotovina "has to realise that he is shaping the destiny of his country which has the right to become a full EU member", Juncker added
