02/03/2005
(EurActiv, Ziua - 02/03/05;
EUobserver, RFE/RL, Rompres - 01/03/05;
EU, AFP - 28/02/05)
Winding up a two-day visit to Bucharest, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Tuesday (1 March) that Romania stands a good chance of achieving the progress needed to join the Union in January 2007.
But he also warned authorities they have no time to waste in meeting the membership criteria.
"Romania should exert efforts for the fulfilment of the accession criteria and, from this viewpoint, each day, each week, each month should be turned to good account in the fight against corruption and the justice reform," Rehn told reporters.
Meeting requirements set out in the accession treaty is the "priority of all priorities", he added.
Romania concluded its entry talks in December and is scheduled to sign, together with Bulgaria, its accession treaty with the EU on 25 April.
Although membership is expected in 2007, safeguard clauses included in the treaty allow for a postponement if conditions are not met.
In addition to tackling corruption and pressing ahead with judicial and political reform, the country must also cut state subsidies to the steel sector.
During his first official visit to Romania since assuming his post in November, Rehn met with President Traian Basescu, Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, Foreign Minister Razvan Mihai Ungureanu and other key officials.
Tariceanu assured Rehn that his country is determined to meet its commitments, particularly in the fight against corruption.
He noted that the administration has moved to free the Supreme Council of Magistrates from political influence, appointed a justice minister with no political allegiances and stripped former ministers of their immunity from prosecution.
"There is no doubt whatsoever as to the authorities' intentions of combating corruption," Tariceanu said.
An EC monitoring mission is scheduled to visit Bucharest this month and present an assessment in May.
Several months later, most likely in November, the EC will publish its comprehensive report on Romania's accession progress.
Rehn has promised a "fair evaluation".
