02/06/2005
(Various sources -- 01/06/05 - 02/06/05)
The Netherlands has dealt a harsh blow to the EU constitution, with the majority of Dutch voters rejecting it in a referendum on Wednesday (1 June).
According to early results released by the Dutch news agency ANP, 61.6 per cent of voters said "no" to the proposed constitution, while only 38.4 per cent supported it. 
Turnout was 62.8 per cent.
"In the Netherlands, more than 40 per cent of the people think that Europe is moving too fast with the Euro and enlargement with Eastern European countries followed by Turkey," Maurice de Hond, director of one of the main Dutch polling institutes, told the AFP.
The Netherlands becomes the second EU founding member to reject the charter in four days. 
The margin was even more decisive than that of the French referendum on Sunday, in which 55 per cent of voters rejected the treaty, while 45 per cent supported it.
The constitution must be ratified by all 25 EU member states by November 2006. 
If four-fifths of the member states have ratified it by the deadline but some encounter "difficulties in proceeding with ratification", then the matter is to be referred to the European Council.
In a joint statement Wednesday, the presidents of the European Parliament, the European Commission and the European Council -- Josep Borrell, Jose Manuel Barroso and Jean-Claude Juncker, Luxembourg's prime minister -- called for a continuation of the ratification process to allow all member nations "to express themselves on the project of the Constitutional Treaty".
"We are confident that together and in partnership -- national governments, European institutions, political parties, civil society -- we will know how to find the means to move the EU towards an enduring consensus as to its identity, its objectives and its means. 
Europe goes on, and its institutions will continue to function fully," the statement said.
So far, nine countries have ratified the constitution through a national parliamentary vote, while Spain is the only country that has held a successful referendum. 
On Thursday, Latvia's Parliament ratified the treaty.
When European leaders meet on 16 June, Czech Prime Minister Jiri Paroubek is expected to propose that the deadline for ratification of the constitution be extended.
Barroso, meanwhile, urged governments not to take any "unilateral initiatives" over the constitutional crisis prior to the summit.
In the aftermath of the Dutch vote, Croatian President Stipe Mesic and his Macedonian counterpart Branko Crvenkovski agreed Wednesday that EU integration-related reforms in their countries should continue, regardless of these developments. 
The two leaders held talks during Crvenkovski's two-day official visit to Zagreb.
