02/05/2005
(Sofia News Agency, RIA Novosti - 15/04/05;
AP, FT, BBC, AFX, VOA, BTA, Sofia News Agency, Athens News Agency, Macedonian Press Agency, Pravda, Bulgarian Government Web site - 12/04/05)
Following more than a decade of negotiations on the Bourgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline, Bulgaria, Greece and Russia signed a memorandum of co-operation on 12 April, paving the way for the launch of the project.
The development ministers of Bulgaria and Greece, Valentin Tserovski and Dimitris Sioufas, signed the document together with Russian Industry and Energy Minister Viktor Khristenko at a ceremony in Sofia.
"This is a very important first step for the implementation of this complex infrastructure project," Tserovski said.
The 522m-euro deal envisions the construction of a 285km pipeline that will carry Caspian crude oil from the Bulgarian Black Sea port of Bourgas to Alexandroupolis, on Greece's Aegean coast.
The oil will be loaded at the Russian port of Novorossiysk and delivered via the Black Sea to Bourgas, where Bulgaria will build a 50m-tonne storage facility.
It will then be piped to Alexandroupolis, to go on to Western Europe.
The pipeline, expected to start operating in 2008, will allow Russia to bypass Turkey's congested Bosporus, where oil tankers are often delayed for several days.
Currently, about a third of Russian oil exports are shipped through the busy strait.
The alternative route is expected to make Russian oil deliveries faster, safer and cheaper.
The pipeline will have a capacity of 700,000 barrels per day.
The planned annual capacity for the initial stage of the project is 15m tonnes.
That would eventually be increased to 24m tonnes in the second year and 35m tonnes in the third year, with an option for increasing it further to 50m tonnes of crude oil annually.
Initial talks on the project began in 1993, but failed to make headway quickly due to disagreements among the three countries over financial and ownership issues.
A study on the technical and economic parameters of the proposed project, conducted by the German company ILF in 1999, concluded that the Bourgas-Alexandroupolis pipeline would be the shortest, safest and financially efficient route.
"Agreement came after we shifted from a geopolitical to a market approach," Tserovski said.
Welcoming the signing of the political accord, Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis described it as a "historic agreement" setting the stage for the implementation of a project of great significance not only for the countries involved, but the entire region.
None of the three governments will provide funding for the project -- it will instead be financed by companies interested in running and exploiting the pipeline.
British oil company BP's joint Russian venture TNK-BP will act as project co-ordinator.
Other partners, according to the media, include Greece's Hellenic Petroleum, US Cambridge Energy Research Associates, Russia's Lukoil and Rosneft, and Bulgaria's Technoexportstroy.
