02/02/2005
By Jona Repishti for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 02/02/05
A tsunami assistance team organised by Albania's Mjaft Foundation is helping provide short-term recovery operations, as well as prevention operations to ward off mounting threats to survivors of the South Asia disaster, including the risk of cholera, typhoid and other epidemics. 
The team is stationed at Banda Aceh -- the epicentre of a catastrophe that has left hundreds of thousands dead and many others homeless.
"What we see is a province overwhelmed by destruction where the reminder of the incredible loss of life is constantly visual. 
Makeshift poles sporting faded clothing, stand like poignant scarecrows and mark the places that had many fatalities in the midst of the relief efforts and medical camps," says Leart Kola, one of the first Albanians to volunteer in Banda Aceh.
Through the initiative, Albanian doctors are working in a local medical camp commissioned by the WHO and co-ordinated by the Indonesian government. 
The medical aid is carefully targeted to those who need it most. 
Though on a small scale, officials say the volunteer effort is a way of demonstrating Albania's solidarity with the international community, and it shows the world a different image of a country struggling to shake its reputation as an exporter of organised crime.
It is "an amazing, very symbolic act that even Albania is modestly contributing in this international disastrous crisis," team representative Besjan Pesha told the newspaper Shekulli."It is the Albania that all of us hope for."
Mjaft (Enough!), the organiser of the initiative, is a civic movement which seeks to raise public awareness of social problems in Albania, including organised crime and trafficking, substandard health services, the problem of blood feuds, and political corruption. 
Immediately after the tsunami struck, the group pledged to work for a strong national response to the calamity.
Since then, other civic organisations, businesses and religious communities throughout Albania have stepped in to do their part, offering generous financial assistance to enable deployment of the relief team.
"We were overwhelmed at the charitable support pouring -- from the president to the average school teacher … Once again the Albanian society showed that it maintains the lead in organisation, humanity, and professionalism," said Executive Director of Mjaft Erion Veliaj.
Albania has a commendable track record in humanitarian aid, starting in 1999, when the country opened its borders. 
Its response to the refugee crisis during the Kosovo conflict was widely hailed. 
The tsunami assistance team represents another important step towards the country's efforts to become integrated in international structures. 
It demonstrates Albania's willingness and capability to export organised aid, compassion and relief, channeling the goodwill of ordinary citizens towards a worthy cause.
Article author Jona Repishti is the Director of Mjaft Foundation in Tirana.
