02/06/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 02/06/05
Greeted with applause by top state officials and members of the diplomatic corps, a platoon-sized group of soldiers from the three major ethnic constituencies in BiH left Sarajevo Airport on Wednesday (1 June) to join coalition forces in Iraq.
The BiH Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) unit includes 36 professional soldiers from the two entities -- 24 from the Federation of BiH and 12 from Republika Srpska.
After ten days of acclimatisation and additional training in Kuwait, they will join a US Marine engineering unit in Fallujah.
Their mission will be to identify and destroy conventional unexploded ordnance at designated collection sites.
BiH recently deployed a fifth rotation of nine military observers as part of the UN peace support operation in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and five military observers in a third rotation as part of the UN mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
But this new deployment marks the first time that the country -- which only ten years ago concluded a brutal interethnic conflict -- is sending a complete unit to join an international military operation.
"With this unit from the BiH Armed Forces a new phase in building our foreign policy was opened, manifested in our readiness to fulfil our internationally taken obligations towards the significant achievements [on the road to] Euro-Atlantic integration," said BiH Presidency Chairman Borislav Paravac in his ceremonial speech.
But the deployment has been criticised by opposition parties, with the Social Democratic Union arguing that the BiH presidency failed to consult parliament before deciding to send troops to a war zone.
The chief of the BiH Joint Staff, Lieutenant General Sifet Podzic, urged the soldiers to show their best in accomplishing a mission "where there must be no mistakes".
He also told them to respect the Iraqi people and their fellow coalition soldiers from 26 countries.
The cadre selected for the mission consists of combat-experienced professional soldiers who volunteered for and completed five months of specialised training.
Their average age is 35, and there is one female medical soldier among them.
The first EOD contingent will serve for six months in Iraq, while the second contingent prepares for deployment.
