01/03/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 01/03/05
Almost a year ago Romanian officials discovered 404 barrels containing more than 100 tonnes of vinyl polychloride in a farmyard in Felnac, a village near the border with Hungary. 
The residue had been imported from France by a Romanian company founded just two months earlier. 
The firm's owner, a French citizen, was going to improvise an incinerator and try to neutralise the dangerous substances -- a plan that would have cost ten times less than if it were done in Western Europe.
"The operation would have had a real negative impact on the air, soil and water in the area," according to the Arad County Environmental Police. 
The barrels were sealed, and months later, exported back to France.
According the Romanian Environmental Ministry, the barrels contained just a small part of the toxic waste that has been brought into Romania from EU countries in the last 15 years in order to be neutralised or stored. 
There are no official figures, but it is estimated that 2,000 to 10,000 tonnes of dangerous materials have been imported.
On the flip side, however, more than 2,000 tonnes of pesticides collected since 1990 from former state-owned Romanian farms will be neutralised in Germany. 
The project will cost 4.8m euros, with 3.5m euros being provided by the EU through the PHARE programme.
Romania has inherited from the former communist regime a terrifying situation. 
Due to an almost total lack of environmental policy, 20 per cent of its rivers were dead in 1989. 
Meanwhile, the air, soil and underground waters were contaminated with toxic chemicals from factories, mining and chemical fertilisers.
After the fall of communism, some things improved. 
Currently, only 10 per cent of rivers are unable to sustain aquatic life, and dangerous gases emissions have dropped by a third. 
But other problems have worsened -- in 1990 there were 221sq km of parks in Romania, but now the surface area has decreased to 190 sq km, directly affecting the level of air pollution.
The handling of toxic residues and other urban waste is one of the most serious problems facing Romania, which hopes to enter the EU in 2007. 
"Only half of the Romanian population has access to an organised garbage collecting system, while the industrial and mining waste often lies in improvised dumps," says Elena Dumitru, head of the Waste Department within the environment ministry.
Modernising the dumps will cost 2.7 billion euros. 
"If we don't comply with our commitments, we risk not to being able to enter EU in 2007," Environment Minister Sulfina Barbu acknowledges. 
Romania has obtained a generous transition period through its negotiations with the EU -- up to 18 years to fulfil all requirements under the environmental chapter. 
However, many analysts say, even that may not be enough.
