01/02/2005
(Bloomberg - 01/02/05;
UN, HINA, FENA)
Pledging to solve the refugee problem in Southeast Europe by the end of 2006, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro have agreed to initiate joint or individual activities towards that end.
Hundreds of thousands of people were forced to flee their homes as a result of the Balkan conflicts in the early 1990s.
The 1992-1995 conflict in BiH alone left over half of its population of 4.4 million displaced.
An estimated 1.3 million were internally displaced and some 500,000 became refugees in neighbouring countries, according to the UN relief agency, UNHCR.
Another 700,000 found refuge in Western European countries, the majority in Germany.
The UNHCR, along with other international organisations, has played a pivotal role in supporting refugee return initiatives in the region.
It estimates that 300,000 or more refugees remain in BiH, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro, still awaiting a more permanent solution.
In a bid to identify individual and joint activities to speed up the return process over the coming months, the three Balkan countries' ministers responsible for refugees held a "3x3 Initiative" conference in Sarajevo on Monday (31 January) with representatives of the UNHCR, the OSCE and the EU.
The forum was opened by BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic, who emphasised that resolving the issue is a crucial step along the road towards EU membership -- a goal shared by the three countries.
Assistant High Commissioner Kamel Morjane praised the "significant progress" made by regional governments, voicing hope that newly acquired data would help improve the co-ordination of joint efforts on behalf of refugees.
"This will be achieved either through voluntarily return to their countries of origin, or through local integration in the host countries, while at the same time providing a much clearer picture of the outstanding needs of those who remain displaced in the region," a UNHCR statement quoted Morjane as saying.
He also said that UNHCR-supported efforts to re-register the remaining population of displaced persons in BiH and Serbia-Montenegro have indicated that their numbers may be smaller than previously assumed.
He also noted that some refugees have acquired citizenship in other countries and no longer wish to return home.
Croatian Tourism, Transport and Development Minister Bozidar Kalmeta, BiH Human Rights Minister Mirsad Kebo and Serbia-Montenegro Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic signed an eight-point declaration Monday, vowing to solve the refugee problem in their countries by the end of 2006.
The document calls for a joint task force to implement the commitments the three countries have made.
The countries will also develop their own individual action plans within three months and unite them in a joint implementation framework.
"This is a political platform to speed up the resolution of a joint problem," Kalmeta told reporters after the conference.
