01/11/2004
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens – 01/11/04
Corruption hurts the economy and undermines democracy, Greek Prime Minister Constantinos Karamanlis told parliamentary deputies in October.
He has vowed to press ahead with efforts to shake up vested interests and introduce greater transparency, even if a resulting political maelstrom culminates in early elections.
"Society has learned that public sector corruption and entangled interests are a problem for every citizen.
They benefit interests which live off state funds and push aside the majority of businessmen, creating an obstacle to investments," Karamanlis said.
Greeks have been hearing about vested interests since the mid-1990s.
Taking advantage of a system that many say is rife with nepotism and corruption, a handful of families -- and in some cases, single individuals -- have acquired a lock on government contracts, while at the same time holding shares in major media and broadcasting networks.
As a result, critics say, they are able to wield great power over the government while at the same time manipulating public opinion.
In an unprecedented move last week, Karamanlis held a staff meeting at one of Athens' best-known souvlaki shops and launched a sharp attack on this concentration of power, declaring, "Greece can no longer be subdued".
Media barons -- many of whom backed Karamanlis during the election -- have fired back, hinting he could face trouble in parliament during an upcoming vote to elect Greece's new president.
Although the identities of those thought to control certain channels or newspapers are common knowledge in Greece, it is hard to actually prove ownership.
Most media owners use offshore companies -- which do not disclose their shareholders -- to conceal their role.
To overcome this problem, the government is seeking to prevent companies controlled by offshore entities from bidding on government contracts, as well as barring them from obtaining broadcast licenses.
Shareholders in media companies, meanwhile, would not be allowed to hold more than 50 per cent of shares in another company -- for example, a construction firm.
This restriction would also apply to their relatives.
The administration also wants to eliminate unclear procedures regarding contracts and agreements.
Finally, a law is being proposed that would empower the public prosecutor's office to investigate crimes involving the Athens Stock Exchange.
The vote on these laws in parliament could lead many MPs to switch sides and vote against their party's guidelines.
The ruling New Democracy party can afford a few defectors, but a substantial number would likely lead to the opposition calling for a vote of no confidence.
That could result in early elections, and the prime minister has said that he is prepared to go there, if needed.
That is a daring statement, analysts say, considering this government has only been in power since March.
Before that, New Democracy had been out of power since 1993.
