01/03/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 01/03/05
One of the largest Italian banks in terms of assets, Banca Intesa, bought a 75 per cent stake in Belgrade-based Delta Banka on 14 February.
The purchase price of 278m euros was among the largest sums to have been garnered from the privatisation of Serbian companies to date.
Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic said Banca Intesa's arrival is important because it would attract the bank's clients and encourage them to do business with Serbian companies.
As a result, it stands to generate a further increase in trade with Italy, Serbia-Montenegro's second biggest trading partner.
"We expect the bank's arrival to help Serbian exports, primarily in the textile and food industries," Dinkic said.
Miroslav Miskovic, the president of Delta Holding -- the bank's parent firm -- said he will invest the money from the sale in further development, with the goal of making the company a regional leader in retail, agriculture and food production.
Delta Holding will try to secure a top position in the Croatian and Slovenian markets, followed by those in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, Miskovic said.
According to Giovanni Boccolini, a member of the Banca Intesa board of directors, Delta Banka is "a good platform" for business growth in Serbia.
The first privatisation of a state-owned Serbian bank took place on 26 January, when Greece's Alpha Bank purchased an 88.64 per cent stake in Jubanka for 152m euros.
The deal was signed by Dinkic and Alpha Bank senior official Yannis Costopoulos.
According to Dinkic, Alpha Bank has promised not to dismiss any of Jubanka's 1,328 employees over the next three years.
Costopoulos said Serbia has experienced much economic growth and has the potential for successful banking.
Through the purchase of Jubanka, which has 90 offices around the country, Alpha Bank has significantly enhanced its presence in the Southeast European market, at the same time becoming a major investor in Serbia.
Following the privatisation of Delta Bank and Jubanka, Dinkic said, foreign investment is expected to total around 1.5 billion euros this year, double the 2004 amount.
