02/05/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 02/05/05
The Macedonian government, which handed in its answers to the EU questionnaire in February, has been given an additional 189 questions by the European Commission (EC).
Received on 20 April, they follow up on Macedonia's initial responses and are meant to further assess the country's readiness to become an official EU candidate.
A letter accompanied the new questions from the EC, expressing gratitude for the relevant and comprehensive answers the government gave to the approximately 3,000 earlier questions.
"We are really very happy because there are no special surprises, and we believe we will fulfil this task in a timely and high quality way, as we did with the previous ones," Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska said at a press conference on 22 April.
"The answers, together with the accompanying documents to a law or an additional report that have been required will be submitted to the EC by 10 May," she said.
More than 40 of the additional questions focus on the agriculture ministry, while 41 relate to justice and home affairs.
The ministry of labour and social policy will answer 26 additional questions, and the foreign ministry 15.
Sekerinska explained that the number of questions does not mean that those institutions have not given quality answers.
Rather, she said, some issues are complex by nature and require great attention and thorough elaboration.
She said the government is pleased that most of the job was completed in the first phase and that only additional clarification is now required.
The new answers will become publicly available when they are complete and sent to Brussels, she said.
Answering questions from the EC is a standard procedure Brussels uses to decide on an avis concerning whether a country is prepared for membership candidate status.
According to EC Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, Brussels will announce the avis in the autumn.
On the basis of that, the European Council will make a decision about Macedonia's candidate status during its December summit.
When handing in the answers in February, Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski said Macedonia's objective is to become an EU member by 2010.
