22/12/2008
(Various sources -- 19/10/08 - 28/11/08)
More than a year after being exonerated of direct responsibility for genocide in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Serbia is now facing a similar new lawsuit at the International Court of Justice (ICJ).
On November 18th, The Hague-based court ruled that it has the jurisdiction to examine a Croatian lawsuit accusing Serbia of repeated violations of the 1948 Genocide Convention during the 1991-1995 war between the two countries.
Zagreb filed its suit with the ICJ in July 1999, when only two of the former six Yugoslav republics -- Serbia and Montenegro -- still remained in what was then known as the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. 
In February 2003, the two constituent republics established the state union of Serbia and Montenegro, which broke up following the May 2006 independence referendum in Montenegro.
Shortly afterwards, the Serbian parliament declared the Republic of Serbia to be the legal successor to the state union of Serbia and Montenegro.
In its judgment, the ICJ ruled that Serbia is the sole respondent in the case instituted by Croatia. 
The 17-judge court also rejected all three preliminary objections, regarding the court's jurisdiction and the admissibility of Croatia's complaint, filed by Serbia in a bid to stop the lawsuit.
Zagreb claims in its lawsuit that Yugoslavia violated the Genocide Convention "by seizing control of the Knin region and eastern Slavonia from 1991 to 1995, by shelling and attacking portions of Dalmatia and driving Croat [and other non-Serb] citizens from these areas".
The aim of those actions was to "ethnically cleanse these regions, and to unite them with the FRY to form a greater Serbian state," Croatia maintains.
It also accuses Yugoslavia of having conducted a second ethnic cleansing of the Knin region just prior to the Croatian Army's Operation Storm in August 1995. 
At that time, according to the lawsuit, Belgrade "directed, instigated and coerced" its ethnic Serb population to evacuate from the area.
Croatia is seeking a judgment that will both declare those actions a violation of the Genocide Convention, as well as order Serbia to pay military reparations in an amount to be determined by the ICJ for the damages to persons and property.
Zagreb claims that 20,000 people died as a result of Serb aggression, with another 800,000 displaced or forced to flee their homes. 
An estimated 590 towns and villages were damaged. 
About 25% of Croatia's total economic capacity and approximately 10% of its tourist facilities were also damaged or destroyed, the suit claims.
The ICJ has given Serbia one year to prepare its defence, but at least another 12 months are likely to pass before the start of the trial.
In a prompt reaction to the court's decision, Belgrade promised to lodge a countersuit against Croatia over Operation Storm, suggesting its case might also touch on crimes committed by Croatia's World War II pro-Nazi regime.
"We will look at all events during the 20th century, events during World War II, during the Independent State of Croatia," Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said. 
"We'll turn to history to establish the truth for the sake of our common future in the EU."
Disappointed by the ICJ's February 2007 ruling on its own genocide case against Serbia, BiH will be watching closely how the Croatia-Serbia lawsuits will unfold. 
If any new evidence should surface during the proceedings, Sarajevo could ask The Hague court, known also as the World Court, to review its verdict, or it could even push for a new trial.
Besides dealing with the legacy of conflict in the region, the court will also be hearing from two Balkan countries that remain locked in a rancorous, though non-violent dispute.
Macedonia has brought a suit against its neighbor, Greece, for allegedly violating a 1995 interim agreement. 
As part of the deal, Greece agreed "not to object" to Macedonia's membership in international organisations and institutions that refer to it as Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) -- the name under which it was admitted into the UN in 1993.
Earlier this year, however, Greece vetoed an invitation for Macedonia to join NATO, citing the long-standing name dispute between them. 
Macedonia filed suit at the ICJ on November 17th.
Greece refuses to recognise the name Republic of Macedonia, on the grounds that it implies a territorial claim on Greek territory and infringes on Greece's cultural heritage. 
Most international organisations, including NATO and the EU, officially use FYROM to refer to the Balkan country.
Greece argues that Skopje itself has violated the interim accord on numerous occasions, and that the lawsuit amounts to "delaying tactics" in UN-led negotiations on the name issue.
Although the ICJ may not need as much time to rule on Macedonia's application as in BiH's 1993 genocide case against Serbia, the court's judgment is widely expected to take several years.
Established in 1945, one of the ICJ's main functions is to settle legal disputes between states. 
Its rulings on such cases are final and binding on the parties concerned, and they cannot be appealed.
Its other function is to render advisory opinions on legal questions referred to it by UN bodies and specialised agencies. 
The latest such issue, filed with the World Court on October 10th, is also related to the Balkans.
In an October 8th vote, the General Assembly approved a Serbian resolution requesting the ICJ's advisory opinion on the question whether Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence of February 17th was in accordance with international law.
The Kosovo authorities, the UN and member states have been given until April 17th 2009 to submit their written statements on the issue and until July 17th to comment on each others' submissions. 
The ICJ will then decide how to proceed.
Its eventual ruling on the issue will have no binding effect. 
Even if the ICJ judges should say that Pristina's independence declaration was not in accordance with international law, none of the over 50 countries that have recognized Kosovo will be obliged to reverse their decisions.
