01/11/2004
(24 Chasa, Novinar - 01/11/04;
Sofia News Agency, Mediapool - 31/10/04)
Bulgaria definitely needs to hold a referendum on its EU accession, President Georgi Parvanov said Sunday (31 October), suggesting the best time would be spring 2006.
His comments followed calls by government officials Saturday for a plebiscite.
Such a move, Deputy Foreign Minister Gergana Grancharova said, would promote a nationwide debate on accession-related issues.
One possible scenario, according to Grancharova, would involve holding a referendum on the EU Constitution simultaneously with parliamentary elections, expected in mid-2005.
That would solve some practical problems, she said, noting that any poll of this type would require additional financing.
"Mobilising the Bulgarian public to go out and vote is a very important process for any politically responsible force," Grancharova said.
In another possible scenario, the vote could take place immediately after the signing of the accession treaty.
According to Foreign Minister Solomon Passy, the referendum could not occur before Bulgaria signs its accession treaty with the Union.
That is expected to take place in early 2005, ahead of the country's planned entry into the EU in January 2007.
Bulgaria does not necessarily have to fix a date for a referendum on the EU Constitution, Minister of European Affairs Meglena Kuneva noted Sunday.
Currently, it remains unclear whether whether the document will come into force on 1 November 2006 as scheduled.
For that to happen, it must be ratified by all member states.
Ten of the 25 nations have already announced plans to put it to a national referendum, which increases the risks of a possible rejection.
If the constitution becomes effective before Bulgaria's entry, a positive vote on the question of the country's accession would also imply support for the constitution, Kuneva said.
The leader of the opposition Bulgarian Socialist Party, Sergey Stanishev, meanwhile, has rejected the idea of holding the referendum and parliamentary elections in parallel, saying no party should be allowed to draw political dividends from this.
Along with Parvanov, the Socialists argue that the plebiscite should be held at a time equally distant from the general and presidential elections.
Deputy Prime Minister Plamen Panayotov voiced confidence Sunday that the majority of Bulgarians would vote in favour of EU accession.
Citing recent surveys, he said more than two-thirds of Bulgarians support entry into the Union.
