01/03/2005
(Reuters, HINA, International Herald Tribune, BBC Monitoring, EurActiv, EUobserver - 28/02/05; Reuters - 24/02/05)
Facing a mid-March deadline for the handover of a key war crimes suspect to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Croatia is stepping up efforts to ensure its EU bid will not be jeopardised.
The EU has set 17 March as the date for launching Croatia's accession talks, making it conditional on the arrest and extradition of retired General Ante Gotovina. 
The court's third most wanted indictee has been on the run since June 2001.
On Monday (28 February), Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader repeated previous calls for the fugitive to turn himself in. 
Speaking on state radio, he noted that others of similar rank, such as generals Mladen Markac and Ivan Cermak, have already surrendered.
Brussels has made it clear in recent weeks that the talks could be put on hold if Croatia fails to deliver Gotovina to The Hague. 
While stepping up efforts to locate and apprehend him, Croatian authorities insist the information they have gathered suggests Gotovina is not in the country -- a claim which chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte refutes.
The country faces a "deadlock situation and a very dangerous one, because [Gotovina] is not in Croatia," Foreign and EU Integration Minister Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic said recently. 
Zagreb must try to convince EU officials that it is doing everything within its means to comply with the requirements, she added.
Del Ponte, however, has said Gotovina is within reach of Croatian authorities, who have "simply not done everything in their power" to arrest him or dismantle his network of supporters. 
A report she is expected to submit within days on Croatia's co-operation with the ICTY will likely be crucial to the EU's decision on proceeding with the accession talks as planned.
Several months ago, the EU froze the assets of Gotovina and other war crimes fugitives. 
Croatia was expected to follow suit. 
Authorities there are said to be preparing for a decision to that effect, and have reportedly been interviewing friends and alleged supporters of the fugitive over the past few weeks.
Asked if Gotovina's assets would be frozen, Sanader said Monday that the State Prosecutor's Office had submitted a report on the issue and that a task force was due to decide whether such a step should be taken.
Meanwhile, Croatian President Stipe Mesic starts a two-day visit to Brussels on Tuesday to brief EU and NATO officials about efforts his country is making to be eligible to join Euro-Atlantic structures.
Mesic is due to meet with King Albert II of Belgium and Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt, as well as European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, European Parliament President Josep Borrell, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana and NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer.
