01/12/2004
(OHR -- 30/11/04 - 01/12/04; Reuters, AP, Fena - 30/11/04)
New revelations suggesting that one of the top war crimes fugitives from the 1992-1995 conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) might have remained on the Bosnian Serb Army rolls until 2002 prompted sharp criticism from High Representative Paddy Ashdown.
The Sarajevo-based daily Dnevni Avaz published a report Tuesday (30 November) displaying what it said was wartime Bosnian Serb military chief Ratko Mladic's military personnel file. 
It showed that he was discharged from the army of BiH's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS), only two years ago.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) indicted Mladic in late 1995, charging him with war crimes, including genocide. 
Mladic is one of The Hague-based tribunal's most wanted indictees, along with former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and retired Croat General Ante Gotovina.
According to the report, Mladic was discharged from the RS army (VRS) in March 2002 under a decree issued by Mirko Sarovic who was serving as RS president at the time.
Ashdown said it was "scandalous" that the VRS had an employer/employee relationship with the fugitive until as recently as two years ago, while claiming it was unaware of his whereabouts. 
This "is an indication of the flagrant disregard that the RS authorities and especially the VRS have held towards their Dayton commitments and their obligations to the International Tribunal in The Hague," the top international envoy in BiH added.
A statement by Ashdown's office said Tuesday that the document published in Dnevni Avaz supported chief ICTY prosecutor Carla del Ponte's remarks before the UN Security Council last week.
"I believe that there are fundamental systemic weaknesses built into the law enforcement and security structures in BiH, and in particular the RS," the prosecutor said on 23 November, criticising the RS authorities for failing to apprehend any of the indictees sought by the ICTY.
"What does this tell us about the collusion of the VRS in Mladic's continued evasion of justice and their willingness to co-operate with the ICTY?" Ashdown asked. 
"The RS must break with the past if it wants a modern European future."
According to the document published by the Sarajevo daily, Mladic was also on active service in the Yugoslav Army (VJ) until 2001, contradicting a claim by RS authorities that the relations between the VJ and the VRS had ended in 2000 and 2001.
Said Ashdown,"If Mladic was registered with both the VJ and the VRS, why did his personnel file never appear back in 2000 and 2001 when the authorities were claiming to have severed the link?"
The new revelations come days before NATO's summit on 9 December. 
At the end of June, the Alliance postponed an invitation for BiH to join its Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme, because of the country's failure to meet its obligations to the ICTY.
BiH news agency FENA quoted Germany's ambassador to the country, Freiherr von Kittlitz und Ottendorf, as saying Tuesday that he did not expect BiH's bid to join the PfP to be a central issue at the December summit, but that it would be discussed. 
NATO would study del Ponte's report to the Security Council carefully, the diplomat said.
