01/04/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 01/04/2005
An unprecedented anti-crime effort known as the POLIS project is now under way in Greece.
Using the expanded forces and capabilities developed for the Olympic Games, police are focusing on high-crime areas, conducting spot checks of individuals and businesses.
According to the government, the programme is producing results.
But some critics charge that it is intrusive and does little to address the country's most serious forms of crime.
A total of 6,153 police have been allocated as part of the project, and in three weeks they have checked 45,462 pedestrians, 21,165 vehicles and 4,372 shops.
As a result of the random identity checks and body searches, 1,407 people were arrested for 9,116 violations of the law.
By taking action before an infraction occurs, crime can be prevented before it has a chance to grow, say ministry of public order officials.
Some human rights advocates, however, have expressed concern about the presence of so many police on the streets.
Others argue that the programme is more of a media show than a useful way to fight crime.
Such displays, they say, have little impact on organised crime and its branches, but instead target illegal immigrants, drug users, prostitutes, sellers of counterfeit products and unlicensed street vendors, many of whom are poor people trying to survive, not hardened criminals.
Moreover, critics add, the programme is overly focused on Athens.
According to Costas Voudouris, the general secretary of the Greek Federation of Police Employees, the reason for focusing on the capital is that most criminal activity is located there.
In the provinces, he says, human relations are stronger and criminals find it harder to infiltrate, hide and operate.
As for the random checks, Voudouris says the POLIS project is intended to tackle low-level crime by arresting those who are carry illegal objects such as drugs, fake products and weapons, or who drive stolen vehicles.
The more complicated operations that focus on any one criminal organisation are not publicised and are handled centrally at police headquarters.
Burglaries, thefts, rapes and organised crime activities can usually only be investigated after the fact, and thus are outside the scope of the POLIS project, Voudouris says.
So far, a quarter of those arrested under the POLIS umbrella have been charged with violating drug laws.
Most are habitual users who roam the cities in search of a quick fix.
The rest of them are younger users found to be in possession of cannabis or ecstasy pills.
About 200 women -- including foreigners as well as Greeks -- have been arrested for prostitution.
Most were at the bottom level of a trafficking network.
More than 150 persons have been arrested, wanted for evading debts to the state, while 100 other detainees were illegal immigrants who either had no green card or were carrying a forged one.
Another 265 people have been arrested for small crimes such as petty theft, copyright theft, possession of an unregistered firearm, breach of the public health code, falsification of documents, or driving a stolen vehicle.
