01/02/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 01/02/05
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), High Representative Paddy Ashdown, announced his decision Monday (31 January) on a plan for restructuring the country's police.
Ashdown chose a scenario that would establish nine local police areas as well as a Greater Sarajevo Metropolitan Police Area.
Together with the Police Restructuring Commission's (PRC) report, the plan will form the basis for future discussions among local police and political institutions, which must reach a final consensus within the next two or three months.
A single police structure under state-level control is a requirement of the Feasibility Study which BiH must adopt if it is to progress towards concluding a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU.
Last November, PRC Chairman Wilfred Martens announced that the commission -- founded by Ashdown in July of the same year -- had reached a basic level of agreement.
However, members continued to differ over a number of possible local police areas.
The PRC report ended up providing three maps, each illustrating a possible option.
One called for five local police areas, the second for nine local police areas and a Greater Sarajevo Metropolitan Police Area, and the third for ten areas and a Greater Sarajevo Metropolitan Police Area.
Ashdown was asked to review the three plans and decide which would best suit the policing requirements of BiH.
Under the "9+1" scheme favoured by Ashdown, local police areas would be established in Bihac, Banja Luka, Livno, Doboj, Tuzla, Zenica, Travnik, Mostar and Foca, in addition to Greater Sarajevo.
Each area would have a local police council made up of elected officials, members of the judiciary and community leaders.
The council would be in charge of maintaining community oversight and police accountability.
"This is the true revolution.
With Local Police Councils we will finally put BiH police under control of their citizens, rather than political circles," said Ashdown.
However, Bosnian Serb objections to some aspects of the proposal could remain a stumbling block.
Under the reforms, the two BiH entities -- the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska (RS) -- would lose authority over policing.
But RS officials have insisted that the entity-level ministries remain in place.
Without the reforms, however, BiH's way to the EU and NATO is blocked -- a fact which Ashdown is likely to stress in the coming weeks.
In other news Monday, the BiH Defence Reform Commission held its first meeting of the year, discussing financial issues and the impact of introducing a single VAT for the country's defence sector.
After the meeting, NATO HQ Commander Brigadier General Steven P. Schook again underlined that the panel's main task was to promote reforms that would finally lead to BiH's admission to NATO.
