01/04/2005
(Dow Jones, Standartnews, Nine O'clock - 01/04/05; BTA, Rompres, Sofia News Agency, BNN, Mediapool, Dnevnik, EurActiv, Bulgarian government - 31/03/05)
The prime ministers of Bulgaria and Romania signed a declaration in Sofia on Thursday (31 March) affirming their governments' commitment to better co-operation on the path to EU membership.
"The two governments agree to co-ordinate and closely co-operate to ensure parallel accession to the EU in accordance with the timetable agreed at the December 2004 European Council in Brussels," reads a joint declaration signed Thursday by Prime Ministers Calin Popescu Tariceanu of Romania and Simeon Saxe-Coburg of Bulgaria.
Sofia and Bucharest will strengthen their efforts towards meeting "all commitments made during the negotiation process and in their relations with the European Parliament" (EP), the leaders also pledged, a day after the members of the EP's foreign affairs committee backed the two countries' EU bid.
The full 732-seat parliament is due to hold a vote on the subject on 13 April, less than two weeks before the signing of Bulgaria and Romania's accession treaty with the Union on 25 April. 
The two Balkan countries are scheduled to join the EU in January 2007. 
But both, particularly Romania, could see their entry delayed by one year if they fail to fulfil their pre-accession commitments, including judiciary reform and other measures aimed at meeting EU standards and norms.
The two countries' shared goal of integration has given a new impetus to their traditionally good bilateral relations, raising them "to a new level of success," the prime ministers said in the declaration. 
They added, however, that some problems from the past must be addressed.
"There are a few issues ... 
and we should set a deadline for their solution so that the two countries do not take the bilateral problems of their past to the EU," the Dow Jones news agency quoted Tariceanu as saying at a news conference after his meeting with Saxe-Coburg. 
Minority issues and border control procedures were among the issues still in need of resolution, he added.
The Romanian prime minister was particularly critical of the attitude and working style of officials on both sides of the common border, saying it was reminiscent of communist times and should change
