28/07/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 28/07/05
St. 
Atanasie Church in the village of Lesok has been reopened for worship, thanks in part to EU assistance. 
The Tetovo-area church was destroyed in a massive explosion during the interethnic conflict in Macedonia four years ago.
The roughly 430,000 euros donated by the EU went towards an ambitious project to rebuild the church with the same rocks used in its original construction. 
The rocks were preserved, enumerated and sorted out by the Institute for Protection of Monuments, which carried out the project.
The re-opening ceremony on 23 July featured an exhibition of photographs showing, in chronological sequence, the progress from a pile of ruins to a majestically rebuilt church. 
The structure is located in a monastery complex that houses three churches: St. 
Atanasie, St. 
Maria and St. 
Lazar. 
The area abounds with historical and religious sites dating back to the 14th century.
"With this act today, we are showing that the attempt to destroy the church and the perpetrators' goals were not successful," said the head of the EC delegation to Macedonia, Donato Chiarini. 
"The ultimate goal is to heal the wounds and prepare this country on its way to the EU."
"The holy places of every religion are achievements of civilisation and they should not be destroyed but respected and glorified," said Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska, who is also in charge of European integration. 
"Wise people preserve what they have; the others always rebuild. 
This building is more than a religious structure. 
It has great symbolism for our country, since it connects us with the past, present and future."
A hospital for respiratory diseases within the monastery compound will be rebuilt with a donation from Norway, Sekerinska said.
"It is human to remember violence and disasters. 
To remember and not to forget them. 
But it is also human and Christian-like to forgive. 
Therefore, let Lesok be a warning to everybody and a testimony that cohabitation must be law for everybody," said the head of the Macedonian Orthodox Church, Archbishop Stefan of Ohrid and Macedonia. 
A reconsecration ceremony was held during the event.
An agreement between the European Agency for Reconstruction and the Institute for Protection of Monuments for additional EU aid of around 150,000 euros was signed at the monastery compound on the day of the ceremony. 
The money will be used for restoration and conservation of 392 square metres of fresco painting in the church.
