28/07/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 28/07/05
In October 1999, an armored truck swerved across the Ibar highway, south of Belgrade, and hit a convoy of cars carrying Serbian opposition politician Vuk Draskovic and his associates. 
Draskovic, currently Serbia-Montenegro's foreign minister, escaped the assassination attempt with only minor injuries, but four members of his Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO) were killed.
Years later, a former special operations commander has been sentenced in the case. 
On 30 June, the Regional Court in Belgrade gave Milorad "Legija" Ulemek and five members of his unit 15-year prison terms for the quadruple homicide and the attempt on Draskovic's life.
The court also sentenced former state security chief Radomir Markovic to 10 years in prison for whitewashing the Milosevic regime's involvement in the murders. 
Three other officials got jail terms ranging from one to three years. 
Two were acquitted.
The sentences handed down to Ulemek and Markovic were the maximum allowed under the applicable laws, according to Presiding Judge Bojan Misic. 
Although a 40-year term was later introduced, at the time the trial got under way, the stiffest sentence allowable was 15 years. 
Draskovic, however, has expressed outrage over the comparatively lenient sentence, charging that it is a result of plea-bargaining between government prosecutors and the former secret service.
"If there is any crime in which maximum 40-year sentences are called for, it is one where state security prepares a liquidation together with the special operations unit," Draskovic told reporters after the trial wrapped up. 
As the sentences were announced, several members of the victims' families left the courtroom in protest.
Serbian judges, however, have fought back, accusing Draskovic of exerting political pressure on the court. 
"Some representatives of government do not want an independent judiciary," Supreme Court presiding Judge Vida Petrovic-Skero said. 
The Judges' Association of Serbia issued a statement saying that anyone has the right to criticise the work of the courts, but must do so in a way that does not undermine their independence.
In any case, Ulemek will be spending a lot more than 15 years behind bars. 
On 18 July, he received a 40-year sentence for his role in the murder of former Serbian President Ivan Stambolic, and he still faces charges stemming from the 2003 assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
