30/11/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 30/11/05
Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic moved a part of his cabinet to Cetinje on Friday (25 November).
The new residence is in the heart of the Montenegrin cultural capital and will be used for his official duties.
Secretary General of the President of the Republic Milan Brajevic said that in the event that foreign diplomatic representatives are unable to come to Cetinje, Vujanovic would receive them in Podgorica.
Consequently, only part of the technical administration will be permanently based in Cetinje, while the rest will remain in Podgorica.
The move was originally announced during the 2003 presidential elections.
However, it was postponed several times due to renovation work at the Cetinje building and a change of contractors during the project.
The estimated cost was about 1.3m euros, while interior design and furniture cost 600,000 euros.
Marking the opening of the presidential residence, Vujanovic praised the rich cultural and historical values of Cetinje.
Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic attended the opening ceremony, together with President of the Parliament Ranko Krivokapic, Deputy Prime Minister Dragan Djurovic and other dignitaries.
Located at the foot of Mt Lovcen, Cetinje is a living monument to the republic's heritage.
It became the capital of the state of Zeta -- today's Montenegro -- in 1482, when Ivan Crnojevic moved his court there from the banks of Lake Skadar to escape a Turkish assault.
At the end of WWI, when Montenegro was absorbed into the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Cetinje lost its position as capital.
The new capital was Podgorica, renamed Titograd after WWII.
Nevertheless, Cetinje has remained a cultural centre of Montenegro.
It encompasses five essential institutions:
the Central National Library Djurdje Crnojevic, the National Museum of Montenegro, the Archives of Montenegro, the Republican Institute for Preserving Cultural Heritage, and the Montenegrin Royal National Theatre Zetski dom.
Cetinje also has a rich publishing and printing tradition.
The printing house of Crnojevici (1492-1496) is of great importance to Montenegrin and Serbian culture and history as well as to the culture of other Orthodox Balkan peoples.
Its greatest contribution was in the spread of Cyrillic type, representing an important link in the chain of world culture.
The ancient libraries of Montenegro place Cetinje on the international map.
The earliest is the Library of the Cetinje Monastery, founded at the end of the 15th century.
Nicknamed the "town-museum", Cetinje is home to the Petar Petrovic Njegos Museum, the Ethnographic Museum, the Electric Industry Museum, the Art Museum and the Cetinje Museum, among others.
Every other year, Cetinje hosts the Cetinje Biennial international art exhibition, founded by Prince Nikola Petrovic, a great-grandson of King Nikola I.
