21/05/2009
BELGRADE, Serbia -- US Vice President Joseph Biden continued his tour of the Western Balkans with a stop in Belgrade on Wednesday (May 20th), stressing that Washington wants continued co-operation with Serbia.
Meeting with President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and other government officials, Biden said his government does not expect Serbia to recognise Kosovo.
"It is not a precondition for our relationship or our support for Serbia becoming part of the EU," he told a joint press conference with Tadic.
Biden added both countries have "reasonable expectations" from each other regarding Kosovo.
He also expressed strong support for Serbia's EU integration efforts.
Biden was the highest-ranking US visitor to Belgrade since then-Vice President Walter Mondale attended Josip Tito's funeral in 1980.
Tadic told journalists he hopes the visit will lead to a new phase in US policy towards Serbia and the Western Balkans, in which Serbia will be seen as a factor for regional stability.
He also reiterated Belgrade's opposition to Kosovo's independence.
"It is Serbia's legitimate right to defend its territorial integrity through the use of peaceful, diplomatic and legal means," Tadic stressed.
On Thursday, an apparently mentally ill man holding a hand grenade entered Tadic's presidential headquarters.
Police sent in negotiators, who say he is angry over a pending legal case.
Biden had travelled on to Pristina, the last stop of his regional tour, for meetings with President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni, among others.
Hyseni was quoted on Thursday as saying Serbia will have to recognise Kosovo in the next ten years.
"I don't see how Serbia will ever join the EU without recognising Kosovo.
I am certain that the EU will not ignore such a big problem." (The Kosovo Times, KosovaPress, AFP, AP, Zeri, Express, Koha Ditore, Lajm, BBC - 21/05/09;
B92, Beta, Tanjug, Studio B, AFP, VoA, Reuters, Telegrafi - 20/05/09)
