30/08/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 30/08/05
US Ambassador to Serbia-Montenegro Michael Polt confirmed earlier this month that Washington has invited authorities in Belgrade to sign two agreements on military co-operation -- the Security and Co-operation Agreement (SCA) and the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).
It is now up to authorities of the state union to decide whether to accept the agreements, Polt said. 
Although neither implies a possible opening of US bases in Serbia-Montenegro, they would stand as a "cornerstone" of future co-operation, he added.
The United States wants to see Serbia-Montenegro fulfil its international obligations and will help as much as possible, Polt said. 
However, he also stressed that membership in the Partnership for Peace programme and NATO was not possible for Serbia-Montenegro until it turns over wanted war crimes suspects -- including former Bosnian Serb military chief Ratko Mladic -- to the UN tribunal in The Hague.
Praising Serbia-Montenegro as a proud and responsible country that belongs in a united Europe, Polt urged authorities to take the necessary step of full co-operation with The Hague.
The two agreements offered by the United States would help Serbia-Montenegro modernise its army, make economic progress and fully adopt principles such as democracy, civil control of the army and a joint defence system with other Euro-Atlantic members, Polt said. 
They do not constitute a "shortcut to NATO," but represent steps that each prospective NATO member must take, he added.
Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic said the federal authorities have received the draft agreements and are reviewing them. 
The two constitutent republics will at the same time issue their own stands on the agreements, he said.
Serbia-Montenegro's special envoy to NATO, Branislav Milinkovic, told Belgrade media that many European countries have benefited from similar agreements with the United States. 
The deals could help spur defence reforms, he said.
The Security and Co-operation Agreement covers two areas -- international military education and foreign military financing. 
The Status of Forces Agreement regulates the status of members of the US military who would stay in Serbia-Montenegro on the basis of the first agreement. 
It regulates customs and tax obligations of US personnel, their drivers' licenses, as well as which courts would have jurisdiction in case of any violations of the law.
