30/08/2005
(The Washington Times, UPI - 30/08/05;
AP, Reuters, AFP, AFX, EUobserver, EurActiv, VOA, Kathimerini - 29/08/05)
Turkey can start accession talks with the EU on 3 October without recognising the Greek Cypriot government, as this is not a legal requirement for the process to begin, European Commission (EC) spokeswoman Francoise Le Bail said Monday (29 August).
But since the negotiations will involve all 25 EU members, including Cyprus, it is in Ankara's interest to defuse tensions over the issue, she said.
"It is clear that every effort that Turkey can make before 3 October will be very helpful," Le Bail said.
"But there is no legal obligation for Turkey to do more than it has done already."
Last month, Turkey met the final requirement for starting entry talks with the Union by signing a protocol extending its customs accord with the EU to its 10 new members, including Cyprus.
But it also issued a declaration stating that signing the document did not imply recognition of the Greek Cypriot government.
The issue is expected to come up this week, when EU foreign ministers hold a two-day informal meeting in the Welsh city of Newport, starting Thursday.
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul is also expected to attend the meeting, hosted by the EU's current presidency, Britain.
Gul will likely be asked to clarify his country's stance.
According to French President Jacques Chirac, formerly a strong supporter of Turkey's EU bid, Ankara's declaration created political and legal problems and such an attitude was not the kind a country seeking EU membership was expected to demonstrate.
His spokesperson has suggested that France would raise the issue of Turkey's refusal to recognise Cyprus during the upcoming meeting in Newport.
"Following its unilateral declaration on Cyprus, Turkey must make clarifications and assure the 25-nation EU of its willingness to fully respect its commitments," Chirac told a conference of French ambassadors in Paris on Monday.
"The opening of negotiations with Turkey is just the start of a long and difficult path whose end is uncertain."
According to the Greek daily Kathimerini, Nicosia is likely to push the EC to officially condemn Ankara's non-recognition of the Greek Cypriot administration.
However, a report published Monday by the EUobserver said the EC will more likely stress that Turkey has met all the legal conditions for launching the talks, and that any move concerning the recognition of Cyprus should be governed by the UN.
Turkey's EU bid is likely to be further complicated following the 18 September general elections in Germany.
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, a staunch Turkish supporter, is widely expected to lose his post to the leader of the opposition Christian Democratic Union, Angela Merkel.
The view promoted by Merkel and her party is that Turkey should not be offered full membership, rather a "privileged partnership".
If the German and French leaders start adding hurdles in the run-up to Turkey's talks, then they are very unlikely to start on time, the EUobserver report said.
