30/11/2005
(International Crisis Group, Reuters, Makfax, Radio B92, DTT-NET - 29/11/05)
An influential international advocacy group is urging the EU to move towards at least a partial liberalisation of its visa regime for four Western Balkan countries, arguing that the current policy is jeopardising the region's progress and stability.
The present visa regime towards Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Macedonia, and Serbia-Montenegro, including Kosovo, "is fostering resentment, inhibiting progress on trade, business, education and more open civil societies, and as a result contributing negatively to regional stability," the International Crisis Group (ICG) said in a new report, EU Visas and the Western Balkans.
At its 2003 summit in Thessaloniki, the EU committed itself to a more liberal visa regime for the Western Balkan countries, but has failed to act on that promise, said the 26-page paper, released Tuesday (29 November).
The ICG acknowledged that full visa liberalisation would probably be more appropriate when the four Balkan countries are closer to EU entry.
At the same time, however, it urged the bloc to begin negotiations on the issue and outline the steps each of the countries must take to obtain an improved visa regime from the EU.
For starters, the ICG said, EU member states should consider a selective visa liberalisation regime for certain groups, including academics, the business and trade community, civil society, the media and officials.
The Union should also move towards broader visa facilitation for all applicants, the group said.
"This is not about emigration, permanent residence or threats to EU jobs," Nicholas Whyte, the ICG's Europe programme director, said Tuesday.
"This is about liberalising the limited-term visa regime, primarily for students, business people and tourists, and making the application process simpler, faster and less painful for all.
The current system is breeding resentment by making the majority pay a high price for a criminal minority."
The ICG also urged the four Balkan countries to take measures such as the conclusion of bilateral agreements with EU member states on the readmission of all third-country nationals who arrive in the EU from their territory.
Other recommended steps include the adoption of legislation incriminating the violation of EU member state immigration laws, imposition of sanctions on the facilitators of illegal immigration and implementation of integrated border management, in line with EU standards.
In addition, Albania, BiH, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro were urged to "continue with efforts regionally, nationally and across entity/state/republic borders, to fight organised crime, drugs, illegal immigration, trafficking, money laundering and terrorism".
Stressing that reform efforts in the region are still on shaky ground because citizens have seen few tangible rewards, the ICG said it is time they are offered some.
"The new Balkans generation, responsible for taking the region out of narrow-minded nationalism and conflict towards a European future, is not being given the necessary tools," said Neil Campbell, an ICG research analyst.
"A visa policy that inevitably fosters resentment towards the EU is certainly no way to make progress -- neither in the region, nor in Europe overall."
