30/08/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -30/08/05
Mayoral elections were held in Skopje's predominantly Roma municipality of Suto Orizari on 21 August.
With no candidate achieving an outright victory, the vote will now go to a runoff, to be held on 4 September.
The candidate of the United Emancipation Party, Erduan Iseni, received 2,626 votes in the first round.
He will face off against the second-place finisher, Saban Seliu of the Roma Union, who won 1,874.
Originally held in March along with the rest of Macedonia, Suto Orizari's mayoral race had to be repeated because the original winner, Amdi Bajram, was ineligible to assume the post, having been convicted in a textiles embezzlement case and sentenced to four years in prison.
Despite this rocky start, observers are assessing the repeat elections as fair and without serious irregularities.
Representatives of NGOs that monitored the vote say it was held in a peaceful and democratic atmosphere, marking a significant improvement from past elections in Suto Orizari.
Some isolated cases of noncompliance were noted, but these did not significantly affect the results.
The main concern, according to the monitors, was the disappointing turnout.
"The most disadvantageous thing in this election was abstention of the electorate," said Sarita Jasarova of the Roma Lobby-Group.
"The first round of early elections for the mayor of Suto Orizari was held in a peaceful atmosphere and without serious incidents," said Slavica Biljarovska of MOST.
"But the turnout was very low."
Only 4,653 (or 23.37 per cent) out of 19,908 eligible voters cast their ballots in the first round, according to the National Election Commission.
As the race heats up for the second round, the candidates are trading barbs.
The Roma Union has accused Iseni of having violated election rules by allegedly campaigning on Election Day.
Iseni has not commented on the accusations, but insists that his party will beat the Roma Union by an even larger margin in the runoff.
