31/01/2006
By Amr Obradovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 31/01/06
Christian Schwarz-Schilling, a German diplomat who served for over ten years as a mediator in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), succeeds Paddy Ashdown on Tuesday (31 January) as the international community's top envoy in the country. 
He has said he will focus on boosting the economy, promoting BiH's bid to join NATO, and reducing the high representative's role and powers while giving more responsibility to Bosnian politicians.
His appointment marks a turning point, as it follows the three and a half year tenure of Ashdown, BiH's longest-serving high representative. 
Using the Bonn Powers conferred by the Peace Implementation Council, Ashdown vigorously pushed BiH along the path of reform. 
Schwarz-Schilling takes over at a key juncture on that road, with BiH politicians mulling key constitutional changes that would represent a major step beyond the Dayton Agreement.
Reports in the Sarajevo media have focused on the strong moral stance the 75-year-old Schwarz-Schilling took in 1992, when he resigned from a ministerial post in the Kohl administration to protest Germany's inaction over the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia.
"Based on the information I have gotten and the experience which BiH has gotten with Schwarz-Schilling, I think that his term will be significantly different from that of Paddy Ashdown," says sociologist and University of Mostar professor Slavo Kukic, the author of the recently published book Ashdown's era in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"A few details confirm this: he was a member of parliament in Germany, minister in government and he's acknowledged in the world of business as well. 
Recently he helped arrange jobs between Deutsche Telecom and China. 
He's a man of enormous experience and he emphasises citizen's rights over collective rights, which is very important in today's BiH. 
All the facts tell me that this country will be better with him and that he is going to have an integrating role," Kukic says.
However, major challenges await, warns Sarajevo publicist Ivan Lovrenovic. 
"The general social-economic and demographic situation is disastrous. 
Return and sustainable survival of refugees and expatriates isn't even close to being finished. 
Whole areas of the country remain ethnically cleansed … without any serious chance of return," he says.
While Washington and the international community have pressed hard for constitutional reforms, more fundamental changes to the two-entity structure seem out of the question, Lovrenovic says. 
Until that basic issue is tackled, BiH will likely remain a divided country with an asymmetrical political structure, he adds.
