29/12/2005
(Reporter.gr - 29/12/05;
AP, Reporter.gr, Serbian Government, Radio B92 - 28/12/05;
Slovenia Business Week - 27/12/05)
This year marks a peak in terms of investments in Serbia, and improvements in the framework for foreign investments should bring about further growth in 2006, the government said in a statement Wednesday (28 December).
In 2005, investments reached a total of 1.5 billion euros, the statement quoted Serbian Minister of International Economic Relations Milan Parivodic as saying.
"I expect that in the upcoming year, foreign investments will be worth at least 2 billion euros, but that depends directly on our ability to adopt world standards in the regulation of the framework for foreign investments," he added.
The top priority, according to the minister, was to carry out land reforms to allow the sale of city building land and its privatisation.
Given enough willpower, the required measures could be completed within "a short period of time", said Parivodic, who also chairs Serbia's land reform commission.
Another measure that could help boost investment is a new mortgage law, which significantly broadens the range of mortgageable immoveable properties and considerably shortens the time frame needed to sell them, Parivodic said.
"Under the previous law it became evident that three to five years were needed to sell immoveables according to the old court procedure, and now that will be possible in a period of three to six months," the minister said.
According to Parivodic, the measure will boost creditors' security and will give them far more freedom in issuing loans.
"In other words, far more people will be able to get loans, which will lead to low cost loans."
Serbia, whose economic reform efforts were praised in a World Bank report earlier this year, says the implementation of new regulations on the sale of companies -- and the writing off of their outstanding debts to the state -- has resulted in the acceleration of privatisation deals over the past six months.
According to Privatisation Agency Director Miodrag Djordjevic, Serbia's proceeds from the privatisation of 501 companies this year will total 390m euros.
The agreed-on investments add up to 118.2m euros.
Of the companies privatised this year, 204 were sold through auction, 15 by tender and 282 state owned stock packages were sold on the capital market.
"In 2006 we plan on selling 300 companies on auction, announcing 30 tenders and selling 250 stock packages from the Stock Fund's portfolio," Djordjevic said.
Major companies slated for privatisation by tender next year include an oil refinery near Belgrade, a major beer brewery and several shipping and transport companies.
