29/12/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 29/12/05
Talks on constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) will continue after the New Year's holidays, with representatives of the eight major political parties seeking to resolve a key disagreement over the future shape of the BiH presidency.
Speaking after the last round ended on 21 December in Sarajevo, US Ambassador to BiH Douglas McElhaney stressed the need to "go beyond partisan politics and take an attitude of statesmanship".
"Those who expected possible answers on the future of the presidency might be disappointed with last talks. 
But if you wanted to see all cards on the table than you should not be unsatisfied," the ambassador said.
US officials have said they back the idea of single BiH president with clearly defined authorities, but the parties from the Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), oppose such a move.
"There is no way for one president," said RS President Dragan Cavic, who backs the current tripartite presidency. 
A number of compromise solutions have been floated, including a single president with two deputies, each from a different ethnic group. 
But RS representatives continue to insist that presidency members need to rotate every 16 months.
Dragan Covic, the head of the major Croat party -- the Croat Democratic Union (HDZ) -- also favours the tripartite presidency, but without the rotation. 
His Bosniak counterpart, Party of Democratic Action (SDA) leader and current BiH presidency member Sulejman Tihic, opposes the tripartite presidency in its current shape.
Disputes have also arisen over how a president or presidency would be elected in the future. 
The opposition parties, including the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and the Croatian People's Union (HNZ), insist the institution has to be elected by the BiH Parliamentary Assembly. 
But the SDA expressed the view that voters should elect a president, with possible deputies.
Tihic told reporters that some progress was achieved on the issue of presidential competencies and authorities. 
The participants generally agreed that the head of the state would represent the state, appoint ambassadors and call upon special sessions of the Parliamentary Assembly and the Council of Ministers.
"It will be much harder to find an agreement on reshaping of the state parliament. 
So the hardest talks are yet to come," warned the head of the SDP, Zlatko Lagumdzija.
Gathering in Washington in November, the eight parties signed a joint statement pledging constitutional reform by March 2006. 
So far, a new constitutional amendment has been agreed upon that would give extra powers to the prime minister of the central government.
On Wednesday, the RS Parliament adopted a constitutional amendment providing for entity competencies in the field of defence to be transferred to the state level. 
The RS Defence Ministry and Army will be abolished starting on 1 January, paving the way for a single defence ministry and military command in BiH.
