28/11/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 28/11/05
As part of its economic programme, the Macedonian government is preparing to issue the country's first Eurobonds, totaling 150m euros. 
The agent will be the prestigious international firm Citigroup. 
Funds from the bond issue will be used to restructure Macedonia's foreign debt.
"With the issuance of our first Eurobond we will generate resources to lengthen the maturity of our foreign debt and cushion the decline in official financing," the government said in a letter of intent submitted to the IMF earlier this year.
According to the finance ministry, the first Eurobonds will be available in December. 
Promotion of the Eurobonds in the major stock markets around the world will follow. 
Finance Minister Nikola Popovski said the government is currently studying recent occurrences in the international capital market where the bonds will be sold.
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski raised the idea when he outlined the government's economic strategy in May. 
"The possible issuing of Eurobonds would be a serious positive signal for foreign investors for the security of their capital invested in the Republic of Macedonia," he said, adding that his administration would review and analyse the experiences of other countries that have issued such bonds.
The move is part of a broader effort by the Buckovski administration to shift Macedonia away from dependence on official balance of payments support to reliance on market financing. 
The government is hoping to increase international reserves and develop its borrowing capacity, both domestically and abroad. 
Thanks to positive reviews of credit ratings agencies, Macedonia is now "on the map for institutional investors", the government told the IMF in its letter of intent.
During the past months, there has been some disagreement over where the revenue from the Eurobonds should best be invested. 
Some economic experts advocate channeling it into infrastructure projects, arguing that these provide the speediest return on investment.
According to the government, however, Macedonia will benefit from using the money to pay off the debt. 
The interest paid by Macedonia on the Eurobonds will be lower than the amount it is paying for the foreign debt, the administration says.
While the actual interest for Eurobonds is not yet known, past practice has shown that buyers applying for the purchase of the bonds determine it. 
The Macedonian government estimates that the rate will be 10 per cent on an annual basis -- lower than the rate the country is charged in the domestic market through the release of treasury bills.
