29/12/2005
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 29/12/05
Italian Foreign Minister Gianfranco Fini arrived in Kosovo on Wednesday (28 December) for talks with Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi and to visit Italian troops serving with KFOR.
He arrived in the province after visiting Belgrade, where he met with Serbian Boris Tadic.
The focus of Fini's trip has been the upcoming talks on the final status of Kosovo, under UN administration since 1999.
"I had occasion to repeat that the independence of Kosovo has not already been decided," Fini said following his meeting with Kosumi.
"Independence on certain conditions may be the outcome of the negotiations but the authorities in Pristina must, with coherent behavior, show the international community that they can guarantee the respect of international standards."
According to Fini, discussions on the province's future "must go hand in hand with reaching standards especially regarding the multiethnic nature of Kosovo, not just the protection of the Serb minority but also the right of refugees to return home".
In some cases -- especially regarding refugee returns -- the minimum standards are not close to being met, while in other areas there is compliance of greater than 50 per cent, he said.
Citing sharply opposing Serbian and Albanian views of Kosovo's future, Fini said it is clear that "much good will is required on both sides and the EU must play an active role."
After his meeting with Fini, Kosumi emphasised the Kosovo government's interest in developing economic co-operation with Italy.
He also pledged that the government and local institutions in Kosovo are committed to implementing the UN-set standards and to building democracy.
"When we say democratic society, we mean a better Kosovo for all its citizens," the prime minister said.
Fini also paid a visit to the Serbian monastery Visoki Decani, which is under the protection of Italian soldiers.
A planned meeting with Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova was cancelled after Rugova, who is battling lung cancer, had to be hospitalised.
"The condition of President Rugova is stable," Fini told reporters.
"We knew and are aware that he is fighting with all his well known determination against the illness," he said, adding, "there is no immediate danger."
