15/12/2008
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo –15/12/08
The census is one of the many issues dividing politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
After the last census, conducted in 1991, war broke out and an estimated 2.2 million residents left their homes. 
Half of them never returned -- an estimated 400,000 still live abroad.
Representatives of the three main nationalities in BiH -- Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats --agree on scheduling a census for 2011 in line with EU norms. 
However, they disagree on whether respondents need to specify their ethnicity, religion and native tongue. 
Serbs want those questions on the census, while Bosniaks and Croats resist the idea, since many from their communities never returned to their homes.
The European Parliament and EU Council of Ministers adopted legislation this summer on censuses for member countries and candidate countries like BiH. 
EU-prescribed questionnaires do not require a question on ethnicity or nationality.
"It is up to each country to decide whether to add questions. 
[However,] a census conducted in only one [BiH] entity would not satisfy the EU, because we need a census covering the entire state," said EC delegation to BiH head Dimitris Kourkoulas.
The European Commission (EC) warns that BiH will be unable to conduct accession talks if it fails to conduct a census soon. 
The EU's regional development policies and budgetary decisions depend on reliable socio-economic data, without which implementation of EU policies would be impossible.
"By 2013, we must complete a deal on administrative units for our regional policies. 
That is why BiH needs fresh data," said Pierre Mirel, the EC's director for the Western Balkans.
After years of squabbling, a deal by the leaders of the three leading political parties restored hope. 
Party of Democratic Action (SDA) leader Suleiman Tihic, Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) leader Milorad Dodik and Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) leader Dragan Covic agreed that once nationwide legislation on the census passes, the 2011 questionnaire should include questions on ethnicity, religion and language. 
They also agreed to let the 1991 census results determine the representation of nationalities in all state institutions until 2014.
Yet Tihic and Covic lack the parliamentary muscle to guarantee passage of such legislation. 
Their state-level coalition partners, the Party for BiH (SBiH) and HDZ 1990, condemned their proposal. 
Those parties' respective leaders, Haris Silajdzic and Bozo Ljubic, think such census rules cater to the interests of the RS government while dismissing the Bosniaks and Croats' own demands. 
The deal's backers hope to coax several opposition members in the state-level parliament into voting for it.
On the other hand, the EU Council of Ministers applauded the three-party agreement. 
High Representative Miroslav Lajcak said he saw "positive signals", which came after the leaders of the three strongest parties in BiH reached an agreement. 
"That is a step in the right direction, and we now expect its implementation," he said.
The BiH Council of Ministers took the first step by ordering the Statistics Agency to start preparations for a 2011 census and to name members to a working group for drafting a census law. 
It also called on relevant state-level and entity ministries to prepare a programme for those who return between 2009 and 2014. 
Experts estimate the operation will cost 20m euros, or 5 euros per citizen.
Now that 17 years without any record-keeping have passed, experts disagree on just how many people live in BiH. 
In 1991, it had 4,377,033 residents. 
The government believes the number has fallen to 3.8 million. 
In contrast, the US Central Intelligence Agency estimated the population at 4,590,310 -- 48% Bosniaks, 37.1% Serbs, 14.3% Croats and 0.6% others -- in July.
BiH censuses date back to 1879 in Austro-Hungarian times. 
There were 12 of them between 1879 and 1991. 
All of those questionnaires asked respondents to declare their religious affiliation. 
All of the Yugoslav censuses asked for a declaration of nationality as well.
If it does perform the nationwide head count, BiH should be able to compare its findings to those of its neighbours. 
They all found signs of war-related dislocation. 
Croatia's 2001 census showed the population actually shrank by 2.6%. 
The ethnic Serb population collapsed by two-thirds from 12.2% to 4.5%. 
Serbia's 2002 census showed that for the first time in its history senior citizens (over age 65) far outnumbered children (under age 18). 
Montenegro's Serb minority soared from 9% in 1991 to almost 32% in 2003. 
Kosovo plans to count its own population in 2009 for the first time in 28 years.
BiH analysts expect a picture similar to Kosovo's to emerge, one of sweeping demographic change. 
They predict the BiH census will demonstrate what numerous elections have -- very few Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats live where they did at the time of the last census.
