20/06/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 20/06/05
Last month, Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski presented to the public the new economic programme which Macedonian and international experts were preparing for several months.
The 18-page programme includes solutions for three key problems in the Macedonian economy -- insufficient economic growth, unemployment and the deficit in trade and balance of payments.
"The main goal of the measures is a higher job-creating economic growth, which we can achieve by improving the total business ambience, further reinforced restructuring of enterprises and the financial sector, direct supporting of small- and middle-size enterprises, new benefits for export-oriented companies, eliminating the most frequently mentioned barriers to investment, and increasing active measures for employment growth," the prime minister said.
Macedonians are expecting a lot from prominent economic expert and former German Finance Minister Theo Vaigel, who Buckovski has engaged as his advisor.
Polls show that poverty and unemployment rates are high on the list of public concerns.
The jobless rate reached 37 per cent last year, according to some figures, and people are tired of the economic status quo.
Buckovski has staked his political capital on the success of his economic programme, along with efforts towards NATO and EU integration.
He projects that as many as 60,000 job seekers will be employed by the end of next year, thanks to poverty-decreasing measures put forth in the plan.
The target for economic growth over the next few years is a 4 per cent to 5 per cent -- an ambitious goal, considering that average GDP growth between 1992 and 2002 was a dispiriting 0.9 per cent.
"The government and economic experts agree that the country’s growth must be a few points higher than the growth of EU full-fledged market economies.
That is necessary in order to overcome the gap in the levels of economic development in relation to the EU, now that the Republic of Macedonia is striding quickly towards membership," Buckovski said.
To overcome high unemployment, the government plans to inject greater flexibility into the job market, offer subsidies for completion of education and requalification, provide co-funding for jobs, especially in small and medium-size enterprises, engage unemployed people in public works organised by regional employment centres, and work to decrease regional differences in employment rates.
The prime minister also cited the issue of illegal employment.
"What we want to do is to help jobless people who really a need job to get one.
Therefore, we want to know how many of those registered as unemployed are really without a job," Buckovski said.
At the same time, the government plans to stay the course it has mapped out with key international financial institutions -- the IMF, the World Bank, and European organisations -- to achieve accelerated development.
As a positive sign, he can point to the announced approval of a three-year stand by arrangement with the IMF.
Buckovski and his advisers also hope to improve the business climate through measures such as establishing a one-stop-shop system.
This would entail, among other things, supporting small- and middle-size enterprises, accelerating bankruptcy procedures and attracting foreign investors.
As he presented the programme, Buckovski cited plans to sign a co-operation agreement with German electronics giant Siemens, a decision by Russia's Lukoil to construct a network of petrol stations across the country, and the readiness expressed by some investors to pump capital into infrastructure projects once the necessary amendments to the laws on energy and water are made.
Some suspended industrial capacities -- such as the Bucim mine and the heavy metallurgy plant Skopski Leguri -- have become operational again in the past months, Buckovski noted.
By attracting investors and capital, the authorities hope to restart other closed-down companies, he said.
As part of this effort, Buckovski and Finance Minister Nikola Popovski recently attended the EBRD annual meeting, held this year in Belgrade.
According to government sources, the Macedonian delegation was presented with a number of interesting proposals during its meetings with European bankers at the forum.
For example, Germany's Deutsche Bank and the Swiss-based UBS Bank expressed interest in becoming Macedonia’s agents in the issuance of Euro-bonds.
Deutsche Bank also signalled its intention to credit several investment projects in Macedonia.
The issuance of Euro-bonds would send a serious, positive signal to foreign investors regarding the security of capital invested in Macedonia, Buckovski said.
At the same time, it would function as an instrument for infusing the economy with fresh capital, helping to accelerate the recovery.
As part of its strategy for supporting small- and middle-size enterprises, including agriculture, the government anticipates establishing a guarantee fund within the Macedonian Bank for Support and Development.
As much as 30 per cent of the total value of a project would be channelled through this instrument.
To stimulate exports, meanwhile, raw materials imports would be exempted from customs if they are used for export-oriented products.
The proposed measures are ambitious, Buckovski acknowledges.
But he believes the results will be apparent soon.
"We have to solve the problems with the economy, and my team and I are convinced that this is the way that will bear economic results," he said.
