30/09/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 30/09/05
UN tribunal chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte, in Belgrade to assess the level of war crimes co-operation, said Thursday (29 September) that she is pleased with the efforts of authorities. 
At the same time, she called for the handover of top indictee Ratko Mladic by December, the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Agreement.
Del Ponte, who held meetings with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and federal Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic, welcomed the surrender of 16 indictees over the past 12 months, as well as the delivery of documents and access to witnesses. 
However, she expressed regret that six fugitives remain at large, including Mladic, and said the Bosnian Serb wartime commander probably still enjoys the protection of elements within the Serb military.
The Dayton anniversary is the third deadline that has been given for the extradition of Mladic. 
Belgrade missed the first one -- 11 July, marking the 10th anniversary of the 1995 Srebrenica massacre. 
Following that, it had been hoped Mladic would be in The Hague by early October, when talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU are due to start.
Following his meeting with the prosecutor, Kostunica said co-operation with the tribunal is very important, especially in light of the SAA, and that Belgrade will do everything it can to further the co-operation process.
"We are aware that co-operation will strongly affect our negotiations with the EU. 
For that co-operation to be fulfilled is in the vital interests of our country, which go beyond EU integration," he said.
However, authorities in Belgrade continue to insist Mladic cannot be located. 
According to Ljajic, it is impossible to promise his extradition by any given date because that "would mean that someone in the state institutions knows the whereabouts of Mladic".
"Nobody can say where Mladic is at the moment. 
I can only talk about the locations we looked for him, but haven't found him. 
The information we had on him was obviously false," Ljajic insisted. 
He said the state has no interest in defending or hiding any of The Hague indictees, and that it would make no sense for authorities to protect the likes of Mladic or Radovan Karadzic after already having handed over top army and police officials.
