30/09/2005
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 30/09/05
As Romania grapples with the impact of more flooding, the European Investment Bank (EIB) has announced plans to lend around 600m euros to help the country rebuild its damaged road and rail networks.
"The EIB will support Romania in the reconstruction after the recent disastrous floods, being without precedence within the recent decades," EIB Vice President Wolfgang Roth said.
"Under the current situation, Romania needs long-term financing that should not be in contradiction to the strict IMF-criteria imposed on Romania recently," he added.
Romania has been hit by six waves of flooding this year, starting in April and May and continuing into September.
Eight people died in the most recent flooding, which has primarily affected the southeast.
At the popular Black Sea resort of Costinesti -- where seven out of the eight deaths were reported -- the beach has been ravaged and as many as 100 houses destroyed.
In Ialomita county, hundreds of stranded villagers, mostly from the Roma community, had to take refuge in a public school as the waters rose, reaching three metres in some areas.
Hundreds of soldiers have been deployed to shore up dams with sandbags, while some local residents have taken initiative and built their own dikes.
The flooding and torrential rains are also affecting life in Bucharest.
In the new Senate building, lawmakers have been using umbrellas to protect themselves against leaking roofs during debates.
Visiting the capital on Friday, European Commission Vice President Franco Frattini expressed his solidarity with the communities affected by the flooding.
He said more than 500m euros would be coming from different EU institutions and member states to support the necessary reconstruction in affected regions.
"The Commission is actively working to allocate or re-allocate funds coming from different funding mechanisms, such the European Union Solidarity Fund and all the three pre-accession instruments:
PHARE, ISPA and SAPARD."
Political controversy has erupted over the government's handling of the crisis, with the opposition Social Democratic Party accusing President Traian Basescu of "cowardice" and "irresponsibility" for declining to impose a state of emergency.
Rumours have circulated about tension between Basescu and Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, though both have appeared together to co-ordinate the government response and insist that a state of emergency is unnecessary.
The flooding this year has been the worst in decades.
Since April, some 77 people have died and thousands of houses destroyed.
According to the government, the overall damage stands at more than 1.5 billion euros, and economic growth is likely to slow.
Nor is the problem receding.
According to meteorological officials, more rains can be expected in the days to come.
