31/10/2005
(BETA, News Room Finland - 30/10/05; Reuters - 29/10/05; AP, ADN Kronos International, Makfax - 28/10/05)
With the launch of talks on Kosovo's future status quickly approaching, the province's ethnic Albanian leaders were unable Friday (28 October) to agree on a common negotiating strategy.
"I hope that in our next meeting we will have more creativity and understanding for each other's ideas and more tolerance," Veton Surroi, the leader of opposition party ORA, said after a discussion in Pristina.
The team, which will be led by Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova, includes Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi, Assembly Speaker Nexhat Daci, Democratic Party of Kosovo leader Hashim Thaci, and Surroi.
Last Monday, the UN Security Council endorsed starting the status talks, which are expected to begin following the appointment of a special UN envoy. 
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has named former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari as the person likely to be assigned to the job.
Meanwhile, international officials have urged the Kosovo Albanian leaders to step up preparations.
"I think it would be good to have a quick parliament session, and a clear and good resolution that would be a guideline for the negotiating team, enabling it to know what its goal is," UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen was quoted as saying Thursday after a meeting with Rugova.
The talks are expected to initially be in the form of shuttle diplomacy before the parties involved take their seats at the negotiating table.
"(Finding a solution) has to start from first listening to the different parties, even if their views are fairly well known," Reuters quoted Ahtisaari as saying Saturday in an interview with Finnish national broadcaster YLE. 
"Then we need to discuss with them how these problems could be addressed. 
There is still a lot of basic work to be done before any kind of specific discussions can begin," he added.
Ahtisaari, 68, played a key role in international efforts to end the Kosovo conflict in 1999, when he persuaded then-Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to accept NATO's terms. 
He is also given credit for mediating a peace deal between the Indonesian government and the secessionist Free Aceh Movement this summer.
