31/10/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 31/10/05
Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski had a half-hour meeting with US President George W. Bush on Wednesday (26 October), during his visit to the United States.
The two leaders touched on many topics, including progress in reforms, implementation of the Framework Agreement and Macedonia's bid to join Euro-Atlantic structures.
"I welcome the progress you have made in approximation to NATO and the EU," Bush said.
"I know this issue is of enormous importance for you and that is why I thank you for having exchanged with me your considerations about the wish of your country to join NATO and its aspirations for EU membership."
Bush also noted Macedonia's progress in the implementation of the Framework Agreement.
"I appreciate the progress you have made.
You have shown that people with different cultures can live together in peace.
I want to thank you for your leadership."
The US president also expressed gratitude for Macedonia's involvement in the US-led anti-terror coalition and the contribution of Macedonian soldiers in missions in Iraq and Afghanistan.
That contribution will continue, Buckovski assured him.
"Macedonian soldiers will remain in Iraq and Afghanistan as long as it is deemed necessary," he said, adding that Skopje also aims to play a positive and constructive role in the Balkans, particularly now that talks on Kosovo's status are getting under way.
Expressing gratitude for US support, Buckovski singled out for special comment Washington's help in implementing the Ohrid Agreement, as well as US recognition of his country's constitutional name, Republic of Macedonia.
After the meeting, the two met with US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld.
"We are concerned, pleased and are giving our support for the progress you have made towards NATO and we wish you all the best," Rumsfeld said.
"I am happy and think there is a good, solid progress and people in NATO recognise that, which is a good sign." He declined to give a specific timetable for Macedonia's entry into the Alliance, noting that such as decision would be reached by consensus among NATO members.
Nevertheless, he said, Washington will continue to back Macedonia's efforts.
Speaking to reporters, Buckovski said his government will be working for a "clear formulation that Macedonia will be accepted in NATO that will emerge from the 2006 NATO summit.
After talks we have had in the Pentagon, it is evident that there will be a summit for enlargement in 2008.
In the meantime, it is essential to receive a signal, to get an invitation."
During his trip, Buckovski also met with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and World Bank President Paul Wolfowitz.
In addition, he opened a new Macedonian Embassy building in Washington.
