31/10/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 31/10/05
Serbia's inflation rate has been a rising source of concern over the past several weeks, with the government conceding that the annual rate for 2005 is likely to be several points higher than the targeted nine per cent.
Citing world oil prices, Trade Minister Bojan Dimitrijevic has predicted a rate of between 13 per cent and 15 per cent, and many analysts say even that is a rosy figure.
Montenegro, by contrast, is on track to achieve an annual rate of 3.2 per cent, and has kept inflation in single digits for the past four years.
Between January and March of this year, inflation in Serbia shot up three points, from 14.4 per cent to 17.4 per cent, according to Central Bank figures.
The rate has since hovered around the 17 per cent level.
While September's year-on-year figure of 16.5 per cent was the lowest in seven months, the drop comes ahead of the winter season with its expected spike in heating and other energy costs.
Annual inflation will be "in the best case scenario, about 17 per cent," according to the Institute for Market Research.
That's three points higher than last year's figure of 13.7 per cent, and dramatically higher than the single-digit figures which the government had originally promised.
Consumers have been feeling the pinch as rising crude prices translate into higher agricultural and food prices.
Pork prices, for instance, rose 10 per cent.
"Those who spend 50 per cent of their budget on food, for them the inflation rate is 25 per cent," says Miroslav Prokopijevic, director of the Free Market Centre.
According to Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, higher food prices are the single greatest source of inflationary pressure in Serbia.
Although oil is doubtless a factor, not all agree it is the main factor.
After all, the rising price of crude impacts the world in general, but not all countries are suffering spikes in inflation.
The real culprit in Serbia, some argue, is excessive state spending and the government's failure to rein in the bloated public sector.
"The price of oil has risen throughout the world, both in the Eurozone and in the United States.
Inflation in the Eurozone is at present 2.1 per cent and in the United States 3.2 per cent.
In Montenegro it is about 3.5 per cent and in Serbia about 17 per cent," Radio B92 quoted economic analyst Miroslav Prokpijevic as saying.
"The main factor in inflation in Serbia is state spending, second is the failure to overhaul public and social companies and third is the closed market, which allows companies to raise prices regardless of the quality of their services.
The oil price is only the fourth factor in Serbia," he added.
Meanwhile, the prices of electricity and central heating are heading upwards, as suppliers battle to cover costs and maintain their facilities.
Consumers in some areas already have seen dramatically higher utility bills, and even these increases, say industry representatives, are not sufficient.
