28/12/2005
(Novinar, NTV - 28/12/05; AP, Reuters, RFE/RL, Sofia News Agency, BNN, bTV, Vsekiden.com, The White House - 27/12/05, Sofia Echo - 26/12/05)
The last batch of Bulgarian troops has left Iraq, Defence Minister Vesselin Bliznakov said Tuesday (27 December), announcing the end of his country's military presence there.
"The last unit of 130 servicemen has been relocated at a safe place in Kuwait since last night," the minister said. 
The group, he added, was expected to return to Bulgaria before New Year's Eve.
Bulgaria joined the international coalition in Iraq in 2003 with a 480-strong battalion, which was eventually downsized to a 400-troop light infantry unit.
In May, Bulgarian lawmakers set the end of 2005 as the deadline for withdrawing the country's contingent from Iraq. 
Bulgaria had planned to begin the pullout operation earlier in the year, but later decided to stick to its year-end target, so that Bulgarian military personnel could help provide security during the 15 December parliamentary elections in Iraq.
The Bulgarian battalion, which has been serving under Polish command, has handed over its duties to Iraqi forces.
Since the start of the US-led operation, Bulgaria has lost 13 soldiers and six civilians, including those killed by hostage-takers.
The announcement Tuesday of the end of Bulgarian military presence in Iraq coincided with the second anniversary of the death of the first five Bulgarian soldiers killed during a suicide bombing attack on the battalion's first base in Karbala. 
The Bulgarian contingent was later relocated to the city of Diwaniya.
According to the defence ministry, Bulgarian military personnel have helped many Iraqis in the ongoing reconstruction process in the country, including in the rebuilding of schools, restoring of water supplies and other infrastructure projects.
In the past two years, Bulgaria's military completed 175 projects, worth more than $5m, Bulgaria's English-language Sofia Echo weekly reported Monday, citing a recent defence ministry statement. 
During the past several months, Bulgarian instructors have reportedly provided more than 500 hours of training for Iraqi troops, carried out more than 500 patrols and 227 escorts, and provided security for civilians and for Multinational Division Central South troops.
Bliznakov said Tuesday that Bulgaria would "most likely" continue its military involvement in Iraq next year by sending a 120-strong non-combat unit to guard the Ashraf refugee camp, some 70km north of Baghdad.
On Tuesday, Ukraine also announced the pullout of its last troops from Iraq.
Asked to comment on the withdrawal of the Bulgarian and Ukrainian militaries, White House spokesman Trent Duffy said, "International countries' obligations or commitments to Iraq are those countries' decisions to make."
"A country's decision on whether, or what level to support the mission in Iraq, either with troops or with money, or with other resources, is the country's decision to make on its own," the spokesman said. 
"And we respect those decisions."
