27/07/2005
(OSCE, AP - 12/07/05)
Croatia has made significant progress in developing democratic institutions, enhancing media freedoms and democratising the police force, the OSCE says in its latest report on the country.
However, the report calls for further efforts in the areas of refugee returns, rule of law and minority rights.
"Croatia has made significant progress in areas covered by the [OSCE] mission's mandate," the head of the OSCE mission in Zagreb said on 12 July.
"However, outstanding issues faced by Croatia in areas such as refugee return and rule of law are more complex and sensitive, and require more time and more consistent efforts," Ambassador Jorge Fuentes added.
The document analyses developments in the six areas of OSCE activity -- media freedom, minority protection, policing, political affairs, return and integration, and rule of law -- from December 2004 to July 2005.
According to the 55-nation organisation, a key event during the reporting period was the conference in Sarajevo on 31 January, which brought together the ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro to deal with the refugee issue.
The meeting led to the adoption of a joint declaration, under which the three countries pledged to solve the refugee problem in Southeastern Europe by the end of 2006.
They also agreed to initiate joint and individual activities towards that end and pledged to develop national plans to address refugee issues in their respective countries.
Croatia presented its plan to the international community on 6 July.
At least 300,000 Croatian Serbs were displaced as a result of the 1991-1995 conflict in the country.
Nearly ten years later, about 117,000 have been registered by the Croatian authorities as having returned, the report says, adding that the sustainability of return remains limited.
One factor for this is the lack of access to housing for refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) who lived in socially owned flats before the conflict.
"Former holders of occupancy/tenancy rights … are the largest remaining refugee and IDP category lacking access to housing," according to the OSCE.
The report notes that the measures adopted since 2000 to alleviate that situation "are still largely unimplemented".
Among the other factors impeding sustainable returns are the lack of jobs and economic opportunities and the persistent lack of access to basic infrastructures, such as electricity and water supply, in some refugee return areas.
Fuentes noted that the government of Prime Minister Ivo Sanader has pledged some important steps, including the adoption of an electoral law later this year and the implementation of the national plan for refugee issues.
"When Croatia carries out these two steps, as well as its commitments towards the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the implementation of the [OSCE] mission mandate could be very well advanced," Fuentes said.
