27/12/2005
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 27/12/05
Out of 800 shareholding companies listed on the Belgrade Stock Exchange (BSE), only the shares of 34 companies are actually being traded. 
Even among these companies, none is willing to rate itself according to the international standards as applied at the BSE.
"Serbian managers do not wish for the public to judge how successful they are," says Gordana Dostanic, director of the Belgrade Stock Exchange. 
The managers, she says, know that rising or falling stock prices can serve as a gauge of whether they are doing a good job.
In Serbia, privatisation is half complete, with only large systems and parts of public enterprises remaining. 
With less and less room for direct purchase at auctions or tenders, the stock exchange is the place where transfer of ownership should be taking place.
One major obstacle is lack of information. 
Investors do not know which shares they can purchase, and shareholders do not know whether to sell their shares and at what price. 
The state tolerates breaches of the law that stipulates that shareholding companies must submit information to the Stock Exchange. 
Too often, when companies submit reports, they are so slim that investors cannot reach any conclusions.
According to Dostanic, the state must get involved if it wishes for the capital market to develop. 
Laws also need to be harmonised, both within the legal system and with the EU. 
Shares of the largest state companies need to be on the stock exchange -- including Serbia Telecom, the oil and gas industry, the railway, and the airline company.
Such moves would also help keep foreign investors, who currently account for 60 per cent of the trading on the BSE. 
In order for them to remain, they need better market material. 
If this does not take place, the newly established private pension funds may have trouble finding something to invest in. 
The same goes for the investment funds that could be set up if parliament adopts the necessary legislation.
"In any case, investments are very low, and it would be catastrophic if funds were to be forced to take this small amount of capital elsewhere," Dostanic says.
Neighbouring countries have provided models to follow. 
The Zagreb Stock Exchange has exceptional support in Croatia. 
National television reports on the stock exchange every evening. 
Effective legislation is in place; just as importantly, it is enforced. 
If shareholding companies do not place their shares on the stock exchange or do not provide all information, they are liable to face criminal proceedings.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, privatisation is being conducted through the stock exchange, while in Montenegro, the shares of state companies are being traded on the stock exchange. 
The same is the case in Bulgaria and Romania. 
Wherever a Southeast European government has had a strategy, the financial markets have exhibited significant increases in foreign investments.
