26/08/2005
(The Times, Radio B92 - 26/08/05;
SEE Security Monitor, Reuters, Beta - 25/08/05)
A leading member of the Serbian Orthodox Church (SOC) has urged fugitive Radovan Karadzic to surrender to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
"If I had to ask Radovan Karadzic one question it would be 'do you want to continue living in a hole like a hunted animal, or would it be better to go to The Hague?'" Amfilohije Radovic, Metropolitan of Montenegro and the Littoral, said in an interview with the Times on Thursday (25 August).
"This is his personal decision, and just as I wouldn't want someone to impose their will on me, I wouldn't like to do the same to him," Amfilohije, who is considered to be Karadzic's spiritual father, told the Times.
"But I expect him to make that decision.-- just as he took responsibility to lead the Serbs from Bosnia.
I expect him to do the right thing, to take such responsibility upon himself."
The ICTY indicted the former Bosnian Serb leader 10 years ago, charging him with multiple counts of war crimes for his role in the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
He also faces two counts of genocide in connection with the 43-month siege of Sarajevo and the 1995 Srebrenica massacre.
Karadzic has been on the run for more than eight years now and is widely believed to be hiding in the eastern parts of BiH or in Montenegro.
In late July, Karadzic's wife made a surprise public appeal.
"I beg you with all my heart and soul to surrender," Ljiljana Zelen-Karadzic said in an interview with AP Television News on 28 July.
"It will be a sacrifice for us, for the sake of your family."
Noting the tremendous pressure that Karadzic's fugitive status has brought on his family, Amfilohije told the Times that were he in such a situation, his choice would be to surrender.
"I can't say what he should do, but I can say what I would do.
I would go to The Hague," he said.
Described as a supporter and confidant of the Karadzic family, the Metropolitan has denied allegations that he is hiding the ICTY indictee in church property in Montenegro, insisting that he has not seen Karadzic since 1995.
He had given a similar advice to other Serb commanders who recently turned themselves in to the ICTY, the cleric said.
The Metropolitan's remarks follow a report the independent Montenegrin weekly Monitor carried Thursday, suggesting that Karadzic could turn himself in as early as September, ahead of the scheduled start of Serbia-Montenegro's negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU in early October.
Citing sources close to authorities, the Monitor said talks on Karadzic's surrender have intensified recently and that his transfer to the ICTY was being prepared in co-operation with Serbian security services.
The handover of all war crimes suspects wanted by the ICTY is a major condition Serbia-Montenegro and other former Yugoslav republics involved in the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s must meet to be able to join EU and NATO structures.
