26/08/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times -- 26/08/05
Following a recent rise in attacks by Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) terrorists, authorities in Ankara have launched a new strategy for addressing the problem.
During a visit to Diyarbakir earlier this month, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said the solution lies in strengthening democracy. 
Turkey's National Security Council (MGK) subsequently met to discuss new measures aimed at boosting the economic development of southeastern Turkey, which has been stymied by 20 years of clashes with the PKK.
According to a report prepared by the MGK General Secretaria, the resurgence in violence in part reflects internal divisions within the PKK, whose leaders have been quarrelling about the group's future direction. 
Another reason is the upcoming adoption, expected in September, of Turkey's new antiterrorism law.
Tens of thousands of people have died as a result of the PKK's separatist campaign. 
In 1999, following the capture of its leader, Abdullah Ocalan, the group declared a unilateral ceasefire and later changed its name. 
In June 2005, however, it decided to end the ceasefire and resume armed conflict, especially in the predominantly Kurdish areas of southeastern Turkey.
Worried that the bad old days of bloodshed and government crackdowns could return, NGOs and some Kurdish intellectuals have urged the PKK to lay down its arms, while also calling on Ankara to grant a broad-based amnesty. 
A new Kurdish political movement led by former Democracy Party (DEP) deputies Leyla Zana, Orhan Dogan, Selim Sadak and Hatip Dicle has asked the PKK to declare an unconditional and indefinite ceasefire.
Meanwhile, the prime minister's statements emphasising democracy have raised hope that the threat of violence can be defused through conciliation. 
Fifteen Kurdish associations, 30 unions, 18 business groups and the Diyarbakır Democracy Platform have backed Erdogan, who risked fierce criticism from Turkish nationalists and some opposition politicians by acknowledging that the "Kurdish question" must be addressed. 
Minority rights is among the issues Turkey has to face as part of its bid to join the EU, with membership talks expected to begin on 3 October. 
The country has already implemented some reforms in this direction, including the lifting of prohibitions on Kurdish-language broadcasting and educational courses.
At least one PKK leader appears to have responded favourably to the government's initiatives. 
Zubeyir Aydar, who is also a former DEP deputy, issued a written statement declaring a one-month ceasefire and saying the recent steps taken by Ankara are an indication of the government's sincerity.
