26/07/2005
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times - 26/07/05
The Central Bank of Montenegro (CBM) established a Regulatory Credit Bureau on 27 June. 
It will provide banks with information about client credit, with the aim of boosting confidence in lending activities. 
The bureau will also simplify the acquisition of new credit clients.
According to the head of the Department for Bank Control, Marko Tintor, the first data under the amended decree on bank reports was submitted to the Bureau on 30 April. 
During the first phase of implementation, Tintor said, the data will be accessible to the Control Department of the CBM, which initiated the opening of the Credit Bureau. 
The data may be exchanged with other banks and customers in the future.
The Credit Bureau, Tintor explained, bases its work on the data collected from banks, which is then analysed and entered into the bureau's database. 
The Credit Bureau is meant to provide a more complete, precise and dynamic examination of the credit risk of individual banks, as well as of the overall system. 
Credit liabilities, history, exposure to various industries and approved interest rates that clients have with their banks will all be tracked, Tintor said.
The data will be used for tracing potential credit risk transfers among banks, and for better direct control. 
It will also provide a database for improved quality control of the market and operational risk in banks, invoicing and keeping track of the average weighted interest rate. 
The statistical data and analysis that the Credit Bureau offers will be a useful indicator of trends in the credit industry.
Another benefit of the Credit Bureau is a more rapid approval of loans to potential clients. 
Potential users will receive loans more easily due to the abridged process the bureau will provide, and clients with a good credit history will receive better interest rates.
Furthermore, the Credit Bureau will enhance the investment climate and send positive signals to potential investors, Tintor said. 
The fact that a country keeps records of assets and liabilities is one of the basic signals pertaining to the level of security in its national economy.
The introduction of this long-awaited information exchange facility will bolster the creation of a credit culture and Montenegro's overall investment climate, according to Tintor.
