28/09/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times -- 28/09/05
Croatia will get nearly 219m euros from the World Bank under two loans approved earlier this month.
A 150m-euro Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL) will underpin measures aimed at improving the investment climate and public sector efficiency, while a second Bank loan, worth 68.7m euros, will back educational reforms.
The PAL is the first in a series of three such loans proposed under the Bank's 2005-2008 Country Assistance for Croatia.
In addition to supporting the government's programme for boosting economic growth, it is intended to help Croatia meet the EU accession criteria.
"Successful integration with the EU calls for intensive structural and institutional reforms, and the PAL supports the Croatian government in that effort," Anand Seth, World Bank Country director for Croatia, Romania and Bulgaria, said earlier this month.
"It is an ambitious and challenging agenda, but implementation is vital if Croatia is to improve the public sector's capacity and provide an enabling environment for the private sector," he added.
The loan will provide support under three pillars:
improving the investment climate, strengthening governance and enhancing fiscal sustainability of sector programmes.
Privatisation or liquidation of state-owned enterprises, strengthening the judiciary, improving public administration efficiency, rationalising social benefits, and improving the sustainability of Croatia's pension system and railways are among the specific areas where the government is expected to take action.
The loan will help achieve a targeted 10 per cent increase in private sector share, which currently stands at 60 per cent of GDP.
It is also expected to lead to a reduction in general government expenditures from 52 per cent of GDP in 2003 to 46 per cent in 2008.
The fiscal deficit should drop from 6.3 per cent of GDP in 2003 to below 3 per cent in 2008.
Other targets the loan is expected to help meet include a 50 per cent reduction of the case backlog in the judicial sector by the end of 2008 and a reduction of subsidies to enterprises to below 2.2 per cent of GDP in 2007 compared to 3.4 per cent in 2003.
The public sector wage bill should also be cut from 11 per cent of GDP in 2004 to below 9.5 per cent of GDP, closer to the average of 8 per cent for the new EU member states.
The second loan approved by the Bank will support the implementation of the priority measures under the Croatian government's Education Sector Development Plan 2005-2010, approved in June.
"The social benefits of education, specifically the synergies between education and the promotion of a good investment climate, constitute a primary rationale for the public funding of education in Croatia," said Seth.
"A good investment climate provides opportunities and incentives for firms … to invest productively, create jobs, and expand.
It thus plays a central role in growth and poverty reduction," he said.
