28/09/2005
(OHR Morning Media Brief - 28/09/05; OSCE, FENA, AP, SEE Security Monitor - 27/09/05)
During a visit to Sarajevo Tuesday (27 September), the OSCE chairman-in-office, Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, called for implementation of crucial police reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) as well as full co-operation with The Hague tribunal. 
While welcoming the progress BiH has made in a number of areas, notably defence reforms, he urged the country to address the problems impeding its progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
"The OSCE recognises [the] accomplishments as well as the progress being made by Bosnia and Herzegovina with the defence reforms and respect for the OSCE politico-military commitments, but there remain challenges ahead," Rupel said.
While in Sarajevo, he met with members of the tripartite presidency, Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic and other members of the BiH Council of Ministers. 
He also held talks with High Representative Paddy Ashdown, European Commission delegation head Ambassador Michael Humphreys and other key members of the international community.
A European future is the only realistic long-term solution for BiH and the region, Rupel said, voicing his country's support for the aspirations of the Western Balkan countries to join the bloc.
Slovenia, which took over the rotating 12-month OSCE chairmanship from Bulgaria on 1 January, is the only EU and NATO member among the former Yugoslav republics. 
Of the others, Croatia is hoping to start its EU membership talks soon, Macedonia is awaiting recognition as an official EU candidate and Serbia-Montenegro is likely to start talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) within the coming weeks.
That leaves BiH as the only former Yugoslav republic that has yet to make the first formal step towards building closer ties with the Union. 
The country had expected the green light for starting SAA talks in May, but the process has stalled over the failure by BiH's main political parties to reach an agreement on police reform. 
The Serb Democratic Party, the leading party in BiH's Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), objects to the idea of creating police districts that cross entity boundaries, as called for by EU-backed police reform principles.
Following his meeting with Rupel, Ivanic -- who heads another Bosnian Serb political grouping, the Party of Democratic Progress -- told reporters that he wants the police reform deadlock to be broken as soon as possible and is ready to propose a compromise.
Speaking on Tuesday, Principal Deputy High Representative Larry Butler said RS's actions on police reform would be the decisive factor affecting the EU's stance on BiH's integration prospects, adding that this week is crucial. 
If the stalemate is resolved by 3 October, when the EU foreign ministers are scheduled to meet in Brussels, a swift change of positions could result, he said.
Butler welcomed the recent statements that RS cabinet is working on a new proposal for police reform. 
However, he underlined that as long as it does not include the EU principles, any attempt would be pointless and a waste of time.
