27/01/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 27/01/06
The start of the New Year is traditionally a time when people make resolutions. 
This year, one of the resolutions Macedonians were asked to make was to refrain from celebrating with gunfire.
"Bullets Are Not Greeting Cards -- Celebrate Without Weapons" was the slogan of a five-week campaign launched by the interior ministry in December, in co-operation with the UNDP's Southeastern Europe Clearinghouse for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons (SEESAC). 
Featuring radio and TV spots, leaflets, posters and flyers, the campaign sought to raise public awareness about the dangers of celebratory gunfire. 
The simple fact, say organisers, is that what goes up must come down -- somewhere.
Every year, celebrations are marred by tragedy because of revelers "giving no thought to what becomes of their bullet," says Norimasa Shimomura, the UNDP's deputy resident representative in Macedonia.
In a case that drew particular attention, a stray bullet hit a young girl during New Year 2005 celebrations in downtown Skopje's central square. 
She died two days later.
Between 31 December 2004 and 2 January 2005, more than 16 incidents involving use of weapons were reported, according to the interior ministry.
The latest public awareness campaign was part of the ministry's ongoing effort to combat illegal weapons in the country. 
"Usage of weapons increases before and after the New Years' celebrations and that is why we have chosen this timing for the campaign," says Interior Minister Tomislav Nikolovski.
He says the government has made progress in its efforts to convince members of the public to hand over illegal weapons. 
A new weapons law provides increased penalties for illegal possession. 
A person found guilty of firing off a gun during celebrations faces a jail sentence of up to 10 years.
"Penalties are rigorous so they give results," the minister said.
The problem is not limited to Macedonia, experts point out. 
Weapons possession in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia-Montenegro also remains high -- with civilians estimated to possess some 3.1 million to 3.9 million weapons in the four countries combined. 
According to SEESAC, only about 1.7 million of those are registered. 
Campaigns similar to the one in Macedonia have been launched across the region, coinciding not only with New Year's but with religious festivals such as Christmas and Eid.
