26/07/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 26/07/05
World-renowned opera tenor Jose Carreras sang in Ohrid on 12 July, opening the 45th International Ohrid Summer Festival.
The two-hour concert was held at the Antique Theatre under the auspices of the president of Macedonia, Branko Crvenkovski.
Carreras performed in front of a more than 2,500-strong audience that included Albanian President Alfred Moisiu, Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov and Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina Prime Minister Adnan Terzic and the diplomatic corps in Macedonia.
Presenting himself for the first time to the Macedonian audience, Carreras and soprano Tina Gorina performed popular pieces by Spanish authors, opera arias by Caballero, Himenes, Lehar, Cesarini and Costa Guno.
They were accompanied by the Macedonian Philharmonic under the baton of David Himeneza.
At the end of the performance, the cheering audience called Carreras back on stage six times.
Pronouncing the opening of the festival, Crvenkovski said the culture of a nation is a mirror reflecting its consciousness, beliefs and traditions, and also serves as a bridge uniting peoples.
"The Ohrid Summer [Festival] has been enlightening the Macedonian cultural treasure and building our bridges to the world for almost half a century, by always showing that cherishing culture and spiritual values is the best guarantee not only for the survival of the state, but for preservation of the identity and dignity of its citizens," Crvenkovski said.
Renowned actress Milica Stojanova sent a message on behalf of the participants in the festival.
Ohrid has always been a place where different civilisations are blended, and the Ohrid event is an opportunity for artistic creations from every meridian to interlock, she said in the statement.
Carreras was Ohrid's guest for three days.
He visited the cultural and historical monuments in the ancient town, including St Sofia Church and the St Naum Monastery Complex.
At a press conference on 11 July, Carreras announced that he will sing with Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti at the next football championship in Germany.
Concerts, plays and other events will take place during the festival, which runs through 20 August.
Performances by eleven foreign soloists, chamber and choir concerts, two ballet performances, an opera, a musical, a modern ballet and ethno and jazz music are planned.
The musical events, numbering around 30, include performances by cellist Maria Kligel, the Munich Philharmonic, the Spiritual Choir Ensembles of the Russian Archbishopric, the Glinka Choir, and a number of Macedonian ensembles -- the Macedonian Philharmonic, the complete ensemble of the Macedonian Opera and Ballet, the St Zlata Meglenska Choir, the Tanec Folk Ensemble and the Ensemble of the Macedonian Musical Youth.
The theatre programme includes 14 plays, a number of premieres and performances from almost every professional theatre group in Macedonia.
Events will take place at the Antique Theatre, the St Sofia Church, Plaosnik and Dolni Saraj.
