25/08/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 25/08/05
During his talks with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica on Wednesday (24 August) in Belgrade, US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Pierre-Richard Prosper stressed again that Serbia must fully co-operate with the UN war crimes tribunal by resolving remaining cases.
"I hope this country (Serbia-Montenegro) will be able to move past war crimes and atrocities committed on the territory of the former Yugoslavia," Prosper said during a visit to a centre for refugees and displaced persons in Pancevo, a town near Belgrade.
Accompanying him was Michael Polt, the US ambassador to Serbia-Montenegro.
Prosper also said the United States acknowledges Serb sacrifices during the period of conflict.
"We are here to say that Serbs have truly suffered.
We know that many Serbs were persecuted, killed, raped, that many had their homes destroyed or were forced to flee," he declared before the assembled refugees.
Saying that his country empathises with the victims and their families, he stressed that those responsible for war crimes must be held accountable for their actions, either before The Hague tribunal or before domestic courts.
Trying the cases in domestic courts would enable the local population to be included in the process of bringing war criminals to justice, he added.
"The United States wants to see Serbia and Montenegro moving towards the EU, to see a world where refugees will be able to rebuild their lives.
You can rely on the United States as a partner and friend there," Prosper told the refugees.
Kostunica, in talks with Prosper, underlined the need "to round off co-operation with The Hague tribunal" for war crimes.
"We are continually working on solving the remaining cases ...
During this year, our country has made significant progress in co-operation with The Hague tribunal, which is confirmed by the fact that a large number of suspects voluntarily surrendered to the tribunal," Kostunica said.
Thursday in Belgrade, Prosper meets with Serbian war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic.
The UN tribunal seeks eight more indictees from Serbia and Republika Srpska (RS), chief among them Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.
Serbian and RS authorities claim no knowledge of their whereabouts.
They also claim that some indictees are hiding in Russia.
