25/11/2005
By Avni Zogiani for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 25/11/05
Stability is crucial to the process of resolving Kosovo's status and those advocating violence will be given no role in determining the province's future, UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari and his deputy, Albert Rohan, said during their recent three-day stop in Pristina.
"The Special Envoy can take appropriate action with his UN mandate to suspend or exclude any individual or group if he judges that their actions are not conducive to progress," Ahtisaari said during a press conference Wednesday (23 November).
Members of the Security Council have signaled they back taking measures to preserve stability if such steps become necessary, he added.
Rohan echoed his remarks, noting that the Contact Group for Kosovo has urged all parties to refrain from unilateral steps and to reject any form of violence.
"The whole international community really rejects violence.
As the president [Ibrahim Rugova] said:
whoever would take this kind of measures, it will be totally counterproductive."
The comments came in the wake of threats by a shadowy militant group calling itself the Kosovo Independence Army (KIA).
In a communique circulated in local media, the group has threatened to launch attacks on Pristina, which it said was under the control of a "modern occupier".
It also urged Kosovo Police Service (KPS) and Kosovo Protection Corps members to join it in a campaign of violence.
The KIA first surfaced two months ago in Dukagjini, in the southern part of Kosovo that borders with Albania.
Masked, armed men reportedly have stopped and interrogated people there, and the UN and other international organisations have advised staff not to travel in the area after dark.
On 16 November, a KPS car was damaged by an explosion.
One day later, a bomb situated under a truck injured four Serb teenagers at a busy outdoor market in Sterpce, a mainly Serb town in the east of Kosovo.
UNMIK has described the incident as a terrorist act, but it is not clear whether there is any link to the KIA.
Using violence to try to force a solution is "crazy", UNMIK head Soren Jessen-Petersen said.
"We are prepared to respond to any kind of provocation of violence," he added.
