28/10/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica– 28/10/05
Plans for an independence referendum in Montenegro were the main focus of Foreign Minister Miodrag Vlahovic's visit this month to the United States and Canada.
Leading a delegation from his ministry, he met with US politicians and administration officials, and attended a roundtable on Montenegro hosted by a prominent Washington foreign affairs think tank.
On 18 October, Vlahovic met with US deputy assistant secretary of State James McDougal and with Alan Van Egmond, the director of Balkan and Eurasian Programmes at the office of the secretary of defence.
Vlahovic insisted that the outcome of the planned referendum would not jeopardise regional stability.
Nor, he added, would it negatively impact efforts to resolve Kosovo's status, "Since these are unrelated processes with different dynamics and reasons of origin".
In talks at the defence department, all sides agreed that continuing links between Montenegro and the United States in the areas of security and defence was in their common interest.
Pentagon officials expressed their satisfaction with Montenegro's co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal and the fact that Montenegro is making a constructive contribution to meet the conditions necessary for joining the Partnership for Peace programme and, eventually, NATO.
Vlahovic also met with US Congressmen Bill Delahunt and Eliot Engel, who praised the multiethnic and multi-religious model in Montenegro.
Their talks focused on minority integration, education reforms and minority roles in the development of democracy and economic reforms.
Marking the Montenegrin delegation's visit, the Washington-based Centre for Strategic and International Studies hosted a roundtable, "Montenegro:
Steps Towards an Independence Referendum".
At the forum, Vlahovic argued strongly on behalf of the referendum, saying Podgorica would resist any outside pressure to delay the vote.
Recent opinion polls show that 43 per cent of Montenegrins favour statehood, 35 per cent oppose it and the remainders are undecided, he noted.
Montenegro's leaders regard an independent status as a precondition for entry into the EU because they do not want the republic to join as a territory or province of another country with its own interests and goals, Vlahovic said.
He added that Montenegro's political system would be simplified by shedding the cumbersome structures of federalism should it acquire statehood, and that country's institutions would be more transparent and less costly.
Montenegro has never been a part of Serbia, the minister noted, emphasising that the issue of Montenegro's status is not related to the status of Kosovo.
Montenegro is aware of the complexities of the region, but will not postpone its own democratic process just because the Kosovo issue remains unresolved, he said.
