27/01/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 27/01/06
Ibrahim Rugova, president of Kosovo, was buried at noon Thursday (26 January) in a ceremony attended by four heads of state and representatives of more than 40 countries. 
Hundreds of thousands of ethnic Albanians braved freezing cold temperatures to bid farewell to the man who was their political and institutional leader for some 16 years.
"President Rugova will not be with us physically, but always he will be in our mind and memory. 
He was and will remain the 'father of independence', said Lutfi Gashi, a resident of Podujeva, as he waited for the funeral procession to pass by.
The fact that so many gathered to pay their last respects testifies to Rugova's importance and the force of his personality, said UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen, lauding the late president for guiding Kosovo along the path of freedom, multiethnicity and European integration.
"President Rugova has left a void behind him, but he has also left a vision to guide Kosovo forward," Jessen-Petersen added.
In his speech at the funeral, EU security and foreign policy chief Javier Solana said Rugova's death was a great loss.
"Ibrahim Rugova was a man who devoted his entire life to protecting the rights of the peoples of Kosovo. 
He was firm in his convictions and determined in his efforts, but he was also a man of peace, deeply committed to achieving his objectives by non-violent means. 
For this he was loved by the peoples of Kosovo and respected all over the world," Solana said.
"And it is one of the cruel ironies of history that he left at the moment he was most needed, the very moment he was expected to provide leadership in helping to settle the future status of Kosovo," he added, urging political leaders to demonstrate unity and responsibilty. 
"There is great deal of work to do and there is no time to lose. 
All communities in Kosovo must be assured that they have a safe and secure future."
Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi also emphasised the importance of unity.
"The death of President Rugova in this difficult time for Kosovo is a clear message that people and leaders of Kosovo must be united in order to realise the will of the people," he said.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski, in Kosovo for the funeral and for meetings with top officials, said that while Rugova's death was a huge loss, it would not alter the path to democracy. 
Among others, Crvenkovski met with Kosumi, Jessen-Petersen, Solana and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. 
All agreed on the need to preserve stability and allow the status process to continue without interruption.
