16/02/2009
(Various sources)
Bulgarian voters will be called to the polls twice this summer – first to elect the country's representatives in the European Parliament (EP), and the second to choose members of their national legislature.
But they believe the elections will have a lesser impact on the country's development this year than the global economic crisis and the freezing of millions of euros in EU assistance to Bulgaria last year, according to a recent survey by Sofia-based polling agency Alpha Research.
The poll, conducted in the first half of December, found that Bulgarians were less optimistic in their expectations about the economic situation in the country than they were a year earlier. 
A combined two-thirds said 2009 would be worse -- 32% -- or the same --34%. 
The share of those who expected it to be better than the previous stood at 33%, down from 42% shown in a similar poll in the end of 2007.
While Bulgarians are slightly more optimistic about their personal well being this year, their biggest worries are about inflation, possible loss of income and jobs and other economic hardships as a result of the global financial crisis.
The government's initial reaction to the crisis was to deny that it will have any meaningful impact on the economy -- citing the country's high economic growth, substantial budget surplus and foreign reserves. 
Experts, however, warned that there was no room for complacency and urged the authorities to consider measures to mitigate the potential negative effect of the global downturn.
The IMF estimated that GDP could fall from 6.25% in 2008 to about 2% this year, and that the already low Foreign Direct Investment would likely further decline.
"The public finances are in good shape, with one of the highest fiscal surpluses in Europe. 
In addition, the balance sheets of the central bank and the government are strong, with large foreign reserves and substantial buffers accumulated in the fiscal reserve account," the Fund said in a statement on December 15th, but warned about "considerable private sector vulnerabilities".
Eventually, as the construction and processing industries and other sectors felt the first pinches of the crisis, the three-way government coalition -- led by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) -- acknowledged that the country would not be able to sail through the global turmoil unscathed. 
The worst is expected to come this spring, according to experts. 
More than 50,000 people could lose their jobs.
The government's sluggishness in pushing through reforms to buttress the impact of the crisis is making citizens angry. 
It is fuelling an already widespread public discontent with the authorities' failure to root out high-level corruption and organised crime, the main reasons for the EU's decision in July to nearly 500m euros in aid to Bulgaria and the irreversible loss of 220m euros of this amount in November. 
Many analysts say the country could lose more EU funding this year, as the measures it has promised to implement have shown no meaningful results.
In 2008, Bulgaria remained the EU's poorest member. 
It also emerged as the most corrupt country in the 27-nation bloc, according to Transparency International's annual Global Corruption Report, released in September.
Public confidence in key state institutions was quite low. 
In December, the approval rating of the cabinet stood at 10%, of parliament at 7% and of court investigation and prosecution bodies at between 12% and 14%, according to Alpha Research. 
The economic fears, the low level of trust in institutions and the political fragmentation could reignite dormant tensions and trigger an abrupt change in public perceptions, the agency warned at the end of a year that saw a series of strikes and protests by steel workers, farmers and others.
To make things worse, Russian natural gas supplies to Bulgaria, pumped via Ukraine, were cut off on January 6th amid a deepening gas payments dispute between Moscow and Kiev in the midst of one of the coldest winters in years. 
With no alternative routes to ensure an uninterrupted flow of gas deliveries into Bulgaria, which relies almost entirely on Russian imports to cover its needs, the Balkan nation's economy and population were badly hit by the new crisis. 
The gas shortage pushed up electricity consumption to record levels.
Ten days into the crisis, Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev gave orders that preparations begin for the re-opening of one of the four 440-megawatt Soviet-era reactors at the country's Kozloduy nuclear power plant that Bulgaria agreed to shut down to secure its 2007 entry in the EU. 
He stressed, however, that the unit would only be restarted if the gas crisis drags on and if the move is approved by Brussels.
President Georgi Parvanov also called for the reopening of closed Kozloduy reactors, noting in his annual speech on national security on January 16th that Sofia did not want to spark a "nuclear energy conflict" with the EU, whose consent will be hard to obtain, according to observers.
Parvanov insisted that a referendum be called on the matter.
But voices among an increasingly discontent public have been rising for a referendum on a different issue ahead of this summer's elections. 
Many want to vote on replacing the current party-list proportional representation voting system with the plurality/majority one. 
Proponents of that idea insist that every next parliamentary election will reproduce the same inefficient model unless the current voting system is scrapped.
However, the majority of incumbent deputies would hardly win re-election if the majority voting system is introduced. 
The chances that they would support the calling of a referendum on that issue are more than slim.
Still, 60% of eligible voters have indicated that they intend to vote in the upcoming parliamentary elections. 
But many say they do not favour any of the parties running.
Sofia Mayor Boyko Borissov's centre-right party Citizens for European Development of Bulgaria (GERB), which is not represented in the current parliament, continued to lead in public opinion polls in December, with 20.9% support of eligible voters. 
Stanishev's BSP was second with 15.5%, followed by the ultra-nationalist Attack party with 6.7%. 
The other two parties in the BSP-led governing coalition -- the ethnic Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms and the National Movement for Stability and Progress -- trailed behind with 6% and 2.2%, respectively.
The right-wing opposition Democrats for Strong Bulgaria and the Union of Democratic Forces each garnered voter support of less than 2% in Alpha Research's December polls. 
Analysts say the two would stand much bigger chances of passing the 4% threshold to enter parliament, if they join forces ahead of the summer elections. 
The recently formed coalition Napred (Forward) appears to have small chances of entering the next parliament.
Only 29% of those polled by Alpha Research in December said they consider the EP elections "very important".
