28/10/2005
(AP, AFP - 27/10/05; AP - 25/10/05; KFOR - 24/10/05)
Less than a week after the UN Security Council gave the green light for the start of talks on Kosovo's future status, KFOR held an exercise Thursday (27 October) to demonstrate NATO troops' ability to deal quickly with potential violence or other security threats in the province.
The drill, dubbed Operation Balkan Hawk II, "has been conducted in order to improve the concept of KFOR operational reserve and to continue to rehearse the techniques of troop maneuverability, flexibility and the ability for several nations to operate together as one team," the AFP quoted KFOR spokesman Pio Sabetta as explaining.
In March 2004, Kosovo witnessed its worst ethnic clashes since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict. 
Nineteen people were killed and more than 900 were injured during three days of anti-Serb riots, in which religious monuments and hundreds of houses were damaged or destroyed. 
Thousands of people were forced to flee their homes.
To prevent such incidents from recurring, KFOR is taking steps to demonstrate its preparedness. 
"We will react immediately because we are ready," said Lieutenant General Giuseppe Valotto, the Italian general who took over KFOR command from France's Yves de Kermabon on 1 September. 
"All the rehearsals we are doing are just to show the population they can believe in us."
Thursday's drill simulated demonstrations and riots against buildings with the intervention of KFOR troops via helicopter deployment in order to stabilise the situation. 
Some 200 peacekeepers, wearing helmets and carrying shields, were involved in the operation. 
They used armoured vehicles and barbed wire to circle a building under mock assault by a crowd of anti-UN and NATO demonstrators, throwing bottles of water, the AP reported.
The exercise was the second held by KFOR this month as part of NATO's planned demonstrations of force under a project called "Determined Effort 2005", involving some 1,500 soldiers and conducted in co-operation with additional troops from Germany and Italy.
It took place a day after a delegation of NATO's Military Committee -- the Alliance's highest military body, comprising the permanent representatives of the 26 member nations -- concluded a two-day visit to the province.
"This is the first visit of the military representatives to Kosovo since NATO announced the plan for transition to a task force concept of operations in August 2005," KFOR said in a statement on the delegation's visit. 
"The timing coincides with the UN's recent comprehensive review report on the situation in Kosovo and ongoing discussions on the future status of Kosovo," it added.
Launched in June 1999, KFOR currently numbers more than 17,000 troops from 35 contributing nations, including 24 NATO member states.
