25/08/2005
(BBC, The Times, Breakingnews.ie, Sky News - 25/08/05; AP, Reuters, BBC, UPI, World News - 24/08/05)
A total of 34 people have been killed by floods that hit countries in Central and Southeast Europe this week, including Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania. 
The death toll is likely to rise when the missing are accounted for, authorities said Wednesday (24 August).
Both Romania and Bulgaria already have been hit by successive waves of floods since April. 
The latest inundation reportedly has had the severest effect on Romania, with 25 people dead and more than 2,000 homes submerged in as many as 21 counties. 
In Croatia, meanwhile, authorities declared an emergency Wednesday in two regions after the river Mura overflowed its banks, damaging homes, crops and infrastructure. 
More than 300 rescue workers were distributing food and other aid to people in flooded areas in Croatia's west and east, according to the AP.
Officials in Bulgaria are still trying to cope with the effects of earlier flooding, which killed 26, left around 14,000 homeless and ruined crops in many areas. 
Vital infrastructure has also been destroyed; damage estimates are in the range of 175m euros. 
The state railway company has sustained losses of about 78m euros.
"The state is absolutely unprepared for a disaster of this size," the BBC quoted Krasen Stanchev, the head of the Institute of Market Economy think tank, as saying Wednesday. 
"There still is the old system of central planning in place, whereby all the decisions have to come from the top and the interests of those using the water resources are not protected. 
Since the 1970s until now, no money has been used to keep dykes and bridges in good condition. 
Now the government is doing the only thing it can -- spend money from the state reserve."
Finance Minister Plamen Oresharski has indicated that he will seek the IMF's approval for channeling part of Bulgaria's budget surplus -- which now stands at half a billion euros -- towards recovery efforts.
A government official said Wednesday that Bulgaria has also asked the EU for additional financial support to help deal with the aftermath of the disaster. 
The country, which is scheduled to join the EU in January 2007 along with Romania, first sought the 25-nation bloc's help in July, asking for more than 200m euros.
"We have sent a second application to the EU updating the damage estimates from the floods which happened in early August," Reuters quoted Deputy Finance Minister Kiril Ananiev as saying Wednesday. 
"It is clear that with the damages from the recent heavy rains, the cost will easily exceed 500m euros."
