25/07/2005
(Blic, Beta - 25/07/05;
AP - 24/07/05;
Radio B92, SEE Security Monitor - 22/07/05)
Serbia-Montenegro's Human and Minority Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic has denied allegations that Belgrade authorities are involved in talks with war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic on his surrender to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
"There are no negotiations being led with Ratko Mladic," Ljajic, who also heads Serbia-Montenegro's council on co-operation with the ICTY, said in an interview with Belgrade-based daily Blic, published Monday (25 July).
"The state does not know where he is," he added.
Ljajic said that never before have the authorities been making stronger efforts to find the fugitive.
Ten years after he was originally charged with war crimes, the former Bosnian Serb military commander remains one of the UN tribunal's most wanted indictees.
Ljajic's remarks follow a statement by Natasa Kandic, the director of the Humanitarian Law Centre, who alleged that negotiations were under way between government officials -- or someone authorised by the cabinet -- and Mladic's associates.
The negotiations, Kandic told Belgrade-based TV B92 on Friday, hinged on whether Mladic and his followers would receive monetary compensation in exchange for the former general's surrender.
Llajic denied that Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, during his tenure as Yugoslav president in the early 2000s, was responsible for protecting Mladic.
"The whole DOS (Democratic Opposition of Serbia) knew where Mladic was," Ljajic said.
The fugitive was not delivered to The Hague at that time because of fears of a conflict between the army and police, he added.
"Some powerful people in the army were protecting Mladic," Ljajic said.
Asked if those people were still in the army, Ljajic denied the existence of "an organised structure", but acknowledged that it is still possible that some individuals in the military are protecting Mladic.
Last week, local media quoted former Serbian State Security chief Goran Petrovic as saying that Serbia-Montenegro Army Colonel Dragomir Krstovic was responsible for the fugitive's security as of the end of 2002, and was likely still assigned to the job.
The defence ministry issued a statement denying those allegations and later announced that the colonel was being pensioned off from the army.
But according to a Radio B92 report on Friday, at the same time that Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic was making the announcement, Krstovic was giving an interview to the Belgrade daily Vecernji Novosti, describing himself as a logistics commander.
Davinic has since admitted that the colonel is still in office, citing the army's complicated retirement procedures.
"When you pension someone, in some way they remain on the payroll in the army for two or three months because it is such a procedure, so that now we have this limbo, he is practically pensioned, but technically he is still in the army," Davinic said.
Ljajic voiced hope that the Mladic case would be resolved by the end of the year.
