25/07/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 25/07/05
With the Development Ministry's decision to publicise the energy industry's operation codes, including the prices set for suppliers, Greece has officially launched an energy privatisation programme.
The move is part of the country's effort to deregulate its energy market, in accordance with EU guidelines.
The privatisation could result in annual turnovers for private firms of as much as 2 billion euros.
This figure is expected to double within five years, giving private suppliers a 30 per cent share of the market the public electricity company has today.
In order for private parties to enter the market, they will have to invest substantial sums of money in the industry.
Investment requirements for the creation of private electrical production units may reach 7 billion to 8 billion euros.
Although Greeks currently enjoy the lowest energy prices in Europe, prices are bound to rise as a result of the privatisation, perhaps by as much as 20 per cent.
The price hikes are necessary in order to make the investment profitable.
However, the blow to Greeks' pocketbooks will be potentially offset by improvements in the system.
Power will now be more reliably delivered to areas of the country that lack adequate access to electricity.
A newly established two-zone system will bisect Greece -- north and south -- to overcome the supply problem.
There will be three possible types of providers:
the current public company, newly-created private companies and foreign power importers from nearby countries like Bulgaria, which already export electricity.
The development ministry's new system is not limited to the public release of electrical power, but includes natural gas and wind energy as well.
Electrical power investors, both Greek and foreign, are avidly anticipating natural gas privatisation, which may constitute the primary fuel for the development of new power units.
The Greek-Turkish natural gas pipeline will be fully operational in two years, and there are plans for a natural gas network extension by upgrading a Greek pipeline to 11 new cities, and creating a new Greek-Italian one.
Finally, wind energy is also attracting foreign investors.
The government has set a plan to double their construction by 2008, as a way to provide inexpensive energy to the Greek islands.
