19/01/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 19/01/09
Financial crisis fears aside, 2009 promises to be a highly significant year for Croatia both domestically and internationally.
Two elections are scheduled, with citizens going to the polls in the spring to elect local officials, and again in the winter to vote in a new president.
Topping the international agenda are NATO membership and the EU accession process.
Croatia hopes to become a member of the Alliance in 2009, while also concluding talks with Brussels.
Joining NATO is not expected to present any special difficulties -- Alliance member states are already in the process of ratifying the basic documentation.
Italy did so in 2008, and as of now 15 out of the 26 NATO members have done their part of the job.
The path to EU accession, however, is a thornier one.
Neighbouring Slovenia has put up a roadblock, citing ongoing bilateral disputes -- in particular, the quarrel over Piran Bay.
All candidate nations must complete negotiations on 35 EU policy chapters prior to membership, but Slovenia has blocked opening 11 of them.
EU leaders, such as Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, have gone out of their way to make it clear there is room for Croatia in the bloc, while also making it clear they want the bilateral dispute settled.
The next Croatia-EU Conference will take place at the end of February.
The Czech Republic -- traditionally a close ally of Zagreb -- has taken over the EU presidency.
Croatian officials are positive that their Czech counterparts will make every effort possible to put Croatian membership high on the Union's agenda.
"2009 will show the concrete results of the international position of Croatia, not only through our membership in UN's Security Council, NATO membership and Roadmap for ending the negotiations with the EU by the end of the year but through our commitment to fulfill all the democratic standards, showing that we are ready to implement the standards of the rule of law, social justice and solidarity," Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said in his New Year's speech.
By becoming a NATO and EU member, Croatia will fulfill an historic dream that was set into motion almost two decades ago, he added.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic also spoke about the expectations for 2009, though his tone was markedly gloomier.
"In a time marked by such a serious crisis politics needs to be more serious than ever," he said.
"This means that sundry personal interests and pressures to delay hard but unavoidable reforms in order to win a few votes more at the elections must not be allowed to prevail over the general interest of all our citizens.
Therefore, responsibility must be the word of the year in 2009."
Some companies, including powerful banks and financial institutions, started off the year by warning of job cutbacks.
Croatians in general have a high level of worry about financial instability, unemployment and the possibility of a slump in summer tourism, something which would only compound economic woes.
In his address, Mesic stressed the need to keep in mind the social dimension.
"How to respond to the crisis now, after having failed to prepare better for it?
First of all, by not turning a blind eye to it.
Followed by two more ways:
we need to defend ourselves from outside shocks while concurrently dealing with all inside sources of crisis.
In a few words, we must seriously and urgently create the conditions for the recovery of industry, production and exports," Mesic said.
The government has already taken one key step to shore up consumer confidence.
A plan by banks to raise interest rates has been squashed, with Sanader warning financial institutions of serious consequences if they go ahead.
Zagrebacka Banka had announced In late December that they would raise their interest rates by between 0.5 and 1.7%.
However, after consultations with the government, the bank scrapped the plan.
The beginning of 2009 also brought some practical changes to the everyday lives of Croatians.
According to the revised Law on Commerce -- which went into effect on January 1st -- all stores must remain closed on Sundays.
The exceptions are bakeries, gas stations and smaller shops at major bus and train terminals or airports.
During the tourist summer season, stores will be allowed to open on Sundays again.
The new rule was met with distain from shopkeepers and merchants.
They say that the new law will adversely affect the economy at a time when the public should be stimulated to spend more money.
