27/09/2005
(FT - 27/09/05; AP, AFP, HINA, ONASA - 26/09/05)
A week before the EU is to discuss Zagreb's bid to join the Union, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader voiced optimism Monday (26 September) that his country's efforts to hunt down a key war crimes fugitive would be "adequately evaluated". 
A positive assessment would likely unblock Croatia's EU entry talks, which were put on hold in March due to Zagreb's failure to co-operate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
In December 2004, the EU set 17 March as the starting date of Croatia's accession talks, provided it arrested retired General Ante Gotovina and extradited him to the ICTY by that time. 
The fugitive -- the UN tribunal's third most wanted indictee -- is sought for his alleged role in the killings of 150 Krajina Serbs and the expulsion of more than 150,000 others towards the end of the 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia.
Croatia's leaders have repeatedly insisted that Gotovina -- on the run since June 2001 -- is not in the country. 
Authorities have been trying to convince Brussels that they are doing everything possible to meet their obligation to the UN court.
According to Zagreb, the late August arrest in Greece of Croatian businessman Hrvoje Petrac, believed to be a key Gotovina supporter, is evidence of efforts it is making to catch the indictee. 
"Whether the negotiations start or not ... 
it remains Croatia's obligation to solve the Gotovina case," Sanader said Monday. 
"In other words, we in Croatia respect the rule of law."
The EU Council of Ministers is expected to review Zagreb's membership bid next Monday, a day after a meeting of the so-called EU task force on Croatia.
These two meetings will follow a Friday visit to Zagreb by chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte. 
She is expected to submit her assessment of Croatia's co-operation with the ICTY to the task force.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has said that Brussels is ready to launch Croatia's entry negotiations "the very same day" it gets the green light from del Ponte.
Earlier this month, the UN prosecutor said that it would be impossible for her to say that Croatia is co-operating fully with the ICTY unless Gotovina is transferred to The Hague or Croatia informs the tribunal of his exact whereabouts.
"Of course, the result of full co-operation is that we have indication about the location of Gotovina, or the best solution [is] that Gotovina is transferred," del Ponte said in an interview with the Belgium-based online news edition EUobserver. 
"But the transfer of Gotovina is not the condition that the EU put on Croatia, it is full co-operation with us … If you are really doing a proper investigation about a fugitive, you must be able to have an indication -- first of their existence, second of their whereabouts."
In an earlier statement, del Ponte voiced concern that if Croatia is allowed to begin its accession talks before it has captured Gotovina, it might shelve further efforts to locate him.
