26/01/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 26/01/06
In a sign that commercial bank activity is developing in Albania, authorities recently registered the country's 17th such institution. 
The firm, Union Bank, will be run by the money transfer agency Western Union. 
It is expected to open a network of branches across Albania, using the infrastructure established through Western Union's money transfer activities.
The banking market has developed over the past two years, with more and more services being offered -- including debit and credit cards as well as Internet banking. 
ATM machines have been installed across the country, while banks have sought to expand their business into areas beyond the capital.
Nevertheless, the banking system remains a work in progress. 
As of now, there are only commercial banks, and no investment or import-export banks. 
The mortgage market suffers from high interest rates and a lack of transparency. 
Last year, an IMF mission issued a report recommending that banks do more to inform their clients about conditions and risks associated with taking out a loan, including the effects of fluctuating interest rates.
The emergence of commercial banks brings obvious benefits to consumers. 
Authorities are also counting on the trend to help efforts to counter the large informal economy -- seen as a major barrier to Albania's economic growth.
According to the IMF, the gray market accounts for up to 50 per cent of economic activity in the country. 
Officials at the Bank of Albania (BoA), meanwhile, estimate that up to 26 per cent of money in Albania circulates outside the banking system -- a figure that represents a decrease from past years, but remains high in comparison to international standards.
"This situation is the result of a lack of information among the public regarding the banking system, and is also connected with economic and financial crime," BoA officials say.
Building a modern financial system is closely tied to the effort to curb informal economic activity, since it will help reduce the widespread dependence on cash. 
The BoA is already implementing a pilot project distributing wages through bank accounts, and the state has moved to stop the practice of paying public employees in cash.
