26/01/2006
(EurActiv, OHR Morning Media Brief - 26/01/06; AFP, AP, VOA, RFE/RL, DTT-NET, Xinhua, FENA - 25/01/06)
As the first round of talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) began in Sarajevo on Wednesday (25 January), a high-level EU official expressed optimism that the process could be completed within a year.
"After the first negotiation round today, I am very confident that we will be able to stick to the timetable," said Reinhardt Priebe, the bloc's chief negotiator for the BiH talks.
The two-day session marks the official opening of BiH's negotiations on building closer ties with the Union, which authorised the start of the process in November. 
The SAA is considered a major first step towards eventual EU membership.
The focus in the first round is on general issues, such as BiH's co-operation with the EU and the Southeast European region, as well as the bloc's financial support for the Balkan country. 
Free trade will be the main topic of the next round, which is scheduled in Sarajevo on 17 March. 
Other key economic and policy issues will be dealt with in later rounds.
The EU has made it clear that if BiH wants to complete its SAA talks within 12 months, it must show progress in implementing required reforms, including in the public administration sector, police and public broadcasting. 
It will also be expected to improve its co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
On Wednesday, Priebe cautioned that the talks could be suspended if insufficient progress takes place in meeting these conditions.
Nevertheless, BiH's chief EU negotiator, Igor Davidovic, was optimistic as he emerged from the first day of talks.
"I, personally, am very satisfied with the beginning of the negotiations and the method of work during the negotiations," he told reporters. 
"In a complete mutual understanding between the two negotiating teams, I think we have been very constructive."
BiH is the last of the former Yugoslav republics to start building closer ties with the EU. 
Slovenia became a full-fledged member of the Union in May 2004, Croatia began its entry talks in October, Macedonia was granted official EU candidate status last month and Serbia-Montenegro started its SAA negotiations in November.
