27/10/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 27/10/05
Earlier this week, the European Commission (EC) released its much-awaited progress reports on Bulgaria and Romania's bids to join the bloc. 
The EC concluded that the two countries could still join on 1 January 2007, as planned, but only if they speed up the reform process. 
Failure to do so could lead to activation of a safeguard clause allowing for a one-year postponement.
In the document, the EC singled out organised crime and corruption as areas of particular concern and called on Bulgaria to move forward with needed judicial and administrative reforms. 
It suggested that Romania -- previously seen as behind in the accesssion process -- may have caught up with its neighbour, which was hampered by a nearly two-month delay in forming a cabinet after the June parliamentary elections.
The cautionary tone of the report was in keeping with predictions. 
Many observers -- including the European Parliament's rapporteur for Bulgaria, Geoffrey van Orden -- had anticipated that the EC would note an apparent slowdown in the process, particularly in Bulgaria.
The EC is under a great deal of pressure to be as critical as possible, due to the recent EU Constitution fiasco and budget difficulties, van Orden told Bulgaria's bTV channel earlier this month.
Heeding this week's "wake-up call", officials in both Bucharest and Sofia vowed on Wednesday (26 October) that they would act to implement the EC's recommendations and avoid a postponement of the entry date. 
Describing the criticism as objective, Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev said it should be taken as a stimulus for greater efforts. 
He voiced hope that the new government would compensate for this summer's delays.
In Romania, EU Integration Minister Anca Boagiu said that the EC report was the "best" one on the country thus far. 
Citing the EC's concern about the lack of sentencing in corruption cases, Justice Minister Monica Macovei pledged on Wednesday that all high-level corruption cases would reach court by April. 
Release of the report came nearly a month after 18 Bulgarian and 35 Romanian parliamentarians joined the European Parliament (EP) as observers, in what was widely seen as a show of confidence in their accession bids. 
The admission had been expected in April, but was delayed over concerns about the two countries' readiness to accede on schedule.
"In this way the Bulgarian and Romanian parliaments will be able to get acquainted with the work, the procedures and the working methods of the EP," the assembly said in a statement. 
"When both countries then actually join the EU and their peoples elect their fully-fledged members of the European Parliament, they will be able to hit the ground running."
