27/10/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 27/10/05
In the future, women in Serbia-Montenegro will have an obligation to serve in the military, under a draft defence law proposed by the federal government. 
In practice, this does not mean they will be conscripted into the regular army. 
But it does mean that women from ages 19 to 50 would be called up to receive "necessary knowledge and training for service during wartime" and might have to serve in the army reserves.
According to the legislation, women who opt for professional military service "will have the right to maternity leave, reduced working hours and other rights associated with child care". 
Pregnant woman will not be called up for training, nor will women with children under age ten or whose spouses are already in the service.
The introduction of military obligations for women is only one of several key innovations envisioned in the draft law. 
Another is the possiblity of "buying" military service -- that is, paying money instead of actually serving. 
Such an option would benefit Serbs living abroad, who find it difficult to interrupt their careers to complete an obligation at home.
The price will be established by the Council of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro. 
"Representatives of our diaspora proposed that military service can be bought for 1,000 euros, whereas in Turkey, payment for military service is 5,000 euros. 
The diaspora ministry considers that a realistic price is somewhere in between, hence between 2,000 and 2,500 euros," Serbian Assistant Minister for the Diaspora Aleksandar Cotric told reporters.
However, several NGOs have said they do not view purchasing service as the best way to solve the problem of recruits living abroad. 
They argue that such a system unfairly discriminates against those who lack the financial means to buy off their military obligation.
"Many countries have freed their recruits from military service or have simply established some other relationship and have not introduced military service," says Petar Milicevic of the European Bureau for Conscientious Objectors office in Belgrade. 
"I don't think that it is appropriate to divide recruits into the poor and the rich, even if they live abroad, for it is the same for someone doing volunteer work in some country as earning large amounts of money, and hence being able to buy military service."
The draft law does show a liberalising trend in Serbia-Montenegro with regard to military obligations, Milicevic acknowledges. 
"This is indicated by the fact that military service has been reduced to six months. 
Service without arms would last 13 months, and according to the current draft law it would also last six months. 
We hope that this law will introduce increased liberalisation into military service to the point of discontinuing of military service, where the world trend is professional service," he says.
