23/11/2005
(The New York Times, The Guardian, BBC, The Scotsman, FENA - 23/11/05; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, VOA, RFE/RL, Washington File - 22/11/05)
Key representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Bosniak, Croat and Serb communities agreed on Tuesday (22 November) to pursue constitutional reforms aimed at strengthening the state institutions.
The agreement, signed in Washington on the second day of ceremonies marking the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords (DPA) that ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, sets the stage for ending lingering ethnic divisions in the country. 
Its implementation will also boost BiH's prospects for EU and NATO membership.
"We have decided to embark upon a process of constitutional reform that will enhance the authorities of the state government and streamline parliament and the office of the presidency," the leaders of the eight main political parties in BiH said in the agreement. 
"We are committed to making these constitutional reforms by March 2006."
Without specifying the measures they plan, the political leaders said that after these "first steps", additional reform of the constitution would be required, so the country can meet EU accession criteria. 
"We are committed to working together to undertake these reforms and to improve the quality of life for all citizens of BiH," they said.
The constitutional changes discussed in recent weeks reportedly are designed to turn the country into a "normal" parliamentary democracy. 
The proposed reforms envision a significant reduction of the powers of the two political entities created under the DPA -- Republika Srpska (RS) and the Federation of BiH -- each of which currently has its own government and parliament. 
The proposal also calls for the replacement of BiH's tripartite presidency with a single president and two deputies.
At a luncheon Tuesday for the BiH delegation, diplomats and other officials, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice hailed the agreement as "an historic step forward".
"To advance the promise of peace and progress, we must now move beyond the framework constructed a decade ago," she said. 
"A weak, divided state was appropriate in 1995, but today in 2005, the country needs a stronger, energetic state capable of advancing the public good and securing the national interest."
In a separate move Tuesday, the leaders of three Bosnian Serb parties called publicly for key war crimes fugitives Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic to surrender immediately or face arrest. 
The two wartime Bosnian Serb leaders, charged with genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of some 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo, top the UN war crimes tribunal's list of most wanted indictees.
"These men do not represent the interests of the RS or BiH and their continued fugitive status threatens our future," said a joint statement signed by RS President and Serb Democratic Party leader Dragan Cavic, BiH Foreign Minister and president of the Party of Democratic Progress Mladen Ivanic and the president of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats, Milorad Dodik.
"If they continue to refuse to surrender, the RS is ready and determined to undertake all possible measures and actions to find and to apprehend them, as well as all other remaining fugitive persons indicted by The Hague tribunal … Our commitment to doing so is a reflection of our intent to embrace all our obligations under international and domestic law," the statement added.
Welcoming the move, Rice said BiH "must fully confront the demons of its past, in particular the urgent and long-overdue need to bring to justice war criminals like Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic". 
The United States will not support the NATO accession of any Balkan country that has failed to arrest its indicted war criminals, she warned. 
"There can be no more excuses and no more delays," Rice said. 
"Ten years is long enough."
