23/11/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/11/05
As the effort to resolve Kosovo's status gets under way, Serbia is seeking international support for its stance on the province's future. 
Top Serbian officials have paid visits to Russia, considered Serbia's traditional ally in foreign affairs, and to China. 
Both countries have veto power on the UN Security Council. 
In addition, Belgrade has sought to engage Israel and EU member Greece in the process.
Serbian President Boris Tadic met with Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin in Moscow on 17 November. 
During the visit, Tadic touted a proposal -- opposed by UNMIK and the EU -- to reshape Kosovo along the lines of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), with two ethnically based entities, one run by Kosovo Albanians, and the other controlled by the province's 10 per cent Serb minority. 
He also said the Balkans could be destabilised "if the Kosovo Albanians are granted the right to form an independent state".
Earlier in the month, Tadic was in Israel for talks with President Moshe Katzav.
"Israel is an example of how an alliance with the world's most powerful states can be useful for the preservation of state and national interests and how a well-planned and focused policy can yield results," Tadic said, saying Israel favours the idea of compromise in the negotiations on Kosovo.
Serbia-Montenegrin Parliament Speaker Zoran Sami was in Moscow prior to Tadic's visit. 
Following talks on 3 November with Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, he said Moscow is supportive of Serbia's stands. 
However, he added, "Russia cannot be expected to veto [in the Security Council] or start a war with someone over us."
On 26 October, the UN gave the go ahead to launching status talks on Kosovo, which is technically part of Serbia-Montenegro but has been under international administration since 1999. 
The province's mainly Albanian population is demanding complete independence from Serbia, while Belgrade seeks to retain sovereignty.
Two days after the UN's move, Serbia-Montenegrin Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic paid a visit to China, where he met with Vice President Zeng Qinghong and Deputy Prime Minister Tang Jiaxuan. 
Afterwards, he said China fully supports Serbia's territorial integrity and favours a compromise solution.
Later in October, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica travelled to Greece, the only Balkan country in the EU. 
Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis told him during their talks that a solution for Kosovo could not be imposed, but would rather have to be reached through dialogue between the two sides.
Kostunica said direct negotiations between the Serbs and Albanians should start as soon as possible, and called for a solution that would preserve Serbia's territorial integrity and sovereignty.
