27/10/2005
(CNN, International Herald Tribune - 27/10/05;
AP, AFP, FT, VOA, HINA, Xinhua - 26/10/05)
Laboratory tests have confirmed that six dead swans found in a park in eastern Croatia were infected with the H5N1 bird flu virus, officials said Wednesday (26 October).
Croatia thus becomes the fifth European country, along with Britain, Romania, Russia and Turkey, where the lethal strain has been discovered.
The Croatian case was confirmed by the EU reference laboratory for bird flu in Weybridge, Britain, which tested samples from the swans found last week in the nature park of Zdenci.
Experts believe that all the swans flew to Croatia from Hungary as part of the same flock.
Recently, about 1,500 swans have flown to Croatia, along what is described as a major route for migratory birds.
Since the virus was detected, Croatian authorities have culled more than 17,000 birds within 3km of the nature park in a bid to contain the spread of the deadly virus.
Other measures include disinfecting the area and putting the region under quarantine.
The H5N1 bird flu strain has led to over 60 deaths in Asia since 2003.
Most of the victims were poultry farmers directly infected by sick birds.
While it is difficult for humans to contract the virus, experts fear that it might combine with the genes of the common flu and mutate into a form that can easily transmitted from person to person, sparking a flu pandemic.
In continental Europe, the dangerous strain was detected earlier this month in Turkey, Romania and Russia.
On Wednesday, Britain announced its second case in less than a week:
this one involving an H5N1-infected parrot imported from South America.
Both birds died while kept in quarantine.
Meanwhile, other European countries, including France, Hungary and Slovenia are awaiting the results of tests to determine whether dead birds found on their territories were infected with this form of bird flu.
Preliminary tests on wild geese found dead in Germany have shown that they carried bird flu;
further tests are being conducted to see if it was the H5N1 strain.
Meanwhile, Greece has announced that it will host a conference of health ministers on 19 November to discuss a common action plan against the bird flu threat.
Health Minister Nikitas Kaklamanis said on Wednesday that he has sent invitations to his counterparts from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Moldova, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and Turkey.
Health ministers from Armenia, Azerbaidjan, Cyprus, Georgia, Russia and Ukraine have been invited as observers.
