25/01/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 25/01/05
Former commander of Serbian paratroopers in Croatia Dragan Vasiljkovic is behind bars after being arrested Friday (20 January) in Sydney, Australia. 
The move came on the basis of an Interpol warrant issued against the 51-year-old, who has dual Australian-Serbian citizenship, and had been living and working in Perth as a golf instructor.
Vasiljkovic, nicknamed "Captain Dragan", allegedly headed a unit that committed war crimes in the early 1990s, as Slobodan Milosevic's Yugoslavia tried to put down Croatia's bid for independence. 
Croatian prosecutors have accused Vasiljkovic of personally overseeing the plans to raid a police station in the city of Glina and occupy the villages of Gornji and Donji Vidusevac. 
The attacks led to the destruction of homes, the expulsion of local inhabitants and the death of civilians, including a foreign journalist.
In addition, Vasiljkovic has been charged with torturing and slaughtering captured Croatian army and police members in the summer of 1991, as well as with war crimes committed in Bruska, near Benkovac, in February 1993.
Croatian Radio Television has published a tape that appears to implicate Vasiljkovic in acts of arson, plunder and murder. 
According to Ivica Pandza Orkan, a retired Croatian Army lieutenant, Captain Dragan's soldiers "committed the worst war crimes, resulting in 2,100 deaths".
According to The Australian, which exposed the suspect's presence in Perth in an October 2005 report, Vasiljkovic has acknowledged training Serbian recruits, interrogating Croatian soldiers, killing in combat action and leading attacks on command centres. 
However, he denies committing any war crimes.
A 1994 report by the UN listed him as second in importance to the most notorious Serbian warlord, the late Zeljko "Arkan" Raznatovic.
Croatia is now preparing a formal demand for his extradition. 
According to the Croatian Justice Ministry, the process will not be a simple one, as it is important to meet all the requirements. 
In addition, analysts say that Zagreb will be under pressure to demonstrate that it can conduct impartial proceedings against Vasiljkovic, treating him the same way it would a Croatian accused of similar crimes.
