26/10/2005
(FT, The Anatolian Times, Turkish Press - 26/10/05; AFP - 25/10/05)
The IMF is expected to release $1.6 billion in delayed loan payments to Turkey in December, Fund officials said Tuesday (25 October) at the end of two weeks of talks with various officials in Ankara.
The funds would come under Turkey's three-year $10 billion standby arrangement. 
The deal's approval by the IMF Executive Board in May was immediately followed by the release of a $837.5m tranche. 
In July, however, the IMF froze the disbursement of a new $800m tranche following Turkey's failure to adopt a social security reform law within the agreed timeframe.
Another setback occurred the same month when President Ahmet Necdet Sezer raised legal objections to certain provisions in a banking law meant to stabilise the crisis-hit sector and returned it to parliament. 
Ignoring the presidential veto, lawmakers recently passed the legislation providing for tighter supervision over the sector.
"We have agreed in principle on a draft letter of intent and on the policy steps needed for the completion of the reviews by the IMF Executive Board by mid-December," the head of IMF's Turkey desk chief, Lorenzo Giorgianni, said Tuesday at a joint news conference with Turkish Economy Minister Ali Babacan.
An IMF delegation, headed by Giorgianni, arrived in Ankara on 12 October for talks on the first and second reviews under Turkey's standby arrangement. 
The discussions with government and central bank officials, financial institutions, private sector representatives and others focused on the authorities' policy intentions for the remainder of this year and for 2006, the Fund explained in a statement Tuesday.
While the IMF mission was in Ankara, the government submitted to parliament a budget for 2006 envisioning an overall primary surplus of 6.5 per cent of GNP and a ratio of current account deficit to GNP of around 6 per cent at the end of the year.
"In the mission's view, this is a strong budget that will help contain the widening external current account deficit," the IMF said in its statement. 
As for the delayed social security reform legislation that prompted the freeze of funds in July, the IMF mission has accepted that it will not be brought in before next year. 
According to Babacan, parliament is expected to pass it in mid-February.
Explaining the Fund's move, Giorgianni said "it's now clear that more time is needed to allow the parliamentary process to run its course." Besides the "very strong" budget, the planned tax reform and the measures aimed at overhauling the social security system that authorities are considering are all encouraging steps, he added.
