26/10/2005
By Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade and Avni Zogiani in Pristina for Southeast European Times -- 26/10/05
On Monday (24 October), the UN Security Council embraced Secretary General Kofi Annan's recommendation that international negotiations on the future status of Kosovo should begin.
Annan and the 15-member Council backed the conclusions of special UN envoy Kai Eide, who reported that although the province lags behind in meeting internationally set standards, the status quo is no longer sustainable and the process must move forward.
Reactions in Belgrade and Pristina reflected the strikingly divergent attitudes in the two capitals towards the future of Kosovo, which technically is still part of Serbia-Montenegro, although run as a de facto UN protectorate since mid-1999.
While Serbian political figures emphasise the concept of sovereignty, in Pristina the talk is of self-determination.
"The transfer from one phase to another is not simple," Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said in response to the UN Security Council decision.
"The framework for resolving the final status of Kosovo lies within the very foundation of the UN, which is respect of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all states." Political forces in Serbia have united against the idea of Kosovo independence, and Kostunica's team will be bringing its formula of "less than independence, more than autonomy" to the negotiating table.
Many would agree that Belgrade faces an uphill battle, given the bloody legacy of the Milosevic years.
"The space for defending our interests has been narrowed, because we inherited the dire consequences of the regime of Slobodan Milosevic and the Serbian Radical Party," President Boris Tadic acknowledged.
At the same time, he insisted that the Serbian side will "defend the legitimate state and national interests with arguments and a unanimous plan and strategy".
In Kosovo, meanwhile, the ethnic Albanian majority greeted the Security Council's decision as a step towards achieving independence.
"This is a much awaited historical moment for us," President Ibrahim Rugova said Tuesday through his spokesman, Muhamet Hamiti.
"When Kosovo is independent, Pristina and Belgrade could be together in multilateral international organisations as equal partners," he added.
"An independent Kosovo is going to be an example of democracy, co-existence and of respect of human values," Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi said, expressing confidence that independence will be the outcome of negotiations.
Although Kosovo leaders have made a point of welcoming the talks, there are many in the province impatient with the need for negotiations, arguing that it should be up to Kosovars to decide.
Among these voices is opposition politician Hashim Thaci, whose political party has been pushing for an outright declaration of independence.
While UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen has moved against such premature steps, he acknowledges that Kosovo's status must be finalised sooner rather than later.
"We don't know how long the negotiations will be, but they should not become another status quo," he said this week.
The first discussions can be expected by early November, Jessen-Petersen indicated, adding that Finnish diplomat Martti Ahtisaari is the most likely choice for UN special envoy in the negotiations.
