23/01/2006
(Reuters, BBC, KosovoLive, B92, FocusNews, Deutche Welle -06/01/22)
News of Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova's death this weekend cast uncertainty over the political scene.
The 61-year-old writer and politician has been a pivotal figure in Kosovo for over fifteen years.
Moreover, despite being diagnosed with lung cancer in September, he had elected to stay in office and serve as the head of the Kosovo Albanian negotiating team for talks on resolving the province's final status.
Rugova was born on 2 December 1944, the son of a shopkeeper who was executed after World War II by the advancing Yugoslav Communists.
He graduated from the Faculty of Philosophy of the University of Pristina in 1971.
He went to the Sorbonne in Paris in 1976 to study linguistics and upon his return to Kosovo he became a professor of Albanian literature.
In 1989 he headed the Kosovo writers' union.
When then-Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic revoked Kosovo's autonomy in 1989, Rugova became one of the founders of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), the province's first non-communist party.
A moderate politician, Rugova led the LDK through the 1990s, advocating a policy of non-violent resistance to the Milosevic regime, for which he was dubbed the "Gandhi of the Balkans".
Known for his love of poetry, he was often seen wearing a silk scarf, a personal trademark.
The LDK boycotted Serbian and federal elections and helped create a parallel administration of hospitals, schools and taxation for the ethnic Albanian population.
In 1992 and in 1998 Rugova was elected president of the self-styled "Republic of Kosovo", which was not recognised by Belgrade.
In 1998, Rugova was awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought.
When the armed conflict with Serbia broke out in 1998, Rugova was sidelined by the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army, as many ethnic Albanians considered him too passive.
However his moderateness and the peaceful nature of his opposition to Serb repression won him international respect and he participated in the Rambouillet peace talks in February 1999 as a member of the Kosovo Albanian delegation.
His party rebounded from the setback, winning the October 2000 municipal elections in Kosovo with 58 per cent of the vote.
Rugova was named president of Kosovo in March 2002, following the general elections in the UN-run province in November 2001, in which the LDK won 46 per cent of the vote.
After his party won the October 2004 elections again, he was elected to a second term as president in December that year and redoubled his call for the independence of Kosovo from Serbia.
