23/01/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 23/01/06
Flags in Kosovo's towns and cities have been lowered to half-mast in tribute to President Ibrahim Rugova, who died Saturday (21 January) after battling lung cancer for several months.
On Monday, mourners began arriving in Pristina by the thousands to pay homage to the late president, whose body will lie in state at the Kosovo Assembly until his funeral Thursday.
Speaking to the media following an address to the assembly, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen stressed the key role Rugova played in shaping Kosovo's future.
"He has laid out a vision, he has provided clear, clear guidance," Jessen-Petersen said.
"With unity, I think everybody will work together to try to make sure that his dream comes true."
Martti Ahtisaari, the UN special envoy for the upcoming talks on the province's final status, expressed hope that the political momentum generated by Rugova would be maintained.
The initial round of direct negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina was to begin Wednesday, but will now be postponed until February.
"Kosovo has lost a historic leader at this crucial time, as the negotiations on Kosovo's status have entered an important phase.
He was the symbol of the aspirations of Kosovo's people and devoted his life to promoting the rights of the people of Kosovo through peaceful means," Reuters quoted Ahtisaari as saying.
Leaders in the region and around the world have sent their condolences and expressed praise for Rugova, described by EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana as a "historic leader who devoted his life to protecting and promoting the rights of the people of Kosovo".
In Washington, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice also praised Rugova's leadership.
The United States will continue to work with Kosovo's people to "build a society based on the principles of democracy, human rights and inter-ethnic tolerance that President Rugova valued so deeply," Rice said in a statement.
In Albania, the government has announced a three-day mourning period for Rugova, starting Monday.
The decision was made during an extraordinary cabinet session Saturday, convoked immediately after news of Rugova's death.
In messages sent to the Kosovo leadership, Albania's President Alfred Moisiu and Prime Minister Sali Berisha praised Rugova as a "great leader" of whom Kosovo and all Albanians could be proud.
Regional media, meanwhile, are reporting that Parliament Speaker Nexhat Daci will temporarily assume Rugova's duties until parliament elects a successor.
Daci, a senior member of Rugova's Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) is seen as a top candidate for president.
Other potential nominees include incumbent LDK leader Kole Berisha and the head of LDK's caucus in the previous Kosovo assembly, Sabri Hamiti.
