22/11/2005
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 22/11/05
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari arrived in Kosovo on Monday (21 November) and has already met with UNMIK head Soren Jessen-Petersen. 
He next holds talks with Kosovo's negotiating team and representatives of the province's Serb minority.
"I am delighted that we have been able to come so soon after my nomination to head the negotiations for the future status of Kosovo," the former Finnish president told reporters after his arrival in Pristina.
He faces the formidable task of hashing out a compromise between two sharply divided positions concerning the future of the province, which is technically part of Serbia-Montenegro although under UN administration. 
Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority is demanding outright independence, while Serbia insists it should retain some form of sovereignty over the province.
As though to highlight the challenge, Ahtisaari's arrival coincided with the Serbian Parliament's adoption Monday of a resolution calling for Belgrade's sovereignty to be preserved even as "substantial autonomy" is granted to Kosovo. 
The resolution's text reflects the "more than autonomy, less than independence" formula that Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica intends to make the basis of his side's negotiating position.
"Kosovo is part of Serbia, and not only part of its history but also part of its present and future," Kostunica told parliament at the session Monday.
In Pristina, meanwhile, independence supporters greeted Ahtisaari by spray-painting "no negotiations -- self-determination" on the concrete walls surrounding UNMIK headquarters.
Speaking to journalists ahead of the envoy's visit, Jessen-Petersen suggested that if Kosovo leaders want to see a swift resolution to the status issue, they should focus on meeting UN-set standards laid out for the province, including decentralisation, ensuring security for minorities, and dialogue with Belgrade.
"Violence cannot speed up the resolution of status; success in standards implementation and decentralisation can do so," the UNMIK chief said.
Meanwhile, the international community is taking a dim view of Serbian President Boris Tadic's suggestion that Kosovo should be partitioned into entities, in a manner similar to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"I do not think that the model of Bosnia can be applied in Kosovo, because Kosovo has its specifics," EU security chief Javier Solana told the daily Koha Ditore.
Jessen-Petersen echoed those remarks. 
"It is sure that the Dayton Agreement for BiH cannot be applied in Kosovo," he said.
