06/04/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 06/04/09
At the June 2003 EU summit in Thessaloniki, Greece, European leaders pledged that the Western Balkan countries and Turkey had clear prospects for joining the bloc. 
However, many Southeast European countries' Union bids may be a problem if member states with existing bilateral disputes continue to block them from joining the EU. 
Such occurrences are ongoing even though EU documents define only three criteria for candidates to meet in order to join the Union.
Criteria, not bilateral grievances, EP members say
The so-called Copenhagen criteria mandate that to join the EU, countries must achieve "stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights and respect and protection for minorities, the existence of a functioning market economy as well as the capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union. 
Membership presupposes the candidate's ability to take on the obligations of membership including adherence to the aims of political, economic and monetary union".
Despite the requirements, four Balkan states striving for Union membership -- Croatia, Macedonia, Turkey and Serbia -- are facing blocks by EU member states over bilateral disagreements.
Slovenia is blocking Croatia over a long-standing border dispute; Greece contests Macedonia's right to the name it uses; predominantly Muslim Turkey is facing the misgivings of EU members over its cultural and religious profile and -- above all -- Cypriot antagonism; and Serbia cannot overcome the insistence of the Netherlands on the arrest of former Bosnian Serb wartime commander General Ratko Mladic.
Tiring of the multiple impasses, the European Parliament (EP), along with some relevant think tanks, has been pointing a finger towards the recalcitrant member states. 
A number of parliamentarians are asking member states to cease using bilateral grievances to obstruct the Western Balkan countries' efforts at further EU accession.
The EP Committee on Foreign Affairs has drafted a report on consolidating stability and prosperity in the Western Balkans. 
Member states "must not obstruct or block the accession process over questions relating to bilateral disputes", the report says.
The EP adopted the report with a sweeping majority -- 478 to 92 with 42 abstentions. 
Apparently sympathetic to Macedonia and Croatia, the report states that "bilateral issues" should not block "accession" to the Union.
For Macedonia, it's all in the name
The EP called for the European Commission to propose to the EU Council to abolish visas for the citizens of Macedonia and specify a date for the start of negotiations by the end of the year. 
However, the EU has made it clear that the row with Greece must be resolved to keep Skopje's bid on track. 
Many observers, however, do not expect solutions soon. 
The last round of talks on the issue was held in February and ended with no new remedies proposed.
Many think that Skopje has been overfocusing on its lawsuit against Greece at the International Court of Justice.
Macedonia's complaint at The Hague-based court says that Greece violated a 1995 interim agreement between the two countries by blocking Skopje's NATO entry bid at the Alliance's Bucharest summit last April. 
Under Article 11 of the agreement, Greece pledged not to block its neighbour's efforts to join international, multilateral and regional institutions.
Athens, however, says the clause is conditional on use of the name Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM). 
The 1995 deal specifically granted Greece the right to object to the use of another name, Greek diplomats note, adding that Macedonia has itself violated several clauses in the agreement.
Croatia encumbered by border dispute
Croatia is still on track to complete its membership negotiations by the end of this year, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said last week, but he urged the Croat and Slovenian authorities to adopt a "constructive" approach to expedite resolution of their border dispute.
On March 17th, Rehn met with the foreign ministers of the two countries in Brussels to discuss the dispute. 
According to reports, Rehn said a new solution was proposed in the form of a joint statement that would ensure that both sides will refrain from issuing any declarations or undertake actions to prejudge the existing border, set with the dissolution of Yugoslavia in 1991. 
The proposal seeks to address Slovenia's claims that Croatia has tried to prejudge the border in the accession documents it has submitted to the EU. 
The plan would give the countries a fresh start to negotiate a solution.
"This would be a confidence-building measure and a step in the right direction," Rehn said after the meeting. 
Rehn encouraged Croatia to keep looking for a solution, saying that Slovenia's three-month blockade of Croatia's efforts to open talks on accession chapters has cost Zagreb time it needs to finish its negotiation process.
Serbia vs the Netherlands
Serbia, another Balkan country aspiring to crack the ranks of the EU, finds the Netherlands squarely in its way. 
Contrary to the wishes of the other 26 EU members, the Netherlands says it will continue to block Serbia's further association with the EU until the country hands over Mladic to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), thereby fulfilling promises of co-operation with the tribunal.
Dutch Foreign Minister Maxime Verhagen said that arresting Mladic would be the best proof that Serbia accepts European values.
In February, Rehn expressed satisfaction with the reform process in Serbia but said that Belgrade must meet all requirements en route to EU membership, including co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
ICTY Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz told the Standing Committee of EU ambassadors that although Serbia's co-operation with The Hague war crimes tribunal is much better than before, there is room for improvement. 
The political climate in Belgrade has changed and authorities are more willing to meet their commitments to the UN tribunal, but Mladic remains at large. 
However, Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic said last month that Serbia would apply for EU candidacy this year.
Turkey's plight
As for Turkey, Katinka Barysch, deputy director of the Brussels-based think tank Centre for European Reform, theorised in an article published on February 24th that Cyprus's motive for obstructing several chapters in Turkey's accession talks might be the hope of gaining leverage in the island's ongoing reunification talks.
France has reasons of its own; since President Nicolas Sarkozy prefers conferring a "privileged partnership" rather than full membership on Turkey, he argues it should not bother with those chapters of the acquis that are relevant only to full members.
"There are long-standing and well-known reasons why enlargement to Turkey and the Western Balkans is proceeding so slowly: the political instability and economic backwardness of most current applicants; the enlargement fatigue of many West Europeans; the specific questions that Austrian, French and other politicians ask about Turkey's European destiny," writes Barysch. 
In her words, only a big political push can resolve these multiple deadlocks. 
But few EU member states are keen to move enlargement along.
"From the Triglav to the Vardar''
Some media have described the stricter terms of membership and increased monitoring of the Western Balkan countries by European institutions as a "blockade from the Triglav to the Vardar" -- a reference to a popular song from Yugoslav times.
EP members' call for greater openness is music to the ears of the Western Balkan nations. 
Nevertheless, their propositions are not binding for the European Commission and the European Council. 
Nobody knows how the integration of Croatia, Macedonia, Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro and Albania will develop. 
Irish rejection of the Lisbon Agreement makes it impossible to expand the Union beyond 28 members. 
It presently has 27.
Observers expect that, realistically speaking, only Croatia will enter the prized club as a new, full-fledged member, while Turkey may have to settle for a "privileged partnership" -- leaving the other aspirants with uncertain prospects for integration.
