25/10/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 25/10/05
Retired General Zoran Stankovic, a pathologist and former head of Serbia-Montenegro's leading medical institution, was appointed defence minister on Friday (21 October).
He pledged to "restore the reputation of and improve the situation in the army".
The new minister, who is not a member of any political party, replaces Prvoslav Davinic, who resigned in early September after Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic accused him of complicity in a military procurement scandal.
The choice of Stankovic set off a flurry of rumours in the Belgrade media, which reported that he is a former close friend of fugitive war crimes indictee Ratko Mladic and is expected to negotiate the latter's surrender.
Since then, Stankovic has attempted to clarify the nature of his ties to Mladic.
He insists that he met the indictee only a few times and only because, as a medical doctor, he had conducted the autopsy of Mladic's daughter, who committed suicide in 1994.
He says he has not seen the indictee for six years and has no idea where the man is.
"It is not realistic to think that a defence minister will run after Mladic through the mountains," Stankovic told Radio B92.
"If I, after only about ten meetings in my life with Mladic, am able to convince him what others have been failing to do for years, then I am much more powerful than I thought," the minister said, adding that arresting war crimes indictees is not under the jurisdiction of the defence minister.
That is a view not necessarily shared by the UN war crimes tribunal, which has charged that hardliners within the Serbian military have conspired to hide and protect Mladic.
Military analysts, meanwhile, say Stankovic's appointment was part of a political deal between the ruling parties of Serbia and Montenegro.
While Stankovic -- Serbia's choice -- gets the defence portfolio, Montenegrin General Ljubisa Jokic has been appointed the Serbia-Montenegro Army chief of staff, replacing Dragan Paskas.
Through this political trade, says commentator Aleksander Radic, authorities in Podgorica hoped to ensure the army won't interfere in the referendum on Montenegrin independence, scheduled for the spring of 2006.
"This will guarantee to Montenegro that there will be no surprises and no reaction in case the republic decides to step out of the state union," Radic told Belgrade media.
Such political deal making has its costs, however, Radic added.
It is "a bad principle if we aim to implement stable and feasible reforms in the defence system".
