26/09/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 26/09/05
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski's government survived a no-confidence vote Friday (23 September).
Following discussions in the parliament, 61 members voted against the motion, 23 members favoured it, and two abstained.
Under the Constitution, a new no-confidence motion may not be submitted for 90 days.
The opposition party VMRO Narodna had filed the motion, citing what it said was a poor economic, political and security situation in the country.
It also criticised the government's foreign policy, blaming it for the delay in Macedonia's invitation to join NATO.
Addressing lawmakers before the vote, Buckovski said the parliamentary debate indicated the country has been moving in the right direction.
"I can see a progress in the political debate between the authority and the opposition," Buckovski said.
"For the first time, I don't feel the need to answer to criticisms about ethnic problems.
The Republic of Macedonia is experiencing Europeanisation, and it is up to the opposition to give its contribution to it or not."
Addressing the issue of NATO accession, he expressed optimism.
"The message we got from Washington does not mean that we have lost the battle.
We will claim victory in 2008."
Former Prime Minister Ljupco Georgievski, a parliamentary member for the VMRO-Narodna who is seen as the party's informal leader, characterised the economic situation in Macedonia as disastrous.
"Instead of attracting foreign investors, the government chases them away," Georgievski said.
The leader of the VMRO-DPMNE, Nikola Gruevski, also took aim at the government's economic performance.
"A lot of companies that were supposed to invest huge amounts in Macedonia were announced," Gruevski said.
"After nine months of the working of this government, there are no traces of the announced investments.
There is neither Siemens nor Deutsche Bank, and a railway to Bulgaria is not being built either," he said.
Both Georgievski and Gruevski held the government accountable for the NATO delay.
"Macedonia will not receive an invitation for membership next year not because the next summit of the Alliance will not have the process of enlargement on its agenda but because the country has been assessed not to have carried out the necessary reforms," Gruevski said.
Georgievski suggested that political decisions are the key to acceptance in NATO.
"As citizens, we should seriously sit down and make a national strategy on how all together, we can float away from this situation and catch up with NATO and the EU again," he said.
