25/10/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 25/10/05
While Romanians are enthusiastic about the long-term benefits of EU accession, they expect a difficult transition period. 
According to a recent poll conducted by the IRSOP Institute at the request of the European Commission's delegation to Romania, most citizens believe accession will bring more disadvantages than advantages in the short term. 
A majority -- 56 per cent -- believe their living standards will worsen following entry into the bloc.
Hikes in prices and taxes, and higher unemployment are among the main worries. 
"It's not hard to see what's going to be like. 
We have already seen the prices going up madly in Hungary after their accession. 
Meanwhile, fuel, natural gas, electricity or alcohol costs now in Romania almost as much as in the EU," says Simona Pavelescu, a 32-year-old teacher from Bucharest.
The year 2005 has indeed been a difficult one for local consumers. 
Natural gas is 35 per cent more expensive than in January, while electricity prices rose 10 per cent in the same period. 
Most of these changes came after excise levels were raised to meet European regulations.
On a brighter note, Romanians appear less concerned about other potential issues that have been raised by Euro-sceptics. 
Only 13 per cent believe joining the EU poses a threat to national identity, and a mere 10 per cent think accession will undermine local agriculture. 
Some critics of accession have suggested Romania will become a kind of commodity market for Europeans who will essentially take over the country and grab the better-paid jobs. 
But fewer than 10 per cent of those polled anticipate such a scenario.
Moreover, a decisive majority of 68 per cent believe their lives will improve in the long term as a result of accession, while only 21 per cent think otherwise.
The most important benefits cited by poll respondents are freedom of travel and work, improved laws, and a more ethical political and social climate. 
"Almost everything good that happened in Romania in the last years took place due to the EU's pressures and promises," says Traian Dobre, a 24-year-old political science student.
According to Jonathan Scheele, chief of the EC's delegation to Romania, "European values must be first known, then understood and debated" before they can be fully assumed. 
"Romanians must know what to expect from the accession, to approach this moment -- which is very close -- as prepared as possible, because those well prepared will benefit most from the advantages or at least will know to protect themselves from the disadvantages," Scheele says.
Indeed, the IRSOP poll shows that adjusting to EU values may pose a challenge, as many Romanians hold views that are starkly divergent from norms in the Union. 
Sixty per cent, for example, favour the death penalty; 46 per cent think there are superior and inferior human races; 40 per cent doubt Romanians and Roma people will ever get along; and 38 per cent view homosexuals as criminals. 
Just as harmonising legislation and economic policy with the EU has not always been easy, the process of cultural convergence may also take time.
