26/09/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 26/09/05
Thousands of people gathered in Athens' Omonia Square late Sunday (25 September) to celebrate their country's European basketball championship title.
Greece beat Germany 78-62 in the final.
Fireworks lit the skies over the Greek capital as fans chanted the national anthem in a rerun of the loud celebrations that marked last year's European soccer title.
Playing in front of a sell-out crowd of 20,000 in Belgrade, the Greeks used good teamwork, solid defence and strong outside shooting to claim their first gold medal in basketball since 1987.
They took a lead in the first three minutes and kept it until the end of the game.
Five seconds before the end, the Greek players started hugging each other, unwilling to defend their basket.
Cheerleaders dressed in ancient Greek robes danced the Zorba syrtaki around the team.
The star of the final was Theodoros Papaloukas, who scored 22 points, including two three-pointers at the start of the game that galvanised the Greek team.
Panagiotis Yannakis, the Greek coach, had seen it all before.
In 1987, Yannakis was point guard for the Greek team that won the title against the Soviet Union with a dramatic final score of 103-101.
Then, as now, Greece was not considered a tournament favourite.
With Sunday's triumph, Yannakis becomes the first person in Europe to win a basketball gold medal both as a player and as a coach.
Immediately after the win, his team tossed him into the air three times, cheering.
The Greece-Germany matchup was a walk in the park, compared to the dramatic semifinal the day before.
Playing against France, Greece was behind by 7 points just 63 seconds before the end.
With Yannakis' detailed strategic skills, the Greeks managed to reduce the difference to 2 points with 11 seconds on the clock.
Under extreme pressure from the French, Dimitris Diamantidis managed a three-pointer at the buzzer, lifting Greece to a 67-66 victory.
Germany also beat Spain by just one point in its semifinal, setting the stage for a thriller on Sunday.
But Greece quickly managed to outmanoeuvre Germany's one-man-show starring Dirk Nowitzki.
He was awarded the highest scorer and Most Valuable Player awards.
With this championship, Greece accomplished what many considered unimaginable.
Lacking even a single NBA player on its roster, it outplayed Russia, France and Germany and their top stars -- Andrei Kirilenko, Tony Parker and Nowitzki, respectively.
"Greece Shocks Europe and Wins 2005 Euro Basket Gold," announced the astonished organisers of the competition, FIBA Europe.
Fans rushed to Omonia Square and Thessalonki's White Tower, the customary mustering-points in every sports victory, where they celebrated in light drizzle.
Major Greek cities were filled with fans waving flags and honking horns.
