23/12/2005
(The Guardian - 23/12/05; AP, Reuters, CBC, Turkish Press, European Court of Human Rights - 22/12/05; AP -- 19/12/05 - 20/12/05)
The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) issued a ruling Thursday (22 December) ordering Turkey to provide redress to Greek Cypriots who lost their homes when Turkish troops invaded northern Cyprus in the summer of 1974.
More than 200,000 people, including some 40,000 Turkish Cypriots, were displaced as a result of the invasion, which followed an Athens-backed coup that sought to unite Cyprus with Greece. 
The island has been divided along ethnic lines ever since.
The decision issued by a seven-member ECHR panel stems from a Greek Cypriot woman's request to regain access to her family property, denied since August 1974.
The applicant, Myra Xenides-Arestis, owns half a plot of land in the Famagusta area, with a shop, a flat and three houses built on it. 
She and her family lived in one of the houses; the rest of the property was either used by members of the family or rented out, the court said in a statement. 
She also owns part of a plot of land with an orchard.
The judges concluded that the convention on human rights has been breached "by virtue of the fact that the applicant is denied access to, control, use and enjoyment of her property and any compensation for the interference with her property rights".
The Turkish government, according to the court, continued to exercise overall military control over northern Cyprus. 
The fact that the Greek Cypriots rejected the UN-sponsored plan for the island's reunification in April 2004 "did not have the legal consequence of bringing to an end the continuing violation of the rights of displaced persons", it found.
It therefore ordered Turkey to "introduce a remedy, within three months, which secures … genuinely effective redress for the applicant" that should occur three months after that.
Describing Xenides-Arestis' case as an example of "a widespread problem affecting large numbers of people," the ECHR said Thursday's decision should be applied to some 1,400 similar property cases lodged primarily by Greek Cypriots against Turkey.
The court's ruling came three days after the Turkish Cypriot Parliament adopted changes to its property laws allowing Greek Cypriots to apply for compensation for property they owned prior to the 1974 Turkish invasion.
Following the ECHR decision, the Turkish Foreign Ministry issued a statement Thursday saying the changes approved by the Turkish Cypriot lawmakers this week were in line with the court's expectations. 
The Greek Cypriot land claims would be reviewed by a property compensation commission, whose establishment is envisioned under changes approved Monday.
"Property issues in Cyprus contain complicated elements," the ministry said, adding, "This legal arrangement offers an important opportunity towards settlement."
While welcoming the court's ruling, the Greek Cypriot authorities viewed it as somewhat vague.
"(Thursday's) decision recognises that Turkey is responsible for everything in the north and any administration there is subordinate to Turkey," the AP quoted Greek Cypriot government spokesman Kypros Chrysostomides as telling reporters. 
"We think the court should have issued a clear decision for compensation and restitution."
