22/07/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 22/07/05
Brussels is "eagerly awaiting Stabilisation and Association negotiations with Serbia-Montenegro in October," EU foreign policy and security policy chief Javier Solana said during a two-day visit to Belgrade earlier this week.
At the same time, he cautioned that better co-operation with the UN tribunal in The Hague is necessary, and that fugitive indictee Ratko Mladic -- one of the alleged architects of the 1995 Srebrenica massacre -- must be brought to justice.
"Co-operation with The Hague tribunal is a fundamental issue ...
a lot has been done already, but we expect the last, final push," he said, referring to Mladic.
The fugitive general was the subject of allegations published this week in the daily <I>Blic</I>, which ran an interview with former security chief Goran Petrovic, who suggested the army still protects Mladic.
During his visit, which ended Wednesday (20 July), Solana met with Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, Serbian President Boris Tadic, and Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic.
Marovic said the message brought by Solana was an important one, opening up a great opportunity for the state union.
"We can do much by the end of the year.
I believe it is very important that the Stabilisation and Association negotiations begin in October, that they be accelerated as much as possible and that, in the meantime, we finally close the Mladic case and secure the country's place in NATO's Partnership for Peace programme," Marovic said.
Although Solana indicated that his visit was focused on the upcoming negotiations and was not meant to cover the thorny topic of Montenegrin independence, the issue nevertheless was on the table.
Djukanovic told Solana that the referendum on the state status of Montenegro must be held by spring 2006, adding that he anticipates a deal on dismantling the joint state well before that.
Tadic and Kostunica, however, said the Stabilisation and Association process should take priority over the referendum issue.
From Belgrade, Solana headed on to Pristina, where he called for speedier implementation of EU standards and government decentralisation.
He said that Kosovo leaders should "step up the process towards reaching the standards," adding that "the decentralisation process should be something they believe in."
The EU official announced that his next visit to Kosovo would take place in late August or early September.
He said he hoped all would become more constructive in heading in the right direction -- one that would earn support from the international community.
