27/02/2006
(FT, EUobserver, Financial Mirror - 27/02/06; AP, AFP, Zaman, Cyprus Mail - 26/02/06; Cyprus News Agency - 25/02/06; Reuters - 24/02/06)
EU foreign ministers approved a decision Monday (27 February) clearing the way for the release of 139m euros in financial aid to the Turkish Cypriot community. 
The aid will underpin projects to improve infrastructure and the economy in the island's north.
The deal -- stalled for 18 months due to Greek Cypriot opposition to provisions for trade between northern Cyprus and EU members -- became possible Friday, when the EU Committee of Permanent Representatives (COREPER) agreed to Nicosia's demand that the funding be decoupled from the trade issue.
"The aim of COREPER is to enhance co-operation between the two communities of the island and create a better climate, so as to increase the chance of resumption of talks for a settlement on the Cyprus problem," Greek Cypriot government spokesman George Lillikas said on Saturday.
Monday's approval comes ahead of a meeting Tuesday between Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos and UN Secretary General Kofi Annan in Paris. 
A Greek Cypriot official said the move was intended to facilitate the revival of peace talks.
However, Ankara has voiced criticism, charging Brussels with acting unilaterally. 
Turkey wants the financial aid to be part of a wider package, including also the initially envisioned agreement on direct trade between the Turkish Cypriots and the 25 EU member nations.
"The genuine step Turkey expects is direct trade together with financial aid," the Financial Times quoted Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul as saying. 
"This unilateral decision by the EU will bring new problems and difficulties."
Meanwhile, Turkish Cypriot authorities have voiced reservations about a cover note to the text approved by COREPER on Friday, making reference to additional Greek Cypriot conditions in order for their community to be allowed to trade with EU member states.
Ahead of the April 2004 referendum in Cyprus on a UN-sponsored plan to end the island's division, the EU promised measures to help relieve the plight of the much poorer Turkish Cypriot community, whose self-proclaimed state is recognised only by Turkey.
In the referendum, the Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected the UN peace plan, while the majority of the Turkish Cypriots approved it. 
On 1 May 2004, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of Cyprus joined the EU, representing the entire island.
The proposal that was eventually approved by the EU envisioned the release of an aid package worth 259m euros and mechanisms to allow the Turkish Cypriots to start direct trade with EU member nations.
However, the expiry date for some of the funding has passed and the Turkish Cypriots are receiving 120m euros less than the originally planned.
