21/11/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 21/11/05
The Donors' Conference for Law Enforcement Reform took place from 3 November to 4 November in Milocer, Montenegro. 
Addressing the participants, Deputy Prime Minister Dragan Djurovic said integration with the international law enforcement community and implementation of European standards are the police force's top priorities.
He also said that overhauling the interior ministry is a significant element of Montenegro's efforts to democratise society, secure economic prosperity, and achieve international integration -- including eventual membership in the EU.
International organisations, as well as a number of countries, have donated 20m euros over two and half years in support of law enforcement reform in Montenegro, the minister said.
Interior Minister Jusuf Kalamperovic noted that the donor conference was the first in Montenegro to be focused on law enforcement reform. 
Recent years have yielded substantial results, he said. 
In addition to providing better services to the public, the institution has also regained their trust, the minister added.
Chief of Police Veselin Veljovic briefed the forum on the current situation in Montenegrin law enforcement and outlined plans for future reform. 
While all the envisioned projects are important, he said, two are especially urgent -- the provision of enhanced equipment for the Special Anti-terrorism Unit, and a project to modernise the Centre for Criminal Expert Reporting.
Other important needs include further education of police officers at all levels and the provision of state-of-the-art technical equipment to all services, Veljovic said.
Despite support from the OSCE, the EU and the United States, he added, Montenegrin police still lack the equipment they need to conduct an effective fight against crime. 
As a result, they are greatly hampered in their efforts to solve crimes and find perpetrators, he said.
During the main part of the conference, 12 interior ministry reform projects were presented. 
The event, co-hosted by the interior ministry and the OSCE Mission to Serbia-Montenegro, was attended by representatives of over 50 international organisations and countries. 
Several potential donors have already expressed an interest in funding reform projects.
