21/11/2005
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 21/11/05
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari plans to ask Kosovo leaders for concrete explanations of how the province will earn independence, the head of the UN's international administration said.
"He (Ahtisaari) will come here to hear how Kosovo proposes to gain what it wants … we all know that Kosovo wants independence, but he will be interested to hear how Kosovo proposes to gain this independence," UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen told local media ahead of the envoy's arrival in Pristina on Monday (21 November).
Pristina is the first stop on Ahtisaari's fact-finding tour of the region, which will also take him to Belgrade, Podgorica, Skopje and Tirana and for consultations with officials in all the states potentially affected by the Kosovo issue.
The former Finnish president, who brokered the 1999 agreement that led to the end of NATO's campaign against Serb forces, has declined to provide a timetable for resolving Kosovo's status.
Jessen-Petersen, however, told reporters last week that he is convinced all issues will be clarified next year.
"I don't think that status quo is sustainable, and for that, I also say: I don't think the status process will go on longer then 2006," he told local media.
Meanwhile, Kosovo's negotiating team for the status talks plans to present Ahtisaari with a document outlining its main positions. 
The office of President Ibrahim Rugova, who heads the negotiating team, confirmed that the envoy would be given "in writing the principal position of the Kosovo delegation," including a demand for independence. 
A resolution adopted last week by Kosovo's Parliament sets forth independence and sovereignty as representing "the political will of the people".
The delegation also reportedly plans to brief Ahtisaari on progress achieved so far in implementing the eight UN-set standards for the province. 
During a meeting Friday with Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi, Jessen-Petersen stressed the importance of continuing dialogue with Belgrade on decentralisation and refugee returns, saying this would facilitate the progress of status talks.
"It's very important to have a direct dialogue. 
Pristina and the Belgrade Working Groups should continue their meetings and have a practical co-operation," the daily <I>Zeri</I> quoted Jessen-Petersen as saying.
