21/11/2005
(The New York Times, Washington Post, BBC, FT, FENA - 21/11/05; AFP, AP, International Herald Tribune - 20/11/05; AP, RFE/RL - 18/11/05; Reuters - 17/11/05)
Dozens of officials and politicians from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) are in Washington on Monday (21 November) to attend the two days of ceremonies marking the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords (DPA).
Ivo Miro Jovic, the chairman of BiH's tri-partite presidency, heads the high-level delegation, which includes about 40 ministers, lawmakers and other officials, according to the AFP.
The programme of commemorative events includes a conference Monday on the Agreement, reached at the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio, on 21 November 1995 and officially signed in Paris on 14 December the same year. 
On Tuesday, BiH officials are scheduled to hold talks with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice about the path ahead for the Balkan country, which is now seeking to build closer ties with the EU and NATO. 
A gala luncheon at the state department, to be hosted by Rice, is also on the agenda of events.
Among the officials invited to attend the ceremonies are the international community's High Representative in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, and Richard Holbrooke, a former US ambassador to the UN who brokered the DPA back in 1995.
Ten years later, both critics and supporters of the agreement say that it has fulfilled its main goal -- to put an end to the bloodiest conflict in Europe after World War II, which left more than 200,000 dead and forced nearly 2 million people to flee their homes.
But the DPA also led to the creation of one of the most cumbersome systems of governance in the world. 
BiH is a country of two political entities -- the Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska -- each with its own government and parliament. 
In addition, there is a national parliament and government, and a tripartite presidency, whose members represent the three main ethnic groups in the country -- the Bosnian Muslims, Croats and Serbs.
In recent months, the international community has begun calling for a constitutional reform, warning that BiH's economic prospects and EU bid could be jeopardised if the current institutional setup -- including more than 100 ministerial posts and 14 local governments -- is preserved.
About ten days ago, leaders of the eight main ruling and opposition parties in BiH met in Brussels to discuss changes in the country's constitution, which is part of the DPA.
"We must now look to provide a new framework for the next phase which is not the peace, but transition ... 
Dayton cannot be our ceiling; it has to be our floor," Ashdown told the AFP last week. 
"We have to move beyond the Dayton construct. 
The framework for what happened so far has been Dayton, but the framework for the future, I think, will be Brussels."
While retaining the two entities, the proposed constitutional reform reportedly envisions a significant reduction of their powers in favour of a stronger central government answerable to a national parliament. 
The proposal also calls for the replacement of the three-member presidency with one president and two vice presidents.
The leaders of the eight Bosnian parties continued talks on the constitutional changes in Washington on Sunday. 
They are expected to issue a joint statement Tuesday, announcing the results of the discussions.
