21/07/2005
SOURCE
Despite election promises by the parties in parliament that they would lift the immunity of MPs in order to boost the fight against corruption, the necessary legislation has yet to be passed. 
The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) and the Republican People's Party have yet to reach agreement on the issue. 
Meanwhile, some 208 cases filed against 117 parliamentary deputies are stalled.
Corruption is widely considered one of the most serious issues that Turkey faces. 
Under current procedure, it is difficult to hold leaders, cabinet members and lawmakers accountable for improprieties while they are still in office. 
Although the ruling party has pledged to close this loophole, the AKP-dominated Parliamentary Immunity Commission decided last year to postpone action until the Turkish justice system has been overhauled.
On 1 June, a new Penal Code was enacted. 
Subsequently, a bloc of female CHP parliamentary deputies launched a campaign to force the AKP to lift parliamentary immunity and enable cases against sitting MPs to proceed.
"We don't accept those who hide behind their privileges," said the CHP Ankara branch's head for women's issues, Nebihe Mani. 
At a press conference, she said the campaign has collected millions of signatures calling for the immunity to be annulled or limited.
Were that to happen, a number of key figures from both major parties would find themselves in the dock, answering corruption allegations. 
They include Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu, Defence Minister Vecdi Gonul, CHP leader Deniz Baykal and CHP deputy Sefa Sirmen. 
The charges may or may not have any legitimate basis. 
But with parliamentary immunity in place, there is no chance to find out.
Public confidence and trust in Turkey's politicians isn't being helped by the failure to resolve the issue. 
The delay fuels suspicion that MPs are holding up action out of fear they might be implicated. 
Some lawmakers are even rumoured to have launched their parliamentary careers precisely to escape possible fraud charges. 
According to experts, the problem needs to be addressed through a broad national consensus -- the sooner the better.
