01/03/2009
WASHINGTON, United States -- In its annual report on global drug trafficking and production, the state department assessed the various countries in the Balkans individually, concluding the region remains a key route for smugglers.
In the report published on Friday (February 27th), Albania was described as a transit country for trafficking -- mainly heroin -- coming from Afghanistan and destined for Western Europe.
The document also noted that Albania continues to produce cannabis for the European markets, with production moving to largely inaccessible mountainous regions.
The report described Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) as another transit country, one lagging in its fight against drug smuggling, due to weak state institutions and poor co-ordination among agencies fighting traffickers.
Bulgaria was described as a transit country for the trafficking of heroin and cocaine, as well as a producer of synthetic drugs.
Croatia, another transit country for trafficking, was applauded for its efforts against smugglers.
Yet more cocaine trafficking is occurring and cannabis is being produced, mainly for domestic consumption.
The report says Cyprus is making serious efforts to combat trafficking and drug use, while Greece, a traditional entry point for trafficking, is reporting more cases of drug addiction.
Drug-related crimes are also on the rise.
Kosovo is a main transit point for trafficking heroin from Turkey and Afghanistan to Western Europe, while the Kosovo drug market continues to expand.
The United States says Macedonia has made some progress in its fight against drug trafficking and is neither a key producer, nor a main regional transit point for illegal drug trafficking.
Montenegro, on the other hand, is a transit point for trafficking cannabis from Albania and Kosovo, as well as for trafficking small amounts of other drugs from the Near East and Latin America to the Western Balkans and Western Europe.
Romania is part of the northern Balkans trafficking route and is seeing more use of synthetic drugs.
Turkey continues to be a transit country for drugs from Southwest Asia to Western Europe, despite the efforts of local authorities.
Serbia is another transit country, although two labs producing synthetic drugs were uncovered near Belgrade last year.
The report says poor border control makes the country an attractive destination for trafficking drugs originating in Central Asia.
(Anadolu news agency, Focus - 28/02/09)
