21/07/2005
(AP, Reuters, RFE/RL, UN News Centre, Xinhua, Kosovareport, Radio B92 - 20/07/05)
Citing a recent slowdown in the pace of implementing internationally approved democratic standards in Kosovo, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana has urged the province's leadership to speed up the process.
"I've been really surprised to see, what is to my mind, a slowdown in the process," Solana told reporters in Pristina on Wednesday (20 July).
"I think that is a mistake.
This is the moment in which the leaders of Kosovo, the government, should do the opposite, should move faster."
His criticism comes weeks before the international community is expected to decide whether to launch talks on determining Kosovo's final status.
A key condition for this is substantial progress in the implementation of UN-endorsed standards in eight areas, including democratic institutions, rule of law, returns, human and minority rights and dialogue with Belgrade.
Solana's visit coincides with an ongoing comprehensive review of the implementation of the standards, led by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's envoy, Kai Eide, who is expected to submit his report by September.
If the Norwegian ambassador's assessment of the situation on the ground is positive, a special UN envoy for the status talks will be appointed in September.
The negotiations are expected to last six to nine months, according to Reuters.
Also noting the recent slowdown in implementation, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen cited three reasons.
One, he said, was an insufficient commitment on the part of the Kosovo Albanian leadership and the provisional institutions "to push forward on returns, on freedom of movement, and also on decentralisation".
The other reasons are Belgrade's refusal to encourage Kosovo Serbs to participate in the political process in the province and the fact that "more and more, issues are now being seen through the prism of status discussions," a UN statement said.
Although not actually among the eight standards, decentralisation -- aimed at ensuring that minorities have more power in running their affairs -- is also viewed as an important factor in the political process.
But there has been little progress in this area.
"It is regrettable that decentralisation has come to be seen only as a minority rights issue -- it is not, it is a democracy issue and one that brings government closer to all," Jessen-Petersen said Tuesday.
Criticising Kosovo's leadership over the slow progress in implementing local government reform, Solana said the first pilot projects for government decentralisation, which are yet to be launched, should include at least two Kosovo Serb communities.
During his brief fact-finding visit to Pristina, the EU foreign policy chief failed to persuade Kosovo Serbs to join the province's institutions.
He was told instead that the community has decided to continue its boycott of the political process.
"As long as Belgrade denies the Kosovo Serbs the opportunity to be part of the process, there will be limits to how much progress we can make on returns, on freedom of movement," Jessen-Petersen said.
Solana and other senior EU officials are expected to visit Kosovo again in late August to assess progress made in the implementation of standards.
