24/10/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 24/10/05
Over 150 participants attended a conference on local and regional government in Southeast Europe, organised by the Council of European Municipalities and Regions (CEMR). 
The event, entitled "Local and Regional Government in South-East Europe: Experiences and Perspectives", was held from 14 October to 15 October in Vienna. 
It addressed such issues as financing local structures and facilitating exchanges of experience.
Local and regional government representatives from around 20 countries and territories attended the event, including Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, and Serbia-Montenegro. 
Also present were representatives of the Austrian government, the EU Commission, the European Parliament and the Council of Europe.
CEMR president and Vienna Mayor Michael Haupl opened the meeting, noting the importance of CEMR's work in promoting local democracy and links between local governments across Europe. 
EU accession -- a major topic of concern throughout the SEE region -- figured prominently in discussions. 
European Parliament member Hannes Swoboda cautioned SEE representatives that the outcome of membership is not a foregone conclusion. 
Rather, he stressed, conditions have to be met, and the process can be lengthy.
Austrian State Secretary for Foreign Affairs Hans Winkler, meanwhile, pledged that the Balkans would be one of the upcoming Austrian EU presidency's chief priorities. 
He also stressed that the EU does not view countries in the region as a package, but rather examines each on an individual basis.
In a statement to the conference, Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe (CLRAE) president Giovanni Di Stasi said he is convinced that local and regional authorities could play a crucial role in enhancing stability and democracy in Southeast Europe. 
He pointed to CLRAE initiatives such as the Forums of Cities and Regions of South East Europe, organised each year in a different country.
Representatives of local administrations in Serbia-Montenegro had the opportunity to discuss their country's progress along the road to EU membership. 
According to Djordje Stanicic, president of the Standing Conference of Towns and Municipalities of Serbia, some municipalities are in talks with the central administration regarding the introduction of rules and regulations in accordance with EU standards.
Tarzan Milosevic, mayor of Bijelo Polje, Montenegro and president of the Network of National Associations of Local Authorities of South East Europe (NALAS), said that it is to Europe's benefit to assist SEE development, as it ensures that countries in the region do not become a burden. 
NALAS, an association of local administrations in ten South East European countries that was recently established in Skopje, focuses on capacity-building support through education, exchange of experiences, and joint information gathering.
The next CEMR general assembly will be held in May 2006 in Innsbruck.
