22/12/2005
(Blic - 22/12/05;
AP, Reuters, VOA, Irish Examiner, AKI - 21/12/05;
AFP - 20/12/05)
Admitting his participation in the execution of six Bosnian Muslim captives near Srebrenica in 1995, a former Serb militiaman has acknowledged that he fired the first shot at the victims.
Pero Petrasevic, one of five former members of the Scorpions paramilitary unit currently being tried over the killings, insisted that he was only following orders, according to testimony read in court Wednesday (21 December).
The landmark trial at the Special War Crimes Court in Belgrade opened Tuesday.
The five former militiamen were arrested in June after Serbian television channels broadcast images of the 17 July 1995 executions of six bound and terrified Bosnian Muslim captives.
The videotape was first shown several days earlier at former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's war crimes trial in The Hague.
Refusing to enter a plea Wednesday, Petrasevic demanded that the videotape be omitted as evidence at the trial.
Instead, Presiding Judge Gordana Bozilovic read the testimony Petrasevic gave to a pre-trial judge on 8 September.
"I ordered the first captive to be taken aside and fired the first shot," the Belgrade-based daily Blic quoted him as saying in his testimony.
"Firing was heard from both the left and the right side.
I was in shock and I do not know who killed the remaining captives and who was shooting at already dead people."
Petrasevic says Slobodan Medic, the commander of the Scorpions unit, ordered the captives' execution and also insisted that it be video-recorded, presumably as proof that he carried out the orders of his superiors.
Petrasevic said he did not know the names of those superiors.
Medic, who pleaded not guilty to all charges on Tuesday, denied having ordered the execution, claiming he had first become aware of the killings only when the videotape was shown on television.
But he added that had he known that the tape would become public, he would have killed "like a rabbit" the soldier, Slobodan Stojkovic, who video-recorded the event.
Medic told the court that he was subordinated to Bosnian Serb Army officers and was taking orders from them.
The video was given to the UN war crimes prosecutors by Natasa Kandic, a prominent Serbian human-rights lawyer.
She reportedly obtained it from a former member of the Scorpions, who is said to have sought protection abroad.
The trial against the five former militiamen, which is being attended by mothers of the victims, is seen as a key test of the Serbian judiciary's ability to handle war crimes cases.
If convicted, the defendants could face up to 40 years in prison.
