14/11/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 15/11/04
A proposal for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia, Serbia-Montenegro and Slovenia to host the 2010 World Basketball Championship jointly is attracting widespread interest.
Serbian President Boris Tadic's office launched the initiative after it became clear that Belgrade -- which in September officially presented its candidacy for hosting the event -- stood little chance against rival candidates France and Turkey, whose offers are stronger financially.
Tadic's sports advisor, Borislav Stankovic -- a former International Basketball Association (FIBA) secretary general and the organisation’s longtime grey eminence -- is promoting the idea.
Reaction among the Serbian public has been overwhelmingly positive.
Many believe it will also appeal to the administrations in Brussels and Washington, because of its potential to improve bilateral relations among the former Yugoslav republics.
In October, the presidents of the four countries' basketball associations held an initial meeting in Belgrade.
According to the Belgrade daily Politika, there was no divergence among the officials, who agreed that each of their countries would get a "wild card" in case of a joint candidacy, guaranteeing participation in the championship.
That would be a major success for Slovenia and BiH, which have never taken part in the event.
Croatia, meanwhile, would be competing for the first time in ten years.
From the start, it has been obvious that political factors would play a decisive role.
"Most politicians in the four countries support the idea.
In Slovenia and BiH, there is 100 per cent support, while there is some resistance in Croatia.
I expect that politicians will green light the petition," Serbia-Montenegro Basketball Association General Director Predrag Bojic said after the meeting.
Dusan Sesok, president of the Slovenian Basketball Association, did not hide his exhilaration.
"The countries should establish ties, and sports are ideal for something like that.
I hope that we will all together be in the EU soon." He added that a joint candidacy would be logical, as none of the four countries could be awarded the project independently.
Tadic confirmed that he has held consultations with Slovenian President Janez Drnovsek, Croatian President Stipe Mesic and BiH High Representative Paddy Ashdown, and that a political agreement has been reached.
"In order to improve our extremely bad international rating, we need to show the capability of posting top results in science, culture, politics and sports alike.
We need to make our contribution to the life in Europe and to the common values we share with the continent and the rest of the world," Tadic said, pledging full support for the initiative.
According to Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic, the Serbian government is ready to provide financial support.
"It is an excellent, brilliant idea and the government is certainly ready to support this proposal -- and if the project is approved, we will include it in the budget," said Dinkic.
Mesic has also confirmed his support for the initiative, in comments to Croatian media.
So has the celebrated Croatian basketball player Dino Radja, who says it is in the interest of basketball.
"More and more countries are joining forces in order to organise competitions.
Why shouldn’t the World Championship be organised on the former Yugoslav territory?" Radja said.
One potential stumbling block could be the distribution of tournament matches among the four participating countries.
The current FIBA rules stipulate that closing competitions must not only be held in the same city, but also in a 15,000-seat venue -- and only the Serbian capital has one.
Belgrade's arena, which meets NBA standards and has a seating capacity of 20,000, was opened this summer for the Diamond Ball tournament ahead of the Athens Olympics.
It will be the site of the European Basketball Championship in 2005.
Thus, initial group competitions would take place in Zagreb, Ljubljana, Sarajevo and Novi Sad, while the later, most popular matches would be held in the Serbia-Montenegro capital.
Zagreb has indicated it wants to host one semifinal match as well as the match for bronze, but this would not be allowable under the current regulations.
The World Championship initiative is not the only example of sports creating a bond between the former Yugoslav republics.
The regional Adriatic Goodyear League, which gathers the 16 best basketball clubs from the four countries, was held this year for the fourth time in a row.
Despite initial scepticism, the league has lived up to expectations.
The games have been excellent and the venues are routinely packed with enthusiastic fans.
Yugoslav basketball used to be one of the former country’s leading brands -- the clubs often won European titles, while the national team never failed to climb the rostrum at the Olympic Games and World Championships.
When Yugoslavia disintegrated, however, so did the quality of basketball in the now-independent republics.
Meanwhile, economic considerations have become more of a driving factor in the sport -- a trend which further illustrates the need for co-operation across the region.
Although the deadline for submitting candidacies was 15 October, FIBA has signalled it will be flexible.
FIBA commissions are scheduled to begin visiting candidate countries this month, and the final decision will be taken when the body meets in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, during the first week of December.
