23/09/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/09/05
Serbian President Boris Tadic travelled to the United States earlier this week, in the face of important events awaiting Serbia-Montenegro. 
Tadic met with US and EU officials during the visit -- from Monday (19 September) to Wednesday -- and discussed the Kosovo issue, co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and negotiations on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU, which are likely to begin next month.
In talks with US State Department Undersecretary Nicholas Burns, Tadic said that Kosovo's status should not be tackled before Albanian leaders meet the previously set international standards, adding that the most important task in the province right now is decentralisation.
The Serbian president also said that a solution for Kosovo must be the result of agreement, not force, and must not violate the UN Charter or jeopardise regional stability. 
He advocated a direct dialogue between Serbs and Albanians.
Burns said that Serbia must fully co-operate with the ICTY, primarily referring to the extradition of former Bosnian Serb warlord Ratko Mladic -- indicted for genocide against Muslims in Srebrenica in 1995. 
Tadic said the Serbian government has assured him it is working to find Mladic, adding that the entire region must face war crimes and those most responsible must be extradited to The Hague tribunal.
"We must find a solution for this problem because it is our commitment," said Tadic in an interview with CNN on Wednesday.
Tadic told Belgrade media on his return to Serbia that he and Burns agreed, "The path of Euro-Atlantic integration of Serbia-Montenegro and all Southeast European countries is a prerequisite for the stabilisation of the political situation."
Burns also said that the stabilisation of relations between Serbia and Montenegro is especially important before the launch of SAA talks, slated for October.
Tadic also met with the head of the Contact Group, German diplomat Michael Schaefer, and EU security chief Javier Solana. 
Tadic said that he hoped negotiations with the EU would begin in October, even if Ratko Mladic was not extradited to the ICTY, adding that he advocated a tighter union of Serbia and Montenegro.
"We need a stable common state and stable institutions in it, given that we are facing very important negotiations [with the EU]. 
We are entering those negotiations with certain difficulties, but they are essentially important for our future," Tadic said.
During the visit, Tadic also gave a lecture at Harvard University.
