20/01/2006
(EurActiv - 20/01/06;
AP, Reuters, BBC, VOA, RFE/RL, EUpolitix, Xinhua, Beta, Radio B92 - 19/01/06)
The EU warned Serbia on Thursday (19 January) that its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) may be cancelled if it fails to hand over former Bosnian Serb military chief Ratko Mladic and other war crimes suspects to the UN tribunal in The Hague.
The warning is the second in as many months.
An earlier one came at the end of the first round of SAA talks in December.
"Suspension of negotiations is certainly one alternative, and I expect that the Serbian government will take this message very seriously," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said.
"Serbia has to choose now between its nationalist past and a European future.
I hope it will choose a European future."
He made the statement following talks in Brussels with chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte, who has repeatedly criticised Belgrade for its lack of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
"I need full co-operation from Serbia and I need help from the EU to obtain that full co-operation," del Ponte said on Thursday.
"I want to put Mladic on trial in July this year along with the other nine accused of genocide.
Mladic must appear in court in July."
Del Ponte, who insists Mladic is in Serbia, also rejected recent media reports suggesting that he had fled to Russia to evade capture.
"I have no need to get in touch with the Russian authorities about Mladic, because Mladic is in Serbia, and as you know, Mladic is protected with the power of the army," the prosecutor told reporters, citing information she had received.
"What I need is an ...
obligation from Belgrade to arrest him and deliver him to The Hague."
During her visit to Brussels, del Ponte met also with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana and NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, reportedly asking them to press Serbia on the issue.
NATO, whose Partnership for Peace programme Serbia-Montenegro is hoping to join as a first step towards eventual membership in the Alliance, has also made full co-operation with the ICTY a precondition for the Balkan country's integration progress.
In an unrelated development, Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Zoran Stankovic insisted Thursday that authorities are still trying to locate Mladic.
Speaking to reporters, he said that he had met with the fugitive's wife and son at his ministry before the New Year, but would not elaborate.
"The operation to catch Mladic is under way and I cannot comment on it," the AP quoted Stankovic as telling reporters.
"All available army personnel are engaged in this."
Mladic and former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic top the tribunal's list of indictees.
Both face charges of genocide for their alleged roles in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of about 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo.
