20/01/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 20/01/06
As the year 2006 gets under way, Albania is approaching a key milestone. 
The European Commission has said it intends to conclude Stabilisation and Association (SAA) talks with the country this spring, paving the way for eventual EU membership. 
However, it warned, an SAA agreement depends on the progress made in implementing required reforms.
The SAA process for Albania has been difficult in comparison to other countries of the region, according to Skender Minxhozi, director of the Tirana daily Gazeta Shqiptare.
"For more than three years Albania has been negotiating an agreement, which technically is considered concluded," Minxhozi told the Voice of America. 
"But there have been problems connected with internal political stability and election processes every year. 
As a result, the EC reply has been conditioned."
Albania will also hold local elections this year, and these will be seen as a test of its ability to hold a free and fair vote in line with international standards. 
Political parties are expected to begin negotiations this month on election reform, a thorny issue over the past decade.
Previous elections, Minxhozi said, have set a bad precedent: each time, after the process is organised, political parties rush to criticise it and make changes to the election code.
"The last local elections were held according to a 'set of rules', which now is considered by many actors as unacceptable. 
Fair elections depend on political parties' ability to find a common language, but the role of the international community is also important. 
Its role, I think, should be more qualified than it has been until now," Minxhozi said.
Another major area of concern is fighting corruption. 
Prime Minister Sali Berisha came to power in 2005 on an anti-corruption platform, vowing to take decisive action against the problem. 
According to analyst Andi Bushati, corruption can indeed be tackled, but the Berisha cabinet cannot do it alone.
"It depends on the political will to fight corruption so the authorities and the citizens can see its results. 
I think that the government should not abuse this fight. 
If the government wants to fight corruption, it cannot do it without being in the same line with other independent institutions," Bushati said.
