18/11/2005
(OSCE, HINA, Euro-reporters - 17/11/05)
The head of the OSCE mission in Croatia, Ambassador Jorge Fuentes, welcomed on Thursday (17 November) the growing maturity of the country's institutions and the "enhanced dialogue" between his office and Croatian authorities.
Presenting his mission's new six-month report on Croatia to the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna, he said there were signs that domestic institutions, the media and civil society were gaining the needed confidence and ability to address outstanding issues in a number of areas.
The 27-page paper, covering the period from May to October, outlines the progress Croatia has made in the fields encompassed by the OSCE mandate, including refugee return, rule of law, media freedom, police reform and the state of civil society.
The most important political event in the past six months was the EU decision of 3 October to open accession talks with Croatia, said Fuentes.
In his view, this "will provide the government with an additional incentive and energy to further pursue the fulfilment of the OSCE mandate".
While citing lack of access to adequate housing, non-recognition of acquired rights and destroyed infrastructure as some of the impediments to refugee returns, the OSCE ambassador said "measurable progress" has taken place.
"It is important that this positive momentum be seen in other areas, such as the provision of housing for the largest remaining category of refugees -- former holders of occupancy or tenancy rights, who lived in socially-owned flats," Fuentes told representatives of the 55-nation organisation.
According to official estimates, the process of reconstruction and repossession of war-damaged properties should be completed within the next two years.
Meanwhile, next month, the OSCE will launch a public awareness campaign aimed at creating an atmosphere facilitating the return and re-integration of Croatian Serb refugees.
The campaign, including TV and radio spots, posters and billboards, has been developed along with the government, the European Commission delegation in Zagreb and other OSCE partners.
Regarding minority rights, Fuentes said there has been at best mixed success, despite the adoption three years ago of a constitutional law on national minorities.
He voiced hope that authorities would take the measures needed to meet their obligations under the law, including ensuring minority representation in administrative and judicial bodies and the adoption of a national plan to combat discrimination.
As concerns judicial reform -- one of the political criteria Croatia must meet to be eligible to join the EU -- the OSCE official pointed to the country's recently adopted judicial reform strategy as a signal of "increasing political support for an improved legal climate in Croatia".
A key upcoming challenge in this area, he said, will be "the effective and impartial adjudication of war crimes by the Croatian judiciary", including cases transferred by the UN tribunal in The Hague for domestic trial.
Another challenge Croatia faces is the implementation of electoral reform.
Some progress in this area is expected by spring 2006, when a permanent State Election Commission is due to be established.
"Regarding media, police and civil society issues, the ongoing co-operation between the mission and Croatian authorities, and the active role of domestic NGOs and the free press, provide encouraging signs that continuing progress in these areas will reach a decisive stage in the course of 2006," said Fuentes.
In other news, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer told reporters Thursday that regional stability and security would be enhanced if Croatia joined the Alliance.
He urged Croatia to push ahead with the required steps for membership, including the arrest and transfer of war crimes indictee Ante Gotovina, who is wanted by the UN war crimes tribunal.
