18/11/2005
By Avni Zogani for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 18/11/05
Kosovo's Parliament on Thursday (17 November) approved a resolution calling on the negotiating team to accept nothing less than independence for the province during status talks expected to start this month.
Under international pressure, however, the lawmakers softened the tone of the resolution, which was proposed by Hashim Thaci's Party for a Democratic Kosovo. 
The original text had amounted to an outright declaration of independence.
"The will of the people of Kosovo for independence is not negotiable," the document adopted on Thursday reads in part. 
It was adopted through acclamation, while Serb representatives in the assembly continued their boycott.
The ten-point resolution will serve as a platform for the negotiating team during the UN-mediated talks. 
In addition to setting independence as the goal, it expresses support for international involvement and demands that every move by Kosovo's negotiators be approved either by parliament or through a referendum.
UNMIK head Soren Jessen-Petersen described the text adopted Thursday as a "good foundation upon which to build a platform for the Kosovo team". 
MPs had acted in line with their responsibilities by adopting the modified resolution, he said.
With the expected launch of the talks fast approaching, Pristina and Belgrade remain far apart in their views regarding the province's future. 
The Serbian government argues that the province should gain something "more than autonomy but less than independence". 
On Tuesday, the cabinet of Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica unanimously adopted a resolution opposing full independence for Kosovo.
In the Serb part of the divided town of Mitrovica, meanwhile, a self-proclaimed council of Kosovo Serb municipalities adopted a declaration, which says that independence of Kosovo would mean a further ethnic cleansing of Serbs.
The UN envoy for the status talks, former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, is expected to visit Pristina and Belgrade next week.
