22/09/2005
(AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, International Herald Tribune, Turkish Press, Turkish Daily News, British EU Presidency Web Site - 21/09/05)
EU officials voiced confidence Wednesday (21 September) that the formal approval of a declaration on Ankara's refusal to recognise Cyprus has cleared the way for the start of Turkey's entry talks next month, as scheduled.
The move "paves the way for a smooth adoption of the negotiating framework and thus the opening of the accession negotiations with Turkey on 3 October," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Wednesday, describing the declaration as "a reasonable and balanced outcome".
The only other issue to be cleared is the adoption of a negotiating framework
Tensions between Turkey and the EU mounted in July when Ankara signed a protocol extending its customs accord with the Union, but appended a declaration saying the move did not amount to recognition of Cyprus.
After much haggling, the EU ambassadors agreed on the text of the bloc's counter-declaration Monday, which was due to be formally approved the next day.
But Cyprus raised last-minute objections Tuesday, and it was taken off the agenda.
The country's representatives dropped their reservations Wednesday, opening the door for the agreement.
Without setting a specific deadline, the document says that Turkey must recognise Cyprus in the course of its membership talks.
"Recognition of all member states is a necessary component of the accession process," the 7-point declaration reads.
"Accordingly, the EU underlines the importance it attaches to the normalisation of relations between Turkey and all EU member states, as soon as possible."
Urging Turkey to ensure "full, non-discriminatory implementation" of the customs accord -- notably by giving access to its ports and airports to Cypriot ships and planes -- the EU warned that if it fails to do so, its progress in the accession talks may stall.
"Turkey must apply the protocol fully to all member states," the EU said, noting that it will evaluate Turkey's implementation of the accord in 2006.
"The European Community and its member states stress that the opening of negotiations on the relevant chapters depends on Turkey's implementation of its contractual obligations to all member states.
Failure to implement its obligations in full will affect the overall progress in the negotiations."
The declaration also made it clear that the UN should play the leading role in efforts to end Cyprus's 31-year division.
Turkish Daily News reported Wednesday that it was that particular item in the declaration that annoyed the Greek Cypriot officials, who wanted to see changes in the text that would give the EU a more prominent role in any new Cyprus peace talks.
Addressing the UN General Assembly session on Wednesday, Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul accused Nicosia of trying to sideline the UN in negotiations on the Mediterranean island's reunification.
"It is regrettable that, at a time when we are debating the best way to reform the UN and enhance its role, we are at the same time witnessing an attempt to move the Cyprus problem away from this organisation," said Gul.
"We regard these efforts to undermine the role of the UN as a most disturbing paradox.''
He also voiced regret that the recommendations for lifting all restrictions on the Turkish Cypriot community that UN Secretary General Kofi Annan made last year, have been disregarded.
All restrictions on the free movement of people, services and goods between the Greek Cypriot south and the Turkish Cypriot north, as well as to Turkey and Greece, should be removed as a package, said Gul.
