24/02/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 24/02/06
The Albanian Education Ministry is launching a new initiative aimed at teaching the Albanian language to the children of Albanian citizens residing in other countries. 
The ministry says this could be realised through specific television programmes aired by stations broadcasting on satellite.
The programming would be beamed to Great Britain, Greece, Italy and other countries where a significant population of Albanian immigrants exists.
"This is a responsibility of the Albanian state, aiming to teach the immigrants' children their mother tongue and giving them information about the Albanian culture," says Education Minister Genc Pollo. 
He said discussions are under way with various satellite networks.
Albanians abroad have long requested such an initiative, expressing concerns that their children are losing touch with their roots. 
Currently, Tirana has limited funding resources for educating expatriate children, and producing TV programmes is a less costly option than establishing Albanian-language schools, say education ministry experts.
Last year, an Albanian immigrants' organisation proposed that the ministry use a combination of television programming and textbooks to reach children residing in other countries.
"The aim of our initiative is to teach the children the language and the culture using a TV programme, because establishing a school needs funds and time. 
The electronic media is a good possibility, fast and efficient," the organisation says. 
The project has been approved by the Albanian Foreign Ministry and is now being considered by the Council of Ministers.
Albanian language courses already exist in Italy, mainly in the cities where immigant populations are concentrated. 
Recently, Greece has shown interest in setting up schools for Albanian immigrants, as part of a bilateral initiative under which Greek language courses would be provided for the Greek minority in southern Albania.
