21/12/2005
(Blic - 21/12/05; AFP, AP, RFE/RL, Serbian Government - 20/12/05)
EU officials warned Belgrade on Tuesday (20 December) that it must demonstrate full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) if it wants its negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) to continue.
The warning came on the first day of a two-day round of technical talks between the European Commission (EC) and the Serbian negotiating team on liberalisation of trade in industrial and agricultural products and on the creation of a free trade area with the EU. 
The next round of talks is scheduled for February.
The EU has set full co-operation with the ICTY, including the arrest and handover of indicted war criminals, as a key precondition for Serbia-Montenegro's accession to the Union. 
Of more than 160 people indicted by the UN tribunal in The Hague for their alleged involvement in war crimes during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s, six are still at large, including former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic.
"The issue of co-operation with the tribunal is very important and we expect government action to end this unfinished job as soon as possible, so we could continue negotiations," said Therese Sobieski, head of the EC unit responsible for talks with Serbia-Montenegro.
While noting "substantial progress" in Tuesday's talks, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, who heads the republic's negotiating team, said the warning should be taken seriously. 
The February round would only take place "if the co-operation with the ICTY is fully realised", he warned.
"I hope everyone here has got that message clearly and seriously," the AFP quoted him as saying.
Last week, UN war crimes chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte told the Security Council that Serbia's co-operation with the ICTY has deteriorated in recent months. 
She demanded that the international community hold Serbia accountable for its failure to arrest Karadzic, Mladic and other war crimes fugitives.
In recent days, attention has also been focused on Serbian authorities' failure to provide documents requested by UN prosecutors. 
At issue are three items said to be missing from Mladic's military dossier, including a postal receipt signed by Mladic. 
Serbia-Montenegro defence officials, however, maintain the items were not in Mladic's 106-page file.
Speaking on Tuesday, federal Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic said finalisation of SAA talks during 2006 is one of Serbia-Montenegro's top three priorities, adding that the country must meet the crucial requirement for full co-operation with the ICTY. 
That includes the handover of Mladic, he noted.
"I don't want to think about the serious consequences if we don't co-operate with The Hague tribunal," the AP quoted Draskovic as saying. 
"We must do what we can and have to do."
In neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina, meanwhile, NATO troops conducted searches Tuesday at two businesses that may be helping Mladic evade arrest and extradition to The Hague. 
Both firms, located in the eastern town of Vlasenica, are reportedly owned by Milje Kljestan, a suspected Mladic supporter. 
In a statement, NATO said the raid was carried out to obtain information about the fugitive's support network.
