21/12/2005
ByVlatko Vukotić for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 21/12/05
On 1 January 2006, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) will introduce a value-added tax (VAT) with a single rate of 17 per cent.
As a result, BiH will no longer be the only country in Europe that does not have this kind of tax.
The move is expected to bring an additional 75m euros to the state budget, as well as to reduce illegal trade.
It comes after a vigorous public debate, during which opposition parties and trade unions challenged the idea of a single rate.
Some argued that certain staples -- such as bread, milk, medicine and books -- should be tax-free.
The Republika Srpska (RS) Employers' Union campaigned in favour of instituting two VAT rates, in keeping with the practice of many other European countries.
The government and international community representatives, however, are convinced that a single rate would prevent abuse of the VAT.
Bosnians are bracing for the impact of the change, which many economists expect to trigger price hikes of up to 20 per cent.
The brunt of these increases will be felt most keenly by the poor and disadvantaged, and High Representative Paddy Ashdown is urging authorities to take steps to cushion the effect.
"The VAT will make a chaos during the first couple of months just like in the rest of countries in the world and that is why it would be good for the government to prepare some mechanisms to protect the poor," Ashdown said.
Authorities in the two BiH entities have projected that around 25m euros will be spent on making the VAT's impact less severe, but union officials think it is not enough.
"If they really want to help the people to survive VAT, it would be better for MPs and ministers to reduce their paychecks and extra salaries," says RS Union Confederation President Obrad Belenzada.
The BiH Council of Ministers has suggested keeping newspapers and books tax-free, amid warnings from publishers that they will not be able to stay in business due to further reductions in already low sales.
However, the European Commission has taken a dim view of making such an exception, insisting that nothing should be changed in the VAT concept.
The central government, meanwhile, has advised the entity administrations to form teams tasked with controlling prices after the VAT introduction and preventing companies from making illegitimate profits.
So far, such a team has been formed in the BiH Federation.
In RS, however, the trade ministry claims it has yet to receive any official notification from Sarajevo and has only heard about the idea via the media.
