22/09/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 22/09/05
Since the beginning of the year, Montenegro has recorded 212.7m euros in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) -- 182m euros more than in the same period last year. 
The gross value of the FDI amounted to 215.5m euros. 
Nikola Fabris, chief economist of the Central Bank of Montenegro, issued a statement saying that FDI in the period from January to June 2005 surpassed that of last year by nearly seven times.
According to preliminary data, Fabris said that portfolio investment in Montenegro amounted to 10.7m euros -- 14 times the amount recorded last year.
Companies from Hungary and Britain are the largest foreign investors in Montenegro, with a combined 169m euros this year. 
Eighty per cent of investment is related to services -- including the Telekom Crne Gore privatization, which amounted to 114m euros -- followed by financial institutions and the real estate market. 
The production industry accounted for 1.6 per cent of the entire sum.
Israel, Russia, Slovenia, Serbia and Britain invested in the production industry -- with the largest amount, 2.3m euros, coming from Japan. 
In the real estate market, investments amounted to 12m euros, and financial institutions attained more than 24.5m euros.
Fabris said that in the first half of 2005, there were new loans to the country worth 64m euros -- with existing loans worth 19m euros paid off during the period. 
He said that even though the majority of the loans could be validated by investment, this would be unsustainable in the long run. 
Fabris added that bank assets increased by 23.3m euros in this period, and that international account reserves increased by 95m euros.
The World Bank's annual report -- released last week -- ranks Serbia-Montenegro first in terms of reforms among 12 transition countries. 
The report is expected to boost the federal union's reputation and perhaps eventually enhance EU membership prospects. 
Talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement are expected to open next month. 
Analysts say the report may also help create an investment boom in Serbia and Montenegro -- with an influx of FDI increasing by about half a billion euros -- to 22.5 billion euros next year.
