20/12/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 20/12/05
Macedonian MPs adopted 11 constitutional amendments on 8 December that could pave the way for a more efficient and independent judiciary. 
Among other changes, the amendments provide for the election of judges and public prosecutors by the relevant councils instead of by parliament.
"Adoption of the constitutional amendments is a huge step in carrying out reforms in the judiciary," said Justice Minister Meri Mladenovska-Gjorgievska. 
Representatives of international organisations also welcomed the amendments. 
In a joint statement, EU Special Representative Erwan Fouere, US Ambassador Gillian Milovanovic and OSCE mission head Carlos Pais hailed the progress towards judicial reform as providing "the basis for consolidation of the rule of law and economic and social progress".
Under the new amendments, judges will be elected by the Judiciary Council of the Republic of Macedonia, in a shift aimed at lessening political influence in their selection. 
Previously, judges were elected by legislators. 
An almost identical procedure will be used to elect public prosecutors, who will be elected by the Prosecutors' Council.
The election of the public prosecutor will still be made by parliament at the cabinet's recommendation, though with prior agreement by the prosecutor's council.
Other changes to the constitution include a provision enabling a state administration authority to sanction violations. 
This amendment is expected to ease the burden of courts.
Complying with recommendations by the Group of States Against Corruption to reduce the number of people enjoying immunity from prosecution, the amendments stipulate that only the president of the government will enjoy such immunity in the future. 
Ministers will not have immunity, and the Public Prosecutor of the republic will have only functional immunity.
While adopting the constitutional amendments, parliament also approved a constitutional law on implementation of the amendments. 
Under it, legislation covering the judicial council, as well as a Law on Courts and a Law on Offences, must be enacted by 30 June 2006. 
Amendments to the Law on Public Prosecution and the Law on the Government of the Republic of Macedonia should be adopted within nine months from the promulgation of the amendments.
