24/02/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/02/06
The eight-member Kosovo delegation returned to Pristina Tuesday (21 February) night after two days of talks in Vienna -- the first round of direct negotiations between Kosovo and Serb representatives. 
A second session will take place on 17 March.
The landmark first round, however, did not tackle the question of resolving the province's final status. 
Instead, the meeting -- chaired by the UN -- focused on the devolution from the central Pristina government to the municipalities.
"We are confident that we had a chance to ensure the international community that our document is positive and functional, which insures and protects the interests and rights of a minority in Kosovo," the head of the Kosovo delegation, Lutfi Haziri, told reporters at Pristina Airport. 
Although he welcomed the talks on decentralisation, Serb delegation chief Leon Kojen said he would have preferred that the negotiations had tackled the status question.
Two plans for decentralisation -- one from the Kosovo side and the other from Belgrade -- were discussed in Vienna. 
The Kosovo negotiators are seeking full independence for the province, which is still officially part of Serbia but has been administered by the UN since 1999. 
Local governance reform should take place after independence is granted, they argue.
Serbia wants substantial autonomy given to Serb minority communities within the province, which would be allowed to maintain close ties to each other and a special relationship with Belgrade.
Foreign diplomats in Pristina praised the negotiations. 
"The Vienna meeting was very constructive. 
The facts of this meeting were seen immediately, because a second round will take place in the coming weeks," said Alexander Bayerl, a member of Austria's delegation in Kosovo.
UN special envoy for status talks Martti Ahtisaari said that the first round went better than expected. 
He will be visiting Belgrade and Pristina next week.
Deputy envoy Albert Rohan, who headed the meeting, said the climate of the talks had been constructive, although there were no "earth-shattering results".
"It was not expected to reach an agreement ... 
but to present various opinions and explore different views, and it was quite successful," he said.
