19/01/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 19/01/06
The decentralisation process is a key issue and must be treated with sincerity, EU special envoy for Kosovo Stefan Lehne said on Wednesday (18 January), urging Kosovo's provisional authorities to demonstrate their readiness to ensure a safe and secure future for minorities.
"Kosovo must show that is ready to offer a safe future for all minorities living in Kosovo," Lehne said following a meeting in Pristina with Local Self-Government Minister Lutfi Haziri and Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) Secretary General Jakup Krasniqi.
The envoy was in Kosovo to discuss the EU's role in the status resolution process, as well as its future role -- including in such areas as justice and policing -- after the status issue is resolved.
His trip precedes a planned 25 January meeting in Vienna between Kosovo and Serbia-Montenegrin representatives, who will be discussing issues related to decentralisation.
"The integration of all minorities in Kosovo society is very important.
We encourage the Kosovo government to work on this issue.
We are expecting the Vienna meeting, because it is in the interest for all to have a good start to the talks," Lehne said.
Haziri welcomed what he said was a "positive beginning" to the negotiations process.
"I want to confirm once again my readiness as a Kosovo government minister to travel to Vienna to discuss the agenda specified under [UN special envoy] Martti Ahtisaari's mandate … but also in order to finalise this important process for all Kosovo's citizens," Haziri said.
Krasniqi said he briefed Lehne on the Kosovo Albanian side's principles for decentralisation and outlined the stance taken by the PDK, Kosovo's largest opposition party.
Lehne also met with Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi and Parliament Speaker Nexhat Daci.
However, none of the parties spoke to reporters after the talks.
Lehne was appointed by the EU last year to assist Ahtisaari.
He currently serves as director for Southeastern Europe at EU headquarters and is a senior adviser to EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana.
