20/12/2005
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 20/12/05
Croatia and Serbia, once bitter adversaries, now increasingly see each other as partners in promoting regional stability and Euro-Atlantic integration. 
As Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's November visit to Croatia demonstrated, the climate has indeed changed.
Kostunica became the first Serbian prime minister to visit Croatia since the breakup of the former Yugoslavia. 
The trip comes a year after his Croatian counterpart, Ivo Sanader, paid an official visit to Belgrade -- the first by a Croatian prime minister in 15 years.
At a joint news conference following their talks in Zagreb, the two leaders agreed that Croatia and Serbia play a key role in ensuring the political stability of the Western Balkans, and that the time has come to resolve all outstanding issues.
Belgrade and Zagreb are ready to work together to become "beacons of peace and stability in the region," Sanader told reporters. 
He congratulated Kostunica on the start of Stabilisation and Association Agreement talks between Belgrade and the EU -- a major step on the road to accession. 
Croatia and Serbia have a mutual EU future, he said.
Serbia also welcomes every Croatian step towards the EU, because it means improvement for the region as a whole, Kostunica said.
Underscoring the commitment to improved ties, a set of bilateral agreements -- including on international combined transport of goods, reconstruction of a railway bridge at Bogojevo-Erdut, and scientific co-operation -- was signed during Kostunica's visit.
Protection of minorities, guaranteeing the right of return for wartime refugees, and resolving missing persons cases remain the main outstanding issues between Croatia and Serbia. 
According to Sanader, the refugee return issue should be solved by the end of 2006, and Zagreb continues to place a top priority on determining what happened to the approximately 1,200 Croats who went missing during the 1991-1995 conflict.
While in Zagreb, Kostunica also met with Croatian President Stipe Mesic and Parliament Speaker Vladimir Seks.
