17/08/2005
(Office of the High Representative, FENA, SEE Security Monitor - 16/08/05;
FENA - 15/08/05;
ONASA - 13/08/05;
SRNA - 12/08/05)
Urging senior officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to put the country's interests above those of their political parties, the Office of the High Representative (OHR) voiced hope Tuesday (16 August) that a meeting on police restructuring Wednesday will prove productive.
"The OHR welcomes the important meeting of government institutions on police restructuring which will take place in Mrakovica," the office of the top international envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, said in a statement on Tuesday.
"It expects senior representatives, with negotiating authority, to attend these talks and to participate constructively in order to advance the process of negotiations on police reform."
During the talks on the issue which began in late April the participating 11 main political parties in BiH reached a compromise on some of the core principles of the reform, particularly the establishment of a single police structure at the state level, free of political interference.
The most controversial aspect of the reform defining the boundaries of policing zones was left to be dealt with during the second phase of the negotiations.
However, the Serb Democratic Party (SDS) decided to retreat from the initial agreement, reached with the support of the party's own negotiators, saying the provisions allowing police forces to cross over the line separating the two entities, Republika Srpska (RS) and the Federation of BiH (FBiH), were unacceptable.
A meeting to decide on the next steps in reaching a framework agreement on police restructuring ended in failure last month as the SDS and the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats failed to show up, thus blocking a deal.
Wednesday's meeting was hosted by the Republika Srpska (RS) government of Prime Minister Pero Bukejlovic.
The prime ministers of BiH and FBiH, Adnan Terzic and Ahmet Hadzipasic, and other senior entity and state-level government officials are been invited to participate in the discussions.
Police reform is a key condition BiH must meet to be able to begin negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU.
"BiH needs to reach an agreement on police restructuring by the beginning of September if it is to qualify for these key negotiations in time for the tenth anniversary of Dayton in November, and if it is to have any chance of catching up with its immediate neighbours, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro," the OHR said.
"The conditions for EU membership are non-negotiable, and until BiH's politicians are prepared to make reforms which meet these conditions, BiH's path to Europe will remain blocked."
Citing the results of different opinion polls, Ashdown's office said that four out of five citizens of BiH want to join the EU and to see policing free of political interference.
"They want their politicians to lead this country forward into modern Europe, not chain it to its past," the statement said.
