31/08/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 31/08/09
Minister of Labour, Employment and Social Affairs Rasim Ljajic has been on Serbia's political radar for nearly two decades.
Ljajic is head of the Sandzak Democratic Party (SDP), which merged with Serbian President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DP) last year for the general elections.
Recently, Ljajic announced plans to establish a new political party called the Social Democratic Party of Serbia.
He says the new party will work towards solving daily problems confronting ordinary people.
The longtime politician is also head of Serbia's National Council for Co-operation with The Hague tribunal, one of the most unpopular jobs in the country.
Despite receiving numerous threats, Ljajic vows to bring war crimes suspects to justice.
Ljajic recently sat down with SETimes correspondent Igor Jovanovic to talk about his role with The Hague, how Serbia plans to weather the economic storm and his new political party.
SETimes:
The Serbian government claims it is closer to arresting the remaining war crimes fugitives wanted by The Hague -- Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.
What has the government done to improve the manhunt and what evidence do you have that both are still on Serbian territory?
Rasim Ljajic:
There is no evidence that the two fugitives are now on Serbian territory.
If we had that evidence, they would already have been extradited to the tribunal.
However, we are doing everything with the assumption that they are in Serbia.
At the moment, no one can say where the fugitives are hiding, not even the people from the ICTY.
In any case, we are carrying out the most thorough activities towards locating them.
ICTY representatives have seen that and the last report by Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz is the most positive so far.
SETimes:
As the minister in charge of social policy, do you foresee mass worker protests this fall?
What period of the year do you see the greatest strain on Serbia's economy and why?
Ljajic:
The global economic crisis has had a severe effect on Serbia.
The number of poor citizens has increased by 60,000-70,000.
The government is doing all it can to soften the consequences of the crisis.
We have put together a set of social and economic measures for the protection of the poorest portion of the population.
Instead of demonstrations, we [the government] are offering a dialog with the social partners, i.e.
the workers.
I will soon start visiting various towns and municipalities in Serbia, we will come to all companies encountering problems and, together with the workers, we will seek a solution for their situation.
That is why I do not expect a "hot fall" as far as strikes are concerned.
SETimes:
As Serbia has a bigger than planned budget deficit and lower tax payment, do you see this as a recipe for state bankruptcy?
If Serbia is to survive the economic crisis, how healthy will its economy be?
Ljajic:
The state going bankrupt is not an option.
Serbia is not among highly indebted countries, our budget deficit cannot lead to state bankruptcy, and certain countries in the region are in far bigger debt than Serbia.
By that I do not mean that our situation is ideal or that we have avoided all dangers, but I am confident that we will reach an agreement with the IMF.
On the other hand, the government will conspicuously cut public spending through the additional downsizing of state administration.
The state must put its hand even deeper into its own pocket, to gain citizens' trust by saving, to convince the public that saving is necessary.
SETimes:
Is the Serbian government healthy enough today to forego a reshuffling of the cabinet?
If Prime Minister Cvetkovic reshuffles his cabinet, will the opposition Liberal Democrats be offered positions within the government?
Ljajic:
I do not expect the Liberal Democrats to enter the government because none of the coalition partners have shown any intention of stepping out of the government for the time being.
The reduction of the number of ministries is both politically desirable and economically useful.
We need a smaller administration, which would give a new impulse to this government to face the economic crisis.
SETimes:
You are forming a new party that will no longer be linked only with the Sandzak region.
What are will its goals and priorities?
Ljajic:
It will be called the Social Democratic Party of Serbia, and we will try to bring something new to the political scene.
[The party] envisages a new approach to politics, new ideas and new people who are to promote that policy.
For the past 20 years, more or less, the same people have been switching between power and opposition on the Serbian political scene.
We need fresh blood for the arduous tasks before us.
