19/07/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 19/07/05
Visiting Belgrade on Monday (18 July), NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer praised progress in the government's co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, but stressed that the extradition of Ratko Mladic, indicted for genocide in Srebrenica, is a condition for the country's further progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
"I cannot explain how 10 years after the Srebrenica massacre the final conclusion can be 'we cannot find Ratko Mladic'. 
I cannot explain that to anyone," de Hoop Scheffer said during talks with Serbian, Montenegrin and Serbian-Montenegrin officials.
"There is a will to find Mladic, but it has yet to materialise. 
Everyone has difficulty explaining that," he added.
While in Belgrade, de Hoop Scheffer met with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and President Boris Tadic, Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic and Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic.
Draskovic said that it is the political and intellectual elite's duty to explain to the public that Mladic's arrest is not only a prerequisite for the road to Brussels, but also for the country's economic development and better living standards.
"We have met all conditions for membership in the Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme, except Mladic's arrest, and I hope that an extensive campaign in the Serbian public will follow, because we are fighting a battle for the future of the country and the fulfilment of an obligation that is not only legal but also moral," said Draskovic said.
Kostunica said Serbia has made significant progress in co-operation with the ICTY, adding that there is "a strong political will to fulfil all obligations".
Talks also addressed the topic of Kosovo. 
De Hoop Scheffer reaffirmed the importance of NATO's presence in the region, pledging that KFOR would do everything in its power to prevent the repetition of interethnic violence that broke out in March 2004. 
He said he would like to see Kosovo Serbs involved in Kosovo institutions and a "mature dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina". 
The NATO secretary general called on both sides to avoid "inflammatory" statements concerning Kosovo.
He and Draskovic signed an agreement on the free movement of NATO troops through Serbia-Montenegro. 
According to Draskovic, the deal allows NATO forces, including KFOR, to react quickly if need be "anywhere in the region where human rights, people and peace are in danger".
Djukanovic told de Hoop Scheffer that Montenegro had fulfilled all the conditions for its admission to the PfP and that he expects Serbia will do the same. 
Djukanovic said membership would contribute to greater stability in the western Balkans, which would have a positive effect on foreign investments.
