21/09/2005
(AP, VOA -- 19/09/05 - 20/09/05;
US Department of the Treasury - 19/09/05)
Albania's opposition Socialist Party (SP) said Tuesday (20 September) it will seek a probe into how thousands of foreigners -- including people allegedly linked to Osama bin Laden -- were able to get Albanian citizenship during the last 13 years.
"Our party will ask [President Alfred Moisiu] to start an investigation to check how Albanian citizenship has been given to some 12,000 foreign citizens -- most Kosovo Albanians -- but also some Arabs, since 1992," the AP quoted SP lawmaker Erjon Brace as saying Tuesday.
The party's decision followed a move by the US Treasury Department to financially isolate Abdul Latif Saleh -- designated a supporter of bin Laden and his al-Qaeda terror network -- who holds dual Jordanian and Albanian citizenship.
A directive issued Monday ordered American banks to freeze any bank accounts or other financial assets Saleh holds in the United States.
The move also implies a ban on any business transactions between US citizens and Saleh.
According to the treasury department, Saleh is closely associated with a number of NGOs in Albania, linked to the Egyptian Islamic Jihad -- a terrorist organisation tied to al-Qaeda, and has received $600,000 from bin Laden to establish extremist groups in Albania.
Saleh set up an Albanian jihadist organisation, financed by the Al Haramain Foundation -- an NGO linked to al Qaeda.
"The mission of the Albanian jihadist group has been to destabilise the internal situation in Albania by fomenting conflict among the different religious groups in the country," the treasury department statement read.
"Al Haramain recruited members from this organisation, which Saleh directly assisted in vetting."
Saleh is said to be associated with Saudi native Yasin Qadi, a businessman who was named a specially designated global terrorist by the US Treasury Department in October 2001.
According to the department, Qadi was an active fundraiser for Saleh's jihadist group.
The two reportedly set up several joint business partnerships, including a sugar importing business, a medical enterprise and a construction business.
"Saleh served as the general manager of all of Qadi's businesses in Albania, and reportedly holds 10 per cent of the Qadi Group's investments in Albania," the treasury department said.
According to the statement, Saleh was expelled from Albania in 1999 on suspicion of terrorism.
His last known residence is the United Arab Emirates.
In 1998, six people were arrested in Albania, two of whom were eventually tried and executed in Egypt as perpetrators of terrorist attacks, according to the treasury department.
"In their testimony, the individuals said it was Saleh who had helped them come to Albania," and identified him as "the one who had helped them in every respect, beginning with picking them up at the airport".
According to the AP, the UN Security Council committee in charge of anti-terrorism sanctions against al-Qaeda and members of Afghanistan's former Taliban regime added Saleh to its sanctions list Friday, as an associate of the al-Qaeda network.
All 191 UN member states are required to impose a travel ban and arms embargo, as well as to freeze the financial assets of all those on the list, which now includes 329 individuals and 119 groups or "entities".
