21/09/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 21/09/05
The IMF has been warning since August that it cannot successfully complete its financial arrangement with Serbia if the country does not proceed with promised pension reform and the sale of two oil refineries within the prescribed deadline. 
The Fund told Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica it would withdraw from the deal if Belgrade fails to meet the requirements by the end of October.
National Bank of Serbia Governor Radovan Jelasic, who recently met with IMF First Deputy Managing Director Anne Krueger and Europe Department Director Michael Deppler in Washington, says the IMF has once again sent a clear signal to all those who have the final say on the privatisation of state oil company NIS and on changes to the pension insurance law: international obligations must be met.
Last week, the government bid to hire a foreign consultant to help privatise NIS -- one of the biggest Balkan companies, with annual production of 783,000 tonnes of oil. 
But it was only last month that parliament gave the go-ahead for the sale, amid fears it would spur greater inflation and leave at least half of the company's 17,000 employees out of work.
The opposition says the government lacks a clear privatisation strategy. 
President Boris Tadic says the cabinet has "no vision of where we are going". 
"Everything is reduced to a quick fix," Tadic said. 
"We've become masterminds at improvisation."
The IMF pension reform divergence condition requires the pace of pension adjustment to match retail price hikes. 
According to the Fund, the adjustment should be made once a year. 
But under the government-proposed amendments to the pension law, adjustments will occur whenever the month-on-month inflation exceeds 5 per cent. 
In theory, it means that pensions could be increased every month.
Kostunica is optimistic about Serbia's further co-operation with the IMF. 
"I am certain that a solution will be found in line with what in a way represents the essence of this government's policy: co-operation with the international community minding our short- and long-term national interest," he said.
Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus explained that the delay in the sale of refineries is due to the company's restructuring, while the pension law is in the parliamentary procedure, which he hopes will result in the adoption of government-proposed amendments.
Rather than share the government's optimism on the outcome of negotiations with the IMF, economists warn that there is not much time left. 
If the Fund bows out, Serbia will not be able to draw the last $90m tranche in the $900m loan package, and the knock-off effect would lead the Paris Club of creditors to decline to write off Serbia's $700m debt. 
Still worse would be the indirect impact, as an IMF withdrawal would send a clear signal to foreign investors that Serbia is a country that does not honour its international agreements.
Analysts warn that increased foreign debt dues would fuel the country's already high unemployment rate.
