20/12/2005
(Turkish Daily News, Zaman - 20/12/05;
AP, AFP, Reporter.gr, Xinhua, Turkish Daily News, NATO - 19/12/05)
Turkey is not the only side that should be working to end the division of Cyprus, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said Monday (19 December), urging Greek Cypriot authorities to also take steps towards resolving the decades-long split.
Cyprus has been divided along ethnic lines since Turkey invaded the north of the island in 1974, following an Athens-backed coup that sought to unite Cyprus with Greece.
As many as 200,000 Cypriots were displaced, with Greek Cypriots driven from the Turkish-controlled north and Turkish Cypriots forced to flee the south.
Following the failure of the latest UN-sponsored efforts to reunite Cyprus, only the Greek Cypriots joined the EU on 1 May 2004 along with nine other Central and East European countries.
The lack of a solution has affected NATO-EU ties, as Turkey -- a NATO member for more than five decades -- opposes Cyprus' participation in meetings with the bloc.
"There are some hurdles to the NATO-EU relationship," de Hoop Scheffer said in Ankara on Monday following talks with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
"As the British say, it takes two to tango.
The solution is not only to be found in Ankara, that solution is to be found in Nicosia as well and that solution is to be found in Brussels as well."
During his one-day visit to Ankara, the NATO chief held talks also with Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul and Minister of Defence Mehmet Vecdi Gonul.
He invited the country to join NATO's reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan by contributing a team that would, along with those from other countries, provide security and logistics support to local authorities and aid organisations.
"If such a decision would take place I would applaud it," de Hoop Scheffer said.
Another issue discussed during meetings Monday concerned the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), which has been identified as a terrorist organisation by the EU, the UN and the United States.
Turkey wants NATO to also officially name it a terrorist group.
In 1984, the PKK took up arms against Turkish government forces, and fought for autonomy in the Kurdish-dominated southeast.
More than 37,000 people were killed over the next 15 years.
In 1999, the rebel group declared a unilateral ceasefire, but called it off last year;
violence has since re-emerged.
At least 200 Turkish soldiers have reportedly been killed in incidents involving the group this year.
According to the Turkish Daily News, the PKK has been listed as a terrorist organisation in the appendix of a document released by the NATO Military Committee in 2003, but Alliance members have yet to agree on updating the document.
Gul has reportedly voiced expectations that this could happen before the end of this year.
