17/11/2005
(AFP, Blic - 17/11/05;
VOA, EurActiv, Kosovareport, Beta, Radio B92, SEE Security Monitor - 16/11/05)
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari is due to arrive on a fact-finding mission to Pristina on Monday (21 November), which will mark the beginning of the first round of UN-led talks to determine Kosovo's final status.
Ahtisaari, 68, who served as president of Finland from 1994 to 2000, was appointed to lead the Kosovo status talks on behalf of the UN earlier this month, after the Security Council endorsed the process on 24 October.
His deputy, senior Austrian diplomat Albert Rohan, will accompany him.
According to the Kosovo daily Zeri, Ahtisaari and Rohan will spend two or three days in Pristina, meeting with members of Kosovo's negotiation team, led by President Ibrahim Rugova, as well as with UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen, KFOR Commander Lieutenant General Giuseppe Valotto and political representatives of the Kosovo Serbs.
Initially, the UN-brokered status talks will be conducted in the form of shuttle diplomacy, with Ahtisaari taking stock of the positions held by leaders across the region.
"For a complex problem such as Kosovo it is meaningless to hold a conference of negotiations that would fail in the first two hours," Zeri quoted Rohan as saying in an interview with the German media company Deutsche Welle.
"This is why the first round of talks will consist of a round of visits to the Balkans, not only to Belgrade and Pristina, but also Tirana, Skopje and Podgorica … In the beginning we will listen to their positions and then call on them not to insist on their demands."
Top Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials are expected to take their seats at the negotiating table at a later stage.
Representatives of the EU, NATO and the six-nation Contact Group for Kosovo, including Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, will also be involved in the negotiations.
The process is expected to last several months.
"I think everyone understands that this process can't go on forever and we have to go forward as fast as we can without rushing unnecessarily, but we will definitely move with determined speed," Ahtisaari said.
"To those who say three or four months, I'm prepared to offer my job immediately."
While making it clear that it does not favour any particular settlement, the Contact Group has laid down the basic criteria that the eventual solution must meet:
it should not imply a return to the pre-1999 situation, a partition of Kosovo along ethnic lines, or unification with any other country or part of a country.
Ahead of Ahtisaari's visit to Belgrade next week, the Serbian government has adopted a draft resolution on the Kosovo talks, which parliament is scheduled to discuss Monday.
The nine-point document states the government's readiness for compromise, while rejecting an independent Kosovo as a possible outcome of the negotiations.
It also says that the legislature will take a stand on the result of the talks and suggests that the citizens of Serbia might be asked to express their opinion on it in a referendum.
Meanwhile, the Kosovo assembly is expected to adopt a resolution Thursday, stating that the negotiations should lead to the province's independence.
International officials in Kosovo have warned lawmakers that while they have the right to approve a document that would serve as a guide and a platform for the negotiating team, a resolution on independence would be considered a unilateral step, which contradicts UN Resolution 1244, and would be unacceptable as such.
