18/01/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 18/01/06
The Albanian government signed a draft three-year agreement with the IMF on 11 January. 
The deal sets out a number of guidelines for Albanian institutions, including setting a realistic budget and threshold for tax collections, as well as improving control over expenditures. 
The IMF Board is expected to approve it on 27 January
"I am pleased to notice that during these months, developments are on the right track to guarantee macroeconomic stability and stable development," Prime Minister Sali Berisha said at the signing ceremony. 
"It is also important to implement, in the second half of the year, a fiscal package which will encourage the economic growth and employment for Albanians," he added.
The document was signed in the presence of Berisha, IMF Mission Representative Ann Margaret Westin, Finance Minister Ridvan Bode, and Bank of Albania Governor Ardian Fullani.
"We believe that this is a very good programme, a solid and conservative one. 
I would like to take the opportunity to thank the government and all the key counterparts for the very close and very efficient co-operation, and in particular the very strong initiative that they showed regarding this reform," Westin told journalists.
Referring to conditions set forth in the agreement, Berisha said improved fiscal administration is at the base of his government's programme. 
The conditions, he explained, include "reduction of the fiscal system in the future, establishing a friendly environment for business, a serious endeavour to regulate financial markets … and continuation of the privatisation process".
Meanwhile, the World Bank announced on 10 January that it would loan Albania $196m until 2009 as part of its new strategy of support for the country. 
The funds, to be disbursed through the International Development Agency and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, will go towards boosting economic growth and fighting poverty through support of private sector initiatives and improved peformance of public services.
"The aim of this strategy is to support the Albanian National Strategy of social and economic development and the process of negotiations for a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU," said the chief of the World Bank mission in Tirana, Nadir Mohammed.
The Bank is also urging Albania to improve the way it manages foreign aid programmes meant to fight poverty and unemployment. 
"The challenge for the new government is how to implement the projects, how to get the results," the AP quoted Mohammed as saying Tuesday (17 January). 
A previous World Bank loan of $130m did not produce the expected results, particularly in improving governance, he added.
