02/03/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/03/09 Photos by Nikola Barbutov
Natasa Bojanic is 26 years old and has a full life -- family, friends, a job she loves.
She's a bit shy, but confident enough to deal with the challenges life has brought her.
Natasa was born with Down's Syndrome.
But thanks to her family's efforts, this has not meant social isolation.
Six years ago, Natasa's mother heard about the Child's Heart charitable organisation, and from then her daughter's life changed completely.
Natasa started meeting new friends, attending daily workshops, and going to movies, theatres and concerts.
She became involved with a programme launched by the organisation dubbed "The School of Life".
Its aim is to help young people with developmental disabilities learn the everyday skills -- such as preparing meals and completing house chores -- that will enable them to function more independently.
"We do everything as if we were living on our own, without mom to do something for us.
We arrange our obligations around the house among ourselves," Natasa explains.
As one of the programme's most successful participants, Natasa was given the chance to become an employee of Child's Heart.
She now comes to work alone every day, riding public transportation.
Ever since she got the job, she has taken on many assignments, from sending faxes to helping develop projects.
Even that, she says, eventually became "boring".
Now, as she proudly points out, she is "head of the beverage section", a job which entails making sure that all guests and employees are served their favourite drink, be it coffee, tea or juice.
She shows us her kitchen, with a reminder of her daily duties posted on the wall and recipes for the preparation of various kinds of coffee posted beside it "just in case".
"The kitchen always has to be clean, and I take care of that," Natasa says.
Outside work, she keeps busy.
When she is not socialising with her friends, she likes to watch TV and play video games.
"My mom doesn't let me watch too much TV or sit in front of the computer for long," she complains.
She has a knack for art and also writes poetry, although when we asked her to read some of her work, her shyness prevailed.
Tanja Staljonic, a representative of Child's Heart, provided more details about the programme.
She said its objective is to enable people with mental disabilities to acquire as many practical skills as possible, leading to more independence.
"For the parents of a mentally challenged person, the biggest fear is:
'what will my child do when I die, who will take care of him?' That is why we try to teach these young people practical things through the School of Life, where we carry out camps lasting for several days.
Everyone knows their obligations and daily tasks.
We act as though they are on their own and react, if necessary, only in crisis situations," Staljonic says.
She adds that around 5,000 children have taken part in Child's Heart projects over the past eight years.
"Good co-operation with parents is imperative," Staljonic adds.
"Many of them cannot get the right information on how to exercise some of their rights.
They are confused and do not know who to address.
That is why Child's Heart is also a sort of information centre with all the necessary instructions."
Over the last few years in Serbia, there has been frequent discussion of the employment prospects for disabled individuals.
As Staljonic notes, however, finding a job is easier for people with physical disabilities than for those with developmental impairments.
"Employers would not have enough patience and would not want to take responsibility for a mentally challenged person.
It is different with people whose mental functions are fully intact.
They just need barriers to be lifted and their work space made accessible, and that is where an employer's concern ends," Staljonic says.
She goes on to say that inclusion in the regular school system should also be carried out in line with the capabilities of disabled individuals.
"Wheelchair-bound children or, for example, those with impaired hearing are able to attend regular classes and they should be enabled to do so.
Mentally challenged people cannot handle such programs, biology and physics mean nothing to them and they need practical skills.
"Still, even though they are not in the same classes, those children should at least be in the same school buildings, so as to develop mutual tolerance and awareness of differences," she adds.
Estimates say that some 250,000 mentally disabled people live in Serbia, but those data are not exact.
In rural areas especially, families often hide family members who have such disabilities.
They may not even receive a proper medical diagnosis, and are not included in the education or social protection systems.
