19/07/2005
(EuroNews - 19/07/05; AP, AFP, FENA, Seeurope.net, SEE Security Monitor - 18/07/05; SEE Security Monitor - 16/07/05)
A special commission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) endorsed two key defence reform bills Monday (18 July), setting the stage for significant changes in the sector. 
The envisioned measures include the creation by 2007 of a joint multiethnic army -- the first since the 1992-1995 conflict -- and the abolition of the entity defence ministries and of the conscription system.
"There will be one, single and only chain of command starting from the Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency, via the defence minister, the head of the Joint Command, commanders of the operational command and support command, and their subordinate units," Sifet Podzic, the head of the Joint Command of BiH's armed forces, said in an interview with BiH's public radio. 
"The operational command will have three tactical brigades, with commands most probably based in Banja Luka, Tuzla and Mostar."
The bills on defence and on service in the armed forces were drawn up by an internationally-led Defence Reform Commission, including representatives of the country's three main ethnic communities -- Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats and Bosnian Serbs. 
The legislation next must be approved by the central parliament and BiH's two entities, the Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska.
Its implementation would help BiH meet one of NATO's two main conditions for admission into the Partnership for Peace programme, the other being full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Defence Reform Commission Co-chairman Raffi Gregorian said the proposed reforms would allow the people of BiH to "demilitarise their minds and turn towards the future".
Welcoming Monday's move, the top international envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, described it as "one of the most significant milestones" the country has passed since the signing of the Dayton Peace Accords in 1995.
"Today Bosnia and Herzegovina has the chance to take a giant step to peace in the future," Ashdown said, urging lawmakers to adopt the legislation as soon as possible.
BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic, who also co-chairs the Defence Reform Commission, told reporters Monday that the bills would be submitted to the BiH government next week.
The passive reserve would be abolished and those who have already completed military training will have no further obligations, Radovanovic added. 
The new active reserve forces would include up to 10,000 members and would be made up of professionals. 
Some 2,400 men were likely to become redundant as a result of the reforms, the minister said, adding that special commissions would be set up to deal with the issue.
