17/11/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 17/11/05
Igor Davidovic, the former ambassador to the United States, has received broad support from all over Bosnia and Herzegovina as the best choice to lead the country's negotiating team in Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) talks with the EU.
Republika Srpska (RS) President Dragan Cavic officially nominated Davidovic on 8 November. 
He has backing not only in RS but in the Federation of BiH as well.
"Davidovic is selected as our primary candidate having in mind the highest degree of political consensus about his competences in business, diplomatic and institutional fields," Cavic said.
Accepting the nomination, Davidovic said he is "ready to provide support on the way from isolation to integration of both RS and BiH".
An attorney, Davidovic headed the RS government during the administration of Milorad Dodik, leader of the Union of Independent Social Democrats. 
Prior to that, he spent nine years managing a trading company in BiH. 
He speaks fluent English, French and Russian. 
"Davidovic is both competent and professional enough and we totally support his nomination," said Dodik.
"The ambassador has proven himself as outstanding professional and we have an excellent opinion about him," said Goran Milojevic, vice president of the Party of Democratic Progress.
"He is simply ideal for the task," said Zlatko Lagumdzija, the president of the opposition Social Democratic Party (SDP) from Sarajevo. 
"Davidovic was one of the best ambassadors of BiH."
BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic has also expressed a favourable attitude towards Davidovic's candidacy, which is subject to approval by the BiH Council of Ministers.
BiH now awaits an official EU decision giving the go-ahead for the talks, expected to begin in December.
"It is of the most importance that BiH has one joint negotiation position for all segments of the SAA. 
I hope that our politicians would recognise the benefit of the process and forget about our usual differences for the sake of the whole country's progress," said Terzic.
