20/10/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 20/10/05
"Their heads turn violet, breathing becomes harder and harder, and in few hours they're dead," a woman in Ceamurlia de Jos village said about domestic birds suffering from avian flu.
Other farmers in the village -- the first place where the disease was found in Romania this month -- said they simply killed the affected chickens, ducks and geese and ate them.
"I didn't know it was such a serious situation.
But the meat was okay, it has no bad taste or smell," one said.
The locality was put under quarantine immediately.
About 45,000 birds were euthanised and no one was allowed to leave Ceamurlia de Jos or to have visitors from outside.
The measures were not easy to implement -- some people wanted to stop the authorities from taking away their chickens, while others were reluctant to stay put in the village.
Since the initial cases, British specialists have established that the strain of flu is the lethal H5N1 type, which many fear has the potential to spread rapidly among humans and trigger a pandemic.
Romanian officials have responded with intensified measures, declaring two counties in the Dobrogea region -- Tulcea and Constanta -- as danger zones.
At two bridges and three ferry crossing points over the Danube, special filters have been installed that disinfect any vehicle leaving the area.
"Meanwhile, we put under quarantine, beside Ceamurlia de Jos, two other Danube Delta villages, Maliuc and Vulturu, where we found some dead swans and domestic birds," Agriculture Minister Gheorghe Flutur told reporters.
Although villagers may have eaten flu-stricken chickens without any adverse effect, alarm over the outbreak has affected the poultry industry.
"Our sales decreased by about 50 per cent in a few days and all the exports were banned," says Ilie Van, president of the Bird Breeders Association.
Kebab kiosks and fast-food restaurants that rely heavily on chicken meat have also seen fewer clients, although many are reluctant to admit it.
In reality, experts say, cooking the meat or eggs at temperatures over 70 degrees Celsius destroys the virus.
"I eat poultry or eggs every day, but prepared according to the right precautions," said President Traian Basescu, trying to reduce any consumer panic.
In addition to poultry breeders, factories, restaurants and stores, the avian flu has also affected tourism in the Danube Delta.
Fall usually brings thousands of tourists, most of them foreigners, to the region for fishing or hunting.
Many have now cancelled their trips.
"Two thirds of the reservations I had for the last weekend didn't show up, but it will be worse if the 2006 season for the Black Sea hotels is affected.
This is the time of year when the contracts with foreign tour operators are signed," said Cornel Gaina, the owner of the Cormoran Hotel in Danube Delta.
Not all businesses are hurting, however.
Though no case of H5 virus transmitted to human beings has been registered in Romania, pharmacies have sold more than 1.5 million doses of anti-flu vaccine -- as much as in a typical winter.
And they anticipate more orders in the days ahead.
