18/01/2006
(OHR Morning Media Brief - 18/01/06;
Reuters, FENA, SEE Security Monitor - 17/01/06)
The eight main political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) ended a final round of constitutional reform talks early Tuesday (17 January) without having reached agreement on key changes.
During November celebrations marking the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement in Washington, the parties' heads pledged to revamp the constitution so as to streamline the central institutions and facilitate the country's Euro-Atlantic integration.
They also pledged to adopt the constitutional reforms by March 2006, ahead of the country's general elections in October.
But during the final round of US-mediated talks in Sarajevo, the Bosnian Muslim, Serb and Croat politicians failed to agree on measures envisioning the replacement of the current tripartite presidency with a single president and strengthening the state parliament.
The talks reportedly stumbled over Bosnian Serb politicians' insistence on the introduction of entity voting in the BiH House of Representatives, while the Bosnian Muslims pushed for the removal of the current minimum thresholds of parliamentary votes from the country's two entities for legislation to be approved.
Representatives from the Serb-run entity Republika Srpska (RS) also opposed the idea of a single president.
EU and US officials in BiH voiced disappointment with the outcome of the negotiations, but hinted the door might not be totally closed to further efforts in reaching a compromise.
"Unfortunately, the parties reached an impasse over several remaining issues related both to the presidency and the parliament," US Ambassador to BiH Douglas McElhaney, who chaired the talks, said at a joint news conference with EU, British and Austrian diplomats on Tuesday.
"I have to be honest and say that I am disappointed," he added, stressing that an agreement could still be possible if the leaders show the necessary political will.
Echoing McElhaney's words, Michael Humphreys, the head of the European Commission (EC) delegation to BiH, noted that there is still time to introduce the constitutional changes already agreed upon.
That, he added, would make the country's EU accession progress easier.
Local media reports on Wednesday quoted McElhaney as saying that his staff and BiH legal experts would work in the coming days on drafting the laws on those changes.
The measures the parties agreed upon during the previous rounds of talks include strengthening the role of the BiH prime minister and expanding the central government from nine to 11 ministries.
Two of the BiH ministries would reportedly be in charge of implementing the agreements the country will reach in its Stabilisation and Association talks with the EU.
The first round of those negotiations is scheduled for 25 January.
British Ambassador Matthew Rycroft said the international community would not backpedal on efforts to reach an agreement on the constitutional changes.
"There are three reasons for this," he said.
"First, functionality of the state, which demands existence of the system that works for the citizens of this country.
The second reason is human rights, and the third, and most important, reason is the preparations for European integration."
