20/09/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 20/09/05
Greek banks' incessant loan and credit card promotions continue, despite a rising number of unpaid balances. 
The banks are simply unaware about whether or not their customers are in position to meet required payments. 
Statements that overall personal borrowing in Greece is only a small percentage of the GDP reassure the public, but banks do not have a clear picture about the number of households on the brink of bankruptcy. 
The private debt situation in Greece has reached crisis proportions.
The ratio of loans to savings has tripled since 2000. 
Based on official national statistics, only 10 per cent of Greek households have savings; 60 per cent spend all that they earn; and the remaining 30 per cent consume more than they earn -- a situation attributable to easily available loans and credit cards. 
Two out of ten credit card holders are over their credit limits, and make only the minimum required payments. 
Balances accrue interest at a rate of approximately 15 per cent annually.
Collection companies are in their glory days. 
Hired by the banks to compel payment of overdue debts, they call borrowers and pressure them to clear their debts immediately. 
If such notifications fail to produce results, the law allows them to take measures, including garnishments, confiscations, even co-operation with bailiffs in cases of collusion. 
There are now 21 such companies in operation, and the number is increasing.
The root of the problem lies in the banks' absence of knowledge regarding debtors' over-borrowing status. 
Bankers use a common White and Black List system -- a database that should include all personal loan or credit card accounts, but by some estimates, only includes data on one in four.
The list fails to provide information on mortgages -- which can result in extensions of lines of credit to customers already burdened by large house payments. 
The White List contains only new listings of consumer credits and credit cards debts. 
Therefore, someone with older debts may, without much trouble, obtain a new loan from another bank. 
In both cases, an over-borrowing status is not easily detected.
In theory, a Greek citizen may obtain a loan and a credit card from every bank in the country. 
Credit control ranges from minimal to none, which leaves the average citizen facing the point where earnings fall short of increased debts.
