18/07/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 18/07/05
With US President George W. 
Bush's decision last month to grant Serbia-Montenegro preferential export status, the final remaining sanctions Washington imposed in 1992 against the former Yugoslavia have been lifted. 
The decision will primarily benefit Serbian businesses, which will now be able to export a broad range of products to the United States duty free.
Instituted in 1987, the general preferential system is intended to help developing countries achieve economic growth through the expansion of trade. 
It provides preferential duty-free entry for more than 4,650 products from 144 countries and territories around the globe.
Speaking on 1 July, US Ambassador to Serbia-Montenegro Michael Polt indicated that the move reflected economic reforms and the improved business climate in the country. 
"We conducted a study and came to the conclusion that there is a free market in Serbia, that there are laws protecting US investors, and based on that we made the decision," Polt said.
Washington's goal in providing the preferential export status is to help boost the development of Serbia-Montenegro's economy, Polt said. 
Asked whether future US support would be tied to Belgrade's co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, he said relations between the United States and Serbia-Montenegro are not based on a policy of conditions, but on common interests and goals.
In the early 1990s, Serbia's exports to the United States totaled some $200m. 
During 10 years of wars and sanctions, exports plummeted to a mere $20m. 
Analysts now predict the level could triple.
Gaining preferential export status is "good political and economic news", said Serbian International Economic Relations Minister Milan Parivodic. 
It opens up a market of around 280 million consumers for Serbian companies, he said, noting that the United States, the EU and Russia combined make up a total market of 930 million consumers.
According to Parivodic, the first goods up for export to the United States are food products, flooring, tires and electronic industry products.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica also hailed the preferential status. 
"This decision has great importance for our economy and there is no doubt that it is highly stimulating for the enhancement of trade with the United States," he said.
