19/12/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 19/12/05
A celebratory mood has prevailed throughout Macedonia in the past days, following the EU's decision to grant the country candidate status.
The heads of state and government of EU member nations made the decision in Brussels in the early hours of Saturday (17 December), following an intense debate over budgetary and enlargement issues.
The news triggered euphoria in Skopje.
A huge crowd gathered in the main city square for an official celebration.
While the festivities were organised by the government, opposition leaders also participated.
"We have got a clear recognition of what we have achieved and of the progress made in the past period," President Branko Crvenkovski told his fellow citizens.
At the same time, he cautioned that the decision "also means enormous responsibility for us to continue with even greater dedication along the same course and towards the same goal".
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski hailed what he described as a new page in Macedonian history.
However, he added, "Candidate status is not a magic stick that will immediately solve all the issues the citizens are concerned with, and in particular those relating economy and life quality."
"Be assured that experience of other countries where investments increased and business conditions improved will be repeated with us," Buckovski said.
Meanwhile, the international community has expressed congratulations.
European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso noted that Macedonia was on the edge of civil war just a few years ago.
Candidate status is an acknowledgment of all it has achieved since then, he said.
US Ambassador to Macedonia Gillian A. Milovanovic also congratulated the Macedonian government.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn explained that the EC did not propose a date for the start of negotiations, as that depends on the capacity of Macedonia to implement the membership criteria.
Nevertheless, the EU has thus given a clear signal for European prospects to the countries throughout the Western Balkans, Rehn said.
In granting candidate status, the EU leaders also included wording that specifies the move does not automatically imply membership negotiations.
"The European Council makes clear that further steps will have to be considered in the light of the debate on the enlargement strategy.
The absorption capacity of the Union also has to be taken into account," the leaders said.
However, Macedonian leaders anticipate the start of negotiations in a year's time.
By then, the EU will have completed a planned review of the enlargement process, and Macedonia will have had time to implement the EC's recommendations.
The election planned for November 2006 will give Skopje an opportunity to demonstrate the country's ability to hold a free and fair vote.
"The EU vision is a united Europe," British Prime Minister Tony Blair told reporters after the decision was announced.
"Macedonia is an important part of that vision," he added.
