16/08/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 16/08/05
Last week, Albania's Central Election Commission (CEC) ordered a rerun in three of the countries' 100 constituencies.
On Sunday (21 August), voters return to the polls in Malesia e Madhe's zone 2, as well as in Lushnja's zone 64, and in zone 90 in the southern city of Gjirokastra.
At these three locations, the 3 July vote either did not take place or was marred by irregularities.
The commission has said it cannot release final results until it has official winners from these districts.
The cost of restaging the vote will total more than 100,000 euros.
Political parties are again gearing up to attract voters.
However, the results won't affect the Democratic Party's (DP) overall victory in the election.
It garnered 78 seats in the 140-seat house -- an absolute majority.
The DP is currently putting together a coalition government to be led by party chairman and former Albanian President Sali Berisha.
The party's allies -- the Republican Party, the New Democratic Party, the Agrarian Environmentalist Party and the ethnic minority Union for Human Rights -- will each hold key ministries in the new cabinet, according to DP officials.
The final tally is being delayed not only because of the problems in Malesia e Madhe, Lushnja and Gjirokastra, but also because the CEC must finish investigating a wave of complaints filed by political parties.
The July vote was seen as a test of the country's readiness to move towards EU and NATO integration, but the outcome was decidedly mixed.
According to international election observers, the poll "only partially" complied with international standards.
"Overcrowding, delays and uncertainty regarding identification of voters gave an impression of disorganisation," said Jorgen Grunnet, head of the election observers.
He added, however, that few allegations of serious irregularities had been substantiated.
Some of the international standards "were almost met, some almost not met, and some were in-between," Grunnet said.
An OSCE statement said the conduct of the poll showed only limited progress since previous elections.
"In many cases observers noted incorrect procedures, particularly with regard to the use of ink to prevent multiple voting, the secrecy of the vote and the checking of voters' identities," it said.
