20/10/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 20/10/05
Albania should continue the reform process and take further measures to strengthen the rule of law, US Deputy Assistant Secretary in the Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs Rosemary A. 
DiCarlo said during a visit to Tirana earlier this month. 
She is one of the highest-ranking US officials to arrive in the country since the new Democratic Party-led government took office.
In talks with Prime Minister Sali Berisha and other top officials, DiCarlo stressed the importance of properly functioning state institutions for the Euro-Atlantic integration process and the development of a market economy.
Briefing DiCarlo on the government's programme for the next 100 days, Berisha emphasised the importance of reducing taxes on small businesses and liberalising higher education -- two of his party's key campaign pledges.
DiCarlo confirmed Washington's support for attempts to halt corruption in public administration, reform the justice system and eliminate conflicts of interest. 
She and Berisha agreed on the urgent need to tackle organised crime and combat human trafficking.
The visit came as US Ambassador Marcie Ries presented the State Department's report on human trafficking for 2005. 
For the fourth year in a row, Albania is listed in the second tier of states -- those whose governments do not comply with the 2000 Trafficking Victims Protection Act's minimum standards, but are making significant efforts to do so.
Kosovo, Euro-Atlantic integration and foreign investment also were on the agenda of talks between DiCarlo and Albanian officials. 
Berisha told the US official that Albania would play an important role in ensuring peace and stability in the Balkans, while Foreign Minister Besnik Mustafaj briefed her on steps taken towards eventual NATO membership. 
He also pledged that Albania would remain a strong partner in the anti-terrorism coalition, including through its contribution of troops to operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
On the economic front, DiCarlo encouraged Albania to do more to attract foreign investment.
"Many US companies are interested to invest in Albania and they want the proper business environment to do so," DiCarlo said. 
Mustafaj said the government would make "economic diplomacy" a priority.
