28/09/2009
By Marina Roganovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/09/09
When he first took over as director of the Montenegrin National Theatre in April 2008, Janko Ljumovic planned to take the institution in a new, exciting direction.
His goals were to attract more people, to take the theatre into cities in the north and other parts of Montenegro, build an up-to-date website, and to get corporate funding. 
"We cannot afford to sit back and wait for new audiences to come to us; we have to find them," Ljumovic said.
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Ljumovic discussed his first year-and-a-half on the job. 
"People who live in the north of Montenegro had a chance to see most plays the theatre had to offer. 
We had performances in Kolasin, Bijelo Polje, Rozaje, Pljevlja and Berane. 
We also staged plays in the Royal Theatre, 'Zetski Dom', in Cetinje and during the summer we took some of our plays to the coast."
The theatre also organised tours to the capital from other Montenegrin cities, so locals could enjoy plays at the premier theatre house. 
"We have good co-operation with many institutions that organise travel arrangements to a show. 
We believe this can be a good tourist offer, too. 
The possibility of coming to the National Theatre to watch a play can definitely be interesting and that is one segment of our marketing that we plan to develop further," Ljumovic said.
The third edition of the Festival of Montenegrin Theatre, which will open in October, brings Montenegrin artists together in a competitive event. 
Ljumovic -- who is also a professor of theatre arts, a producer and a writer -- said the event strengthens Montenegro's cultural scene and extends the theatre's mandate beyond merely staging plays.
"It would be much easier for us if we were only taking care of our core projects, but considering the circumstances, the theatre is working on a series of projects that help develop not only theatre culture but our culture in the wider sense," he told SETimes.
Ljumovic's first production as director of the National Theatre was of the country's national opera, "The Balkan Empress". 
Montenegro's late King Nikola originally wrote the royal love story, complete with tragedy, betrayal, revenge and death, as a play in 1888. 
The play was transformed into an opera by Italian composer Dionisie de Sarno san Giorgio and was given to Montenegro prior to his death in 1937. 
Radmila Vojvodic directed last year's production of the work, which opened to rave reviews and sold out crowds.
"The audience interest for the opera was exquisite and we had no problem attracting people for this project," said Ljumovic. 
It proved to be so popular that it was extended. 
"We were only going to perform it a few times but it was preformed ten times," he says with pride. 
"We crossed the borders of Montenegro with it and had a performance in Sarajevo, at the Sarajevska Zima Festival. 
This success showed how important the project was, not only for the Montenegrin Music Center, which co-produced 'The Balkan Empress', but in the wider cultural context."
Although Ljumovic hopes to repeat performances of "The Balkan Empress" in the coming season, he regrets that Podgorica's theatre house does not meet the technical requirements of touring opera companies. 
"However, with the help of the Hungarian Embassy in Montenegro, we are negotiating to host the Hungarian National Opera", at some point in the future, said Ljumovic.
With so much competition for the attention of Montenegrins in the Age of Information, Ljumovic says the theatre cannot afford to target market to any specific demographic. 
"The [theatre] exists because of its audience. 
Young people, retired people, middle generations, there is not a category we place them in. 
All these people that come to the theatre prove that the repertoire is good and everything the theatre does is to serve the cultural needs of the audience."
The National Theatre's first season with Ljumovic at the helm was a successful one, featuring 230 programs, of which 160 were plays, with the rest being big musical happenings and exhibitions. 
"Besides the basic program of plays, we organised a great number of concerts in association with the Music Centre. 
The biggest one of these is 'A Tempo', the international music festival. 
We also exhibit works of art. 
The 2008/2009 season was closed with a photographic exhibition from that season," said Ljumovic.
The National Theatre has a new improved website, where theatre-goers can follow recent events, find out about the history of the theatre, and many other things.
Cultural institutions the world over are feeling the effects of the global financial crisis, partially because corporate sponsorship has dried up, and the director's dream of finding large, private sector benefactors has not yet materialized.
"I have to admit, there is not that kind of co-operation with the companies, yet. 
There are individual cases, but that type of a strategic relationship, or the presence of private sectors in the national institutions in Montenegro, still isn't alive," Ljumovic said.
New plays are on the repertoire all the time at Podgorica's theatre house and Edward Albee's classic, "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?", premiered on the big scene last March. 
This play brought Bosnian star director Dino Mustafic and the biggest stars in Montenegrin theatre together.
