20/02/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 20/02/06
European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said on Thursday (16 February) that the EU remains firmly dedicated to the European future of Serbia-Montenegro, while warning that Stabilisation and Association negotiations could be in jeopardy if the union's co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) remains insufficient.
Co-operation must improve by the end of February for the process to proceed, Barroso indicated, following high-level talks in Belgrade.
Brussels would like to sign an agreement this autumn, Barroso said, but that can't happen unless Belgrade removes the obstacle presented by its failure to meet obligations to The Hague-based court.
One of the main sticking points has been the continued fugitive status of indictees, including former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic.
"What is at stake is the credibility of the rule of law and the democratic foundations of this society.
Nobody should allow those who are indicted for crimes to steal this part of Europe's future," Barroso told members of the Serbia-Montenegrin Parliament.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, who accompanied Barroso on his tour of Southeast Europe, has said he will inform EU foreign ministers at the end of this month about the level of co-operation with the ICTY.
That assessment, in turn, will depend on UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte's opinion.
Del Ponte has been sharply critical of Belgrade, charging that repeated pledges of co-operation fail to result in action.
Yet authorities in Belgrade have been trying to convince the international community of their determination to tackle the problem.
Serbia-Montenegrin President Svetozar Marovic said after his meeting with Barroso that Stabilisation and Association talks are very important for the state union, and that no one would risk them by refusing to co-operate with The Hague tribunal.
Meanwhile, federal Defence Minister Zoran Stankovic -- a former associate of Mladic -- has said he would step down if the fugitive were not arrested soon.
Despite these latest pledges, however, Mladic remains on the run.
