16/11/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 16/11/05
Albania has decided to stop using its MiG-19 fighter aircraft by the end of this year. 
Defence officials say the planes are too old and costly to maintain.
According to Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu, the move is also part of reforms leading to NATO integration. 
"Our aim is to build a professional armed forces, maybe small in number, but well trained, in order to respond to challenges, and to prepare the way for NATO membership," he said.
Armed Forces chief General Lieutenant Pellumb Qazimi said that it is better to halt usage of the aircraft, given the circumstances.
"We have declared that starting from 2006 we would not use the MiG-19 war airplanes. 
This comes as a result of the country's financial possibilities, their usage and maintainance, and in accordance with our declarations that Albania would have to cut its military possesions. 
MiG-19 airplanes are a security risk and do not comply with NATO standards," Qazimi said.
The MiG-19 fighters were imported to Albania from China during the regime of communist dictator Enver Hoxha. 
They were part of a fleet of 125 Russian and Chinese-made planes that the country acquired during the Cold War.
The old technology is considered risky. 
Several months ago, pilot Jani Tarifa, 45, was killed when his plane crashed five minutes after take off from Albania's Mother Theresa International Airport, due to technical problems. 
In all, 35 pilots have been killed aboard the planes.
The MiGs also require 1,000 litres of fuel per flight -- an expense which Albania can hardly afford. 
Quoting Qazimi and other officials, a Reuters report said the government is planning to send the planes to museums and scrapheaps, unless it can find buyers.
Some Westerners have expressed interest in turning the planes into bars, Reuters said.
Meanwhile, the government is pressing ahead with an overhaul of its defence structures in a bid to attain NATO membership within the next three years. 
According to defence officials, 1,900 armed forces officers face early retirement as a part of the reform process, while 300 professional soldiers will be added.
"We have to bear in mind that we aim to join NATO by 2008, and we do not have enough time to prepare orselves. 
We have to work hard on implementing the reforms. 
Albania is waiting an evaluation by NATO and the United States for the reforms," Mediu said.
