19/10/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 19/10/05
A US Navy warship visited the small coastal town of Neum in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), in what is described as a sign of continuing US support for BiH's efforts towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
Arriving on Saturday (15 October), the guided-missile destroyer USS Mitscher (DDG 57) remained at Neum at the weekend as part of commemorations marking the upcoming 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The visit included several events and interaction between Mitscher crewmembers, the US Embassy and representatives of the BiH and local governments.
It is the second time a US ship has come to Neum.
Local journalists were able to walk around the ship and visit the Mitscher's Combat Information Centre.
During a press conference on the ship's deck, US Ambassador to BiH Douglas McElhaney said the visit clearly indicates the dedication of the United States to this region, and especially BiH.
"The United States of America has been with this country since the signing of the Dayton Accords, which ended the terrible war.
We have worked with the citizens of this country and great progress that has been realised exceeds the frameworks of the Agreement," he said.
In particular, McElhaney hailed the breakthroughs in defence and, more recently, police reform.
At the same time, he stressed that the most important issue now is for fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to be apprehended and extradited.
That would open the door for entry into NATO's Partnership for Peace programme, he noted.
Also in Neum was US Admiral Harry Ulrich, commander of NATO's Allied Joint Forces Command in Naples, Italy.
It is difficult to imagine that only ten years ago warships like the Mitscher were deployed near the coast as part of attempts to end the BiH conflict, he said.
Welcoming the ship's crew, BiH Presidency member Borislav Paravac said the visit represents US recognition of everything achieved in the decade since the Dayton Accords were signed.
"We see this visit as a response to our gratitude to the United States, which has done a great deal for BiH, primarily in establishing peace, and in the enormous support provided for implementing reforms that will lead us to Euro-Atlantic integration," Paravac said.
The USS Mitscher is an Arleigh Burke class destroyer that was commissioned on December 10th, 1994.
Part of the US Atlantic Fleet homeported at Norfolk, Virginia, it is 154 metres long, has a displacement of 8,000 tonnes and draft of 9.3 metres.
The ship has made three Mediterranean deployments and participated in numerous Caribbean exercises.
Commander Stephen Evans of Beaufort, South Carolina, is the ship's commanding officer.
He leads a crew of aproximately 340.
