19/10/2009
(Various sources -- 02/10/09 - 13/10/09)
Balkan and EU officials heaved a deep sigh of relief when the results of Ireland's repeat referendum on the Lisbon Treaty were announced.
More than 75% of voters in Europe's third-largest island said "yes" to the pact on October 2nd, overturning their initial rejection of the deal in the first ballot held 16 months earlier.
The Union appeared to have overcome the crisis it was plunged into by the Irish "no" vote to the treaty, which must be ratified by all 27-member states to enter into force.
Having cleared that major hurdle, and with Poland and the Czech Republic the only EU nations yet to complete the ratification procedures, the bloc appeared set to meet its target of having the pact take effect early next year.
The original plan was for the reform treaty to enter into force on January 1st 2009.
"Thank you Ireland!
It's a great day for Ireland;
it's a great day for Europe," European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso said after the vote.
The text of the treaty -- which amends the 1992 Treaty on the EU and the 1957 treaty establishing the European Community -- was conceptualised at an EU summit in October 2007.
Leaders of the 27 states signed it an official ceremony in Lisbon weeks later, on December 13th.
Once enacted, the charter will clear the way for reforms aimed at adapting the structures of a bloc that has nearly doubled in size with the admission of 12 new members in the past five years.
It would also set the stage for streamlining EU functions, including decision making, as well as give the club more clout on the world stage.
The Irish "no" vote in June 2008 dealt a bitter blow, not only to the EU reform plans, but also to the aspirations of a number of countries knocking on the club's doors.
"No Lisbon [Treaty], no enlargement," French President Nicolas Sarkozy said after the first Irish referendum.
"I would find it very strange for a Europe of 27 [nations] that has trouble agreeing on workable institutions to agree on adding a 28th, a 29th, a 30th, a 31st [member]."
Officials in other EU capitals and institutions shared the view that enlargement -- one of the bloc's most successful projects -- would have to come to a standstill as long as the Lisbon Treaty remained in limbo.
According to experts, however, the present institutional framework for an EU of 27 members, the Nice Treaty, provides no technical, legal or administrative barriers to the further expansion of the Union.
It is all a matter of political will, they say.
That's why Macedonia -- one of three official EU candidates, along with Croatia and Turkey -- and Serbia, which is expected to submit its application for membership before the end of this year, hailed Irish voters' endorsement of the Lisbon deal.
"It creates a clearer situation in terms of EU enlargement;
its implementation will be a plus for European countries aspiring to join the Union," said Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, whose country has awaited a start date for entry talks with Brussels since the end of 2005.
Officials in Serbia also welcomed the Irish vote, with President Boris Tadic calling it "great encouragement for the EU enlargement process" and Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic calling it "good news" for his country's European path.
"It's about bringing to a close five years of institutional vacuum on our continent," Djelic told Belgrade-based B92 on October 4th.
Once the Polish and Czech presidents sign the treaty that their countries have already approved, Europe will finally "be able to grapple with the 21st century challenges", he added.
But the initial relief and euphoria proved short-lived.
EU officials were busy considering the next steps towards finalisation of the ratification process and making preparations for a two-day summit, opening in Brussels on October 29th, two days before the end of the current EC's term.
Leaders of the 27 nations will meet in the Belgian capital to discuss the appointment of the bloc's first-ever full-time president and foreign minister and other institutional issues.
Media across the continent were already rife with speculation about possible candidates for the new EU, when Czech President Vaclav Klaus threw a spanner in the works a day before his Polish counterpart, Lech Kaczynski, signed the treaty on October 10th.
Although both houses of the Czech parliament approved the pact earlier this year, Klaus demanded an opt-out from its Charter of Fundamental Rights, similar to that negotiated by Britain and Poland in 2007.
"Before the ratification, the Czech Republic must at least negotiate a similar exemption," Klaus said.
That, he explained, was needed to prevent the descendants of the millions of Sudeten Germans expelled from his country after World War II from reclaiming their property after the rights charter becomes legally binding.
In addition to the new obstacle raised by Klaus, who opposes a deepening of EU integration, a group of 17 lawmakers close to him have filed a motion against the treaty with the country's constitutional court.
It will hold a hearing on the complaint on October 27th, just two days before the Brussels summit.
Increasingly frustrated by Klaus's last-minute move, European officials have indicated that they will not let him hold the rest of the EU hostage by refusing to sign the treaty.
They have urged him to stop erecting roadblocks.
"It's clear that we have to wait for the conclusion of the procedure in the Czech constitutional court," Barroso said following talks with Czech Prime Minister Jan Fischer in Brussels on October 13th.
"But as soon as this is done, the judgment permitting, we expect the Czech Republic to honour the commitments it has taken."
Further delays serve nobody's interests, least of all those of the Czech Republic, the EC president also stressed.
But despite warnings from Brussels that the Czechs could lose their right to have their own commissioner in the next EC unless the treaty comes into force, Klaus has no plans to drop his objections.
Fischer has established a working group to craft a document formulating Klaus's demand and then submit it for approval to the leaders of the EU's 26 other nations, either at the late October summit, or at a subsequent one in mid-December.
"There could be a brief political declaration, with reference to the fact that it would be put at a later date into a protocol.
This is the legal form that's on the table," Fischer told reporters after his meeting with Barroso.
The EC president said there was no way the Union would agree to new talks on the treaty's content.
"What is not acceptable is the re-opening of negotiations," Barroso stressed.
"That is absurd, it would be surreal."
