19/09/2005
By Anes Alic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 19/09/05
A single, cross ethnic missing persons organisation was formed in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) last month, in an effort to ease the search for thousands of people still missing from the 1992-1995 conflict.
The merger took five years to achieve, due to back-and-forth negotiations and political obstruction.
The newly founded Missing Persons Institute (MPI) unites Bosniak, Croat and Serb organisations, in the hopes of fostering inter-ethnic co-operation to find those still missing.
The MPI will assume the responsibilities of the Bosnian Serb-run Republika Srpska Office on Missing and Detained Persons and the Bosniak- and Croat-run Federation Commission on Missing Persons.
A state-level missing persons organisation was originally created in 2000, but its operations never got off the ground because of a Bosnian Serb demand that the three separate ethnic commissions continue to work on their own.
But Jeffrey Buenger, the International Commission on Missing Persons (ICMP) director of government relations, said the Bosnian Serb demand was not the main "sticking point".
"We didn’t want to drag them [Bosnian Serbs] into creating a state-level institute.
All problems were negotiated and agreed on," he said.
Most significantly, Kathryne Bomberger, the head of the ICMP in BiH, said the MPI creates a central database of missing persons -- which will help establish exactly how many there are.
"It will help address the concerns of family members and their communities about the actual numbers of missing persons and where they went missing," Bomberger said.
The MPI will investigate the truth behind the fate of those missing, giving the country a possible way to works towards reconciliation.
Both the international community and local authorities agreed that the establishment of the MPI was one of the most significant steps taken towards that end in some time.
The institute will become fully operational next year, most likely in the spring when exhumations begin anew.
In the meantime, representatives of the three ethnic groups are mapping out the exhumation plans.
Since the end of the war, political manipulation of the numbers of missing persons has made it difficult to determine the exact count.
The International Committee of the Red Cross estimates the number of missing at 21,000, while the ICMP's estimate is around 30,000.
Bosnian officials estimate there are 28,000 still missing.
Authorities are still searching for 600 Serbs, 300 Croats and more than 20,000 Bosniaks.
About 12,500 missing Bosnians have been located and identified.
Of those, 6,000 remains have been identified using the ICMP's state-of-the-art DNA testing, while another 7,500 exhumed bodies are still awaiting identification.
One-third of the bodies identified were from Srebrenica.
Still, some NGOs, including families of the missing, view the creation of a single missing persons institution as an extension of BiH's ethnic-based politics.
Like other BiH institutions, the MPI will have a tripartite leadership with representatives from each of the three ethnic groups holding rotating positions.
"The missing persons institute, as a humanitarian organisation, should be above politics.
Those who are going to lead the MPI are politicians," said Srdjan Dizdarevic, president of the Bosnian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights.
Dizdarevic said that while the single database will be helpful, other problems that have plagued the process all along would remain.
Buenger said every effort would be made to avoid political obstructionism.
There will be a monitoring and advisory board of representatives of victims' families involved in every decision.
