17/01/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 17/01/06
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) lacks precise data on the amount of international donor funding that has been invested in postwar reconstruction over the past ten years.
Even after a year of research, a parliamentary investigative commission has not been able to come up with an answer.
According to the most recent information from the Council of Ministers, BiH has received about 3.7 billion euros.
But the investigative commission disputes that figure, saying it conflicts with earlier data.
It remains unclear if loans are being included together with donations.
"The ministry in charge has informed us that they have found 6 billion euros to be donated, not including European Comission funds of 1.5 billion euros.
We ask where more than 2 billion euros have disappeared", says Investigative Comission president Tihomir Gligoric.
Although the commission has not finished its job, it has been abolished and the task taken up by the Council of Ministers.
In Srebrenica, known internationally as the site of Europe's worst atrocity since World War II, no one is sure how much has been donated over the years for reconstruction of houses and infrastructure.
Partial data suggests some 37m euros have been invested.
"Right now we cannot say exactly how much has been invested ...
I can only say that about 8m euros were spent in Srebrenica last year," said Mayor Abdulrahman Malkic.
The local government has formed a commission to look into allegations that it has improperly spent the money.
About 1,800 houses and apartments have been reconstructed in Srebrenica.
One of them belongs to Dzevad Tuljkovic, who returned to the area from Tuzla after the conflict ended.
He says he waited five years for reconstruction and eventually was able to rebuild his house with the help of the German organisation THW.
The family has depended on the help of neighbours and friends to obtain windows and doors in order to survive the winter.
"I got bare walls and I was promised the whole house would be ready to move in.
I have not signed officially that the work is finished.
Obviously someone else did it for me", Tuljkovic said.
Malkic has declined to speculate if there was any wrongdoing or negligence in the use of reconstruction funds, but he emphasises that the donations have not been sufficient to enable people to return to normal life.
Many analysts, however, point to inadequate oversight throughout BiH.
The possibility of abuse could be prevented, they say, if BiH had an agency that would oversee the millions in donations each year.
