19/10/2005
(Journal of Turkish Weekly, Standartnews, Monitor, VOA - 19/10/05; Transparency International, BBC, Makfax, HINA, BETA, FOCUS, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik, SEE Security Monitor - 18/10/05; Council of Europe - 14/10/05)
The level of corruption remains high across Southeast Europe (SEE), Transparency International's (TI) annual survey of corruption perceptions in 159 countries suggests.
According to its Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) 2005, released Tuesday (18 October), Iceland, Finland and New Zealand are the least corrupt countries among those surveyed. 
At the bottom of the table are some of the world's poorest countries, including Bangladesh, Chad and Turkmenistan.
The CPI is a composite survey, reflecting the perceptions of businesspeople and country analysts, both resident and non-resident, and drawing on 16 different polls from ten independent institutions. 
It ranks countries on the basis of a perceptions scale of 10 to 0, with 10 indicating most honest and 0 most corrupt.
All SEE countries, except for Cyprus, score less than 5.0, placing them among 113 world nations, or 70 per cent of those surveyed, where "corruption pervades all aspects of public life," said TI Chairman Peter Eigen.
Among the SEE countries, Greece scores best, at 4.3, placing it 47th in the world, ahead of Bulgaria, which ranks 55th with 4.0 points. 
Turkey ranks 65th with 3.5 points, Croatia takes 70th position with 3.4 and Romania is 85th with 3.0.
Turkey, which scored 3.2 in last year's CPI, was listed among a number of countries and territories that have shown "noteworthy improvements". 
Compared to the 2004 index, Bulgaria's score this year is 0.1 points lower, while those of Croatia and Romania are both 0.1 points higher.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Serbia-Montenegro, Macedonia and Albania are among 70 countries scoring less than 3.0 points, indicating "rampant corruption that poses a grave threat to institutions as well as to social and political stability".
With 2.9 points, BiH ranks 88th, followed by Serbia-Montenegro in 97th position with 2.8 points and Macedonia in103rd position with 2.7 points. 
At 2.4, Albania scores worst among the SEE countries, in 126th position. 
Compared to last year's CPI, BiH and Albania's scores have dropped by 0.2 points and 0.1 point, respectively, while Serbia-Montenegro's has inched up by 0.1 points. 
Macedonia's score was unchanged.
A poor score, according to the TI, should not serve as grounds for penalising a country or denying support aimed at improving the development of its people. 
Instead, it should be interpreted as a signal that its structural health is failing and needs urgent attention.
"Corruption is a major cause of poverty as well as a barrier to overcoming it," Eigen said Tuesday at the presentation of the CPI 2005. 
"The two scourges feed off each other, locking their populations in a cycle of misery. 
Corruption must be vigorously addressed if aid is to make a real difference in freeing people from poverty."
Companies, including ones based in affluent nations, are "tacitly or explicitly allowed to feed the demand for corruption with a steady flow of bribe money" -- a practice which low and high-income countries must make joint efforts to end, Eigen said.
At an international anti-corruption conference in Bulgaria last week, a Council of Europe official said that every firm operating in Central or Eastern Europe sets aside about 2.2 per cent of its budget resources for bribes.
Describing corruption as "the cold, calculated theft of opportunity from the men, women and children who are least able to protect themselves," TI Chief Executive David Nussbaum urged leaders to "make good on their promises to provide the commitment and resources to improve governance, transparency and accountability".
