17/01/2006
(Ziua - 17/01/06;
AP, Bucharest Daily News, Mediafax, Evenimentul Zilei - 16/01/06;
RFE/RL - 13/01/06)
Former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase stepped down as executive president of Romania's opposition Social Democratic Party (PSD) on Monday (16 January), pending an investigation into the means by which he acquired his wealth.
Amid calls from senior party members for his resignation, Nastase announced his decision to "suspend" himself from the PSD leadership for three months.
"I don't want this campaign against me to harm the party image in any way," the Romanian daily Ziua quoted him as saying at a press conference.
In an asset statement submitted last week, Nastase revealed that he had inherited more than 300,000 euros and three apartments from an aunt, who died last year at the age of 97.
He insists that his Aunt Tamara, who had reportedly lived in poverty, made her fortune by selling family jewellery in recent years and then investing well in the real estate market.
On Friday, Romania's anti-corruption body said it was expanding its investigation into the sources of the Nastase family's inheritance.
The former prime minister was already facing a probe concerning a deal in which he bought a real estate from a former lawmaker who was later convicted of fraud.
Nastase, who served as prime minister from 2001 to 2004, has accused President Trajan Basescu as being behind the campaign against him, describing it as politically motivated.
On Monday, he was expected to testify before the prosecutors, but sent his lawyers instead.
Former Romanian Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana, who was elected PSD president last year, said the party faces moral and ethical problems as a result of the corruption allegations against Nastase, so his resignation was "the only (viable) formula at the moment".
"This is a hard moment for the party," the AP quoted him as saying.
"We are not deaf nor blind to these moral dimensions."
But Nastase did not resign from his post as head of the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of parliament, as urged by Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, who heads Romania's National Liberal Party (PNL).
"The PNL is publicly asking Adrian Nastase to take responsibility in this political scandal," Ziua quoted Tariceanu as saying Monday.
"It would be normal for him to resign as president of the Chamber of Deputies to avoid doing harm to the parliament's image."
Tariceanu says Nastase is not the only corrupt politician in the PSD.
"Now what this party's leaders did when they were in the opposition, before 2000, starts coming out," said Tariceanu.
"But we expect that what they did when they were in power, in 2000-2004, to become visible too."
Meanwhile, another member of the PSD leadership has announced his resignation, claiming he is being victimised by political opponents.
Dan Ioan Popescu, the chairman of the party's Bucharest branch and a former economy and industry minister in the Nastase cabinet, has also come under an investigation after submitting his assets declarations.
Announcing the probe Monday, prosecutors said they had ordered that 23 properties owned by the Popescu family be seized as the former minister had failed to clarify how he obtained them.
According to reports, Popescu also could not justify part of the money he earned in 2004
