15/08/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens - 15/08/05
The worst accident in Greek history took place on Sunday (14 August) at around noon, when a passenger jet from Larnaca crashed near Athens. 
It carried 115 passengers -- most of them Cypriots -- and 6 crew members. 
All died in the crash.
Flight HCY 522, operated by Helios Airlines, had been scheduled to land in Athens and then continue to Prague. 
It entered Greek airspace at 9:37 am, and was identified by the Greek Civil Aviation Service (YPA). 
Half an hour later, when the control tower at Athens International Airport attempted to contact the plane, there was no response. 
At 10:20 am, the YPA contacted its Cypriot counterpart, and found out that the pilot had reported a problem in the air-conditioning system.
At 10:25, the YPA mobilised all its national search and rescue services. 
At that time, the plane started circling the island of Kea, south of Athens. 
It is now presumed to have been on autopilot.
Five minutes later, two F16 fighter jets were scrambled to escort it. 
They subsequently reported that the pilot was missing and the co-pilot was slumped over the controls. 
There was no sign of life in the plane and the oxygen masks had dropped. 
Two persons were then seen in the cockpit, but it was not clear if they were the pilots or passengers making a last-ditch effort to take control of the plane.
Civil and military rescue services were then set in motion on the ground, at sea, and in the air, in order to get closer to the area and be prepared to assist in the rescue services. 
A Puma helicopter, a frigate and two destroyer ships responded to the call immediately.
At 12:07 pm, the plane crashed in Grammatiko, a mountainous area north of Athens, possibly when its fuel ran out. 
Thirty-five ambulances arrived at the scene, ten mobile medical service units and many specialised service vehicles.
At the crash site, only the tail of the fuselage remained intact, and the government quickly ruled out the possibility of any survivors. 
The debris sparked fires, which hindered the work of rescue and salvage crews.
Investigators are now struggling to explain what appears to have been a catastrophic loss of cabin pressure or oxygen supply at 35,000 feet. 
On Monday, the Greek Defence Ministry reported that many of the bodies recovered were "frozen solid", and some were found wearing oxygen masks.
According to the Greek government's spokesman, Theodore Roussopoulos, one of the passengers was able to send an SMS text message to his cousin. 
"The pilot has turned blue. 
Cousin, farewell, we're freezing," it said.
The same plane was reported to have had a similar problem in a flight from Warsaw to Larnaca on 16 December 2004. 
On that occasion, the pilot quickly dropped the plane to 11,000 feet to avoid cabin decompression at a high altitude, and many passengers were taken to hospital upon arrival, because of the sudden change in pressure.
Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis cut his holiday short in order to manage the crisis. 
All the political leaders in Greece and in Cyprus expressed their condolences, and Tuesday was proclaimed a national day of mourning.
