16/01/2006
(International Crisis Group, Reuters - 12/01/06)
Macedonia's further progress on the road to EU integration hinges on the implementation of key reforms, particularly in the police and judiciary sectors, the International Crisis Group (ICG) said in a report released Thursday (12 January).
The country has made significant progress in fulfilling the August 2001 Ohrid Agreement, which ended seven months of ethnic conflict, the ICG said.
However, it added, the fact that the EU has not set a starting date for membership talks indicates that Macedonia still has challenges it must face in order to become a stable post-conflict democracy.
"The EU's decision at the end of last year to grant Macedonia candidacy status was an important boost to its prestige and self-confidence," Reuters quoted ICG analyst Jennifer Leonard as saying Thursday.
"But it still has a long way to go before it can be considered functional enough to enter into membership negotiations."
According to the ICG report, Macedonia:
Wobbling towards Europe, police and judicial reforms are issues of critical concern not only for the average Macedonians, but also for their political leaders, and progress in their implementation is a prerequisite for EU membership.
The group was particularly critical of Macedonia's "unreformed and dysfunctional" judicial system.
"A country of two million citizens has a backlog of some 1.2 million cases," its report said.
"The crippled system, which is still subject to excessive executive branch influence and corruption, suits entrenched political interests.
The international community recognised the problem late, only after the judicial system began to endanger progress in other areas," it added.
While several constitutional amendments aimed at improving judicial independence have been drafted, authorities must now focus on their actual implementation and on improving the quality and accountability of the system by purging it of corrupt and incompetent judges and by training the capable and qualified, the ICG said.
The ICG also urges the international community and Macedonian authorities to lobby the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague to delay the return of four cases "until at least late 2006 (preferably 2008) while donors work with the government to fast-track judiciary reforms".
In the area of police reform, authorities have made notable progress in implementing changes outlined in the Ohrid Agreement, the ICG said, pointing to the recruitment and training of new cadets, the addition of ethnic Albanian officers, and steps taken to enhance border security.
However, it cautioned, fundamental management issues such as decentralisation and introduction of a merit-based personnel system must still be addressed.
The group's recommendation to Brussels is that a new EU mission be established to start operating in June 2006.
It should draw staff and expertise from the former Proxima and the interim successor EUPAT police missions and should be provided increased financial and staff resources, the ICG said.
Meanwhile, the European Commission's Ambassador to Macedonia, Ervan Fuere, told a session of the Macedonian Parliament on Friday that obtaining a date for EU membership talks depends on the conduct of this year's elections and on intensifying economic reforms.
All political leaders are responsible ensuring free and fair elections in 2006, as well as for preventing a repeat of the problems with the last poll, Fuere said.
