15/11/2005
(AFP -- 11/11/05 - 14/11/05; HINA -- 10/11/05 - 14/11/05; European Commission; EurActiv)
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader has expressed confidence that his country will be able to complete its accession talks with the EU by the start of 2008. 
Croatia, which only started its membership talks with Brussels in early October, is hoping to enter the Union in 2009.
"I am convinced that we will be able to conclude (talks) at the end of 2007 or the start of 2008," the AFP quoted Sanader as saying in an interview published by Le Figaro on Monday (14 November). 
"I am convinced that we are ready, we can turn the page from the socialist economic system and, so as to free us from the consequences of war, we are conducting a process of political reconciliation and supporting the participation of national minorities."
Minority rights, along with judicial reform, the fight against corruption and refugee returns, are some of the political criteria Croatia is expected to meet to be eligible to join the EU.
Last week, the European Commission (EC) published its annual report on Croatia's accession progress, focusing on the political and economic developments in the country over the past 12 months, as well as on its ability to transpose and implement EU legislation. 
While noting the progress Croatia has made in all those areas, the paper also highlighted the need for further efforts.
The EC also stressed that Zagreb must maintain its full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and that the last remaining war crimes indictee, retired Croat General Ante Gotovina, "must be located, arrested and transferred to The Hague".
As concerns the economic criteria Croatia must meet to join the EU, last week's report outlined macroeconomic and structural problems that could mar the country's prospects for strong growth. 
"Progress also needs to continue on structural reforms and on advancing privatisation and enterprise restructuring," the report said. 
"A number of foreseen measures need to be implemented without delay."
Given the challenging agenda Croatia faces on its path to EU membership, a senior EC official urged authorities last week to focus on the implementation of the required reforms.
"The time has come for reforms," Fabrizio Barbaso, director-general for enlargement at the EC, said Friday, at the end of a two-day visit to Croatia. 
"It could be a difficult time since the reforms will be demanding," he added, warning also that progress towards EU membership could be slowed by concerns over corruption.
He also voiced scepticism about Croatia's chances of fulfilling its 2009 EU entry target.
"I think the aim of becoming a full (EU) member in 2009 is too ambitious," Barbaso said in comments published by the Croatian daily Novi List on Saturday. 
"If all goes well, the optimistic forecasts are that 2009 will see the end of (membership) negotiations," he said. 
Additional time should also be allowed for procedures relating to the signing and ratification of Croatia's future accession treaty with the EU.
