14/11/2005
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 14/11/05
Talks between the IMF and the government of Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica ground to a halt in late October, with a deal still out of reach on extending an 850m-euro credit arrangement. 
Stung by the recent adoption of a pension law that breaches IMF terms, representatives of the Fund were not receptive to administration promises of reform -- promises which so far have been slow to translate into action.
The IMF now wants hard guarantees, and negotiations will not resume until serious action is taken to reduce public spending and privatise the public sector.
The stakes are high. 
The Paris Club of creditor banks has agreed to write off $730m of Serbian debt -- but only if the IMF talks conclude successfully. 
If a deal is not reached by the end of 2005, Serbia will be charged full interest on the entire $2.61 billion owed to the Paris Club. 
That is money that the government simply does not have.
A successful conclusion of the arrangement with the IMF is also one of the conditions set by the EU for finalising a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Belgrade.
An unsuccessful outcome means financial disaster, economists say. 
The foreign trade deficit is still at a very high level -- 10.6 percent of GDP. 
Debts are at 60 per cent of the GDP, and the inflation rate of 17 per cent is by far the highest in the region.
Without a deal with the IMF, no serious foreign investors are likely to come to Serbia, and without fresh capital the country could enter a debt crisis as early as 2007. 
Starting that year, Serbia's annual interest rate on its foreign debt would amount to $1 billion.
According to Economy Minister Predrag Bubalo, the government is working "full steam" to meet the IMF's conditions. 
But another official, Labour Minister Slobodan Lalovic, has acknowledged that an agreement probably won't be reached by the end of the year.
Piritta Sorsa, the Fund's representative in Serbia-Montenegro, says the government simply hasn't fulfilled the loan criteria. 
Speaking to reporters after the IMF withdrew from the talks, she cited excessive public spending, inflation and monetary policy as the main obstacles.
With annual inflation expected to be 3 per cent higher than planned, "the key issue is how to subdue prices", Sorsa added.
The Serbian side is offering to trim public spending by 1.35 per cent of the GDP, or around 250m euros, with deep cuts in healthcare, education and the army. 
However, the pensions issue remains a deal-breaker. 
And with Kostuinca's government dependent on the "silent support" of Slobodan Milosevic's Socialists -- which backed the controversial pensions legislation -- prospects remain uncertain.
