14/11/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 14/11/05
The European Commission (EC) has cleared the way for Albania to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU by next spring, though without giving a specific date. 
In its annual report, made public on Wednesday (9 November), the EC concluded that the country has made progress.
"Basically, the political situation in the country has improved and the democratic institutions, judiciary system and the public administration are strengthened," the EU's executive body said in the report.
"The EC will propose to its 25 member states the signing of the SAA with Albania in the spring, a process which will be followed by the ratification by the EU members. 
This process might last until 2009," Robert Nelson, representative of the EC delegation in Tirana, told journalists.
However, Albania will still be required to show positive, concrete results in the fight against corruption, as well as boosting efforts towards the free movement of capital, agricultural reform, overhauling the visa regime, fighting organised crime, guaranteeing media freedom, increasing the efficiency of the judiciary system, and ensuring property rights.
"During this period, we will discuss the modalities of the full text of the agreement between Brussels and Tirana, which needs one or two rounds of negotiations. 
The signing of the agreement is the beginning of a new long way," said Carlo Natale, another EC delegation representative.
Ahead of a two-day visit to Tirana, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn made it clear that the SAA agreement is an initial step towards eventual membership in the bloc. 
"The criteria for its conclusion are different from the ones for membership," he noted.
Prime Minister Sali Berisha's administration says it has accepted the EU's recommendations, and has pledged to make implementing them a top priority.
"Our institutions have been ordered immediately to study in detail the report and make their evaluations in order to deal with the new tasks," said Deputy Prime Minister Ilir Rusmajli.
The EU decided in June 2001 to proceed with SAA negotiations with Albania, and a negotiating mandate was adopted in October 2002. 
Talks officially opened on 31 January 2003.
