14/11/2005
(The Guardian, OHR Media Morning Brief - 11/11/05;
AFP, Ireland.com, Newsweek, Washington File, FENA, The Guardian - 10/11/05)
The leaders of the main eight ruling and opposition parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have begun talks in Brussels to discuss constitutional changes, aimed at transforming their country into a modern, centrally-governed parliamentary democracy.
So far, the participants reportedly have agreed only that the task before them is difficult.
Nevertheless, the US Institute of Peace -- which has prepared a draft constitution to be used as a basis for negotiations -- says it remains optimistic.
Among those attending the meeting are the presidents of the Party of Democratic Action, the Serb Democratic Party, the Croatian Democratic Union of BiH, the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats, the Social Democratic Party of BIH, the Party of Democratic Progress, the Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Croatian National Union.
Should an agreement be reached, BiH's new constitution would be signed in Washington later this month, when US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will host a high-level Bosnian delegation for a two-day commemoration of the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords (DPA).
The agreement was initialled in Dayton, Ohio, on 21 November 1995 by the former presidents of Bosnia, Croatia and Yugoslavia -- Alija Izetbegovic, Franjo Tudjman and Slobodan Milosevic.
It was officially signed in Paris on 14 December of that year.
"The Dayton Accords were never meant to be set in stone," US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns said Tuesday (8 November) during a hearing at the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
"The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have already recognised the need for reform if they are to join NATO and the EU."
Many, including the international community's High Representative in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, believe that the DPA has served its main aims -- to stop the fighting, begin to restore the country's infrastructure and hold democratic elections -- and it is time now to modernise it and correct some of its deficiencies.
BiH has one of the world's most cumbersome government systems -- each of its two entities, Republika Srpska and the Federation of BiH, have their own parliaments and governments.
In addition, there is a national parliament, a tripartite presidency and the BiH government and prime minister.
"It is not unusual that states have a certain degree of dysfunction built into them to cope with the ethnic, cultural and political mixes," Ashdown said in an interview with Newsweek published Thursday, citing Belgium and Switzerland as examples.
"But no state can survive where 70 per cent of its taxes are spent on government and only 30 per cent on its citizens."
The proposed constitution -- drawn up after months of consultations with BiH politicians -- would turn the country into an integrated, non-ethnic parliamentary democracy.
The national parliament and the central government and cabinet would have full legislative and executive powers, respectively.
"This draft would mean the total transformation of this country," The Guardian quoted a senior official in Ashdown's office as saying.
"This is very ambitious."
