16/01/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 16/01/06
The EU's special envoy for Montenegro, Miroslav Lajcak, has expressed confidence that dialogue among Montenegrin ruling and opposition parties over the planned independence referendum will begin in the near future.
Speaking Thursday (12 January), after talks in Podgorica with party leaders, Lajcak said the talks would focus on referendum-related legislation, media coverage, financial control of the campaign and monitoring the referendum process.
"Both blocs" in Montenegro had confirmed they were prepared for dialogue and agreed that it should start soon, Lajcak said.
He added that talks could begin after the special session of the Montenegrin legislature, scheduled for Tuesday.
The negotiations would be conducted within the legislature, and there would initially be no direct talks, Lajcak said, adding that he was certain the two sides would eventually sit at the same table.
"The dialogue will be conducted by party leaders, while teams of experts will deal with concrete issues," he said.
According to the envoy, the EU views the character of the referendum process as more significant than its results.
Brussels has "no mandate" to predict results, favour one of the options or "throw someone out of the game" in advance, he said.
"The aim is to create conditions for the fair and free expression of the citizens' will," Lajcak added.
While in Podgorica, Lajcak met with representatives of all parties in the Montenegrin legislature, except the Serb People's Party, which rejected the dialogue.
He also talked with Serbia-Montenegrin President Svetozar Marovic about how its results would affect the lives of Serbia-Montenegro citizens.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic said he expects an agreement to be reached on the topics that are important for the referendum, in order for a concrete dialogue to begin as soon as possible.
Djukanovic also said he was certain the EU would help conduct the referendum process in a democratic manner and under conditions acceptable to all interested sides.
He pledged that Montenegrin authorities would take into consideration all internationally recognised standards and the strictest current European practice in organising referendums.
