16/01/2006
(Blic - 16/01/06; AP, Beta - 15/01/06; AP, Radio B92 - 13/01/06)
Serbia-Montenegrin Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic warned on Sunday (15 January) that his country could face "drastic consequences" unless it swiftly resolves problems affecting its co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Belgrade's talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU are in jeopardy because top war crimes indictees such as Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic remain at large, Draskovic told the steering board of his party, the Serbian Renewal Movement.
Serbia-Montenegro aspires to join the EU and NATO, but both have set full co-operation with the ICTY as a condition. 
In October, the country began talks on a SAA with the EU, a first major step towards eventual entry into the Union. 
But EU officials have said the negotiations could come to a halt unless Belgrade takes steps to ensure full co-operation with the ICTY. 
The next round of talks is scheduled for February.
If "The Hague obstacle is removed" quickly, Draskovic said, the SAA talks would be completed by the end of 2006. 
By that time, Serbia-Montenegro would have also been admitted into NATO's Partnership for Peace programme and would have gained significant political, economic and financial support from the EU. 
In addition, the minister said, Belgrade's position in the Kosovo status negotiations would be strengthened.
Draskovic's comments followed a similar warning by Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, who said on Friday that the threat of SAA talks being suspended was a realistic one, given Belgrade's ongoing lack of co-operation with the ICTY.
"We have missed all deadlines and the world has lost patience," he said.
Serbia-Montenegrin Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic, who heads his country's council for co-operation with the ICTY, has also stressed the need for Mladic to be handed over to the UN tribunal so that the country can move ahead on its path towards European integration.
"His extradition would mean enormous progress for Serbia-Montenegro's efforts to join Europe," Ljajic was quoted as saying in comments published by the Serbian daily Politika on Sunday. 
"This is the moment when Mladic should be in The Hague."
