17/02/2006
(Independent, Nine o'clock - 17/02/06;
AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, EurActiv, EUpolitix, VOA, Adnkronos International - 16/02/06)
EU veterinary experts approved new measures Thursday (16 February) aimed at limiting the spread of bird flu.
The potentially deadly H5N1 strain of the flu has already reached six of the bloc's 25 member states.
After a two-day meeting, the EU Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health decided that 3km protection zones and surrounding 10km quarantine and surveillance zones should be established automatically around flu outbreaks in wild birds.
In the event the infection passes from wild birds to poultry, wider buffer zones must be created and the transport of poultry restricted within them.
The scope of those zones is to be determined by national authorities, but they could cover an entire region of a country.
"While we have to learn to live with periodic outbreaks of avian influenza in wild birds, the EU is making every effort to contain avian influenza in wild birds and seek to prevent it reaching commercial poultry," EU Health Commissioner Markos Kyprianou said in a statement Thursday.
Croatia, Romania and Turkey were among the first European countries where the highly pathogenic form of bird flu was first detected in October.
Last Saturday, cases of the H5N1 strain were confirmed in Bulgaria, as well as in EU members Greece and Italy.
In less than a week, the presence of the virus was verified in Austria, Germany, Hungary and Slovenia.
In all affected EU nations, as well as in Bulgaria, the verified cases of H5N1 involved only migratory birds.
At present, humans can contract bird flu only through close contact with infected birds.
But experts fear that the H5N1 strain could mutate into a form easily transmissible between people and trigger a pandemic.
The H5N1 strain has claimed the lives of at least 90 people since early 2003, mostly in Southeast Asia, where the infection first appeared.
It also led to four deaths in Turkey last month.
Under the safety rules approved Thursday, poultry in the affected areas must be kept indoors and infected birds and birds on neighbouring farms suspected of being infected must be culled.
Separately, the European Commission said that no compensation will be provided to poultry farmers whose stocks are destroyed by bird flu, or who suffer losses if prices drop due to falling public confidence.
In Italy, demand for chicken meat reportedly has plunged 70 per cent since Saturday.
"There is no bird flu in commercial stocks," the AP quoted EU spokesman Michael Mann as saying.
"But if prices fall in the market there is nothing the Commission can do."
The EU veterinary experts also supported an EC decision to extend restrictions on poultry and bird product imports from Bulgaria.
The country was already facing a regional ban for imports of poultry meat, eggs and products from wild fowl from ten counties hit by another bird illness, known as Newcastle disease.
