16/12/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 16/12/05
Reported cases of medical mistakes have tripled over the last five years in Greece, as more victims of malpractice choose to seek legal recourse despite formidable obstacles.
Such cases include mistaken diagnosis, improper treatment, technical problems and other faults.
The largest number of accusations involve obstetricians, anaesthetists, orthopaedists, paediatricians and surgeons.
According to the only survey conducted into the issue over the past five years, as many as 20 people die and up to 200 are injured every day as a result of faulty medical care.
Nevertheless, the majority of cases are never reported and usually don't see the light of day.
Patients and relatives may be unwilling to face a long court battle, and the doctors responsible will almost certainly not admit they are liable.
It may take more than five years for a lawsuit to reach trial, and even longer to obtain any compensation that may be awarded.
Medical institutions can hamper the process by endlessly delaying the release of medical records.
It can also be difficult to find independent witnesses.
The testimony of relatives and close friends may not be considered objective, and doctors are reluctant to implicate their colleagues.
Should compensation be awarded, it can be difficult to collect, leaving the victims with little other than moral satisfaction.
Meanwhile, doctors who committed malpractice continue their practice.
Even if they are found guilty in the first degree, they will not lose their license until a court of appeal has heard the case.
But only a very small percentage of cases ever get that far.
And even when they do, the accused doctor may be allowed to continue working in the hospital if he or she has no former history of malpractice or unprofessional conduct.
Recently, however, there have been signs of change.
A number of well-publicised cases have highlighted the problem and increased public awareness.
In one, a 25-year-old man died after being given the wrong drug for feverish gastroenteritis;
the three doctors in charge received a 2 year to 3 year suspension.
In another, a court awarded compensation for a woman and child following a botched C-section.
With irreparable damage to spinal marrow, the child will never walk.
Judges awarded 2,245 euros per month for 71 years for lost income and 336.000 euros for punitive damages -- the highest sum ever awarded for such a case.
