17/02/2006
by Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 17/02/06
The EU is proposing that a referendum on Montenegrin independence be held by 14 May at the latest, and that a "yes" vote on independence should be considered valid if supported by 55 per cent of those who go the polls. 
The EU's special envoy for the referendum, Miroslav Lajcak, outlined the proposals on Thursday (16 February).
Lajcak also recommended a single question for the referendum ballot: "Are you for a Montenegro as an independent state with full international and legal subjectivity?"
He said he expected both the government and the opposition to reply to the EU's proposal early next week, adding that he has asked Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic to hold an early legislative session to discuss rules for the referendum. 
"The EU sees Montenegro as a future member and I believe that the entire process will be organised in a European manner. 
That way, Montenegro would show the EU how much it followed European rules," Lajcak told reporters.
The proposal has been criticised by the ruling coalition in Podgorica, the opposition bloc, and by the Serbian government.
Vujanovic said the requirement for 55 per cent of participating voters "does not respect the equal value of the vote". 
He repeated the government's stance, which is that a "yes" vote should be considered valid if backed by 41 per cent of all registered voters.
The Montenegrin opposition parties, which support continuation of the state union with Serbia, complained that Lajcak presented the EU proposal in a "take it or leave it" manner. 
The opposition is calling for a threshold of 50 per cent of registered voters as the "necessary valid majority" for the referendum decision.
Serbian Minister for Local Governments Zoran Loncar said on Thursday that Belgrade would not recognise Montenegro's referendum if it follows the rules suggested by the EU. 
Like the Montenegrin opposition, Serbia insists that the republic should become independent only if the motion is backed by 50 per cent of all registered voters.
The rules establishing a required margin of victory could have a decisive impact on the referendum outcome. 
Current polls show 41 per cent of Montenegro's residents favour independence, 32 per cent oppose it, and 25 per cent indicate they have not decided.
Lajcak emphasised that the EU's proposal should be seen only as a suggestion for local politicians, who are ultimately responsible for deciding the referendum rules. 
At the same time, he warned that Brussels will not be putting forward any new proposals, and that it expects the current one to be taken seriously. 
"This is the stand of the EU, and Montenegro is striving towards integration with Europe," he said.
"The EU's recommendation that the qualified majority in the referendum be 55 per cent of the turnout is fair, because it best reflects the situation in the field and favours no one," Lajcak said.
