17/01/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 17/01/04
The Macedonian government is currently in the process of answering the EU Questionnaire -- an important step towards receiving an avis, or official opinion, from the European Commission on whether the country is ready to receive EU candidate status.
During his inauguration speech in December 2004, Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski pledged that Macedonia would succeed in its membership bid, while Radmila Sekerinska, the deputy prime minister in charge of EU integration, has suggested that the avis will be received late this year with negotiations beginning in 2006.
Are these expectations realistic?
The answer depends on whether Buckovski's government is able to translate promises into specific reforms.
These include judicial reforms which should be carried out in 2005, the continuation of reforms in the police and public administration, changes necessary to facilitate the visa regime with the EU, and implementing decentralisation -- one of the final remaining obligations from the Ohrid Framework Agreement.
These are the elements necessary for meeting the requirements for candidate status, as set forth in the Copenhagen Criteria.
EU Assessment
The EU will assess the general political conditions in the country, such as its ability to organise free and fair elections, as well as to maintain the rule of law throughout the country.
Macedonia had to delay the most recent local elections because of the recent referendum on the new territorial organisation legislation.
The elections are now scheduled for early March, and analysts say they will be a crucial test.
The Union will be looking for a firm demonstration of Macedonia's ongoing democratic orientation.
The failure of opponents to overturn the new territorial organisation laws has paved the way for moving ahead with a key element of the Ohrid Agreement.
The EU's representative in Macedonia, Michael Salin, has made it clear that fulfilling all the requirements under Ohrid is essential for progress towards EU membership.
In December, the authorities were able to negotiate a peaceful resolution to the standoff in the village of Kondovo, which was occupied by a group of armed men for nearly a month.
The authorities will need to ensure that similar situations do not occur in the future.
Despite this incident, there is a general consensus that Macedonia is stable.
No peacekeeping mission has had to be deployed there since the departure of Concordia in December 2003.
Currently, the EU's Proxima police mission is engaged in supporting, monitoring and providing mentorship for police reforms.
Realistic Prospects
One sign that Macedonia's prospects are realistic is the fact that responsibility for the EU's relations with the country have been transferred as of this year from the Directorate General for External Relations of the European Commission to Directorate General for Enlargement.
The European Parliament's Commissioner for Enlargement Olli Rehn said the fact that his office is now responsible for relations with five Balkan countries is a crystal-clear sign that they are on the road to EU membership.
"I believe it would be very nice if Macedonia were completely involved in the European prospective admission of EU members," Rehn said.
"I do not want to predict when this will happen but with our help, this country could slowly but steadily get closer to the EU.
It seems completely realistic to me that this country will enter the pre-accession strategy and head towards the EU but it is up to your country now to do that."
Overwhelming Support
A positive incentive for the Macedonian government is the public's favourable opinion concerning EU membership.
Support, which was high to begin with, has shown a steady increase over the past 13 years.
The latest poll conducted for the Sector of European Integration in May 2004 showed 91.4 per cent of Macedonian people answering "yes" to the question "if a referendum for accession to the EU were held next week, how would you vote?" Compared to a previous survey, an increase of 1.5 per cent was recorded.
Moreover, all parliamentary parties in Macedonia have included NATO and EU membership among their strategic priorities.
This fact not only shows the level of Macedonian commitment to integration, but also provides a great deal of momentum for the government -- regardless of which party is in power -- to conduct the necessary reforms.
To be sure, Buckovski faces serious challenges.
In his former role as defence minister, however, he proved to be an effective and uncompromising reformer, and many believe he is the right person to accomplish what needs to be done in 2005.
The EU has maintained an open door policy for the Balkans.
At the 2003 Thessaloniki summit, that policy was given a more concrete shape, with a number of programmes and funds becoming available for Macedonia.
At their most recent summit, in December 2004, European leaders reaffirmed their commitment to full implementation of the Thessaloniki agenda and to a European future for the Balkan countries.
At the same time, the leaders stressed that the progress of each country depends on meeting the Copenhagen criteria and the conditions of the Stabilisation and Association Process, as well as on other key factors such as democracy, the rule of law, respect for human rights, the rights of minorities, and full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
Macedonians feel certain that they are on the path towards membership, but wonder about the timeframe.
Certainly the country has passed a number of important landmarks.
It has moved forward with decentralisation, meeting its obligations under the Ohrid Agreement.
The upcoming elections should demonstrate the country's democratic capacities and institutional stability.
Co-operation with the UN tribunal presents no obstacles.
The most pressing problem that must be addressed is judicial reform and the rule of law.
Success in these areas could determine how quickly Macedonia moves ahead
