16/02/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/02/06
Despite legislation and government promises, efforts to curb the distribution of pirated materials in Serbia have not borne fruit. 
Copyrights continue to be grossly infringed upon -- a problem that could ultimately lead to sanctions from international institutions.
Last year was Serbia's worst for cinema attendance, even though blockbuster films were being shown. 
With black market versions of the films available on the street for a fraction of the price of a cinema ticket, the drop should not be surprising. 
The music industry is suffering similar woes. 
Although occasional police raids are conducted, these are hardly enough to halt the flow of illegal DVDs and CDs -- a trade which brings considerable profits to those involved in it.
Serbia has had a copyright protection law on the books since 1929, but it is mostly ignored. 
No single entity tasked with enforcing copyright protection exists, and the various authorities -- such as police, customs inspectors, prosecutors and courts -- are not working together to combat the problem effectively.
"The services which are supposed to enforce the law are not well co-ordinated. 
A large number of government services have authority in particular areas, whether market inspectorates, customs inspectorates, the ministry of culture and internal trade. 
No one is co-ordinating these activities at the level of the republic," says Ivan Tasic, director of the SOKOJ society for the protection of copyrights.
This society collected 1.2m euros in copyright fees in 2005. 
In neighbouring Croatia, which has half the population of Serbia, the figure was 5m euros, while in Romania it was 9.5m euros and in Hungary, 12m euros.
The state is losing around 20m euros in sales tax each year, according to Verica Vukovic, a lawyer and the secretary of the Anti-piracy Association. 
That is revenue that could be used to fund important projects or improve the well being of Serbia's citizens, Vukovic adds.
