16/02/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 16/02/06
At a former Republika Srpska (RS) Army barracks, buildings have been reconstructed to provide room for a different kind of activity:
higher education.
Last year, Banja Luka University became the owner of the complex, which is comprised of 41 buildings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) military reform has reduced the number of soldiers and military equipment during the last few years.
In light of this, the local government in Banja Luka handed over the barracks -- formerly the site of RS Army Headquarters -- to the university, where 15,000 students are enrolled.
More than 3.5m euros are being be spent in constructing the new University City.
The art, agriculture and sports departments have already moved to the former barracks, while the philosophy department, architecture school and dental school are in the process of doing so.
The rectory will be in the main building, and students are getting a new restaurant and a dormitory building with about 300 beds.
Although the conversion process is under way, many deadlines have been missed, upsetting students.
University officials have given them permission to enter their dormitory, but the building has been without heat and lacks furniture and other necessary equipment.
The RS government says work is being slowed by complicated legal procedures.
The university's relocation is taking place against the backdrop of efforts to improve the quality of higher education throughout BiH.
In 2003, a joint commission on higher education drafted legislation that would introduce principles of the Bologna Declaration -- a landmark 1999 agreement aimed at creating a European Higher Education Area (EHEA) by 2010.
BiH is one of 40 signatories to the document.
However, passage of the legislation has been obstructed.
Croatian representatives claim it would "compromise national interest," while RS is anxious to make sure the establishment, funding and regulation of institutions remains at the entity level.
