14/07/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 14/07/05
Decentralisation in Macedonia formally started on 1 July, with Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski pledging co-operation between the central and local authorities.
As a result of the process, municipalities will gain extensive competencies previously handled by the state.
Decentralised authority means that local mayors and their teams will assume responsibility for almost all functions previously performed by the finance, transport, labour, education and culture ministries.
Among other things, local authorities will now issue construction licenses, collect taxes and select primary school principals and police chiefs.
"We are facing a great and serious reform process encompassing not only the transfer of important competences from the central to local levels, but the transfer of around 540 facilities that previously belonged to the state, and of around 30,000 government staff members from the central to local governments," Buckovski told the Local Self-Government Association (ZELS) managing board on 1 July.
"That will certainly be a comprehensive and difficult process, but I am convinced we will manage to accomplish it," he added.
The prime minister pledged that the government would provide assistance in resolving the most striking problems facing the municipalities -- their financial debt burden.
"We are aware most municipalities have their giro-accounts blocked because of their debts, mainly owed to public utilities.
Together with interest, the debt to the ESM Power Utility alone is around 6.72m euros.
I hope we will manage to free the municipalities from their interest burden, and we will reprogramme the principal," Buckovski said.
ZELS Chairman Andrej Petrov believes the government has to assist the municipalities, primarily in coping with their financial problems, if it wants them to become effective units of government.
"I am satisfied with the government's promise to assist the municipalities with taking on the first central government staff members from the ministry of transport and communications," Petrov says.
"Also, we have reached an agreement with the government that a fairer part of VAT should go to municipalities."
Minister of Local Self-Government Rizvan Sulejmani said the government has already prepared for the start of decentralisation.
"Of 42 laws adopted, 36 are directly related to the start-up phase of decentralisation and only two regulations related to transfer of staff from the ministry of transport sector and distribution of VAT remain to be adopted," Sulejmani said.
International representatives in the country have welcomed the start of decentralisation.
"The first phase …means the start of a new process leading to a more accessible local authority, strengthening local democracy and intensified participation of citizens in local governance," said a joint statement signed by EU Special Representative Michael Sahlin, head of the EU Delegation Donato Chiarini, US Acting Ambassador in Macedonia Paul Wohlers, OSCE Ambassador Carlos Pais and NATO High Representative Dennis Blease.
