14/07/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/07/05
Serbia's national strategy for association with the EU specifies the manner in which the country should develop en route to integration with Europe. 
The document, developed by experts from several Serbian institutes and faculties, lists Serbia's overall development as the main goal, while accession to the EU is considered a means to that end.
The strategy, more than 200 pages long, enumerates political and economic tasks authorities must undertake on the path to accession. 
A projected date for membership is not given.
According to Milica Delevic-Djilas, one of the strategy's co-authors, polls have shown that 65 per cent of Serbian citizens favour EU accession, although they admit they do not know what changes will be required. 
A far smaller number approve specific steps such as labour force reductions, public spending cuts, closing unprofitable companies, and the suppression of the so-called gray economy.
"That is why the strategy must clearly show both politicians and citizens not only what awaits us on the way to the EU, but also what is expected of them on that road," Delevic-Djilas said.
Serbia has yet to resolve two major issues -- the future status of Kosovo, and the uncertain survival of the state union with Montenegro. 
The strategy "does not foresee exact solutions for those two issues," says Tanja Miscevic, secretary of the Serbian Office for Association with the EU.
Serbia also has to face the problem of full co-operation with The Hague tribunal. 
The court expects Belgrade to extradite several fugitive indictees, including Bosnian Serb wartime General Ratko Mladic. 
The strategy urges reaching a consensus on the need for co-operation, but does not suggest how that consensus can be reached.
"It seems that the matter of co-operation with the tribunal is increasingly a thing of the past in Serbia and that authorities are determined to bring the matter to a close," said Vladimir Todoric, another co-author of the strategy.
Serbian officials generally have declined to speculate about when Serbia might join the EU, though Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus has said this could happen in 2012 "if all goes according to plan." So far, there is little concern in Belgrade about the rejection of the proposed EU Constitution by Dutch and French voters -- a development that many see as potentially impacting the enlargement process.
"It will not affect us now, but we are aware that it could have consequences in the long term. 
That is why we must carefully watch the situation in the EU," Labus said. 
The government's current priority is to initiate Stabilisation and Association talks with the EU, slated to begin in early October. 
Meanwhile, it presses ahead with legislation meant to bring the country closer to EU standards.
