14/07/2005
(EurActiv, The New York Times, International Herald Tribune, The Daily Telegraph, Independent, BBC - 14/07/05; AP, Reuters, AFP, CNN, RFE/RL, VOA, DPA - 13/07/05)
Pledging to step up their co-operation in the fight against terrorism, EU justice and interior ministers agreed Wednesday (13 July) on a wide range of measures to be adopted by December.
At the initiative of the British EU presidency, the 25 ministers met for crisis talks in Brussels, six days after the 7 July bombings in London, which killed at least 52 people.
"All of us across the EU are absolutely determined to accelerate our work to make terrorism more difficult," said British Home Secretary Charles Clarke, who chaired the emergency meeting.
In a four-page declaration adopted Wednesday, the ministers set as an "immediate priority" the development of an EU framework for pursuing and investigating terrorism across borders, in order to impede terrorists' planning, disrupt support networks, cut off funding and bring terrorists to justice.
The framework would build upon already existing plans, adopted in the wake of the 11 September attacks on New York and Washington and after the March 2004 train bombings in Madrid.
The implementation of anti-terrorist measures proposed after the Madrid attacks has been slower than EU officials would like, said EU Justice and Home Affairs Commissioner Franco Frattini.
"The time has come to name and shame" laggards, the AP quoted him as telling reporters in Brussels. 
"Without true European co-operation, we cannot prove and show to the public and to the terrorists that we are willing and ready to move ahead very quickly."
One of the most controversial steps discussed Wednesday concerns the retention of telecommunications data. 
Under the proposed measure, telecommunications companies would be required to store details of all telephone calls, e-mails and Web traffic for at least 12 months.
Last month, the European Parliament rejected a proposal to that effect, citing civil liberties, privacy and other concerns.
But Clarke said civil liberties had to be treated proportionately. 
"I argue that it is a fundamental civil liberty of people in Europe to be able to go to work on their transport system in the morning without being blown up," he said.
Other issues likely to raise controversy include measures for countering radicalisation and recruitment, for strengthening the visa information system and the Schengen information system, and for the adoption of common standards for ID cards. 
Britain is expected to push for the inclusion of biometric details in all ID cards.
Other specific measures to be adopted by December include a framework decision on European evidence warrants, a data protection policy, a new money laundering directive and measures to prevent the misuse of charities by terrorists.
