15/12/2005
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 15/12/05
The deputy UN emissary for talks, Albert Rohan, wrapped up his two-day visit to Kosovo on Wednesday (14 December), making it clear that neither Pristina nor Belgrade would get all they want during the negotiations.
He also warned Kosovo leaders that status would not come automatically.
"The solution won't fall from heaven … They (Kosovo's leaders) have to really pull up their socks and start to work," Rohan said.
"Words and statements are good, but in coming weeks we need to see concrete results on the ground," he added.
While in the province, the former Austrian secretary general for foreign ministers met with Kosovo political leaders and UNMIK officials.
He made it clear that protection of minorities was a prerequisite for a solution, and called on representatives of the Serb minority in Kosovo to rejoin political life, which they have boycotted for nearly two years.
Ethnic Albanian leaders should reach out to the Serbs and other minorities by addressing issues such as local government reform, aimed at giving them more say in the areas where they live, said Rohan, who is assisting UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari with the negotiations process.
Kosovo's 100,000-strong Serb minority lives in isolated enclaves, protected by NATO-led peacekeepers.
Its leaders have refused to participate in the province's institutions since a wave of riots by ethnic Albanians targeted them in 2004.
"We want them to have a future in Kosovo, we want to facilitate this and guarantee this, but they must also participate in shaping the future of Kosovo," Rohan said of the Serbs.
He said that the solution would require compromise.
"Both sides must relax their preliminary stances," he said.
Rohan also issued a sharp warning:
violence would mean the beginning of the end of the status process.
"The security situation must be improved.
We are against any kind of violence.
It also will be very difficult for Kosovo's people to realise their aim, if violence restarts here," he said.
He next travelled to Belgrade for talks with officials there.
Separately Wednesday, the Contact Group for Kosovo called for a spirit of realism in the status negotiations.
The process must take place in parallel to the realisation of internationally set standards, the six-nation body said in a statement following its meeting in Paris.
