28/12/2009
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 28/12/09
Bulgarians, Croats, Greeks and Romanians celebrated last week what many view as the most wonderful holiday on the calendar -- Christmas. 
Catholics in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Kosovo also mark the holiday on December 25th, while Orthodox Christians in those countries, as well as in Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia mark it on January 7th.
As elsewhere across the globe, it is a time of focus on traditions and family life. 
Many opt to stay home, though some prefer to back to their native villages or towns for a family reunion. 
Still others seize on the opportunity for a vacation in the mountains, away from the hassle and bustle of the city, or on the beaches in warmer lands.
Despite the severe economic crisis their country has been going through for over a year, thousands of Romanians have flocked to mountain resorts this season, with almost all the hotels and hostels booked for Christmas and the New Year.
In Greece, meanwhile, two out of three people will stay at home with their loved ones, according to a recent survey conducted by MasterCard Barometer. 
Bulgarians and Croats are also staying put, with the recession far from over. 
The crisis has forced many in both nations to cut their budgets for gifts as well.
"This year we did not get Christmas bonuses in the company so it means less expensive presents for my family," Ana Turkalj, 35, said while shopping at one of Zagreb's malls. 
"But everyone will get something, a bit cheaper, but from the heart."
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor warned recently that 2010 will remain financially difficult for her country.
The shopping malls in Croatia have been trying to attract buyers with earlier discounts of up to 70%. 
Although the malls are packed with people, shop owners have been complaining that this is mostly window shopping.
In Bulgaria, the majority of government employees did not get their usual "13th-month salary" for Christmas, and fewer than half of pensioners received a symbolic bonus of about 12 euros each.
Nevertheless the lights, decorations and the glowing Christmas trees in towns and cities across the Balkans brought the spirit of the upcoming festivities weeks ahead of the holiday.
Athens Mayor Nikitas Kaklamanis lit the tree at the city's central Syntagma Square on December 11th amid music and carols sending out a message of hope and peace. 
There is also an ecological meaning to this year's events, as the Christmas tree is made up of 250 fir trees, which after the holidays will be planted in one of Attica's fire-ravaged areas.
"In this way we would like to send a message, in practice as well, to the residents and visitors of our city: that the city and the environment are one, and that it is up to all of us to protect the environment by changing our habits to help our city, our country and our planet breathe," Kaklamanis said.
Besides events taking place at Syntagma Square, the city municipality has organised street parties with concerts, DJ sets and free sweets and wine throughout the Greek capital.
For the first time since the end of communism in Bulgaria, a Christmas festival, called Koledariya 2009, opened in downtown Sofia on November 30th, in a bid to establish the kind of celebration typical for London, Paris, Vienna and other European capitals.
Brass band music, symphonic concerts and puppet shows for kids are being performed. 
Visitors can buy special Christmas sweets and other food, beverages and gifts. 
Free wireless internet and an opportunity to be photographed with Santa Claus are among the other attractions at the Koledariya, which runs until January 7th.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the Croatian Cultural Society "Napredak" (Progress) is again the organiser of the Christmas Days in Sarajevo, a month-long series of events. 
One of the most significant among them was the Ceremonial Christmas Concert, held on December 18th, at the National Theater in the BiH capital.
Other events taking place in Sarajevo during this holiday season include the charity concert of the Catholic School Center on December 23rd and the traditional 10th Festival of Christmas Songs, Popular Dances and Customs, organised by the NGO Libertas. 
Aside from the traditional Christmas carols, it also features classical pieces, as well as local pop-rock hits.
"Christmas, as the most beautiful Christian holiday, melts into one the Christian theology and various popular beliefs, customs and rites," said Marijo Pejic, a sociology professor from Sarajevo and the author of the festival.
The thick snow blanket that covered Bulgaria, Kosovo, Romania and other parts of the Balkans several days before Christmas added to the festive atmosphere in the region.
In Kosovo, children held a holiday concert in Gjilan. 
Christmas also marked the official opening of the New Episcopal Residence, which is part of the new Mother Tereza Catholic Cathedral currently under construction in downtown Pristina. 
As usual, the Christmas mass was held at midnight at the Saint Ndou Church in Kosovo's capital.
On Christmas Eve, Catholics in Albania attended a traditional church ceremony held in every city in the country. 
The next day, families gathered around the table at lunch, enjoying food and talk. 
Meat and wine is the basis of different recipes of this day. 
After lunch, families visited each other bringing sweets and presents, along with warm wishes once again.
Orthodox Albanians celebrate Christmas in much the same way, but on January 7th. 
The festive atmosphere and harmony on both dates is enjoyed by all, including members of the country's Muslim community.
The tradition of Christmas gift-buying is new to Macedonia, but appears to be slowly becoming a habit among people there, as the crowds can at Skopje's two biggest shopping centers suggest. 
The discount prices shop owners have been offering before New Year Eve during the past two years have possibly contributed to this trend.
In Serbia and Montenegro, Christmas is generally celebrated at home and in a much calmer atmosphere than New Year and is neither as spectacular nor as commercial as in the West.
However, every year there are more indications that Montenegrins are sampling the flavour of Western Christmas. 
Inflated Santa Clauses carrying ladders made from Coca Cola cans have appeared throughout the capital. 
The day before Christmas, church leaders lit bonfires across the country in mid-afternoon.
SETimes correspondents Manjola Hala in Tirana, Jusuf Ramadanovic in Sarajevo, Natasa Radic in Zagreb, Maria Paravantes in Athens, Linda Karadaku in Pristina, Marina Stojanovska in Skopje, Marina Roganovic in Podgorica, Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest and Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade also contributed to this report.
