15/12/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 15/12/05
Economic relations between Serbia-Montenegro and the United States are improving, Serbia-Montenegro Ambassador Ivan Vujacic told a trade and investment conference held in Washington last month.
The event was organised by the SCG-US Business Council in partnership with the US Embassy in Belgrade.
More than 20 companies from the telecommunications, banking, construction, infrastructure, production and air transport industries were represented.
The SCG-US Business Council was established in April 2004 with the goal of promoting the export of Serbia-Montenegro's products.
Its chairman, John Sailor, expressed satisfaction with the success of the conference, adding that this was only the beginning of an intensive business dialogue between businesspeople and institutions from the United States and Serbia-Montenegro.
According to Sailor, American businesses have demonstrated a clear interest in trading and investing in Serbia-Montenegro.
In a taped video message played at the conference, US Ambassador Michael Polt said the current macroeconomic and relative political stability presents an opportunity for investment.
The region is recovering and making progress in accomplishing reforms, and the business environment keeps improving, Polt said.
Vojin Vlahovic, Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic's adviser for international economic relations and privatisation, briefed attendees on the privatisation progress in Montenegro and the outlook for 2006.
The Montenegrin delegation included Agriculture Minister Milutin Simovic, Agency for Foreign Investment Promotion director Petar Ivanovic, Road Infrastructure Directorate chief Ratko Ivanovic, Port of Bar executive director Miodrag Gvozdenovic, and Vesna Maras, a representative of Plantaze Company.
Also in November, a business forum on strengthening economic relations between Montenegro and the Czech Republic took place at the Chamber of Commerce in Podgorica.
Djukanovic and his Czech counterpart, Jiri Paroubek, were present.
The Czech leader said his country stood ready to assist Serbia-Montenegro on its path towards the EU and Euro-Atlantic institutions, adding that he shared
Djukanovic's optimism about future bilateral ties.
Djukanovic, meanwhile, said that Czechs were among the increasing number of foreign investors interested in Montenegro.
The rise in interest confirms that Montenegro is establishing a favourable and secure investment environment, thus creating a modern state and economy, the prime minister added.
Paroubek also met with President Filip Vujanovic, who expressed his satisfaction with ever improving economic relations.
They agreed there is room for expanding co-operation, particularly in the economic area.
During the forum, a co-operation agreement between the Czech and Montenegrin chambers of commerce was signed.
