16/09/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 16/09/05
"Get moving. 
Play. 
Feel the love. 
Go". 
With these words, Europe's 34th basketball championship, Eurobasket 2005, opened at the Kalemegdan Park in Belgrade on Thursday (15 September). 
Some of the world's greatest players have packed their bags for a trip to Serbia-Montenegro, host of this year's event.
It is no accident that Kalemegdan was chosen for the tournament opening. 
Since 1945, many Yugoslav and European basketball stars got their start on its courts. 
Players from Serbia and Montenegro have won no fewer than eight gold medals over the past three decades, and basketball remains the country's most popular sport.
Four groups containing the 16 best representations in Europe will play preliminary rounds in four cities -- Belgrade, Novi Sad, Podgorica and Vrsac. 
All the major hotels in the four cities have been booked solid for ten-day event. 
Tickets for the 25 September finals, at a regular price of 25 euros each, sold out more then two weeks ago. 
Unusual for a championship of this kind, even the preliminaries have been selling out, although a few tickets are available for first-phase matches in Podgorica.
The four host cities have already received long-term benefits, in the form of new facilities. 
A new hotel has been built in Vrsac, while two went up in Novi Sad. 
Podgorica has been spruced up for the event, while Belgrade can boast the newly built Arena, the largest sports hall in the state union. 
Covering 37,500 metres and seating 20,000 spectators, it is a universal hall for all sporting events, whether basketball, handball, volleyball, tennis, gymnastics or ice-skating. 
The Eurobasket 2005 quarterfinals, semifinals and final will be held there.
For ten days, Serbia-Montenegro -- a country that still often feels far from the EU -- will be the centre of attention for the sports public in Europe and beyond. 
No fewer than 80 countries are broadcasting the tournament live. 
The games can also be seen on the Internet, via real-time video stream. 
More than 800 journalists will cover the event.
This year also marks a 30-year jubilee. 
The former Yugoslavia hosted the championship in 1975, winning a gold medal. 
In 1989, just before the country fell apart, it hosted it once more and again won gold.
Will Serbia-Montenegro strike gold this time around? 
Fans and basketball professionals have been discussing the prospect for months. 
In its quest for a ninth championship, the national team will be up against the likes of Spain, last year's champion Lithuania, Croatia, Greece, Italy and Russia. 
According to Serbia-Montenegro team manager Zarko Paspalj, this year's meet could be "a great chance for Serbia-Montenegro's representation to rise to Europe's top, where it belongs".
"There isn't a bigger motivation then playing in front of your own crowd. 
It is a privilege and at the same time puts great pressure on players. 
But, our team has shown that it gives greatest results under pressure," Paspalj said.
