13/07/2005
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 13/07/05
A Montenegrin delegation headed by Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic participated in the 16th Crans Montana Forum that took place in Monaco in late June. 
The three-day meeting drew about 400 regional leaders, diplomats, representatives of the EU and international organisations and business executives.
The annual event, considered one of the major international meetings of high-ranking officials and private sector representatives, is dedicated to building a "more humane world" through sustainable development, poverty reduction and promoting harmonious international relations. 
The first forum was held in 1989, in response to the new economic and political architecture of post-Cold War Europe, with the initial goal of providing a European venue where East and West could meet.
The forum tackled topics of global importance, including the reconstruction of Iraq, China's emerging international role, the global fight against terrorism, and environmental challenges. 
A number of sessions were dedicated to issues in Southeast Europe (SEE). 
OSCE Chairman-in-office and Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel chaired a meeting on Kosovo, while Macedonian Economy Minister Fatmir Besimi led a session on foreign investment in his country. 
A special session was held on boosting Montenegro's tourism sector. 
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, meanwhile, was honoured with the annual Prix de la Foundation, as was Slovenia's Rupel.
Djukanovic addressed the forum's plenary session, which focused on new worldwide challenges and changes. 
Speaking on the integration of the SEE region into Europe, he said Montenegro is committed to a partnership with the EU and Euro-Atlantic structures. 
The issue of Montenegrin statehood should be resolved in a democratic manner, thus spurring the reform process and furthering weakening "nationalist structures", Djukanovic said.
Only Euro-Atlantic values and the principles of justice can ensure stability in the region, the Montenegrin prime minister said, adding that these will be crucial to resolving what he described as the "complex security problem" of Kosovo.
The gap between the Balkans and the rest of Europe has serious drawbacks and risks, and helps fuel populist and nationalist structures, Djukanovic said. 
While much progress has been achieved, the region remains at an uncertain historical crossroads, and an active, strategic approach towards long-term solutions must be found, he added.
Several other Montenegrin officials, including Deputy Prime Minister Miroslav Ivanisevic, Tourism Minister Predrag Nenezic and the director of the Montenegrin Tourist Organisation, Vojin Vlahovic, accompanied Djukanovic to the forum.
