15/09/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 15/09/05
The EU and the United States have welcomed the appointment of the new government in Albania, headed by Democratic Party (DP) leader Sali Berisha.
The cabinet was sworn in Sunday (11 September) after receiving parliamentary approval the day before.
"The EU welcomes the conclusion of the election process in Albania, which has resulted in the first peaceful transfer of power since the fall of communism,'' the British presidency of the EU said in a statement.
It urged lawmakers to begin implementing changes meant to "direct the country towards integration into Europe" -- particularly, boosting the rule of law and moving ahead with electoral reform.
While the EU backs the reform efforts, the key for success "is in the hands of Albanian authorities", the statement said.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, meanwhile, spoke to Berisha by phone.
He called for implementing anticorruption measures and empowering state administration.
Through its deputy foreign secretary, Senator Robert Antonioni, EU member Italy formally invited Berisha to visit Rome to meet with counterpart Silvio Berlusconi.
"Italy remains a strong and a long-term partner of Albania for its development, implementation of reforms and Euro-Atlantic integration," Antonioni said in Tirana.
The United States, through Ambassador Marcie Ries, greeted the "successful parliamentary elections and the power shifting transition," which she said demonstrates the progress of democracy.
Her comments came during a Monday meeting with Berisha, during which she presented him a message of congratulations from US President George W. Bush.
According to a White House press release, Bush told Berisha that his country should be proud of the peaceful transfer of power.
He called on the new parliament and government to move forward with anti-corruption efforts and with creating a better business environment.
He also thanked Albania for its contribution to the global war on terror.
Berisha, meanwhile, has already met with World Bank experts to discuss the country's further economic development.
At a seminar in the coastal city of Durres, he urged the Bank to assist the cabinet in implementing its programmes, including the key objective of fighting corruption.
