15/09/2005
(The New York Times - 15/09/05; European Commission, AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, The International Herald Tribune, Bloomberg, Athens News Agency, Eupolitix.com - 14/09/05)
Greece has provided more than 540m euros in illegal state aid to Olympic Airways and its successor, Olympic Airlines, since December 2002, the European Commission (EC) said Wednesday (14 September). 
This gave the Greek flag carrier an unfair advantage over competitors, the commission ruled, demanding that the company return an as yet unspecified amount of the funds.
European Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot said an almost 18-month investigation into the finances of Olympic Airlines and its predecessor had confirmed that EU rules had been violated.
"It would be entirely unfair to the other airlines in the EU to continue in this fashion because they are respecting the rules," Reuters quoted him as saying at a news briefing Wednesday.
Olympic Airways was founded by shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis in 1957. 
The company ran into financial problems after the 1973 oil crisis, and two years later Onassis sold it to the state. 
Between 1994 and 2000, when several attempts to privatise the Greek carrier failed, the EC endorsed a number of decisions allowing public aid for its restructuring. 
In December 2002, however, the Commission found that, contrary to common market rules, the company had been granted additional, unauthorised state aid. 
It was told to return 160m euros, but has not yet complied.
As part of its plans to restructure the company, Greece set up Olympic Airlines in late 2003. 
The new firm took over the flight operations and most of the assets of Olympic Airways, leaving behind almost all of its debts. 
The EC has declined to regard the two companies as separate entities.
The investigation the EC launched in March 2004 showed that Greece had continued to grant further aid to Olympic Airways and Olympic Airlines, including 40m euros to partially cover the latter's aircraft leasing expenses and an overvaluation of assets.
Greece also tolerated Olympic Airways' failure to pay more than 350m euros in tax and social security liabilities due between December 2002 and December 2004 and assumed a number of the company's financial obligations, totalling up to 60m euros, the EC said, ruling that Athens must recover part of the illegal aid.
"Greece has two months in which to inform the commission of the measures it intends to take to comply with the decision," Barrot said. 
If the government fails to take action, it will face daily fines, the commissioner warned.
"This decision has a catalytic effect on Olympic's already burdened situation," Greek Transport Minister Michalis Liapis said Wednesday. 
Olympic Airlines will continue operating until the best possible solution can be found, he added.
According to analysts, the EC decision has cast doubts about the Greek national carrier's chances for survival.
In anticipation of the decision, hundreds of Olympic Airlines pilots, cabin crew, ground staff and other workers and trade unionists staged a protest at Athens International Airport on Wednesday, promising to fight any shutdown.
