15/02/2006
(EurActiv - 15/02/06;
AFP, DTT-NET, EUpolitix, EurActiv, EUROPA, Makfax, Radio B92 - 14/02/06;
Beta, HINA - 13/02/06)
European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn are expected to reconfirm this week the European prospects of Western Balkan countries.
During a four-day tour of the region, beginning with a visit to Zagreb on Wednesday (15 February), the two top Brussels officials will also call for stronger efforts in the implementation of reforms and for greater regional co-operation.
An EU statement on Tuesday quoted Rehn as urging leaders in the region "to work with each other, since regional co-operation is key to achieving these goals".
Such co-operation is "not just a step in moving closer to the EU, but an integral part of the logic of European integration," Rehn added.
This will be Barroso's first trip to the Western Balkans since he was confirmed as EC president in November 2004.
After Zagreb, he and Rehn will travel to Belgrade, Pristina and Skopje, before concluding their tour Saturday with visits to Tirana and Sarajevo.
A new EC strategy paper for the Western Balkans, presented in late January, is expected to figure strongly in talks with regional leaders.
The document outlines a package of measures aimed at consolidating stability and promoting economic development and co-operation.
A key proposal calls for establishing a free trade zone that would include Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro, including Kosovo.
Such a zone would replace the existing network of 31 different bilateral trade agreements in the region.
The plan, however, has been met with suspicion by Croat officials, who say it is too reminiscent of the former Yugoslavia.
Rehn has sought to allay those concerns, while also remaining open to a Croatian counterproposal that would involve expanding the Central European Free Trade Agreement.
"Let me be clear and open, it is entire nonsense to assume that someone could try to create a new Yugoslavia," Rehn said, stressing that the main idea behind the plan was to "strengthen trade and investment in the Western Balkans".
Other proposed measures include easing visa requirements, promoting dialogue between civil society organisations in the region and the EU, and providing more scholarships for students.
The EU financial assistance for the region for 2005-2006 totals some 5 billion euros.
"The EU's goal is to consolidate peace and improve the lives of people in the Western Balkans," the EU statement quoted Barroso as saying ahead of the trip.
"We are working in partnership with the countries to help them to improve their democracies and reform their economies.
If they can achieve these aims, it will bring them closer to the EU, and materially improve the lives of the people of the region."
During their brief visit to Belgrade, the two EC officials are expected to reiterate the need for full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Brussels has warned that failure to do so could lead to the suspension of Stabilisation and Association Agreement talks with Serbia-Montenegro.
On Monday, Rehn said chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte continues to assess Belgrade's co-operation with the ICTY as inadequate, pointing especially to its failure to hand over former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic.
