11/11/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 11/11/05
Macedonians have responded with euphoria to the recent EU avis on the country's progress, which includes a recommendation that it be granted candidate status. 
Speaking in Brussels on Wednesday (9 November), EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn echoed the words of the avis.
"We weighed the positive and negative aspects and unanimously came to a conclusion that Macedonia should be recommended a candidate status," he said, citing the considerable progress made since the 2001 interethnic crisis.
At the same time, Rehn stressed that Macedonia faces many obligations. 
"We believe negotiations for membership should only be opened when the country meets the membership criteria," he said prior to departing for Skopje, where he addressed the Macedonian parliament Thursday.
The 142-page Avis includes a thorough analysis of conditions in Macedonia. 
It concludes that the republic has stable democratic institutions which function properly, respecting the limits of their competences and co-operating with each other. 
At the same time, however, it points to deep weaknesses in administration and an urgent need for judicial reform.
In Skopje, Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski said his country has been given a "one-way ticket" to entry into the bloc. 
"The way there is clearly depicted in the Avis our friends in the European Commission have given, and their will to assist us actively on that way is clearly expressed. 
How fast we will tread it only depends on us and our energy to carry through all the necessary reforms started by this government," he said.
"With this unbiased Avis, the EU has given Macedonia and the region a message that European transformation is possible," said Radmila Sekerinska, the deputy prime minister in charge of European integration.
The head of the EC Delegation in Macedonia, Ervan Fuere, who handed the Avis to Buckovski, said the decision encourages the country to boost all the efforts to implement the necessary reforms before the start of negotiations.
"Mr. 
Prime Minister, we are with you on this journey," Fuere said, "we will stride with you, in other words, we will run to the finish."
Opposition parties are also pleased. 
In its initial response, the VMRO DPMNE said the move by Brussels is a step towards achieving of the strategic goal of EU membership. 
It claimed, however, that had the government worked better, an actual date for the start of talks could have been obtained.
The EC's recommendation must now be acted on by the EU heads of states and governments members of EU, known collectively as the European Council. 
It is expected to make a decision at its summit in December
