11/08/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times -- 11/08/05
While more new refugee return projects are being developed everyday, there is a shortage of funds to underpin those already in the pipeline, according to a UNMIK official.
Killian Kleinschmidt, the acting head of UNMIK's office on returns, estimates an additional 22m euros are required to help hundreds of displaced families return to their pre-conflict homes in Kosovo this year.
"I would say God help us if there are more returns happening, because then we are saying, well, sorry, we cannot help you because (there is) not enough money," the UN official said at a joint press conference in July with Fatmir Sheholli, spokesman for Kosovo's Ministry of Communities and Returns.
Technically part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict.
Talks to determine the province's future are expected to begin later this year, provided it is found to have made substantial progress in implementing internationally approved standards in eight areas, one of which is refugee returns.
The other areas include democratic institutions, rule of law, human and minority rights, the economy and dialogue with Belgrade.
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's envoy, Kai Eide, is currently conducting a review of Kosovo's progress in implementing standards in the eight areas and is expected to submit his report by September.
While a positive assessment would pave the way for the launch of status talks this autumn, the Norwegian diplomat recently voiced disappointment with the slow progress in refugee returns and the general security situation.
An estimated 180,000 Serbs and other ethnic minorities fled Kosovo after the conflict.
According to Kleinschmidt, 13,000 have returned since 1999, 50 per cent of them Kosovo Serbs.
Scores of refugees from Kosovo -- including Kosovo Albanians -- still live in Germany, Scandinavia and other parts of the West, as well as in Serbia-Montenegro and Macedonia.
"In Germany some 52,000 or so have declared that they are from Kosovo," said Kleinschmidt, adding that there were probably an estimated 100,000 Kosovo refugees living in Western Europe today.
In addition, there are 22,000 internally displaced people within Kosovo, the UN official noted.
Sheholli said his ministry had received 25 or 26 applications, "70 per cent coming from the (Kosovo) Serb community and the rest from other ethnic groups".
According to Kleinschmidt, the funding shortage is in part due to "bad messages", coming from both Kosovo and Serbia, to the effect that it is too early to repatriate refugees or that they have nothing to return to.
Speaking on 19 July, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen re-iterated the importance of the returns process, which he described as "critical … the priority standard of priority standards in some respects".
His comments came as he and Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi launched the 2005 Strategic Framework on Communities and Returns, aimed at energising the process.
The new framework, Kosumi said, "confirms the government's position on returning all refugees to their properties" and its "readiness to offer financial help to the returnees".
