24/08/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 24/08/09
Italian Army Brigadier General Sabato Errico is the first non-American to command the NATO forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
On 15th January, he took his assignment as the commander of NATO Headquarters Sarajevo (NHQSa) and senior military representative. 
In an exclusive interview with SETimes correspondent Antonio Prlenda, Errico spoke about the current defence reform in BiH and the multinational Combined Endeavour 2009 (CE09) communications exercise, which will be held at Banja Luka from September 4th-17th.
Southeast European Times: What is the importance of the Combined Endeavour 2009 exercise for NATO allies, and how important it is for BiH and its Armed Forces?
General Sabato Errico: As a US European Command (US EUCOM) sponsored exercise "in the spirit of Partnership for Peace", this exercise offers an excellent opportunity to focus on one of the key elements of the Partnership and the Alliance: interoperability. 
Allies and partners who participate in NATO-led collective security operations must be able to work together and to communicate effectively -- exercises such as Combined Endeavour allow us to practice this.
The decision to hold this exercise in [Banja Luka] is a sign that BiH is a credible partner country -- capable of providing the infrastructure to support the exercise as well as the legal framework for visiting forces under the NATO/Partnership for Peace Status of Forces Agreement … and of course capable of participation in the technical aspects of the exercise.
SETimes: Some Bosnian Serb officials recently invited Serb members of the BiH Armed Forces to leave the NATO exercise in Georgia because Russia was opposed to that event. 
Are you concerned that Bosnian Serb hardline officials can endanger the organisation of the Combined Endeavour 2009 exercise?
Errico: The Armed Forces of BiH demonstrated their professionalism, commitment and adherence to the chain of command by carrying out their orders concerning the exercise in Georgia despite attempts at political interference. 
As for Exercise Combined Endeavour 2009, NATO is a partner to the state of BiH, not to the entities or Brcko District.
BiH, through the appropriate channels, has agreed to host the exercise, and the Ministry of Defence and the Armed Forces of BiH are conducting the necessary activities within the lawful chain of command, which runs from the most junior soldier to the presidency. 
It is important to note that Combined Endeavour will be conducted in BiH completely in accordance with the constitutional and legal framework of the country and the international agreements to which it is party.
SETimes:Are you satisfied with current land and air capabilities of the BiH Armed Forces and with the support of local officials for its modernisation, reform and budgeting? 
Particularly with the level of GDP that is dedicated for the defence?
Errico: NATO interacts with BiH concerning the development of land and air capabilities through the Partnership for Peace Planning and Review Process (PARP). 
This involves the development of specific capabilities in the coming years, and making those capabilities available for NATO-led collective security operations. 
In March, the NATO allies acknowledged the progress that BiH has made towards fulfilling these commitments, and noted that many of the key challenges facing BiH are largely political.
Concerning the defence budget and modernisation, BiH is conducting a defence review that will culminate in the development of a realistic and affordable modernisation plan. 
I hope that the relevant authorities will give this plan, and the underlying analysis, careful consideration when it is submitted for their review.
SETimes: When can we expect that BiH will be ready for the Membership Action Plan level on its way to full membership to NATO?
Errico: Through the Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP), BiH is already working on many of the areas that would be part of any Membership Action Plan (MAP) -- political, security, defence, economic, rule of law, and so on. 
In March, NATO allies reviewed BiH's progress under the IPAP and highlighted the need to continue efforts in a number of complex areas affecting the functionality of the state.
In July, the NATO secretary general reminded all of us very clearly that the allies will base any decision on MAP on primarily political criteria, and he noted specifically the requirement for progress on constitutional reform. 
It is important to remember that NATO is both a political and military alliance: BiH will be subject to the political assessment of all the allies, and that assessment will consider qualitative factors.
SETimes: Are you satisfied with the level of public support to NATO membership within the Republika Srpska (RS)?
Errico: NATO HQ Sarajevo has been highly active for years in travelling throughout the Republika Srpska and in meeting with all parts of RS civil society to answer their questions about NATO and NATO membership. 
Our experience is that there is very strong interest, especially amongst young people, in how NATO membership could improve their lives, not just in terms of the military but in bringing economic investment, better governance, stability and further integration into Europe.
Our recent series of live radio programmes reached over a million people, mainly in the RS, and attracted 365 questions from listeners who wanted information about NATO. 
Clearly there is a public need for information. 
We are encouraged that the people of the RS are generally open minded and genuinely interested in NATO.
