11/08/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 11/08/05RCE
Foreign investment in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) increased by close to 50 per cent during 2004, recently released statistical data shows.
The figures, published at the end of July by the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina (CBBH), record a direct foreign investment inflow of 468m euros.
The data is "evidence of the increased interest of foreign investors for BiH," says CBBH Governor Kemal Kozaric "Obviously, this has a positive effect on economic growth in the country".
According to the data, in 2004 the largest amount of direct foreign investment -- 178m euros -- came from Austria, followed by the Netherlands Antilles (125.5m euros) and Croatia (4.5m euros).
Together, these three countries accounted for 72 per cent of total direct foreign investment during the year.
"Foreign investments increased over the year to reach 207m in the fourth quarter of 2004," Kozaric said.
"In respect to sectors' share, the shift has been noticed in terms of larger investment in production -- 50 per cent, followed by banking with 25 per cent and non-banking financial sector with 9 per cent," he added.
Data on foreign investment stocks at the end of 2004 was also compiled.
As of 31 December, foreign investment stocks in BiH amounted to 2.95 billion euros, 1.9 billion euros of which represented direct foreign investments.
Portfolio and other types of investment accounted for the other 1.05 billion euros.
Out of the 1.9 billion euros of direct foreign investments, 68 per cent was in the form of ownership capital, while the rest was from intercompany loans and other forms of investment.
The CBBH conducts detailed quarterly and annual research through direct compiling of the data from companies and banks with foreign investments in accordance with international methodology.
Through this research, more than 600 companies and banks with foreign investments of over 50,000 euros were covered, while estimates were made for others.
"Internationally-recognised concepts on foreign investments were used and these data may be different from the administrative data which were published in BiH earlier," said CBBH public relations official Almir Salihovic.
"In the process, the CBBH co-operated with the BiH Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations, as well as with companies, which send their data regularly."
