14/12/2005
(Amnesty International - 14/12/05)
The international human rights watchdog Amnesty International urged Bosnian authorities Wednesday (14 December) to address lingering human rights issues related to the 1992-1995 conflict, which left tens of thousands of people dead and millions of others displaced. 
It called for efforts to bring all war crimes indictees to justice and to end discrimination against minority returnees.
"The wounds of the war may have closed but they have not yet healed," the organisation said in a statement on the 10th anniversary of the signing of the Dayton Peace Accords (DPA) that ended the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Many of those charged with war crimes for their involvement in atrocities committed during the conflicts in the Balkans in the early 1990s have been brought to justice. 
But six of the 161 people indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) are still at large. 
Among them are the UN tribunal's two most wanted indictees -- former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. 
So far, not a single ICTY indictee has been arrested by police in BiH's Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), Amnesty noted.
"Only the political will and the commitment of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to bring to justice those responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide committed during the war can make peace sustainable," Amnesty's programme director for Europe and Central Asia, Nicola Duckworth, said.
While praising the outcome of two recent trials in RS, which ended with the conviction of four Bosnian Serb war criminals, Amnesty expressed doubt about the ability of local courts to try war crimes cases, given their lack of resources, capacity and the political will for dealing with such cases.
The BiH judiciary had failed to diligently prosecute all war crimes cases, it said, adding that it questioned whether adequate mechanisms were in place for the transfer of evidence from the ICTY to the BiH State Court's War Crimes Chamber. 
The group also called on the international community to extend the mandate of the ICTY beyond its envisioned closure in 2010 "until an effective action plan for ending impunity in the countries of the former Yugoslavia has been adopted and put into effect".
As for refugee returns, Amnesty noted that only about half of the around two million people displaced by the conflict have returned to their homes over the past ten years. 
Persistent problems, including lack of access to employment, education, health care, social services and pensions, continue to impede refugee returns, and ethnically-based discrimination is "widespread and ongoing", the group said.
"The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have the responsibility to create the best conditions for the reintegration of displaced people in their pre-war communities," Duckworth said. 
"This means creating a secure environment free of ethnic discrimination in which returnees can enjoy fully their rights. 
Unless they can become truly reintegrated into their pre-war communities and secure an adequate standard of living, the right to return will remain an empty concept."
