14/10/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/10/05
Following a report from UN special envoy Kai Eide and a recommendation by Secretary General Kofi Annan, negotiations on Kosovo's final status could start before the end of 2005 if the Security Council gives the go-ahead. 
Serbia, which intends to push for retaining some form of sovereignty over the province, is getting ready for the landmark talks.
The two main questions being discussed in Belgrade are "who will be on the negotiating team?" and "what will be the negotiating platform"? 
While the team has not yet been named officially, many have speculated Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica will head it. 
Although he may be formally designated the team leader, the prime minister is most likely to be involved in the beginning and end phases of the negotiations, says Kostunica adviser Vladeta Jankovic.
Jankovic himself, a former ambassador to London, is considered a possible candidate. 
Former Serbia-Montenegro Minister of Foreign Affairs Goran Svilanovic has said his diplomatic background and academic expertise (he has been a university professor) would make him a good fit for the job.
Another issue to be resolved is whether Kosovo Serbs should be part of Belgrade's team, or represent themselves. 
Serbian politicians from Kosovo have differing views. 
One, Oliver Ivanovic, believes that Serbs from Kosovo should have their own team and, more generally, work to regain a presence in Kosovo institutions. 
Another, Marko Jaksic, takes a harder line, arguing that "Serbia should regain its authority in Kosovo" as a result of the talks.
Serbian leaders say they have drawn up proposals for Kosovo that will serve as the basis for Belgrade's negotiating platform. 
The plan has been discussed by Serbian President Boris Tadic, Kostunica, state union leaders and members of parliament. 
However, it has not been made public because, as Tadic put it, "some parts of it are strategical and tactical."
Whatever the precise talking points may be, it seems that no one on the Serbian side is prepared to think about Kosovo being independent. 
The platform will most likely centre on the "more than autonomy, less than independence" formula which the Kostunica government has been circulating for some time. 
In addition, the Serbian negotiators will insist on ensuring civil and human rights for the non-Albanian minority in Kosovo, as well as on protection for Serbian churches and other cultural monuments.
Albanian politicians are adamant about settling for nothing short of outright independence, so one thing is clear: the negotiations won't be easy.
