14/10/2005
(HINA, EurActiv - 14/10/05; AP, HINA, HRT, FENA, Radio B92, MTI, Makfax - 13/10/05; Croatian Summit 2005)
Sixteen presidents of Central and Southeast European countries have gathered in Croatia to discuss EU integration and regional co-operation issues. 
The two-day summit, which opened Friday (14 October) in Zagreb, was called by Croatian President Stipe Mesic, who is hosting the event.
The presidents participating in the Croatia Summit 2005 are Alfred Moisiu of Albania, Heinz Fischer of Austria, Ivo Miro Jovic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgi Parvanov of Bulgaria, Vaclav Klaus of the Czech Republic, Laszlo Solyom of Hungary, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi of Italy, Branko Crvenkovski of Macedonia, Vladimir Voronin of Moldova, Aleksandar Kwasniewski of Poland, Ivan Gasparovic of Slovakia, Janez Drnovsek of Slovenia, Svetozar Marovic of Serbia-Montenegro and Traian Basescu of Romania.
Lithuanian President Valdas Adamkus is attending the 12th annual conference, previously known as the Central European Initiative, as a special guest. 
Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko has cancelled his participation due to health reasons.
The first such meeting, held in the Czech town of Litomysl in April 1994, brought together the presidents of seven states, of which only Austria and Germany were EU members at the time. 
Participation in the forum, which "offers the prospect of viewing matters concerning Europe from a multitude of different angles", has gradually grown. 
Eight of the countries represented in this year's event are already members of the EU, three are official candidates and the others are aiming at building closer ties with the bloc.
The Croatia Summit 2005 focuses on three key topics: the consequences of the admission of the first group of Central European countries and next steps in the process; the Western Balkans' contribution to the common European policies and the role of regional co-operation; and business environment and investment opportunities in Central and Southeast Europe. 
Welcoming participants at the opening of the summit at Zagreb's Westin hotel on Friday, Mesic said EU enlargement is the only way Europe should go. 
Describing the process as "a unique, millennium endeavour, which has no alternative", the Croatian leader said it was in the interest not only of European countries, but the entire world. 
Its successful completion requires a serious effort by all EU members, candidates and would-be candidates, he said.
Countries hoping to win formal recognition as EU candidates must resolutely continue adapting to European standards and adopting European criteria to meet the Union's requirements and begin membership negotiations as soon as possible, Mesic said.
For his part, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader called for the continuation of the process of EU enlargement until it has covered the entire continent. 
The EU states should not yield to enlargement fatigue and balk from the challenges of the process, he said.
Only after enlargement has been completed will it be possible to say that a new Europe has been built and its political and security architecture transformed, Sanader added.
