13/12/2005
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/12/05
In a 7-page report presented Monday (12 December), EU security chief Javier Solana and Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn called for an EU force to assume a greater role in Kosovo after its final status is determined, including taking on policing functions.
The report is an update of one released in June, which initially set forth the idea of an EU policing mission.
It was presented Monday to EU foreign ministers, who gathered in Brussels to discuss the prospects for further EU engagement in the Balkans.
"The EU could take on responsibilities in the police and rule of law and certain economic areas," the Reuters news agency quoted the new report as saying.
"Contingency planning for a possible ESDP [security and defence] mission on police and rule of law should start."
The two officials also urged the bloc to help strengthen the rule of law in Kosovo by sending prosecutors, judges and prison staff, and to provide more aid to help lower the province's staggering unemployment rate, which currently stands at over 50 per cent.
Rehn and Solana stressed, however, that the bloc had no intention of completely replacing the current UN mission, which now handles everything from maintaining law and order in the province to overseeing its everyday civilian administrative tasks.
The bloc would not be creating a "EUMIK", they said.
At the same time, they warned the EU's engagement in Kosovo would likely be its largest and most expensive yet, representing another substantial burden for the EU's 2007-2013 budget -- already a source of strain within the bloc.
"The EU contribution to the future international presence may have to include the funding of any future interim civilian administration structure to implement the status settlement, as well as a future ESDP operation for police and rule of law," they wrote, urging ministers to make sure the budget includes sufficient funds.
The financial impact is likely to be keenly heeded by EU leaders, who have so far been unable to strike a deal over the bloc's long term financing.
The impasse has already had an impact on the EU's Balkan policy, with a decision on Macedonia's candidate status apparently put off in part because of budgetary concerns.
Speaking to reporters Friday, however, Rehn said the Union could not afford to fail in Kosovo because the province is "so important for the stability of the Western Balkans".
In their report, Rehn and Solana suggested there should be a European horizon for Kosovo regardless of how its status is resolved.
However, they said, the EU's role will depend on the progress of the status negotiations, which will have to somehow reconcile Serbia's demands for continued sovereignty and the ethnic Albanian majority's insistence on full independence.
