14/09/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times -- 14/09/05
Amid a diplomatic quarrel over Turkey's non-recognition of Cyprus, EU members were scheduled to meet Thursday (14 September) to discuss a compromise agreed on by Britain and France. 
Meanwhile, Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan sharply criticised the EU for its handling of the issue, saying it had attempted to change the conditions for membership talks at the last minute.
"If you were to be negative towards Turkey why did you announce Turkey a candidate, why did you say that you would start talks without delay if the Copenhagen criteria were met?" Erdogan said, addressing the UN Foreign Relations Council on Tuesday.
After 40 years of waiting, in December 2004 Turkey was finally given a firm date for starting the accession talks. 
The conditions set forth included extending a customs agreement to the 10 new EU members, including Cyprus. 
In July, Turkey signed the expanded agreement, but also issued a document declaring the move did not constitute recognition of Cyprus and that Turkey's ports will remain closed to Greek Cypriot ships.
In September, EU foreign ministers decided to issue a counterdeclaration, but were unable to agree on the text. 
However, current EU presidency holder Britain has now reached agreement with France on a draft response. 
It stipulates that Turkey must recognise Cyprus before obtaining full membership, and urges it to normalise relations as soon as possible.
The text voices "regret" that Turkey deemed it necessary to issue a statement declaring its non-recognition of the Nicosia administration, and says the EU expects full, non-discriminatory implementation of the protocol and the removal of all obstacles to the free movement of goods, including restrictions on transport. 
A review would be conducted in 2006, and negotiation chapters would be put on hold if the implementation is found wanting.
Cyprus has been divided since 1974, when Turkey invaded the island's northern half. 
Ankara wants the longstanding issue to be resolved through a UN framework, while the Greek Cypriots -- who joined the EU on 1 May 2004, gaining veto power within the bloc -- have increasingly sought to make it an EU issue. 
The Greek side rejected a reunification plan sponsored by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, in part because of expectations it could obtain a better deal.
Although Turkey's EU bid has been a top priority for the Erdogan administration, there are limits to the concessions it is prepared to make. 
The prime minister faces political pressure at home, with nationalists charging he has already given away too much. 
With some EU political figures -- such as Germany's Christian Democrat leader Angela Merkel -- appearing to rule out full membership for Turkey, many in the country wonder whether the odds are too high.
Speaking to The Economist, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul charged that some EU member states were playing politics by shifting the goalposts weeks before the talks were due to start. 
He also warned that such maneuvering could backfire. 
"Should they (the EU) propose anything short of full membership, or any new conditions, we will walk away. 
And this time it will be for good."
