14/02/2006
(Bucharest Daily News, Nine o'Clock, Ziua - 14/02/06;
AP, Reuters - 13/02/06)
To ensure the speedy parliamentary approval of a large package of health reform bills, the Romanian government moved to invoke special powers Monday (13 February), saying it was assuming responsibility for the legislation.
This enraged the opposition Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the Greater Romanian Party (PRM), which threatened to file a vote of no-confidence against the centrist cabinet of Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu.
Under Romanian law, a censure motion must be submitted no later than three days after the government's declared assumption of responsibility for the legislation in question.
Parliament then has another three days to put it to the vote.
But if the PSD and PRM fail to file a no-confidence motion as required or if fails to be approved by parliament, the government will survive and the package of 17 health reform measures will be automatically adopted.
Tariceanu, whose country is scheduled to join the EU in January 2007, said on Monday that the proposed reforms, aimed at strengthening the country's crumbling health system and at bringing it closer to European standards, must be approved urgently.
"If our health system were a patient, he would probably need major surgery to get better," the prime minister said, addressing a joint session of parliament's two chambers.
For Romania's health system, according to Tariceanu, the past 16 years have been marked by poverty, corruption and inefficiency.
"Public health has gotten worse while funds allocated to health care have grown steadily," Tariceanu said, noting that in 2005 alone, Romania spent 2.8 billion euros on health care.
While life expectancy in the EU exceeds 78.5 years, it is only 71.2 years in Romania, Tariceanu said, adding that Romanians continue to suffer from diseases -- tuberculosis, for instance -- which should have disappeared years ago.
Increased funding funnelled into the system has not resolved problems such as negligence, conflict of interest and corruption, as well as the pervasive lack of financial discipline, accountability and transparency, Tariceanu said.
The proposed legislative package includes new laws on national health programmes, public and private health insurance systems, and hospitals.
Separate laws have also been put forward on the status of physicians, dentists and pharmacists.
Although the four-party ruling coalition has only a slim majority in parliament, analysts expect the government to survive a no-confidence vote.
