27/07/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for the Southeast European Times from Belgrade -- 27/07/09 Photos by Nikola Barbutov
The Serbian town of Jagodina has undergone many changes since its conception in 1399.
The town got its name from the Serbian word for strawberry, "jagoda", but was renamed Svetozarevo after one of Serbia's most prominent socialists, Svetozar Markovic, in 1946.
The old name Jagodina was given back to the town in 1992.
Prior to the 1991 breakup of Yugoslavia, Jagodina was known as an industrial centre, with a cable factory and brewery.
These companies are still working, although not as successfully as before, but they still provide jobs for a large number of Jagodina inhabitants.
The central Serbian town, located about 135km from Belgrade, has 36,000 inhabitants, with an additional 35,000 in the surrounding settlements and villages.
Mayor Dragan Markovic has been at the town's helm since 2004.
In last year's early local election, his party, United Serbia.
won 56% of the votes -- the biggest landslide victory in the history of the country's local elections.
"I have been a private entrepreneur for years and owe my success in running the town to that experience.
I know how to deal with problems and handle the budget properly.
For many politicians, the global economic crisis came as a tornado;
for me it is just a breeze," Markovic tells SETimes.
Jagodina today is building a reputation as a tourist centre.
Markovic emphasises that turning Jagodina from an industrial zone to a tourist centre is one of his biggest achievements.
"The space where only weeds and grass used to be is now occupied by the Aqua Park, zoo and the [wax] museum ...
Those venues are daily visited by up to 10,000 tourists during the summer season," Markovic says.
In 2006, the Jagodina Zoo opened.
The zoo, which cost more than 300,000 euros, is part of the city's nature park.
Funding for the zoo came from the town and donors, with the Belgrade zoo being the largest contributor.
The third largest zoo in the country, it houses more than 100 species of animals.
The Aqua park was opened in 2006.
The park features several water slides, pools and tennis courts for its hundreds of daily visitors.
Despite these major innovations for the town, Markovic is proudest of the town's unique social programme.
"I have problems with my kidneys, and I have no money for the necessary injections, so the town administration provides them for me free of charge," Jagodina pensioner Zoran Djordjevic told SETimes.
He says that, as a pensioner, he is entitled to free rides via public transportation.
The town administration also provides him with transportation to Belgrade for medical treatment.
"There is a lot of construction in Jagodina;
the streets are constantly being fixed and have all finally been paved.
Life hasn't died down here," Djordjevic points out.
The programme also assists young married couples.
"Unemployed pregnant women receive aid of about 100 euros per month.
Every child receives 200 euros from the administration upon birth.
Every fourth child in the family receives 200 euros per month until the age of 18.
Students from distant villages have free rides to school, and the town administration also provides scholarships for around 1,400 top elementary, high school and university students from Jagodina," Markovic says.
These benefits have attracted inhabitants from other towns and villages in the vicinity -- as many as 37 apartment buildings are currently under construction in the town.
Despite the town's positive actions, citizens still face problems.
The biggest of them -- finding and keeping a job -- is a global phenomenon.
Milena and Predrag Djuricic have two children and work in private firms.
They say their salaries are not big, but at least they have not lost their jobs, unlike some of their friends.
"The impact of the crisis can be felt in Jagodina.
Maybe it hasn't hit full force yet like in other towns, but I know many friends who are having a difficult time finding a job," Milena said.
In order to employ as many young people as possible and encourage them to start a family, Jagodina officials decided that if neither spouse has a job when they get married, the administration should find them one.
Although this decision cannot be fully implemented in practice, Markovic claims that several young couples are getting jobs due to the programme, and he says there is more to come.
"The town has offered 150 hectares of its land over to investors for the construction of new factories and many are already interested.
Investors will be obligated to ensure 23 jobs per hectare, thus employing over 1,000 young people," Markovic says.
Although he stresses there are practically no more communal problems in Jagodina, Markovic says that water supplies from the town waterworks need to be accessible by the surrounding villages, where people are still dependent on alternative forms, such as wells and rain water.
Another goal is to install gas pipelines in every village, the mayor says.
