13/10/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 13/10/05
The newly-elected leader of the opposition Socialist Party (SP), Edi Rama, has embarked on a programme to restructure the party in the wake of its loss in the July parliamentary elections.
At a meeting Wednesday (12 October), Rama urged local party branches to play a larger role in a number of areas, including the selection of a new leadership.
The proposal came a day after the entire SP chairmanship resigned, enabling Rama to inaugurate a sweeping overhaul of the party, dogged by frequent infighting and charges that it has fallen out of touch with voters.
Rama, the mayor of Tirana, won the top party post on Sunday during an extraordinary congress called after the resignation of former Prime Minister and SP head Fatos Nano, who took responsibility for the SP's defeat at the polls after eight years in power.
In voting at the conference, Rama easily beat a rival candidate, former Albanian President Rexhep Meidani to clinch the leadership position.
Out of 449 votes, 297 were in favour of Rama and 151 for Meidani.
The new leader told delegates that he would do his best to keep the party united, respecting "opposite opinions".
"Taking this post, I will give the possibility to see closely that I respect all the collaborators;
I am very careful towards the others who do not think as I do," Rama said.
Among other reforms, Rama has proposed introducing the "one-member, one-vote" concept as the basis for electing the leadership.
According to analysts, Rama faces multiple challenges.
He must rebuild the party as a potent opposition force, keeping it in the forefront of left-wing parties, while at the same time building alliances and co-operation with other political forces.
Born in 1964, Rama is an artist as well as a politician.
As mayor of Tirana, he gained international notoriety for his ambitious programme to beautify the capital's public spaces.
He was elected World Mayor 2004 in an Internet poll.
