10/11/2005
(EurActiv - 10/11/05; European Commission, AFP, RFE/RL - 09/11/05)
The European Commission (EC) released on Wednesday (9 November) its annual reports on the accession progress of EU candidates Croatia and Turkey and of the Western Balkan nations hoping to join the Union. 
The papers focus on the political and economic developments in the EU hopefuls during the past 12 months.
One of the key developments is that Turkey has been granted official recognition as a functioning market economy, a major condition for membership. 
But the EC also said the country would only be regarded as such "as long as it firmly maintains its recent stabilisation and reform achievements".
Noting the progress achieved in a number of areas, the report on Turkey also cautioned that the pace has slowed during 2005. 
It also voiced concern over continuing cases of torture, violence against women, and breaches of human and minority rights.
"Significant further efforts are needed, especially as regards freedom of expression, women's rights, religious freedoms, trade union rights, and the rights of non-Muslim religious communities," said EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn.
The EC report on Croatia reaffirmed the country's market economy status. 
It also said that the country meets the EU political criteria for membership. 
Zagreb was warned, however, that full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) must continue and that the last remaining indictee, retired Croat General Ante Gotovina, "must be located, arrested and transferred to The Hague".
The reports on Croatia and the other Western Balkan countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro, including Kosovo -- highlighted the need for continued efforts in the fight against corruption.
An important development for Macedonia, which submitted its official application for EU membership in March 2004, is the EC's recommendation that it be given EU candidate country status. 
Highlighting the implementation of the 2001 Ohrid Peace Agreement as "a major achievement", the EC also urged Macedonia to make additional efforts to carry out reforms in the judiciary and the police and to improve the electoral process.
Nearly 30 months after opening talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Albania, the EC said it was ready to conclude the process, but did not set a specific date for the signing of an accord, a first step towards eventual EU membership.
The report on BiH comes less than a month after the EC's recommendation on 21 October that Brussels open SAA talks with the country. 
While BiH's co-operation with the ICTY has improved significantly, "progress has sometimes been slow", the paper said.
The report on Serbia-Montenegro, which started SAA talks with the EU on 10 October, noted the country's economic progress. 
But it also urged further improvements in co-operation with the ICTY, implementation of judicial and public administration reforms and strengthened democratic control over the military. 
The EC also called on political leaders to take a constructive approach with regard to Kosovo.
