10/11/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times – 10/11/05
As Serbia begins to move forward on the road to EU accession, it is likely to face greater international scrutiny of the human rights situation for minorities in the republic. 
One area of particular concern is Vojvodina province, where the Croat and Hungarian communities have long complained about harrassment by Serb ultranationalists and a lack of protection by the authorities. 
More recently, Slovak and Ruthenians in the province have said they are being attacked.
Members of the Parliamentary Assembly of Europe highlighted the Vojvodina issue recently, drafting a resolution that expressed concern over "the high number of alarming and sustained human rights violations against ethnic and national minorities in the province of Vojvodina which are reoccurring since 1992".
The reported violations include physical assaults, including against women and schoochildren; vandalism of minority-owned property and threats of violence meant to induce minorities to leave Serbia, with leading intellectuals and politicians among the main targets.
Besides being a breach of human rights standards, the situation poses a potential refugee problem for the EU, as people flee Vojvodina for neighbouring Hungary or other parts of the bloc, the resolution said, calling for EU observers to be sent to the province.
October also saw the release of a 52-page report from Human Rights Watch that concluded authorities are failing to address a rising tide of violence against ethnic and religious minorities throughout Serbia.
"Officials have been quick to minimise incidents, police have sometimes failed to protect mosques and minority-owned businesses from attack, prosecutors have been slow to prosecute attacks, and those who are brought to justice are often punished with suspended jail terms or small fines," the organisation said. 
According to Holly Cartner, its Europe and Central Asia director, Serbia will find its EU bid hampered "unless it starts taking these attacks a lot more seriously".
The government's weak response only encourages hate crimes, human rights advocates say. 
The threat could become worse in the near future, if tensions over Kosovo's status lead extremists to take out their anger on minorities living close by.
Serbia's Minority and Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic, meanwhile, insists the problem has been exaggerated and should not influence the accession process.
"The European Commission and the all international officials agree that progress has been achieved in respect for human and minority rights, and facts are simply on our side," Ljajic said.
European diplomats have suggested giving Vojvodina more autonomy as one approach to improve the situation there. 
Such a move, however, depends on the constitutional process in Serbia going forward. 
At the same time, Brussels has indicated that it does not aim to foist on Belgrade a solution of what should be an internal matter. 
The EU's interest lies in seeing a reduction in ethnic incidents and tensions, and in Serbia showing that it is taking steps to bring human rights standards in line with the Union it wishes to join.
