13/12/2005
(Novinar, Focus News Agency, Sofia News Agency, bTV - 13/12/05;
AP, BBC, BNN, Dnevnik, Vseki Den - 12/12/05;
Mediapool - 11/12/05)
Teachers from more than 2,000 schools and kindergartens across Bulgaria began a strike Monday (12 December), a day after the latest round of talks with the government failed to produce a deal.
The teachers' main demand is for a 15 per cent salary increase for 2006.
They also insist on more funding for education in next year's budget.
According to the Bulgarian Teachers' Union (BTU), there were no classes Monday in 1,680 schools and 420 kindergartens.
More teachers were expected to join the strike Tuesday.
BTU and other syndicates supporting the strike say that unless an agreement is reached with the government by Wednesday, teachers will demonstrate in front of the parliament building Thursday, when lawmakers are expected to vote on the draft budget.
"We protest to demand a system or a programme for the sustainable development of secondary education, which would get the children back in schools, provide quality education and establish evaluation systems for teachers and students," BTU head Yanka Takeva told the private television station bTV.
On Sunday, representatives of the syndicates met with President Georgi Parvanov and the ministers of finance, education and social policy, but failed to reach an agreement.
After the meeting, Plamen Dimitrov of the Confederation of Independent Trade Unions in Bulgaria voiced hope that the prime minister and the leaders of the three parties in the ruling coalition would take note of a compromise formula proposed by Parvanov.
It envisions a 4 per cent salary increase as of 1 January 2006, a 6 per cent hike in July, and new salary talks in the autumn.
Finance Minister Plamen Oresharski, who was offering a 3 per cent pay hike in January and a 6 per cent rise next July, opposed Parvanov's compromise.
Leaders of the parties in the governing coalition, led by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), plan to discuss the issue Tuesday.
Meanwhile, the head of the IMF mission for Bulgaria stressed in Sofia on Monday that before raising teachers' salaries, the government should take long-delayed steps to reform the educational system.
Bulgaria should reduce the number of schools and teachers and improve the quality of education, Hans Flickenshild said, warning that if authorities give in to teachers' demands for higher wages, they would be bombarded with similar claims from workers in other sectors.
"Reforms in your educational sector should have been made a long time ago," the IMF official said Monday after talks with Social Policy Minister Emilia Maslarova.
Compared to other European countries, Bulgaria has an overabundance of schools and teachers, while the number of students is diminishing.
There are some 100,000 teachers in Bulgaria's public schools, where the average monthly salary equals about 150 euros.
