13/10/2005
(OHR Morning Brief - 13/10/05; AP, Reuters, FENA - 12/10/05)
US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns called Wednesday (12 October) for constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to create a stronger and more efficient state. 
The changes should include unifying the country's presidency and other government institutions, Burns said.
BiH's constitution is part of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, signed in Dayton, Ohio, on 21 November 1995. 
The accord, which ended a brutal interethnic conflict that lasted for more than three years, established BiH as a federal state consisting of two entities -- a Muslim-Croat federation, or the Federation of BiH (FBiH), and a Bosnian Serb republic, the Republika Srpska (RS).
In addition to a state-level government and parliament, each of the entities also has its own government and parliament. 
The country has a three-man presidency, each member represents one of the main ethnic groups living in BiH -- Bosnian Muslims, Croats and Serbs.
Welcoming the significant progress achieved in BiH over the last ten years, Burns said it was time for the country to move forward and modernise the Dayton Peace Agreement (DPA), in accordance with its spirit. 
He also praised a recent move towards the establishment of a state-level police force in the country over the next five years, noting that the next logical step would be to amend the constitution.
"The Dayton accords were meant to end the war, but it should not be set in stone or concrete," Burns said Wednesday in Sarajevo, the first stop of his three-day tour of the Balkans. 
"We do believe that the logical objective would be a single presidency, a strong prime minister and parliament."
Burns held talks Wednesday with a number of the country's leadership, including BiH Presidency members Sulejman Tihic and Borislav Paravac, BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic and Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic, RS President Dragan Cavic, Milorad Dodik, the leader of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats and High Representative Paddy Ashdown.
Burns invited the BiH presidency members to visit Washington on 21 November to participate in a ceremony marking the 10th anniversary of the DPA, while stressing that the leadership is expected to show a clear vision for change by then.
The US diplomat also warned that BiH, Serbia-Montenegro and Croatia could not expect to build closer ties with NATO as long as the UN war crimes tribunal's most wanted indictees -- former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, his military chief Ratko Mladic and retired Croat General Ante Gotovina -- remain at large.
Burns said he was encouraged by the statements made Wednesday by BiH officials that Karadzic and Mladic must face justice at The Hague.
"I hope that in five weeks, in Washington, leaders of all BiH political parties, as well as of the three-member presidency, that they will … demand Karadzic and Mladic to surrender," local media quoted the US diplomat as saying. 
"That would be a step forward."
