13/02/2006
(Reuters, FT, The Times, EUobserver, EurActiv, DPA, Irish Times - 13/02/06; BBC, Reuters, AFP, Washington Post, The New York Times, RTE, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 12/02/06)
Strict precautionary measures were imposed Sunday (12 February) in areas of Bulgaria, Greece and Italy where migratory birds were found to have died of H5N1, the highly pathogenic form of avian flu. 
A case of the deadly virus is also suspected in Slovenia.
The EU reference laboratory in Weybridge, Britain, confirmed on Saturday the presence of the H5N1 strain in a dead swan found in Bulgaria's northwestern wetland region of Vidin, close to the Romanian border, and in three wild swans found near Thessaloniki, Greece.
Meanwhile, Italy's national avian flu laboratory in Padua said samples from dead swans found on the island of Sicily and in the southern regions of Calabria and Puglia had also tested positive for H5N1. 
Checks are also being carried out on a swan found dead in the central Abruzzo region.
The measures prescribed by the EU include the establishment of a 3km protection zone around each area where the infected fowl were found and a 10km surveillance zone. 
Poultry within the protection zones must be kept indoors and their transportation, unless it is to a slaughterhouse, is banned. 
People are also advised to avoid any contact with wild birds or their excrement.
The H5N1 strain of bird flu has killed 90 people since 2003, mostly in Asia. 
An outbreak of the disease in Turkey in recent months has claimed four lives. 
At present, humans can only contract bird flu through close contact with an infected animal.
Bulgarian veterinary authorities said they are prepared to start large-scale culling of domestic fowl should an outbreak emerge. 
They said on Sunday they had imposed a quarantine on a region near two lakes on Bulgaria's northern Black Sea coast amid suspicions of possible bird flu cases. 
Samples from the dead swans found there will be sent to the Weybridge laboratory on Tuesday.
Dead birds found in the Ticha dam on Sunday sparked panic among residents of the northeastern city of Shumen, which relies on the reservoir for its water supply. 
According to authorities, the water is being disinfected and poses no health threat. 
Even if the birds were infected with the deadly virus, it is unlikely the disease could spread through water, they said.
Meanwhile, Romania, which along with Turkey was among the first European countries to be hit by bird flu over the past several months, reported new sites of H5N1 infection among poultry.
The latest case, bringing the number of affected sites to a total of 29, was in the village of Tropaisar, near the eastern city of Constanta. 
Fowl from a household farm in the village of Sarina Suf in the Danube Delta and in the southwest village of Cetate, also located on the Danube River, are also believed to be infected with avian flu.
