12/12/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 12/12/05
Turkey's unemployment rate reached 9.4 per cent during the three-month period that ended in September.
According to figures released by the State Statistics Institute (DIE), the urban unemployment rate was 12.3 per cent, while in rural regions of the country it was 5.5 per cent.
The total unemployment figure for the same period rose to 2.381 million people, compared to 2.317 million in June through August.
After a series of economic crises during the last decade, the Turkish economy has been on the road to recovery.
Meanwhile, political stability has returned, with a one-party government taking power after some 20 years of two or three-party coalition governments.
Despite stellar economic growth, joblessness remains high -- partly because of large numbers of young people entering the market, and partly because of cost-cutting measures imposed by businesses following the 2001 financial crisis.
Turkey is a young and growing country, with people below the age of 22 constituting around 40 per cent of the population in 2005.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his cabinet have said fighting unemployment is one of the administration's top priorities.
The government "aims to decrease the unemployment rate, poverty and inequality in income distribution", Erdogan assured the nation in a recent televised speech.
He noted that the European Commission's most recent progress report had identified Turkey as a functioning market economy, and said prospects for increased foreign investment are good.
"We need to create jobs for 700,000 people," Deputy Prime Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin told a meeting of the ruling Justice and Development Party in November, adding that the solution lay in encouraging the private sector.
As part of the effort to lure investors, the Erdogan administration has announced cuts in corporate and personal income taxes, to take effect starting in 2006.
Corporate taxes will be reduced from 30 per cent to 20 per cent.
The highest personal income tax rate will be reduced to 35 per cent from the present 40 per cent.
Another step currently under consideration is the establishment of regional minimum wages, designed to boost employment and investment in areas where development has been sluggish.
According to experts, the latest indicators show improvements in the number of educated unemployed and most of those are looking for a job for the first time.
However, the government is under pressure to show more dramatic results and prevent the jobs issue from undermining social stability.
