11/07/2005
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 11/07/05
Last week, the two main ruling parties in Romania, the National Liberal Party (NLP) and the Democratic Party (DP), decided to seek a stronger mandate by calling early elections. 
The move comes on the heels of the DP's decision to change its political orientation, abandoning its affiliation with the Socialist International (SI) to join the European People's Party (EPP). 
The way now appears to be clear for formation of a strong centre-right bloc in Romania, marking a significant sea change in domestic politics.
The DP's political shift followed six months of intra-party debate, launched by the former DP chief, President Traian Basescu. 
In January, he suggested that the party he led from 2001-2004 should abandon the ideology of social democracy, join the EPP and merge with its coalition partner, the NLP. 
Although the Liberals downplayed the idea, the DP has followed Basescu's advice. 
At the party convention in late June, nearly 4,000 delegates voted in favour of the political shift. 
According to current DP leader, Cluj Mayor Emil Boc, it is a natural evolution that formally recognises the party's repositioning to the centre.
"It is the first time that a party decides to leave the Socialist family to become one of our members", said former Belgian Prime Minister Wilfried Martens, the president of the EPP.
The split has been long in the making. 
In the 2004 elections, the SI threw its support behind the former ruling party, the Social Democrats (PSD), shunning Basescu and the DP. 
For his part, Basescu ran a campaign steeped in centre-right rhetoric, criticising welfare dependency and calling on Romanians to "put away the theory of the paternalist state, which takes care of the slothful". 
The SI's decision turned out to be a losing bet. 
One month after defeating his PSD rival, former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase, Basescu called for changes in the DP's doctrine and international affiliation.
The EPP is looking to Romania with greater interest, in light of the country's scheduled entry into the EU in 2007. 
"As the largest political force in Europe, it is not surprising that we are always seeking reliable and strong partners that share our values", said MEP Antonio Lopes-Isturiz, the EPP general secretary.
At home, meanwhile, the DP's move further strengthens the resurgent centre-right, which only four years ago was in grim shape. 
The Romanian Popular Christian Democrat Party was trounced in the 2000 elections and is unable to get back into parliament. 
Some DP officials, such as vice president Sorin Frunzaverde, have already suggested joining up with the EPP's other Romanian parties -- the Christian Democrats and the Hungarian Union -- to build a powerful new political force on the centre-right.
Another junior coalition partner, media mogul Dan Voiculescu's Humanist Party, has also rebranded itself. 
Now known as the Conservative Party, it too is seeking EPP membership. 
Its application, as well as that of the DP, is being reviewed by the EPP, with a final decision due in September.
