13/09/2005
(AP, Reuters, BBC, UPI - 12/09/05; Reuters, VOA - 19/08/04; AP - 22/11/02)
The retrial of eight former military policemen, charged with torturing and killing Serb prisoners of war in 1992, opened Monday (12 September) in Croatia's southern coastal city of Split. 
In August 2004, the country's Supreme Court sent the case back to court, ruling that the original trial, which ended with the defendants' acquittal in November 2002, was "fraught with serious flaws".
Seven of the indictees were guards at the Lora military prison in Split during the 1991-1995 war in Croatia and the eighth, Tomislav Duic, was the camp's commander.
The former policemen are charged with torturing and abusing both soldiers and civilians held at Lora, as well as with killing two detainees and seriously injuring another two. 
According to prosecutors, inmates at the prison were deprived of food and water, with some being forced to bark while sitting in a doghouse and to lick wounds they sustained during beatings.
At the end of the original trial, Judge Slavko Lozina ruled that, while crimes had undoubtedly been perpetrated at Lora, there was "not a shred of evidence to suggest that any of these suspects committed them". 
Therefore all eight, including Duic who was on the run and being tried in absentia, were acquitted.
The verdict provoked outrage among human rights activists, who accused the judge of bias and ties to extreme nationalists. 
Tonci Majic, head of an independent human rights group that monitored the trial, claimed at the time that at least 50 potential witnesses decided against testifying at court due to Lozina's refusal to guarantee their safety. 
"Dozens of witnesses were subjected to abuse and threats until they agreed to alter their pretrial testimonies," Majic was quoted as saying.
Acting on an appeal filed by the state prosecutors against the suspects' acquittal, the Supreme Court ruled on 19 August 2004 that the case should be sent back to the first-instance court "where it has to be retried before an entirely new trial chamber". 
It also issued arrest warrants for the all suspects.
Only four of the indictees appeared at the Split district court as the trial reopened Monday, pleading not guilty to all charges brought against them. 
The other four, including Duic, remain at large and will be tried in absentia. 
The trial is expected to go on for months. 
If convicted, each of the defendants could be given a prison sentence of up to 20 years.
This time around, prosecutors reportedly plan to summon also 14 witnesses from Serbia, including survivors of the atrocities committed at Lora, who had cited personal safety concerns when they refused to testify during the original trial.
According to media reports, the new trial likely would be seen as a test of the Croatian judiciary. 
Croatia, which currently awaits the start of accession talks with the EU, is anxious to show that its judicial system can function fairly and independently and is capable of handling war crimes trials.
