09/11/2005
(FT - 09/11/05;
US Department of State, AP, Reuters, VOA, RFE/RL - 08/11/05)
With the UN-sponsored talks to determine Kosovo's final status expected to begin within weeks, a senior US official called on Tuesday (8 November) for the constructive participation of all sides in the process.
"The parties to the talks -- the Kosovo Albanians, Kosovo Serbs and the government of Serbia-Montenegro -- will see their vital interests at stake," US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns told the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
"We expect them to participate constructively and to restrain more extreme groups from using violence to gain political ends."
Any such attempt to use violence "will be put down swiftly and firmly by NATO", Burns added.
The United States is a member of the six-nation Contact Group for Kosovo, including also Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Russia.
It will play an active role in the talks, which will be led by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's special envoy for the negotiations, former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari.
As the Kosovo Albanians and the Serbian officials are likely to enter the process with mutually exclusive positions, Burns said he expects the talks to be "difficult".
"The Kosovo Albanians insist that they can only be secure if they are independent of Serbia," he told the senate committee.
"Serbs have promoted a future of 'more than autonomy, but less than independence' as the most they could support."
The Contact Group members -- as well as the EU and NATO, which will also be involved in the talks -- have refrained from signaling their backing for any possible outcome of the negotiations.
They have, however, ruled out any solution that implies a return to the pre-1999 situation, a change in Kosovo's existing boundaries or partition.
"Other principles for a settlement include full respect of human rights, the right of refugees and displaced persons to return to their homes, the protection of cultural and religious heritage and the promotion of effective means to fight organised crime and terrorism," Burns said.
"The Contact Group agreed to exclude those who advocate violence and that, once begun, the status process must continue without interruption."
The US diplomat, who hosted a meeting of political directors from the Contact Group countries, attended also by Ahtisaari and representatives of the UN, the EU and NATO, said the international community would ensure that the outcome of the talks meets three key criteria.
First, it should promote stability not only in Kosovo, but throughout the entire region.
Secondly, it should "provide full democratic rights for all people, especially minorities" and lastly, it should further the region's Euro-Atlantic integration.
Ahead of the talks, Burns urged the Kosovo Albanian negotiators to put aside their political and personal differences and agree on a common position.
"If Kosovo Albanians aspire to independence, this is their greatest opportunity to make the case to the world that, should they become independent, they will be able to govern effectively and in a way that promotes stability in the region," the diplomat said.
His message to officials in Belgrade was that they should encourage Kosovo Serbs to participate in the political process.
"The Serb community is losing political influence in Kosovo and there is now a net outflow of Serbs," Burns said.
"Whatever Kosovo's future will be, Belgrade can best protect the interests of Serbs by encouraging them to participate in politics and begin to integrate themselves with their Kosovo Albanian neighbours."
He also made it clear that the United States will not support Serbia's admission to NATO's Partnership for Peace programme until the Kosovo status issue has been resolved.
