12/12/2005
(AP, BBC, Independent, New York Times, Euronews, ADN Kronos International, Radio B92 - 12/12/05; Reuters, AFP, BBC, VOA, RFE/RL, HINA - 11/12/05; ICTY - 10/12/05)
Retired Croat General Ante Gotovina made his initial appearance before judges at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on Monday (12 December), pleading not guilty to all seven charges brought against him.
According to his indictment, Gotovina was the overall operations commander of Operation Storm in the southern portion of the Krajina region. 
As such, he is held responsible for the unlawful killings of at least 150 Krajina Serbs and the forced deportation of up to 200,000 others. 
He is also accused of persecution, plunder of property, wanton destruction of cities, towns or villages, and other inhumane acts committed by troops under his command and control.
Until his capture last week, Gotovina was one of the ICTY's three most wanted indictees, along with former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. 
Gotovina disappeared weeks before the ICTY made public its initial indictment against him in July 2001. 
An amended indictment was issued in February 2004, charging him with seven counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war.
The Croatian Army staged operation Storm in August 1995 to regain control over Krajina from Serb separatists. 
According to UN prosecutors, however, the operation aimed not only at re-establishing Croatian authority but also at forcibly and permanently removing the Serb population.
After more than four years on the run, Gotovina was arrested Wednesday at a beachside hotel in Tenerife, one of Spain's Canary Islands. 
He was flown to Rotterdam and handed over to the Dutch police on Saturday, and was subsequently taken to the The Hague tribunal's detention unit at Scheveningen.
Spanish authorities have revealed that Gotovina had used a false passport in the name of Kristijan Horvat in his travels over the years. 
He is said to have visited Tahiti, Argentina, Chile, China, Russia, the Czech Republic, Mauritania and Mauritius. 
At the time of his arrest, he had a dozen 500-euro banknotes on him and was in possession of a laptop. 
A second false passport, in the name of Stjepan Senicic, was found in his hotel room.
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte announced his arrest during a visit to Belgrade on Thursday.
Welcoming the development, EU and NATO officials said the action should be followed with the arrests of Karadzic and Mladic.
"The arrest of Gotovina is good news for the world, for bringing people to justice who are not yet convicted but who are accused of very serious crimes, and indeed I think it is also good news for Croatia," NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said Thursday, adding that this will help bring Croatia closer to the Alliance. 
He also stressed that the two former Bosnian Serb leaders should be brought to justice at The Hague.
