12/09/2005
By Dimitri Agrafiotis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 12/09/05
Greece has kept a comparatively low profile regarding the EU accession bid of its Aegean neighbour, Turkey. 
It has consistently backed full membership in the EU for Turkey, while warning that major unresolved issues -- in particular, the reunification of Cyprus -- must be addressed.
However, the emerging split within the Union regarding Ankara's prospects has put the government of Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis in a complicated diplomatic position. 
With the scheduled launch of accession talks -- set for 3 October -- only weeks away, EU members have been at odds over how to respond to Ankara's non-recognition of Cyprus.
Turkey has agreed to extend a customs agreement with the Union to its 10 new members, including Cyprus. 
At the same time, it issued a declaration explicitly stating that the expanded agreement does not amount to recognition. 
Ankara argues that recognition was not one of the conditions laid down for the start of talks, and that the Cyprus question should be resolved through the UN peace process, rather than through EU negotiations.
Cyprus, seeking to use its own EU membership as a bargaining tool, has called for postponing the talks. 
In recent weeks, it has found a powerful ally in France, whose prime minister, Dominique Villepin, has said it is "inconceivable" for the talks to begin while Ankara refuses to recognise one of the EU's members.
Turkey also faces opposition from Austria, which favours a "privileged partnership" over full membership. 
And while it has the backing of German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, he may soon lose his job to Christian Democratic leader Angela Merkel, who opposes membership for Turkey.
That leaves Britain, the current holder of the EU presidency, as the strongest advocate of launching the accession process on time. 
Pushing hard to break the diplomatic stalemate, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw has warned Britain's fellow EU members that failure to start the talks on schedule would play into the hands of Islamic extremists.
Turkey's EU membership is vital to preventing a "clash of civilisations" between the Muslim world and the West, Straw said, warning that snubbing Turkey could lead Europe into "a crisis on our own doorstep".
The official line in Greece, espoused by both of the major parties, is that the accession of Turkey would boost stability in the region and foster relations between the two countries. 
It supports full membership and opposes the "privileged partnership" idea being put forward by Austria and Germany's Merkel.
At the same time, Greek leaders are supportive of Cyprus and reluctant to find themselves at odds with France. 
In a recent statement, Greek leaders cautioned Britain to "act objectively" and take the views of all EU member states into consideration. 
And Karamanlis, speaking at a trade conference in Thessaloniki, said any country wishing to open accession talks must meet its "fundamental obligations", adding that this is a "position of principle which we will not forego".
