09/11/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/11/05
Unemployment, poverty and corruption continue to top the list of concerns among Macedonian citizens, according to the UNDP's 4th Early Warning Report, which covers the June 2005 to August 2005 period.
On several key questions, the results are the same as in the UNDP's previous report, published in June.
Sixty one per cent of respondents pointed to unemployment as the largest problem facing the country, and 62 per cent fear for their jobs.
Only 47.2 percent of Macedonian citizens say they have regular incomes, while 40 per cent report having no income at all.
"Citizens know exactly how to locate the problems and therefore the government's priority should be betterment of the economy," said Vlado Dimovski, one of the report's co-authors.
"To improve the economic climate Macedonia needs a growth of at least 5 per cent, the percentage point that countries in the region have had in the past few years," he added.
Gjuner Ismail, another co-author, says Macedonian politicians should make an effort to establish a state based on rule of law, rather that taking patchwork, short-term measures.
"Macedonia is stable and dissatisfied, paralysed in seeking the solution to its dissatisfaction," Ismail says.
Although Macedonians' top concerns remain essentially unchanged, their political views show some emerging trends.
For the first time since the 2002 elections, the opposition VMRO-DPMNE rates higher than the ruling Social Democratic Union for Macedonia (SDSM).
Asked which party they would vote for if elections were held now, 15.8 per cent of respondents favoured the VMRO-DPMNE, while 13.4 per cent said they would vote for the SDSM.
Among ethnic Albanian parties, the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) -- a member of the SDSM-led coalition -- is leading decisively with 50 percentage points, and the opposition Democratic Party of Albanians is second with 16.7 per cent.
The third ethnic Albanian party, the Democratic Party for Prosperity, is supported by only 3 per cent.
The number of those who think that the country is moving in the wrong direction has shot upward.
As many as 67.8 percent say that Macedonia is moving in the wrong direction, compared to 54.7 percent in the earlier report.
The percentage of those who believe interethnic relations are not good has also increased, from 12.2 per cent to 17.6 per cent.
In addition, the UNDP report signals increasing distrust towards institutions.
It found that 38.9 per cent, 54.3 per cent and 50.6 percent of respondents distrust the president, parliament and the government respectively.
