12/09/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 12/09/05
Albania's new prime minister and cabinet were sworn in Sunday (11 September) during a ceremony attended by President Alfred Moisiu. 
A day earlier, parliament approved the new government headed by Sali Berisha, whose Democratic Party (DP) won the 3 July elections.
Berisha's cabinet was backed by 84 MPs, while 53 voted against it. 
The approval followed two days of debate.
On Friday, Berisha presented his programme and list of ministers, saying that he would focus on the consolidation of democratic institutions, the fight against corruption and the improvement of public order, with the aim of guiding Albania towards membership in EU and NATO structures.
"Albanians deserve a capable, honest and fair government," Moisiu said during Sunday's ceremony. 
"I express my conviction that the new majority, combining human capacities and professional capability with the necessary political will, will make possible and transform in reality a good governance."
As he had pledged earlier, Berisha has reduced the number of ministries from 19 to 14. 
The cabinet will include one deputy prime minister -- lawyer Ilir Rusmajli. 
One of the key members will be the former Albanian ambassador to Paris, writer Besnik Mustafaj. 
He heads the foreign ministry.
At least five of his ministers are in their thirties. 
Sokol Olldashi, 32, heads the interior ministry, a merger of the current public order and local government ministries. 
The ministries of territory and tourism and of culture, youth and sports are being merged to form the ministry of culture and tourism, run by Bujar Leskaj, 39.
Arenca Troshani, a 32-year-old lawyer, was appointed integration minister, while Aldo Bumci, 31, becomes minister of justice. 
The transport and telecommunications ministry is headed by Lulzim Basha, 31.
The finance ministry is run by Ridvan Bode, and the agriculture ministry by Jemin Gjana. 
The economy, energy and trade ministries are merging into a single body, led by Genc Ruli as economy minister. 
Maksim Cikuli takes over the health portfolio.
After the government was sworn in, Berisha called a cabinet meeting.
With strong parliamentary support, analysts say, Berisha should face few difficulties in choosing a new president in 2007. 
The issue had been seen as a possible trouble area, but Berisha appears to have won a sufficiently strong mandate to avoid a political crisis.
