08/08/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 08/08/05
After a long wait, Serbia is finally getting a new healthcare law. 
According to Health Minister Tomica Milosavljevic, it will allow citizens to choose their doctors in the future and thus make doctors more accountable in meeting the needs of their patients. 
At the same time, capable doctors will also benefit, as they will get paid according to the number of patients who come to them for treatment.
Pilot projects are already under way in several cities in Serbia, allowing citizens to select their doctors themselves. 
The same project is to begin in Belgrade in 2006. 
"A selected doctor will have charge over 1,500 persons who select that doctor. 
It's a question of quality. 
If I am ill mannered, if I don't take care of my patients, in December they will select another doctor for the coming year. 
If it occurs for three years in a row that I do not have a sufficient number of patients, then hospital managers will sit down and will say, 'wait a minute, something is not quite right'," Milosavljevic said.
Under the new law, withholding from the patient his/her legal medical rights will also be sanctioned. 
Verification of medical associations will be conducted by the profession, while the actual operations of the medical associations themselves will be based on association meetings, in accordance with the association statutes.
In a bid to raise professional standards, accreditation and licensing of doctors, dentists and pharmacists will also be introduced, with the issuing of licenses entrusted to the professional associations.
In parallel with the new healthcare law, the government has also presented draft legislation on health insurance. 
Among other things, it stipulates the introduction of voluntary additional health insurance that will complement the existing mandatory insurance. 
Those who pay for voluntary health insurance, should the law be adopted, will get waivers for paying surcharges for particular medical services.
Additional health insurance will include a package of services such as choice of hospital rooms equipped with air-conditioning, television and other amenities. 
Such insurance can be organised by legal entities, insurance companies or other private firms.
Serbia's healthcare system is currently in debt to the tune of 100m euros. 
According to Milosavljevic, the new legislation is an attempt to tackle its financial woes, while also setting needed priorities in providing healthcare treatment, including protection for the poorest segments of the population.
