11/01/2006
(Reuters, FT, UPI, Bloomberg, VOA, ITV, The New York Times, Independent, CNN, The Guardian - 11/01/06;
AP, AFP, BBC, RFE/RL - 10/01/06)
Turkish authorities have stepped up measures to contain the further spread of a bird flu outbreak, which has claimed the lives of at least two teenagers in the country's east.
Of some 70 people hospitalised with flu-like symptoms across the country in a week, the number of patients to have tested positive for the virus's deadly H5N1 strain was set at 13 on Tuesday (10 January).
Muhammet Ali Kocyigit, 14, and his sister Fatma, 15, from the rural eastern town of Dogubeyazit, near the Turkish-Iranian border, became the country's first H5N1 victims last week.
Their sister Hulya, 11, died shortly after, but initial tests indicated H5N1 was not the cause of her death.
A fourth sibling was also treated for bird flu and has reportedly recovered.
All four children came into contact with infected chickens.
According to latest reports, the virus has quickly spread westwards, reaching Ankara, Istanbul and the country's popular Aegean Sea resort of Kusadasi, some 1,650km from Dogubeyazit.
The infection is said to have affected poultry in 30 out of Turkey's 81 provinces.
The government said on Tuesday that a total of 306,000 birds have been killed across the country since 26 December.
Facing criticism over their alleged slow response, authorities stepped up efforts this week to raise public awareness about precautionary measures against the disease.
The campaign includes the distribution of leaflets, and television spots urging people not to touch fowl and to wash their hands after handling poultry.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan says there is no reason for panic.
"The situation is fully under control," he told reporters at a joint press conference Tuesday with visiting Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi.
"We will continue to deal with the situation with the utmost care."
Scientists are concerned that while the deadly H5N1 bird flu virus remains hard for people to catch, it could mutate into a form that can become easily transmissible among humans and spark a pandemic.
A report in the The Times quoted British scientists, who have been studying the bird flu virus found among patients in Turkey, as saying that initial tests showed no indication that it has mutated.
The WHO, which sent a team of health experts to the country following the Kocyigit teenagers' deaths last week, also said Tuesday there is no evidence to suggest human-to-human transmission of the infection.
Guenael Rodier, the leader of the WHO investigative team currently in Turkey, said the bird flu outbreak appears to be limited to cases in which those infected with the H5N1 virus had contracted it through direct contact with sick birds.
"It seems to be clear that we are dealing with a situation similar to what we have seen in Asia, which means in practice a number of small sites, family clusters of disease involving many children and always with documented or reported contact with infected birds, typically backyard poultry," Rodier said.
"I have a sense that what is going on in Turkey can be brought under control relatively easily," he was also quoted as telling reporters in Geneva by phone.
What is seen as puzzling in Turkey is the fast spread of the infection, which has claimed 76 lives in China and Southeast Asia since 2003, or about half of the confirmed H5N1 cases in that region over the last two years.
