12/10/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 12/10/05
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, in Belgrade to mark the start of negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), hailed what he described as a new stage in the relationship between Serbia-Montenegro and the EU, but warned that obstacles remain.
"It is a crucial step forward on Serbia and Montenegro's way towards the EU," Rehn said Monday (10 October) at a ceremony with top leaders, including Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, federal Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic.
At the same time, Rehn noted that difficult political issues are on the horizon, including the state union's future and the status of Kosovo.
"It is in everyone's interest not to allow [these issues] to obstruct the SAA negotiations," he said.
In addition, Belgrade still has not met all its obligations to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, one of whose top indictees -- former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic -- is thought to be holed up somewhere on Serbian territory.
"For the smooth conduct of the negotiations, it is crucial that you maintain your efforts and enhance co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
During the negotiations, we will continue to monitor progress closely, and the Commission will not hesitate to recommend the suspension of negotiations if the efforts falter," Rehn said.
Regarding Montenegrin independence, Rehn said simply that the Council of Europe gave the European Commission a mandate to negotiate an agreement with the state union, including its two constituent republics.
"It is not useful at this point to start a hypothetical discussion about what would happen if a referendum next year resulted in [the] secession [of Montenegro]," he said.
Acknowledging that the Mladic case is obstructing Serbia-Montenegro's path to Europe, Marovic called for resolving it as quickly as possible.
Draskovic, who takes on the role of Serbia-Montenegro's chief negotiator with Brussels, said he told Rehn that all requirements would be met in the shortest time possible.
He also said he would not hesitate to publicly condemn anyone obstructing the process.
Kostunica said that Serbia-Montenegro "is closer and closer to the EU and the goals and values that we have believed in and worked towards all these years." His Montenegrin counterpart, Djukanovic, said that Montenegro's referendum on independence -- planned for next year -- "will in no way affect the efficiency of the negotiations".
