11/10/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 11/10/05
A new law adopted by parliament and signed by President Branko Crvenkovski at the start of October rewards MPs with a cozy retirement package, granting them a full allowance at an early age.
Male and female MPs with two years experience in parliament can retire at ages 55 and 53, respectively.
That contrasts sharply with the situation for most Macedonians, who are being asked to work longer and retire later.
Under legislation that entered into force this month, men can retire after 40 years of work experience and women after 35 years.
For most citizens, that means a retirement age of 64 for men and 62 for women.
Under the previous law, men could retire at 63 and women at 60.
At a time when many in the country are struggling to make ends meet, parliament's action has set off a storm of controversy.
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski's cabinet, the opposition VMRO-DPMNE party, trade unions and public opinion in general have opposed the legislation, and President Crvenkovski himself has sharply criticised it.
Under the constitution, however, he was obliged to sign the bill after MPs passed it a second time.
"My personal opinion is that there is a moral issue if a group of citizens is privileged over others without any grounds," said Finance Minister Nikola Popovski.
About 50 current and former legislators meet the conditions for retirement under the law, which applies even to MPs no longer in office.
"The members of parliament only showed greed for money and did not bother to consider the consequences of this law entering into force," said Pece Gruevski, a spokesman for the Macedonian Trade Union Association.
"This will instigate anger with workers."
In addition to an earlier retirement, parliamentarians will also enjoy a wealthier one.
They voted themselves an allowance of around 36,000 denars -- almost 10,000 denars more than the highest retirement allowance (26,880 denars) currently paid out in the country.
Under a law regulating salaries for officials, adopted a few months ago, the average wage for a parliamentary deputy stands at about 45,000 denars.
Seeking to mollify public opinion, some MPs have proposed delaying for two years the new retirement ages imposed on ordinary citizens.
The opposition VMRO-DPMNE threatened to impeach Crvenkovski if he signed the law.
Although the constitution requires him to do so, the party argued, it does not specify a time frame.
Some extra-parliamentary parties, meanwhile, have announced an appeal to the Constitutional Court.
