11/10/2005
(BBC - 11/10/05; Reuters - 10/10/05; International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia)
Three former Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) officers, charged with war crimes over the 1991 Vukovar massacre of more than 260 Croats and other non-Serbs, went on trial Tuesday (11 October) at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
According to their joint indictment, Mile Mrksic, Vesselin Sljivancanin and Miroslav Radic bear individual criminal responsibility and superior criminal responsibility for the killings. 
The three are charged with five counts of crimes against humanity and three counts of violation of the laws or customs or war for persecutions, extermination, murder, torture, inhumane acts and cruel treatment.
All three served in the JNA's 1st Guards Motorised Brigade (gmtbr), which bore the primary responsibility for the attack on Vukovar. 
According to the ICTY, Mrksic, 58, was the commander of the 1st gmtbr and Operational Group (OG) South. 
As the security officer of the 1st gmtbr and OG South, Sljivancanin, 52, was effectively in charge of a military police battalion subordinated to the 1st gmtbr. 
Radic, 43, commanded an infantry company in the 1st Battalion of the 1st gmtbr.
The former Serb officers -- often referred to as the "Vukovar Three" -- have pleaded not guilty.
After a three-month siege, the city of Vukovar in Croatia's Eastern Slavonia region fell to Serb forces on 18 November 1991. 
In the final days of the siege, several hundred people sought refuge at Vukovar hospital, near the city centre, believing that they would be evacuated in the presence of international observers. 
Under an agreement between the JNA and the Croatian government, the Serb forces were entrusted with the evacuation of the hospital.
On the morning of 20 November 1991, troops under the command of Mrksic, Sljivancanin and Radic removed some 400 patients and refugees from the hospital. 
About 300 of them were transported to the nearby Ovcara farm. 
There, according to the indictment, the troops involved in the operation "forced them to run between two lines of soldiers who beat the men as they passed" and then "continued to beat and assault the detainees inside the farm building".
Later, the detainees were divided into groups of 10 to 20 and taken to a wooden ravine less than a kilometre from the Ovcara farm. 
At least 264 Croats and other non-Serbs were shot and killed by the Serb forces, who then "used a bulldozer to bury the bodies of the victims in a mass grave at the same location," reads the indictment.
The incident, which became a symbol of the savagery of the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s, was among the first investigated by ICTY prosecutors following the court's establishment in 1993.
The three were originally indicted in 1995 along with Slavko Dokmanovic, the president of the Vukovar municipality in 1991. 
He was transferred to the ICTY in June 1997 and died in custody a year later, after his trial had been completed.
Mrksic and Radic surrendered to the UN tribunal in 2002. 
Sljivancanin remained at large until June 2003, when he was arrested in Belgrade after a tense 10-hour standoff between Serbian special police troops and a crowd of supporters outside his apartment block, where he had returned to celebrate his 50th birthday.
