23/11/2009
Text and photos by Maria Paravantes for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 23/11/09
Stamatic Kraounakis, a diverse artist who draws on traditionalist elements and universal themes embedded in his own culture, speaks about his notion of art, hard work, and what is important.
SETimes: Many say you are one of the greatest composers of your time. 
Some have said that you are a legend. 
In your opinion, what makes a legend?
Stamatis Kraounakis: I have no idea what makes a legend. 
What I do remember ever since I was 14, when I realised I would be doing this job, is only work, work and work. 
From 6:30 in the morning to 3 the next morning. 
And this became more so when I started working in nightclubs. 
There was so much work that I ended up taking hour-long naps in the dressing rooms.
I firmly believe that only hard work opens doors and breeds ideas. 
There comes a point where you don't just sit waiting for inspiration, you're always wired to it. 
No artist can say he's waiting for inspiration, like waiting to go on a date. 
Inspiration should always be there. 
You till the soil, rain or shine, so you can one day harvest the crop. 
Some day you can say that something unique, different or new is born of this [creative] process. 
That's what you do in art.
From a very young age I have felt that I am a communicator. 
I feel like I'm here on a mission, to communicate and heal through music. 
As the years go by, I realise that my "patients" recognise me.
SETimes: Theatre, music, film, children's plays, prose -- what art form is the closest to your heart?
Kraounakis: I always wanted to do musical theatre. 
That's why I feel so rewarded doing it. 
I believe the theatre won me over because the first book I read was a dialogue, a play by Tennessee Williams. 
I am among the most prolific artists in this genre. 
I've been doing it for so long I feel I've become a specialist of sorts.
SETimes: The Speira Speira troupe is celebrating its tenth birthday with the anniversary performance of FestiValium. 
How was the troupe born and what keeps you dedicated to an art form that is not lucrative?
Kraounakis: It was God's will. 
That's the only thing I can say about a troupe that has persevered for a decade. 
We all manage to communicate with one another. 
We never let bad moments take us down. 
Our philosophy? 
Poverty needs the finer things -- gourmet. 
And to be honest, in the beginning our only sponsors were the kids' families. 
Many of the youth said, once here, their parents took them seriously. 
And this paved the way for other young people to come and join us. 
What keeps us dedicated? 
The fact that we all laugh and have fun on stage while working.
SETimes: What does the Speira Speira troupe represent in today's local artistic reality?
Kraounakis: Freedom of expression. 
We manage to communicate and break all barriers -- age, culture and personality differences, which are not easy. 
But what kept us together was the fact that we never lie. 
Truth is our point of reference in everything we did and do.
SETimes: The subject matter of your performances, their openness, the way they uncover secrets -- truths that no one wants to talk about or admit -- has it driven audiences away?
Kraounakis: Audiences change every year, depending on what they can and want to see or hear. 
In Greece, whether one is a fan or not, we want to watch the acrobat fall off the tight rope. 
There are those who are waiting to see us fail, but the same imitate us, thinking it's easy to do what we do. 
Success is really all about expressing something at the core of things. 
Our success is in the fact that every single show touches on issues that affect all at all times.
"Oli Mavra" (All Black) was about Sarajevo, "Sold Out" dealt with the abolition of the drachma and the introduction of the euro, "Klassiki Syntagi" (Classic Recipe) was about the socialist party's demise and the return of the right-wing New Democracy party; "Bibero" (Pacifier) revealed the defeat of the socialist model and the return of the right-wing Karamanlis mentality of the '50s – just some of the themes and topics we tackled. 
All our performances reflect the signs of the times; they dare portray things as they are.
SETimes: How does an artist/composer/poet manage to speak to many generations, in many languages, to exceed limits and surpass borders?
Kraounakis: By observation, by becoming a part of what you see, by understanding what is behind the facade. 
I believe my songs have become a part of our collective memory, signifying the times we live in. 
You can easily see a mother and daughter singing the same songs.
SETimes: There's a popular Greek song by Dionysis Savvopoulos that says: "these are the Balkans, and that's no joking matter".
Kraounakis: For me Greece is the spiritual centre where everything started. 
But it is exactly this spirituality, this energy, that we are suffering from and being punished for. 
Greece is diverse: there is the Epirot, the Cretan, the Ionian, and at least ten different musical influences and genres that interact with our Greek identity. 
Our Balkan neighbours love us and we have many things in common -- our passion for one. 
I try to follow as much art as I can in the neighbouring countries. 
My greatest love, of course, is Constantinople, where one of my grandmothers had her roots. 
I also love Bulgarian music, the Yugoslav traditions, which resemble our Macedonian songs.
Although I firmly believe that Greece is one of the few countries with a plethora of musical genres and traditions, it saddens me to see younger performers going abroad and imitating instead of seeking inspiration in our collective memory. 
Nowadays, we see these so-called modern works that are so far from the written word, from tradition.
