10/02/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/02/06
Serbian police issued a warrant for prominent tycoon turned politician, Bogoljub Karic, on 4 February, after he failed to appear in court for questioning.
Karic, a friend and business partner of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, is owner of the BK Company and head of the Power of Serbia Movement.
Karic was due to appear at the Belgrade District Court on 3 February for questioning about the activities of his former company, the mobile phone operator Mobtel.
However, he did not appear.
Police say Karic was not at his Belgrade address and officers were searching for him.
Belgrade-based B92 Radio quoted a Power of Serbia Movement official, Dejan Milekovic, as saying Karic was out of the country, along with his brothers Sreten and Dragomir Karic.
"The lawyers have told me that Sreten Karic is in Moscow and I believe them.
Bogoljub Karic is outside the country collecting documents, as is Dragomir, who has lived outside the country for a long period of time," Milekovic said.
Karic and his brothers are thought to face charges of tax evasion, mismanagement of millions of dollars and money laundering.
The warrant is the latest development in an ongoing struggle between Karic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's government, which has revoked Mobtel's operating license.
The government has also threatened to confiscate the Karic family's assets if it does not pay an alleged 3.3m euros in back taxes.
Karic, meanwhile, has accused Kostunica of orchestrating a "lynch campaign" because of the popularity of his party, which ranks third in opinion polls and is ahead of Kostunica's party.
With the investigation, the roots of the Karic family's enormous wealth -- amassed over two decades -- have come to light.
Using political connections and state capital, the family created a business empire that today operates construction, finance, media and agricultural companies across three continents.
In Belgrade's exclusive residential quarter Dedinje, the Karics own nine villas, with a combined property value of around a billion euros.
For many years, Mobtel was the only telecommunications company in the world that did not register any profit.
Revenues were siphoned off into companies owned by the Karic family, including prepaid card merchandiser Astra, the Family Tours car rental company, the Avropa osiguranje insurance company and BK Television.
