08/11/2005
(Kathimerini - 08/11/05;
AP, Pravda - 07/11/05;
Appeal of Conscience Foundation)
Religious figures must promote peace and conciliation, not conflict, Christian, Muslim and Jewish spiritual leaders said Monday (7 November) at the start of a three-day conference in Istanbul.
The forum, dubbed Peace and Tolerance II, focuses on inter-religious co-operation aimed at strengthening peace in Southeastern Europe, the Balkans and Central Asia.
The meeting is taking place at the initiative of Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, the spiritual leader of some 250 million Orthodox Christians living around the world and a strong backer of interfaith dialogue, including efforts to heal the centuries-old schism between the Orthodox and Catholic churches.
The event is co-sponsored by the New York-based Appeal of Conscience Foundation, an interfaith coalition of business and religious leaders promoting peace, tolerance and conflict resolution.
Speaking on Monday, Bartholomew stressed the need for different religions to search for their common ground and to co-exist peacefully for the sake of both believers and non-believers.
He voiced hope that the meeting would "unveil possibilities of understanding," or at least of "avoiding the participation of religion at large" in events that lead to strife.
Among those attending the forum, according to the AP, were representatives of the Roman Catholic Church, the chief Islamic and Catholic representatives of Kosovo, religious leaders from the Caucasus and Central Asia, Turkey's chief rabbi Isak Haleva, the Armenian patriarch of Istanbul and the Turkish minister of religious affairs.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier, who founded the Appeal of Conscience Foundation in 1965, said one of the main objectives of the conference was to press governments to ensure that hatred is not taught at schools.
Another goal is to take a stand against religious leaders who incite violence, to marginalise and isolate them.
Viewing freedom, democracy and human rights as the fundamental values that give nations their best hope for peace, security and prosperity, the foundation has been urging religious leaders worldwide to denounce terrorism, help end violence and promote tolerance.
The organisation has been the co-sponsor of similar conferences in the past, including in Switzerland and Austria.
In 1994, religious leaders adopted the Berne Declaration, which stated that a "crime perpetrated in the name of religion is the greatest crime against religion." At the end of another meeting in Vienna the following year, a declaration was adopted stating that "among people of faith there can be no place or tolerance for the conflicts visited on so many people in the former Yugoslavia, the Caucasus and Central Asia."
The participants in the ongoing conference in Istanbul are also expected to approve a formal declaration.
US President George W. Bush, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, European Commission President Jose Manual Barroso and Pope Benedict XVI have reportedly sent letters welcoming the event, which were to be read by their representatives.
