08/07/2005
(Various sources -- 06/07/05 - 08/07/05)
As many as 50,000 people are expected to gather in Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) eastern town of Srebrenica on Monday (11 July) to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the single worst atrocity in Europe since the end of World War II.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn is one of a number of senior officials due to take part.
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's chief of staff, Mark Malloch Brown, will deliver a message on behalf of Annan.
Theodor Meron, the president of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), also confirmed his participation in the ceremony.
A number of regional leaders, including the presidents of Serbia and Croatia, Boris Tadic and Stipe Mesic, are planning to attend the ceremony.
Republika Srpska (RS) President Dragan Cavic and other senior Bosnian Serb officials will join them.
On 11 July 1995, Bosnian Serb forces overtook Srebrenica, which had been designated a UN "safe area" since April 1993.
During the next several days, as many as 8,000 men and boys were summarily executed by troops and paramilitary forces under the command of General Ratko Mladic.
Dutch UN peacekeepers stationed in the area failed to prevent the slaughter.
"We have to bear our burden of guilt when it comes to making up for what happened," Hannes Swoboda, an Austrian member of the European Parliament (EP), said during a debate at the EU legislature Wednesday to commemorate the upcoming anniversary.
The debate culminated in a resolution which condemned the massacre, called for its perpetrators to be brought to justice, urged future peacekeeping missions to learn from the lessons of the Balkan conflicts, and pledged support for the EU accession bids of BiH and other applicant countries.
"We have a duty to remember -- so that we will see no other Srebrenicas, so that ethnic hatred and destructive nationalism will be definitively buried, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the Balkans, in the whole of Europe," Rehn said during the debate at the EP on Wednesday.
Ahead of Monday's commemoration, the international community's High Representative in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, said the country and the region as a whole had changed significantly over the past decade.
"The authorities in the RS and in Serbia have moved from denial to recognition of the enormity of the crime that was committed here," Ashdown said.
However, the alleged architects of the Srebrenica massacre -- wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic -- are still at large.
Both have been indicted by the ICTY on charges including genocide.
Karadzic is thought to be hiding in his native Montenegro, while Mladic is believed to be in Serbia.
