09/12/2005
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times -- 09/12/05
Retired Croatian General Ante Gotovina, who went into hiding in 2001 after being indicted for war crimes by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), was arrested on Wednesday (7 December) in the Spanish Canary Islands. 
Gotovina was transferred by military plane to Madrid, where he was read the indictment against him. 
He is currently being transferred to The Hague.
Immediately after Gotovina's capture, Spanish police reported the action to UN war crimes chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte, who was in Belgrade. 
Del Ponte then informed Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader of the arrest. 
At a press conference in Belgrade, del Ponte announced the arrest, thanked Spanish officials for their efforts and Croatian officials for their co-operation.
The ICTY formalised charges against Gotovina in 2001, when he was indicted over his alleged involvement in atrocities committed against Krajina Serbs towards the end of the 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia. 
He was accused, along with former Croatian President Franjo Tudjman, of masterminding the executions and other actions during the Croatian military offensive operation, codenamed Operation Storm.
Soon after his disappearance, he was added to the Interpol list of most wanted and an international all-points-bulletin was released. 
The United States offered $5m for information about his whereabouts.
Quoting anonymous sources, international media reported that the government in Zagreb provided key evidence of Gotovina's presence in Spain to international investigators in September. 
Del Ponte's favourable report on Croatia's co-operation with the tribunal, which persuaded the EU to launch accession talks with the country, was also presented in September. 
According to foreign media reports, Croatian police obtained Gotovina's phone number and other information from some of the fugitive's supporters identified by Britain's MI6.
Gotovina's arrest sparked a slew of reactions. 
Around 500 Croatians demonstrated against the arrest in Zagreb's Jelacic Square Thursday night. 
Police secured the event and maintained order.
Sanader, who announced the arrest to the Croatian Parliament, said the capture proves that his country was not in error when it said Gotovina was not on Croatian territory. 
"It is the final confirmation of the credibility of Croatia and its state institutions. 
Those who believed us when we were saying that Gotovina was not in Croatia, today received the final and complete confirmation."
Both Sanader and President Stipe Mesic said that anyone charged should appear before justice, but at the same time, stressed that there should be a presumption of innocence.
Anto Djapic, the leader of the opposition Croatian Party of Rights, said it was a "sad day for Croatia and all its defenders". 
Djapic's deputies walked out of parliament in protest Thursday, as Gotovina's supporters organised protests in Zagreb, Gotovina's hometown of Zadar and several cities. 
According to early reports, roadblocks were set up and several automobiles were set on fire in Gotovina's home region of Dalmatia. 
But spokesman Zlatko Mehun said police were ready to handle anyone who broke the law.
In the international community, the EU and NATO welcomed the arrest, and said the action should be followed with the arrests of Bosnian Serbs Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.
NATO chief Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said Gotovina's capture clears the way for Croatia to enter the EU. 
He, too, stressed that Karadzic and Mladic should be in custody. 
"The arrest of Gotovina is good news for the world, for bringing people to justice who are not yet convicted but who are accused of very serious crimes, and indeed I think it is also good news for Croatia ... 
Karadzic and Mladic should be at the Hague and not at large."
The United States also welcomed the arrest, saying that it strengthens Croatia's prospects for Euro-Atlantic integration. 
The government reiterated the call for the arrest and extradition of Karadzic and Mladic.
