09/02/2006
(AP, AFP, Reuters, FT, EUobserver, EUpolitix, EUROPA - 08/02/06)
Amid rising oil prices and a recent controversy over Russian gas imports, the European Commission (EC) adopted a strategy Wednesday (8 February) aimed at boosting the production of biofuels from agricultural raw materials.
The main goals set out in the paper are promoting biofuels inside the bloc and in developing countries, preparing for large-scale use of biofuels and supporting developing countries where biofuel production could stimulate sustainable economic growth.
Increased use of biofuels will, according to the EC, help reduce the 25-nation bloc's dependence on fossil fuel imports from Russia and the Middle East. 
Other expected benefits include a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, new opportunities for farmers and economic possibilities in several developing countries.
"There has never been a better moment to push the case for biofuels," said EU Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development Mariann Fischer Boel. 
"Crude oil prices remain high. 
We face stringent targets under the Kyoto Protocol. 
And the recent controversy over imports of Russian gas has underlined the importance of increasing Europe's energy self-sufficiency."
Biofuels, including bioethanol and biodiesel, are transport fuels produced from biomass feedstocks -- a renewable resource. 
Biofuels are a direct substitute for fossil fuels in transport and can be readily integrated into fuel supply systems. 
Up to 10 per cent of petrol can be made from ethanol without the need to modify vehicle engines.
According to Wednesday's paper, transport in the EU is responsible for an estimated 21 per cent of all greenhouse gas emissions that are contributing to global warming, and the percentage is rising.
The EU's Biofuels Directive of 2003 set out indicative, non-mandatory targets for member states, including a 2 per cent market share for biofuels in 2005 and a 5.75 per cent share in 2010.
"We are actually at this stage far from the targets set," said Fischer Boel. 
"The fact is today we are only able to deliver 1.4 per cent," she added, also voicing skepticism that EU governments would take action towards meeting the targets unless they were made mandatory. 
Brussels will consider the issue later this year when it reviews the underperforming Biofuels Directive, the commissioner added.
The EU's production of biofuels amounted to 2.4 million tonnes in 2004, including 0.5 million tonnes of bioethanol and 1.9 million tonnes of biodiesel. 
This equals approximately 0.8 per cent of EU petrol and diesel consumption.
At the same time, the EU is said to be the world's biggest energy importer, accounting for around 17 per cent of global energy use.
The EU Strategy for Biofuels adopted Wednesday builds upon the biomass action plan adopted in December, and has been developed along seven policy axes: stimulating demand for biofuels, capturing environmental benefits, developing the production and distribution of biofuels, expanding feedstock supplies, enhancing trade opportunities, supporting developing countries and supporting research and development.
"We need to stimulate the demand for biofuels,” Fischer Boel said. 
"I'm an impatient person, and I would like to see things moving more quickly."
According to EU Development Commissioner Louis Michel, an increased use of biofuels would also create potential opportunities for developing nations, especially those affected by the EU sugar industry reform. 
"Many developing countries are naturally well placed for the production of biofuel feedstocks," he said. 
"The expanding EU market for biofuels will provide them with new export possibilities."
