13/06/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 13/06/05
Southeast European Times:
What have Transparency investigations shown regarding the level of corruption in Macedonia?
Zoran Jacev:
Unfortunately, there are not enough investigations of corruption in Macedonia and those that have been made show corruption levels that an aspirant country for NATO and EU membership cannot allow itself.
In the past four to five years, the trends have been either negative or stagnating, despite recent efforts at suppressing corruption.
This is also confirmed by the position Macedonia has in the Corruption Perception Index which Transparency International prepares annually on a global level.
Since Macedonia was first included in the list, it has shown, with small variations, a constant downward trend:
we were 63rd in 1999 and the latest rating in 2004 saw us in 97th place.
SETimes:
How does Macedonia rank among countries in the region in terms of corruption levels?
Jacev:
The Corruption Perception Index for 2004 ranked Macedonia near the bottom of the list of countries in the region, followed only by Albania (108).
We shared 97th place with Serbia and Montenegro.
Romania (87) and Bosnia and Herzegovina (82) were slightly ahead, whereas Croatia (67) and Bulgaria (54) departed from other countries in the region, enjoying a position in the middle of the list.
Without intending to question the methodology of the CPI, I believe the difference in real corruption in those countries is not as great as the rankings suggest, and that the corruption levels are actually similar.
The difference is more in the progress those countries have made in developing anticorruption mechanisms (laws, services, procedures) -- that is, strengthening the immune system of the state so it will be able to fight corruption more effectively in the future.
Macedonia is still at the tail of the list among countries in the region because it lags in the development of an anticorruption system, though significant efforts have been exerted to this end in the past couple of years.
SETimes:
Do you think the government is taking the right steps in combating corruption?
Jacev:
There is a daily declarative wish of the government to suppress corruption.
But when we talk about realistic results, they are still more than modest.
Creation and maintenance of a stable anticorruption system requires a clear definition on the one hand, and gradual implementation on the other.
So far, this has been made without any elaborate study and has consisted of case-by-case practice without a clear and visible concept.
The proof is the lack of a single state-run strategy for suppression of corruption.
Therefore, fighting corruption has evident elements of selectiveness, dependence on political will and inconsistency.
Prevention of corruption has been insufficiently addressed.
Until that changes, Macedonia will always be in a position to remedy the consequences of corruption instead of preventing its occurrence.
There are ambiguities in laws, by-law acts, discretion powers of officials and other generators of corruption that have yet to be eliminated.
There is also a lack of clearly defined powers to confiscate properties acquired through corruptive conduct, which still makes corruption in Macedonia the most lucrative and low-risk activity.
SETimes:
Transparency was the first NGO to speak out publicly about this problem.
Is there any difference between then and now?
Jacev:
There is, and it is enormous.
One cannot compare the time when we started work -- three or four years ago -- and now because corruption was then hardly spoken about publicly.
In 2001-2002 most citizens (including close friends) thought we were naïve because they did not believe something could be done in this field, and they even advised us not to play with fire.
Fortunately, today’s debate on corruption and activities for its suppression are light years away from those times, but unfortunately they are also far from the desired situation.
There has been significant progress with the issuance of the Law on Preventing Corruption and the establishment of the Anticorruption Commission.
Prosecution (despite delays and deficiencies in procedures) of perpetrators of corruptive criminal acts has increased.
SETimes:
After a long period of waiting, court trials in corruption cases against former government officials have now been intensified and quickly resolved.
What accounts for this?
Jacev:
Domestic public opinion and international factors have rightfully criticised the judiciary for more than a year because of its unacceptable sluggishness and inefficiency.
The reasons lie in the lack of a merit system for evaluating the work of judges and courts, their responsiveness to political and corruptive influences, as well as lack of financial and tangible materials for work.
All this disables those judges who are professional and honest (the majority of the judiciary), hampering them from performing their duties in line with the regulations, and it suits those who want to profit from the inefficiency of the judiciary.
The situation has drastically changed since the US administration released the so-called "hit list" of judiciary cases delayed without justification.
The move has intensified court work, and they busily started to issue rulings -- proving that the judiciary has enough capacity to operate.
It has also shown that the system does not have enough independence in operation and that external influences can accelerate, slow down and even direct its work.
SETimes:
Are you satisfied with your participation in public debates on the government's intention to privatise Elektrostopanstvo na Makedonija?
Jacev:
In principle, we are satisfied with the course of the project, whose aim is opening a procedure for the privatisation of Elektrostopanstvo na Makedonija (ESM), the state-run power utility, to the wide and professional public.
We opted for such a move because no government that has tried to privatise ESM has done it in a transparent manner by clarifying the reasons for privatisation, its scope and model, as well as the anticipated effects.
We want to replace the debate held so far, which has been focused with "when" and "who" will privatise ESM with real questions -- "whether" and "how" to privatise the largest economic subject which is still owned by the state.
We have held three debates and one or two more remain to be organised, as well as training of journalists who cover the ESM privatisation process.
The effects of our involvement can be felt because the views of experts from our forums are taken into account and the government is considering possibilities for changing the privatisation model.
SETimes:
What are your perceptions regarding Macedonia’s responsiveness to GRECO guiding principles?
Jacev:
During the latest visit of GRECO officials to Macedonia, they stated that two more obstacles for implementation remain.
Implementation would mean that the country is complying with international anticorruption recommendations.
Successive governments have been co-operative in establishing measures proposed by the international factors, but specific results were still missing.
I believe it’s high time we moved to deeds from declarative commitment if we want to attract foreign direct investments and integrate into NATO and EU.
Without that, Macedonia will most likely end up in a kind of a "twilight zone" in the Balkans, together with Kosovo and Albania.
SETimes:
Do you think high officials in Macedonia are meeting their obligation to report their property?
Jacev:
The Law on Preventing Corruption anticipates declaration of property by officials when they assume or leave office as well as changes during their term.
Such a measure is more than necessary and is one of the best means of prevention of corruption if it is enforced consistently and unselectively.
As far as I am aware, officials have mainly complied with the measure so far, but if we want to achieve its true effects, we should increase the possibilities of checking up on the property situation.
We should update and computerise the records, strengthen the capacity of the Anticorruption Commission, which is in charge of monitoring this issue, and facilitate access to officials’ property records.
