09/02/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/02/06
Macedonia's ruling and leading opposition parties have made progress in ironing out the rules for the country's next parliamentary elections, despite continuing disagreement over some key issues.
In January, they agreed that the main opposition party would nominate the state election chairman.
The candidate must be acceptable to the ruling coalition, unaffiliated with any particular party, and a lawyer.
"The government submitted a draft election code, and the VMRO-DPMNE party had 12 objections," Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski said following a four-hour meeting last month.
"We agreed on nine of them."
The country's political parties are trying to reach a consensus on the election code ahead of this year's vote, which is seen as a crucial test of Macedonia's readiness to move forward on the path to EU membership.
Brussels has indicated that the start of membership talks is at stake.
Ensuring fairness and preventing irregularities are among the main concerns.
Proposed new amendments to the criminal code stipulate prison sentences of up to five years for anyone forging ballots or committing other types of election fraud.
The process of cleaning up the voter list -- viewed as a key source of problems -- is under way, with the aim of harmonising it with census information.
A special multiparty commission has been given the task.
According to opposition politicians, the number of non-existent voters included on the list could be as high as 100,000.
VMRO-DPMNE head Nikola Gruevski says the opposition and the government are still at odds over the inclusion of civil administration members on the election boards.
"We see this as an attempt to perpetrate forgery," he said.
Buckovski says the inclusion is reasonable.
"We have a sea of civil servants who can realistically be members of the election boards.
This is about people in the education and health security system that are respected in their environments and I see no reason for their not being included in the boards," he says.
One innovation in the upcoming vote will be the monitoring of party election staffs by the OSCE.
"Party leaders have a responsibility to ensure awareness at their local branches of conducting the elections in compliance with the standards," EU Representative for Macedonia Erwan Fouere said, explaining the need for the move.
