10/10/2005
(AP, Sofia News Agency, BNN, Focus News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Europol - 06/10/05)
Bulgarian and Austrian officials announced last week they had smashed a well-established international criminal network operating across Europe. 
Fiften suspected gang members, including Bulgarian, Serbian and Ukrainian nationals, were arrested during a joint operation by the two countries' law enforcement units, with assistance from Europol.
"We are proud that we supported our partners, co-ordinating this successful operation, which proves the importance and power of international co-operation," an Europol statement Thursday (6 October) quoted the agency's head, Max-Peter Ratzel, as saying. 
"This shows not only the importance and strengths of international co-operation, but also underlines the necessity of exchanging operative informations in order to detect international criminal networks."
The operation, carried out Wednesday by members of Bulgaria's National Service for Combating Organised Crime (NSCOC) and the Austrian Criminal Service, followed a five-month investigation into the group's activities, including forgery, money counterfeiting and money laundering.
More than 30 homes and offices in Bulgaria and Austria were raided on Wednesday. 
"Forged ID documents including passports, debit and credit cards as well as counterfeited Bulgarian ministerial documents have been seized," the Europol statement said. 
"In addition, firearms, synthetic drugs, counterfeit Euro banknotes, large amounts of cash and documents related to money laundering have been recovered."
NSCOC chief Major General Vanyo Tanov told reporters that eight of the suspects were arrested in Bulgaria. 
Seven were local citizens and the eighth -- the group's suspected leader -- was Dmitro Kara, an Ukrainian national. 
He was wanted by the Austrian authorities following a dramatic escape from custody in Vienna last spring. 
All will be tried in Austria.
According to Europol representative to Bulgaria Maurizio Varanese, the origin of the fake euros is still unknown. 
"The forged euros will be put to a technical expertise so that their source can be identified," he said.
The investigation is still ongoing and several international arrest warrants have been issued by Austrian authorities, the Europol statement said.
"This is an excellent result, which was only achieved because of the close co-operation between Europol, the Bulgarian Police and the Austrian Bundeskriminalmt," the statement quoted Austrian Bundeskriminalamt head Herwig Haidinger as saying. 
"This case is an example of professional and successful European police work."
