10/10/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times -- 10/10/05
Faced with an escalation in terrorist activities and spreading unrest, the Turkish government has drafted legislation intended to boost the power of security forces.
Parliament likely will consider the draft this fall.
The Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK), a banned organisation which is on US and EU blacklists of terrorist groups, said on Thursday (6 October) that it was calling off a temporary ceasefire and resuming its armed campaign.
"With the start of [EU accession] negotiations the Kurdish problem is no longer just Turkey's problem, it is now a basic problem of the EU," the PKK said in a communique.
Violence targeting civilians as well as military forces has been on the rise since June 2004, when the group announced it was resuming its attacks following a five-year lull.
The PKK's campaign has put pressure on the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, which has had to tackle the threat at a time when Turkey is attempting to bring its human rights situation into line with EU standards.
Searching for a way to reconcile these priorities, Erdogan's cabinet has been scrutinising anti-terrorism legislation in Britain, which has been drafting stiffer measures in the wake of the deadly July bombings there.
Turkey's Antiterrorism Supreme Board has convened for the first time since 1997, under the chairmanship of Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul.
The government's draft legislation reportedly defines terrorism broadly, covering any crime that targets the country's constitutional, political, legal, judicial, economic and social structure.
Anyone displaying the symbols or emblems of illegal organisations or producing propaganda on their behalf would be liable for prison terms ranging from two to five years.
Individuals could be banned from entering or living in a particular region, and even from inhabiting certain residential areas or a specific location.
Justice Minister Cemil Cicek insists the draft law is in line with EU standards, although human rights advocates say otherwise.
They have urged authorities not to sacrifice civil liberties in the quest for greater security.
"All articles restricting human rights in our laws have been excluded in recent years.
If the former articles are re-included, no one would accept this," said Attila Maras, spokesman for parliament's Human Rights Commission.
"The new act should not harm people's freedoms and rights.
We will examine the draft meticulously.
If we find any drawbacks or violations of human rights in it, we will raise questions about them," Maras said.
