10/10/2005
(AP, HINA, Xinhua - 09/10/05;
AFP, AP - 08/10/05)
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn congratulated Croatia on Sunday (9 October) on the opening of its EU accession talks and urged authorities to focus on meeting membership conditions.
The commissioner noted in particular the need to stay on the course of reform, to speed up the process of refugee returns and to improve minorities' rights.
He warned that the country could face a suspension of its accession talks if it fails to adhere to the bloc's principles and norms.
"If there is any serious and persistent breach of the rule of law or democracy or other core European values then negotiations can be suspended," Rehn said in an interview with Croatia's state television Sunday.
Croatia's EU entry talks were formally launched Tuesday after chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte said Zagreb is co-operating fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The process, originally scheduled to begin in mid-March, was put on hold due to Zagreb's failure to deliver a key war crimes fugitive to the UN tribunal in The Hague.
Retired General Ante Gotovina is wanted by the ICTY for his alleged role in the killings of 150 Krajina Serbs and the expulsion of thousands of others during the 1991-1995 ethnic conflict in Croatia.
He has been on the run since mid-2001.
At the start of his two-day visit Saturday, Rehn met with President Stipe Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader.
He voiced confidence that Zagreb would do everything in its power to track down Gotovina.
"I trust that Croatia also keeps its commitments, especially when it comes to maintaining full co-operation with The Hague tribunal, as long as the remaining indictee is brought to justice," Rehn said after talks with Sanader.
For his part, the Croatian prime minister has pledged that authorities will continue making strong efforts to locate Gotovina.
"Our firm commitment regarding full co-operation with The Hague tribunal remains," Sanader said.
Croatian news agency HINA quoted the prime minister as saying the screening process --which assesses how closely a candidate country's laws approach EU standards -- would begin on 20 October.
He voiced hope that some of the negotiating chapters would be opened soon and closed quickly.
Establishment of the rule of law, judicial reform and suppression of corruption are some of the key issues affecting Croatia's progress in the EU negotiations, according to a Croatian Parliament press release that followed Rehn's visit.
On Friday, Croatian Foreign and EU Integration Minister Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic met with NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer at Alliance headquarters in Brussels.
They focused on the progress achieved by Croatia on its road to NATO integration.
Grabar-Kitarovic presented the Croatian government's Membership Action Plan for 2005-2006, saying Zagreb has made every effort to bring its level of defence spending into line with NATO standards.
