07/11/2005
(AP, Blic, Tanjug, Serbian Government, Xinhua - 07/11/05;
AP, ITAR-TASS, RFE/RL, Beta - 06/11/05)
Kosovo's final status should be resolved through agreement and should not be imposed, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said in Belgrade Monday (7 November).
He is on a two-day tour of the region, with stops in Belgrade, Podgorica and Pristina.
The Kosovo issue ranks high on Lavrov's agenda.
Russia holds a permanent seat on the UN Security Council and is a member of the six-nation Contact Group for Kosovo.
It will thus play an important role in upcoming negotiations on the province's future.
On 24 October, the Security Council endorsed the start of status talks, and UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has appointed former Finnish President Martti Ahrisaari as his special envoy for the negotiations.
The EU and NATO, along with Russia and the United States, are expected to have one representative each, serving as Ahtisaari's deputies.
While legally part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been a de facto UN protectorate since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict there.
The majority of ethnic Albanians, who make up 90 per cent of the province's population of about 2 million, hope that the upcoming negotiations will lead to full independence from Serbia.
Serbia, meanwhile, has made it clear that it is ready to give the province "essential" autonomy, but wants to retain some control over it.
Serbia-Montenegrin Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, who met with Lavrov on Sunday, indicated that Belgrade seeks Russian backing for its negotiating stance.
"We expect from Russia as a permanent member of UN Security Council and member of the Contact Group to support our minimal and legitimate requests regarding Kosovo and Metohija, reflected in the formula 'more than autonomy, less than independence'," the Russian news agency RIA quoted Draskovic as saying.
On Monday, the top Russian diplomat met with Serbia-Montenegrin President Svetozar Marovic, Serbian President Boris Tadic and Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
He was scheduled to travel to Pristina later in the day to open the Russian chancellery there.
During his brief visit to the province's capital, Lavrov will meet with UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen and Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova.
He also is visiting Podgorica for talks with top Montenegrin officials on the future of the Serbia-Montenegro state union.
In addition to political issues, Lavrov is in the region to discuss economic co-operation.
According to ITAR-TASS, bilateral trade between Russia and Serbia-Montenegro totalled 1.06 billion euros during the first eight months of this year.
