09/01/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 09/01/06
Dragan Cavic, the president of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Serb entity, has insisted he will not withdraw the government's mandate despite its loss of parliamentary support.
Cavic, who heads the ruling Serb Democratic Party (SDS), also warned that his party would not participate in a new cabinet if the current one is removed.
The Republika Srpska (RS) government has been on shaky ground since the decision by the Party of Democratic Progress (PDP) -- led by Bosnian Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic -- to leave the ruling coalition and go into opposition ahead of autumn elections.
Following the rejection of its proposed budget for 2006, the SDS-led cabinet no longer appears to have enough strength to stay in power.
Nevertheless, Prime Minister Pero Bukejlovic has refused to resign, insisting that the budget impasse is the result of his fight against corruption.
"Do not expect the government to resign after these results.
That would be an irresponsible move that would help those who have made this crisis," Bukejlovic said.
The government, the entity's 10th since its formation, was elected 11 months ago.
It is composed of ministers from SDS and individual representatives of the Bosniak and Croatian communities.
Nine PDP parliament members had also supported Bukejlovic's cabinet.
Although the party did not have any ministers, it was given significant positions in public companies.
RS's strongest opposition party is the Union of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD).
Its leader, Milorad Dodik, has said a motion against the cabinet is imminent.
"We have enough votes to replace the current government and I expect that the new government will be elected by the end of this month," Dodik said.
Some analysts have argued that the political crisis was created ahead of the elections so that the cards could be dealt, in effect, before the vote.
Polls suggest that the SNSD stands a strong chance of gaining the mandate for a new government, provided it can obtain the support of PDP and several independent MPs who used to support Bukejlovic.
As a result of the budget impasse, RS institutions are now being financed according to the Resolution on Temporary Financing -- which is actually a copy of last year's budget.
Some 540m euros were planned for this year's budget, an increase of 9 per cent over last year.
