09/09/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 09/09/05
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has reconfirmed the bloc's intentions to start negotiations in October on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia-Montenegro. 
Speaking to reporters Thursday (8 September), he said the decision would be made at by the European Council at its 3 October session.
Serbia has made significant progress in fulfilling preconditions for the talks, including those related to co-operation with The Hague tribunal, Rehn said. 
At the same time, he urged authorities in Belgrade to do everything they can to arrest and extradite former Bosnian Serb warlord Ratko Mladic and to help with the arrest of Radovan Karadzic.
Rehn's comments came two days after a meeting between Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus and British Ambassador to Belgrade David Gowan. 
During a joint news conference Tuesday, both sides voiced optimism that the SAA talks would soon get under way.
"I expect the negotiations to kick off on 10 October," Labus said. 
Gowan also said he expects the talks to begin in October. 
But he added that EU ministers are waiting for Belgrade to "keep its promise" and see to it that Mladic and Karadzic are in The Hague by 5 October.
According to Gowan, the decision about launching negotiations depends on how well the criteria set in Copenhagen in 1993 have been met, as well as on the level of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Labus argued that while the arrest of Karadzic and Mladic is surely a condition for EU membership, it is not a prerequisite for the launching of SAA talks.
"This is a matter of process. 
We got a positive assessment of the feasibility study because we had made significant progress in co-operation with the ICTY, after which officials from Brussels told us that we should continue co-operating and we did just that. 
It is certain that all indictees will face the ICTY at the end of that process," Labus said.
Chief UN prosecutor Carla del Ponte, however, has come out firmly against the launch of SAA negotiations until Mladic is brought before the tribunal.
"This may seem as an unrealistic demand, but believe me it is not. 
It is primarily a thing of political will, and as we all know political will is influenced by pressure from the outside," del Ponte told a human rights conference in Switzerland on 1 September. 
"If the EU launched [SAA] negotiations on 5 October and Mladic was still at large, this would severely compromise any chance of that arrest happening in the near future. 
It could even be a 'pass' to lack of punishment," she said.
