09/01/2006
(Reuters, BBC, The Guardian, Independent, EUpolitix, EurActiv, EUobserver - 09/01/06; FT - 08/01/06; AP, AFP - 07/01/06; Bloomberg - 05/01/06)
The 25-member European Commission (EC) and top Austrian officials are holding a series of meetings in Vienna on Monday (9 January), marking the official start of Austria's six-month EU presidency, which it assumed from Britain at the beginning of this month. 
Issues including further enlargement and the future of the bloc's moribund constitution are expected to be the focus of discussions.
Ahead of the meeting, Austrian officials noted their determination to revive the constitutional process, which was put on ice after the majority of French and Dutch voters rejected it in referenda last year.
"We have promised ourselves that we will restart the negotiations on the constitution," Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schussel said Sunday. 
"We will not be able to resolve the matter entirely, that is clear. 
But we have made it our aim to present a progress report at the summit in June."
The constitutional treaty, which seeks to streamline the decisionmaking process within the Union and envisions the creation of a semipermanent presidency and a foreign minister, must be approved by all 25 member nations. 
Only 13 countries have ratified it so far.
Following the French and Dutch "no" votes last year, European officials have expressed different ideas regarding the proposed treaty. 
Some, including Schussel's deputy, Hubert Gorbach, view the constitution in its present form as dead and believe an entirely "different text" must be drafted. 
Others support the idea of "cherry picking" important advances envisioned in the original document and drawing up a new, less ambitious treaty.
"The constitutional process ... 
has slowed down over the last half-year and is now in a way covered with a blanket of snow and waiting for spring," Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik told reporters on Sunday.
Without specifying the steps her country plans to take, Plassnik suggested that Vienna would initiate a broad dialogue. 
The focus, Reuters quoted her as explaining, would be on issues such as the "finality" of European integration, further enlargement, the EU's response to globalisation and the place of democracy.
In an interview with the weekly news magazine Profil, Plassnik voiced support for the EU's further expansion to the east, stressing that the bloc should keep its commitment to the Western Balkans and ensure the continent is secured.
"No one can desire that a zone of unrest and uncertainty develops again between Italy, Slovenia and Greece," she said. 
"We cannot arbitrarily slam on the brakes at a certain time."
Austria's presidency will likely see a decision on whether Bulgaria and Romania's EU entry takes place as scheduled on 1 January 2007, or is delayed under a safeguard clause. 
Croatia and Turkey, meanwhile, have begun the process of accession negotiations, while Macedonia recently received official candidate status.
