09/09/2005
(AP, AFP - 08/09/05;
Reuters - 07/09/05)
NATO is unlikely to accept any new members before 2008, a senior US diplomat indicated Thursday (8 September).
"
We don't think that the candidates that are interested in that are ready yet," Kurt Volker, the US principal deputy assistant secretary of state for European and Eurasian affairs, said following talks at NATO headquarters in Brussels.
"If we were to try to reach a consensus in NATO on sending invitations to those countries this year or next year, there is no guarantee that they would make it.
They have more to do."
The United States has proposed that the focus of NATO's summit in 2006 be on the 26-nation bloc's transformation into a global security and political body, capable of coping with the new challenges and threats.
The issue of enlargement would be discussed at a summit in 2008.
At that time, the Alliance could extend membership invitations not only to the three Balkan nations, but also to former Soviet republics, such as Ukraine, as well as to some Middle Eastern and North African countries, the AP reported.
Several applicant nations, including Albania, Croatia and Macedonia, had been hoping to get membership invitations before the end of 2006.
While acknowledging that the possible postponement might be disappointing, Volker suggested it may strengthen their chances in the long run.
"By setting out a time period further down the line and giving them time to enhance their performance we think there is a realistic possibility that ...
they'll be much stronger candidates," he said Thursday.
"While it may be a disappointment for them, it's not so much a decision as an assessment of what is the lay of the land, what can be realistically achieved."
Albania, Croatia and Macedonia have each entered into "membership action plans" with NATO.
Under the plans, their membership bids depend on their capacity to fulfil their commitments to defence reform and democratisation.
Thus, the 3 July parliamentary elections in Albania were viewed as a major test of the country's adherence to democratic standards.
While the vote was "competitive and voters were provided with a diversity of information", the OSCE said in a statement on 4 July, it "complied only partially with international commitments and standards for democratic elections".
Similarly, reports of irregularities in the March local elections in Macedonia did not work in favour of its EU and NATO accesion prospects.
Both organisations have urged Skopje to make sure that flaws, such as stolen ballot papers and intimidation, do not happen in future polls.
A key condition for Croatia's aspirations to join both the EU and NATO is its full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, particularly the arrest and handover of retired General Ante Gotovina, one of the court's three most-wanted indictees.
