08/12/2005
By Georgi Mitev-Šantek and Davor Konjukušić for Southeast European Times – 08/12/05
After a one-month delay, in which the Serbian Parliament had to adopt the budget for the coming year, along with a package of reform laws that were agreed to by the government and the IMF, Serbia has received the sixth and final audit of the credit arrangement.
Serbian officials are now waiting for the meeting of the IMF Board of Directors in Washington at the end of January -- where the agreement should be concluded.
The first consequence would be the release of the sixth installment of $200m of credit, followed by the write-off of $700m of debt by the Paris Club.
The creditors made the write-off of the debt conditional upon the successful conclusion of the three year arrangement with the IMF.
Talks on the sixth audit were concluded abruptly at the end of October.
Chief of the mission to Serbia-Montenegro, Pirita Sorsa, left Belgrade saying that she needed parliament to legitimise what the government was promising.
Within 24 hours of the belt-tightening budget being passed -- along with laws that bring reforms to healthcare and limit salaries in the government sector -- Sorsa returned to Belgrade.
Now, the IMF Mission is heading to Washington with the promise that the Serbian 2006 budget will have a surplus of 3.6 per cent of the GDP, and that salaries in the public sector in 2006 cannot increase beyond 10.3 per cent.
Serbian officials voiced relief at the conclusion of this deal.
According to Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus and Minister of the Economy Predrag Bubalo, it was neither quick nor easy.
"To conclude the arrangement we had to resolve the issue of debts, to ensure economic growth greater than five per cent, to create a surplus in the budget, to embark on structural changes in the public sector and to initiate a new investment cycle," Labus said.
Although the almost concluded agreement is reaping praise, it was a struggle to get here.
During the process, officials grumbled that that IMF was "pressing too hard" and was "asking the impossible" for a country in transition.
However, the impossible always proved to be possible, as the government on several occasions cut the budget in line with IMF demands.
The two most recent reductions in public expenditure touched upon sensitive points of a post-socialist society -- the reform of the state pension system and healthcare insurance.
Legislation has been changed so that pensions can no longer increase beyond the inflation rate, while state healthcare will have to reduce its workforce by 7,000 employees.
The conclusion of the three-year agreement does not imply an end to Serbia's relation with the IMF.
If the agreement is finalised in January, the IMF will assume the role of a kind of auditor for planning and implementation of Serbian macroeconomic policy, as it does for other countries in the region.
