07/07/2005
(Blic - 07/06/05;
AP, Radio B92, HINA, SEE Security Monitor, Serbian Government - 06/07/05)
Croatian President Stipe Mesic and his Serbia-Montenegrin counterpart, Svetozar Marovic, agreed Wednesday (6 July) on the need for further efforts to resolve all problems left over from the 1991-1995 conflict.
These include refugee returns, missing persons and unresolved property issues.
"We must not close our eyes to those problems," Marovic said in Belgrade after his talks with Mesic.
Belgrade was the first stop on the Croatian president's three-day tour of Serbia-Montenegro, which also includes trips to Kosovo and Montenegro.
Starting a war is easy, but ending it is harder and dealing with its consequences is even harder, Mesic told reporters.
"Citizens of both countries must realise that we cannot be slaves to the past, and that we must turn to the future," the Croatian state news agency HINA quoted him as saying.
He also announced that he has invited Marovic to visit Croatia.
Referring to the war crimes committed during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s, the Croatian leader said that those who committed them should face justice either at home or at the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague.
While in Belgrade, Mesic also met with Serbian counterpart Boris Tadic.
Both leaders are scheduled to visit Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Monday for the commemoration of the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre.
Condemning the atrocities there, Mesic said that those who ordered the killings and those who carried them out should both be brought to justice.
"By saying that I am not playing down the crimes which happened in other places," he said.
"Every crime is a crime for itself and has no nationality."
For his part, Tadic said he would go to Srebrenica with reconciliation and regional co-operation on his mind, but thinking too about responsibility for all that happened on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
"War crime is the criterion by which I differentiate parties of the 19th century (when Balkan nationalism started) from parties of the 21st century and politicians and individuals who are for life in the 19th century from those who are for life in the 21st century," Tadic said.
The open issues between the former Yugoslav republics were the focus of Mesic's talks with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
According to a Serbian government statement, the two leaders agreed that bilateral co-operation "is of extreme importance for the stability of the entire region, as well as for shared European aspirations".
On Wednesday afternoon, Mesic and Tadic visited the northern city of Subotica for meetings with Croatian minority representatives and Serb refugees from Croatia, and to attend the celebration of the 15th anniversary of the founding of the Democratic Alliance of Vojvodina Croats.
Both presidents called on Croats living in Serbia and Serbs living in Croatia to be loyal to the countries in which they live.
"You, Croats, living in Serbia-Montenegro, must never forget that you have to remain loyal to the country in which you live," Mesic said.
"You also must not forget that you have the right to your own language, culture and religion.
I think the same when Serbs in Croatia are concerned."
