07/07/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 07/07/05
Only one third of Romania's more than 1,500 daily trains were in operation between 8 June and 30 June, as the result of a strike by engineers and train depot employees -- their longest since 1989. 
The workers were demanding a 10.7 per cent wage raise, 20 meal coupons every month and better working conditions.
Officials of the Romanian Railway Companies (CFR) made a counteroffer -- 10 meal coupons and more investments to improve working conditions, but no raise.
According to the rail companies and government officials, a salary hike was impossible due to losses in 2004 and a deal with the IMF. 
"The CFR companies have about 124m euros in debts and there is no money in the budget for wage increases in any event," said Transportation Minister Gheorghe Dobre.
The unions have rejected those arguments, saying that the money would be available if the transportation ministry properly collected its debts. 
In addition, two of the rail companies -- CFR Passengers and CFR Freight -- are turning a profit, the daily Averea quoted engineers' union head Voicu Sala as saying.
The strike resulted in direct losses of nearly 1m euros daily, according to the government, plus additional, hard-to-qualify indirect losses. 
More than 150,000 passengers had to find alternate means of transportation, and freight transport was hit hard.
"The strike made it very difficult to transport coal from the Jiu Valley. 
But some companies in the chemical industry also had problems in delivering external orders," said Economy Minister Codrut Seres during a press conference.
Some foreign investments also suffered. 
According to Ana-Maria Cristina, the chief of the Romanian Agency for Foreign Investments (ARIS), an Austrian businessman planning to develop a 300m-euro furniture factory is reconsidering his decision, claiming that the strike cost him more than 100,000 euros a day.
Not everyone is unhappy, however. 
Bus lines saw spectacular growth in their numbers during the strike. 
"We almost doubled the number of trips, raised fares a little and still the buses were packed," said Dumitru Toader, a driver for a Bucharest company.
The protest continued for three days after the 20-day strike deadline set by Romanian law expired, and was then ruled illegal by Bucharest judges.
Union leaders say they will continue the fight by suing CFR for violating the collective working contract. 
According to this document, the minimum monthly wage paid by rail companies should be 150 euros, but thousands of rail workers' salaries fall below that level.
At the same time, the administration insists the employees won't be paid for the 23 days they were on strike, and will sue them for the damages incurred.
