08/09/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 09/08/05
The IMF recently gave the go-ahead for a $73m stand-by arrangement for Macedonia over the next three years.
Besides approving the arrangement, the IMF Board of Directors also approved the first installment of $14.5m.
The arrangement provides funding for structural reforms in the health system, the judiciary and the labour market, as well as for improvement of the nation's business climate.
This includes establishing better fiscal and monetary policies with the objective of increasing economic growth and reducing poverty and unemployment.
In addition to the standby arrangement, Macedonia also anticipates approval of a three-year deal with the World Bank within the next two months.
For the first time, the country is in a position to have simultaneous arrangements with the two financial institutions, nicknamed the Bretton Woods Twins.
While economic experts say this sends an excellent signal to foreign investors, they also warn that the situation in Macedonia will not be rosy.
The country is undergoing major and protracted reforms, especially in the health sector.
The business sector also has to contend with tough monetary and fiscal policies and the fixed exchange rates of the Macedonian denar.
These encumber exports and the domestic investment climate.
Finance Minister Nikola Popovski, expressing his satisfaction with the IMF arrangement, said the government has met all the conditions for the standby.
"I am convinced the arrangements, when they end somewhere in late 2008, together with preparations the government makes for its EU candidacy, will make Macedonia better off and much better prepared for integration with Europe," he said.
At the same time, Popovski noted the importance of proceeding with the sale of the national power utility Elektrostopanstvo na Makedonija and the Negotino Thermal Power Plant (TEC Negotino), as well as of some residual shares the state holds in commercial banks.
These sales must be completed by March 2006, since by law, the state cannot sell off capital facilities less than six months prior to an election.
Parliamentary elections are expected in September 2006.
Authorities expect the foreign currency inflows from these sales to support the country's balance of payments.
In that case, there would no longer be a need to withdraw installments that would amount to $5m in the next period.
But economic experts urge caution.
The government, they say, must be sure to implement the policies and measures agreed on with the international financial institutions.
