08/02/2006
(The Irish Times - 08/02/06;
Reuters, AFP, BBC, VOA, UPI, Sofia News Agency, NetInfo - 07/02/06;
AP, AFP - 05/02/06;
AGI, HINA - 04/02/06;
Turin 2006 Official Web Site;
International Olympic Committee;
National Olympic Committees)
Three days before the opening of the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, International Olympic Committee (IOC) President Jacques Rogge praised Italy on Tuesday (7 February) for its efforts in organising the event.
"For the past seven years, the Italians have done everything possible to put the physical and human structures in place to guarantee the best conditions for the athletes," UPI quoted Rogge as saying.
The 17-day Games, closing on 26 February, will bring together 2,500 athletes from 85 countries, with 84 sets of gold, silver and bronze medals up for grabs in 15 sports disciplines.
Although Balkan countries are sending fewer than 100 athletes, at least some -- notably Croatia's Janica Kostelic -- stand a strong chance of taking home medals.
The events will take place at seven sites, including in Turin, Bardonecchia and Sestriere, which will also host the three Olympic villages.
Friday's opening ceremony is to be attended by 35,000 spectators inside the Olympic stadium in Turin.
This is just a fraction of the 1 million tourists and 2,300 representatives of the IOC, National Olympic Committees and Federations that organisers say will arrive in Italy for the Games.
"The opening ceremony on Friday, with the lighting of the Olympic cauldron, symbol of brotherhood among people, will be a moment full of emotion for us Italians, for sports people all over the world," Italian President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi said on Tuesday.
"I am confident that everyone -- citizens and institutions -- will work together in order to obtain the best performance from these Olympic Winter Games."
The opening ceremony will be attended by 15 heads of state and government;
46 sports ministers;
first ladies, including Laura Bush and Cherie Blair;
and royalty, including Spain's King Juan Carlos, Harald of Norway and Albert of Monaco.
To ensure the safety of athletes, guests and spectators, Italian authorities have stepped up security measures.
Some 15,000 police and military personnel will be in charge of security on the ground, while NATO surveillance planes handle the skies.
Three hundred snipers on skis will patrol the slopes and bomb-sniffing dogs will check spectators.
"We've taken on board that there's an extra danger out there and our attention will be that bit sharper," Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said in an interview Tuesday, referring to the Muslim riots following the publication of caricatures of the prophet Muhammad.
Italian Interior Minister Giuseppe Pisanu also has warned in recent months that Turin could become a potential target of terrorist attacks during the Games.
Despite protests during the journey of the Olympic Torch, Rogge was confident that the Games would be "wonderful" and "peaceful".
These Olympics will see a surge in anti-doping measures.
The IOC chief said there would be a 72 per cent increase in the number of drug tests taken during the Turin Games as compared to the 2000 Olympics in Salt Lake City.
A total of about 1,200 tests are expected.
In addition, there will be systematic blood tests for the first time and all samples will be kept for the next eight years, the BBC reported.
"Thousands of athletes will compete cleanly and fairly," Rogge said.
"We have a duty to put in place the strongest measures to trap the small minority who cheat."
