08/12/2005
(Dnevnik - 08/12/05;
Reuters, AFX, AP, Mediapool, Bulgarian Government - 07/12/05)
After a seven-year delay, US energy company AES and the Bulgarian government launched a project Wednesday (7 December), worth 1.1 billion euros, for the construction of a new thermal power plant in the Balkan country.
The new facility, to be built at the site of the Maritsa Iztok 1 power complex in southern Bulgaria, will have two units with a total capacity of 670 megawatts and desulphurising installations.
Construction is expected to begin next spring.
The first unit will start operating at the end of the third year and the second, six months later, the government said.
The plant, which will have a total capacity life of 40 years, is designed to fully meet both the Bulgarian and the EU technical and environmental requirements and standards.
Maritza East 1 is also expected to become the most modern and environmentally friendly lignite-fired thermal plant in Europe.
The project will help Bulgaria make up for the energy capacity it stands to lose by the closure of two 440-megawatt nuclear reactors at the Kozloduy nuclear power plant.
During its accession negotiations with the EU, the country agreed to shut down Kozloduy's Soviet-era units 3 and 4 before its scheduled entry into the Union in January 2007.
"This is the biggest investment in Bulgaria to date," Bulgarian Economy and Energy Minister Rumen Ovcharov said, after the signing of loan and commercial agreements in Sofia.
"It is an investment which will allow us to keep our position as the leading energy producer in the region."
AES will cover 30 per cent of the project cost.
The remaining 70 per cent, or 790m euros, will be covered by loans from four banks -- the EBRD, ING Bank, Calyon Bank and BNP Paribas.
Bulgarian banks will provide 45m euros.
"This financing really does allow the project to go forward to complete the construction," AES President and CEO Paul Hanrahan said in Sofia.
"The loan will be repaid through the revenues generated by the project."
Under a power purchase agreement AES signed with Bulgaria's National Electric Company on Wednesday, the Balkan country will buy the new plant's output at a fixed price for a period of 15 years.
In 2001, according to Bulgarian daily Dnevnik, the price was set at 3.9-4.5 US cents/kWh, but has subsequently been reduced by 14 per cent.
