08/09/2005
(OHR Morning Media Brief - 08/09/05;
SRNA, FENA, OHR - 07/09/05)
International community High Representative Paddy Ashdown has warned that the Serb Democratic Party (SDS) could face sanctions if it continues to block a deal on police reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), a key condition the country must meet to make progress on its path to European integration.
Unless an agreement is reached by 15 September, the country is unlikely to get the green light for opening talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU before the end of this year.
Officials representing the BiH government and the governments of the two entities, Republika Srpska (RS) and the Federation of BiH (FBiH), resumed talks on police restructuring in Sarajevo on Wednesday (7 September).
Although the three RS representatives in the talks -- Prime Minister Bukejlovic, Finance Minister Svjetlana Cenic and Interior Minister Darko Matijasevic -- are not members of the SDS, they were nominated to their posts by the party and have its backing.
"The RS representatives must change their position," Ashdown told the daily Dnevni Avaz ahead of the meeting.
Should the talks fail, he said, he will "clearly and unequivocally blame the SDS".
"Unless they table a proposal quickly which will be in line with the European principles it is only BiH that will not be with the rest of the Balkans -- on the road to Europe," Ashdown said."In this case, the RS will be identified as the party to blame and the international community will have to consider this fact very seriously.
The SDS will thus prove once again that it is the party of the past and of obstructionism".
According to local media reports, the talks so far have reached agreement only on setting up a unit for the implementation of police reform.
"Somebody calls this body a directorate, somebody else a working group, but its basic task is to prepare a plan for the implementation of the reform and relevant laws and regulations," BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic told journalists during a break in the talks.
Later, following the end of Wednesday's session, Terzic said the RS representatives would have until Monday for further consultations with the European Commission on the three key principles of police restructuring set by the EU.
These include transfer of police authorities to the state level, with police allowed to cross the entities' borders.
Brussels says these principles are non-negotiable.
The RS government, Terzic suggested, is trying to find a way to convince lawmakers in the Bosnian Serb parliament to accept the EU principles.
"On Monday we will have to say whether we are in favour of the agreement based on those three principles or not, because the deadline for Europe is running out," said Terzic.
