07/12/2005
(OHR Morning Media Brief - 07/12/05; AP, BBC, AKI, FENA, Radio B92, Xinhua - 06/12/05)
Italian Major General Gian Marco Chiarini assumed command of the EU peacekeeping force (EUFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Tuesday (6 December), as the EU mission marked its first anniversary there.
Chiarini replaces British Major General David Leakey, and is the second EUFOR commander since NATO handed over its peacekeeping duties in BiH to the EU in December 2004. 
This is Chiarini's second assignment in the Balkan country since 2003, when he served as the commander of NATO-led SFOR troops in Mostar.
Taking over command of the 6,500-strong EUFOR, the bloc's largest military operation to date, Chiarini said that BiH's future is in the EU and pledged to help the country on its path to European integration.
The handover ceremony -- held at Camp Butmir in Sarajevo -- was attended by EU security chief Javier Solana, the chairman of BiH's tripartite presidency Ivo Miro Jovic, presidency member Borislav Paravac and other officials.
Solana, who arrived for a two-day visit Tuesday, said Europe has made it clear to BiH that it can become an EU member -- it is now up to the country to prove that it wants and deserves it. 
BiH began talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU last month, a key first step towards eventual membership.
Solana also voiced confidence that the people of BiH want to see war crimes indictees -- particularly former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander Ratko Mladic -- face justice in The Hague. 
Solana added that the primary responsibility for their arrest lies with BiH authorities, or the country in which they are hiding.
Karadzic and Mladic, who top the Hague tribunal’s list of most wanted war crimes suspects, were indicted for their alleged involvement in actions during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH more than 10 years ago. 
Both face charges of genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. 
Karadzic is widely believed to be hiding in eastern BiH or in neighbouring Montenegro, while Mladic is said to be in Serbia.
Speaking to the BBC on Tuesday, Leakey said co-ordinated international action, including the closing of suspected hideouts and a crackdown on support networks, had made it virtually impossible for the two fugitives to move around freely, but that was not enough.
Leakey was sceptical about EUFOR's chances of arresting the pair anytime soon, especially if they prove to be hiding in Serbia-Montenegro -- which would put them out of the EU troops' reach. 
If that is the case, then it would be political, rather than military, support that Chiarini needs if he is to capture the two, Leakey added.
As for EUFOR's achievements over the past year, he cited ensuring peace and stability in BiH and helping the country make progress on its European path. 
EU peacekeepers have also assisted the country's efforts to fight organised crime and corruption and will continue to provide help in this area, Leakey said.
