07/12/2005
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 07/12/05
EU security chief Javier Solana said on Tuesday (6 December) that talks on Kosovo's future will not be easy. 
The negotiation "will be not just a simple walk", Solana said after meeting with Kosovo's negotiating team in the talks, which are being led by UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari. 
"It will have some difficulties, there will be moments of tension."
After a meeting Tuesday with UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen, Solana said that Kosovo is beginning a new chapter in its history -- requiring preparation and commitment.
He said a "new page" was being opened with the upcoming status talks, adding that the EU will provide assistance to the region. 
"You have started your journey ... 
and you can end up in Brussels," Solana said.
He said that he has made clear to the political leaders of Kosovo that the process is a political process, and said any violence would be unacceptable. 
"If any type of violence -- low level or high level -- restarts, than this will probably be the beginning of the end of the process. 
This is a political process that has to be done politically, with the intelligence of the people, by political means and no other," said Solana.
He also announced that UNMIK will stay in Kosovo to monitor the process, until the UN Security Council approves a new resolution.
In meeting with the negotiation team, Solana recommended that they work on improving living conditions for all citizens, and to continue standards implementation -- which will create more social welfare. 
"Regardless of ethnicity, [Kosovo citizens] should feel comfortable in this country. 
That it is why it is very important for the decentralisation process, which is related to standards, to be implemented adequately," said Solana, adding that he will visit Kosovo more often, to stay in touch with the process.
Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova also met with Solana, saying that an "independent Kosovo will offer full guarantees to members of minorities" in respect to human rights and freedoms. 
"I continue to insist on direct recognition of Kosovo independence." He added that an independent Kosovo would "peacefully integrate into the EU and NATO, [and maintain] a lasting friendship with the United States".
