05/08/2005
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 05/08/05
Last month, a senior figure from the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) took charge of the Committee for Security and Defence, a parliamentary body set up to oversee the work of the police and the Agency for National Security (ANS).
Dragan Kujovic, the deputy speaker of the Montenegrin Parliament, will head the body, which consists of 10 members from five political parties:
the DPS, the Socialist People's Party (SNP), the Social Democratic Party (SDP), the Serbian People's Party (SNS) and the People's Party (NS).
Two representatives of Albanian parties in Montenegro will also be joining, after parliament approves the planned enlargement of the committee.
The Democratic Serbian Party (DSS) has also requested a seat on the body.
The committee's first task was to hold hearings on the nomination of Dusko Markovic -- the choice of Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic -- as head of the ANS.
Despite an attempt by the opposition to block his appointment, he was confirmed by a parliamentary vote of 31-21 on 28 July.
The ANS has been the subject of an ongoing political row, with opposition parties arguing that it serves political interests.
Lawmakers from the opposition bloc decided to boycott the hearings on Markovic, on the grounds they were closed to the public.
Keeping the session closed was a sure sign that parliamentary control of the police and the ANS is being undermined, they charged.
The ANS doesn't guard national security, but rather Djukanovic's job security, said SNS Vice President Novak Radulovic.
NS deputy Dejan Vucicevic, meanwhile, voiced doubts about the administration's readiness to carry out police reform, saying that it was all too clear who the ANS really represents.
The DPS rebuffed the opposition's accusations, arguing that the stability and security Montenegro enjoys is in no small part due to the State Security Service, which was headed by Markovic.
Kujovic also denies that the ANS is beholden to a specific party, insisting that it will protect the interests of all citizens.
Parliament will do its utmost to maintain authority over Montenegro's security services, he said, and the committee will keep the public informed about the crucial transformations that are under way.
