07/09/2005
(Blic - 07/09/05; US Department of State, OSCE, AP, Beta, Radio B92 - 06/09/05)
Serbia-Montenegro must accelerate the implementation of political and economic reforms and strengthen the rule of law in order to facilitate its faster integration into Euro-Atlantic structures, a US diplomat said Tuesday (6 September).
Addressing a special session of the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna, the US permanent representative to the organisation, Julie Finley, also stressed the need for Serbia-Montenegro to co-operate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and hand over former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic.
"Until General Mladic appears in The Hague, the United States cannot support Serbia for membership in (NATO's) Partnership for Peace" programme, Finley said. 
"The need for courage and political will to address war crimes issues applies not only to ICTY co-operation, where the final steps should be taken without further delay, but also to domestic prosecution and trial of persons suspected of war crimes."
Finley also stressed the need for further progress in southern Serbia, particularly in the areas of economic development and the integration of minorities into state institutions. 
"Similarly, we appeal once again to Belgrade to facilitate, rather than to block, the participation of ethnic Serbs in the provisional institutions of self-government in Kosovo as well as their involvement in deliberations on decentralisation," the US diplomat said.
Finley's speech came in response to remarks to the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna by Serbia-Montenegro's Foreign Minister, Vuk Draskovic, concerning Kosovo's prospects.
"In Belgrade, we cannot envisage an agreement about the future status of Kosovo being reached without negotiation," said Draskovic. 
"But we are open for compromise, compromise, compromise, and we are for unconditional dialogue."
In her address, Finley restated Washington's principal position that the status quo in Kosovo is neither sustainable, nor desirable. 
"It satisfies no one and leaves open the possibility of renewed violence," she said. 
No matter when the talks on Kosovo's future will begin, she added, the United States will remain actively involved throughout the negotiation process.
Along with the other five nations in the Contact Group for Kosovo -- Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Russia -- the United States rules out any return to the relationship that existed between Serbia-Montenegro and Kosovo in 1998 and 1999, Finley said, adding that Washington also opposes any partition of the province or changes to its territory.
"Beyond that, we do not favour any specific outcome of the talks. 
Our role, and that of the international community, should be to facilitate a process to arrive at a future status for Kosovo," Finley said.
In comments made the same day, British Ambassador to Belgrade David Gowan urged authorities in Serbia-Montenegro to "fulfil their promise" and arrest Mladic and former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic by 5 October, when Serbia-Montenegro expects to begin talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Brussels.
Gowan, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, told reporters in Belgrade that the start of talks depends on the fulfillment of requirements set by the Union, including full co-operation with the ICTY.
"If this issue is resolved, it will have a vast positive impact on talks between Serbia-Montenegro and the EU, but if, as autumn goes by, the matter is not resolved, it will certainly adversely affect relations between Serbia-Montenegro and the EU," Gowan said.
