05/08/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 05/08/05
Hopes that one of the UN war crimes tribunal's top indictees, Radovan Karadzic, may soon be arrested or turn himself in were buoyed last week by an unexpected statement from his wife. 
In an interview broadcast on television around the region, Ljiljana Zelen-Karadzic pleaded with him to surrender, saying the pressure was becoming too much for the family.
Her message was welcomed by officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as by representatives of the international community.
"There is no alternative to the arrest of top fugitives," said Republika Srpska President Dragan Cavic. 
"If Karadzic doesn't hand himself over, he will be arrested. 
It is painful but without it we will still have a political problem that will escalate."
The Bosnian Serb entity's future, Cavic stressed, depends largely on co-operation with the UN tribunal. 
BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic, meanwhile, called on Karadzic to "obey his wife's wish and make life easier for all of us".
BiH wants to join NATO's Partnership for Peace programme, but cannot until it meets a major political precondition -- the handover of Karadzic and other indictees.
International community High Representative Paddy Ashdown says all those indicted for war crimes must face justice.
"Ljiljana Karadzic's plea represents a clear fact which is in the best interest of her husband, the Serb people and stability of the whole region," he added.
EUFOR peacekeepers and the NATO Headquarters in Sarajevo (NHQSa) also welcomed the move by Karadzic's wife, while stressing that they will continue to pursue all fugitives wanted by the UN tribunal.
"We will continue to agressively search for him and we will do all we can to make life difficult for all fugitives and person who support them," said EUFOR spokesman Tom Rayll.
"We are hoping that Mr. 
Karadzic did hear the plea and we are expacting he will respond to that," said NHQSa spokesman Derek Chappell. 
"I think that this clearly shows how isolated Karadzic in fact is now. 
Obviously there are not so many people left that support him. 
It is really time for him to hand himself over now."
The UN tribunal in The Hague indicted Karadzic 10 years ago, charging him with multiple counts of war crimes for his role in the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH. 
He also faces two counts of genocide in connection with the 43-month siege of Sarajevo and the 1995 Srebrenica massacre.
