07/02/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 07/02/06
At a meeting with Serbia-Montenegrin and Serbian officials on Monday (6 February) in Belgrade, Hague chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte said that the arrest of the six remaining fugitives -- especially Ratko Mladic -- is a priority in terms of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Del Ponte warned that she would urge the EU to suspend talks with Serbia-Montenegro unless it acts to meet its international obligations. 
She requested that Hague investigators be allowed to access Serbia-Montenegro state archives -- primarily military documents concerning Mladic and other indictees.
Allowing access to this documentation would indicate "Serbia-Montenegro's clear commitment to full co-operation with The Hague tribunal", she said.
According to federal Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic, who also chairs the state union's council for co-operation with the ICTY, the Serbian government will approve the decision to let Hague inspectors access the archives this week.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica told del Ponte that Serbia is determined to co-operate fully with the international court. 
Significant progress has been made already, and the job must be finished, he said.
After talks with Serbia-Montenegrin Defence Minister Zoran Stankovic, del Ponte asked authorities to present "concrete results" of co-operation, saying that promises of implementation are not enough. 
She noted that since April 2005, none of the accused had been sent to The Hague.
Stankovic said he believes there are conditions for continued ICTY co-operation, and said details of a military security report on former army members who had helped Mladic until 2002, were made accessible to del Ponte.
Commenting on why the names of individuals listed in the report -- delivered to officials last week -- were not made public and why they were not arrested, Stankovic said the findings must first be examined, then arrests made based on the information collected.
At a meeting with Serbian Special War Crimes Prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic, del Ponte praised the work the prosecutor's office has done so far and supported the institution's further activities. 
According to Belgrade media, Vukcevic could be named head of a special team formed to locate Mladic.
Del Ponte left Belgrade for Sarajevo, where she will meet with the international community's new High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Christian Schwarz-Schilling.
