06/09/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 06/09/05
Bulgaria is a stable, reliable and solid partner of NATO, the Alliance's secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, said Friday (2 September) in Sofia after talks with Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov.
He voiced confidence that Bulgaria's new government would continue the policy of active participation in NATO-led international missions, and urged it to press ahead with vital defence reforms.
After joining NATO in April 2004, Bulgaria set aside nearly 800m euros for measures intended to bring its army into line with Alliance standards.
The modernisation of the army is scheduled to be completed by 2015.
Speaking at a joint press conference with de Hoop Scheffer, Parvanov pledged that implementation of reforms would stay on track.
The new government, he said, would continue allocating considerable resources towards this end.
Besides promising his country's further participation in NATO-led international missions, Parvanov also expressed Bulgaria's readiness to play an active role in policy dialogue and in the Alliance's political and military transformation.
During his meeting with de Hoop Scheffer, Parvanov says he stressed the need for NATO to keep its doors open for other countries -- particularly Albania, Croatia and Macedonia, which "are quite close to membership in the Alliance".
He also thanked NATO for the assistance rendered in the wake of this year's devastating floods.
In addition to his talks with Parvanov, de Hoop Scheffer also met with the new Bulgarian prime minister, Sergey Stanishev.
"NATO is a pillar of stability for our country, and Bulgaria is a consistent and reliable partner and will stick to the fulfilment of its commitments as a NATO member state," Stanishev said.
While in Bulgaria, the NATO chief also attended the Alliance's Co-operative Key 2005 military exercise at the Krumovo airbase near Plovdiv.
Co-operative Key 2005, which ran from 25 August through 4 September, is a major live-flying exercise, designed to allow the air forces of NATO, Partnership for Peace and Mediterranean Dialogue nations to practice and refine interoperability in air and limited land operations in support of crisis response and peacekeeping.
Thirty nations, including all those in the region, participated in the exercise, joined also by international organisations such as the UNHCR and the Red Cross.
A total of about 1,650 service members and more than 60 aircraft were involved in this year's exercise, conducted in Bulgaria for the third time since 2001.
