07/02/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 07/02/06
Visa relief, more scholarships for students, a regional school of public administration and a free trade zone in Southeast Europe (SEE) are among a set of proposals put forward by the European Commission in a report published on 27 January.
While SEE countries have welcomed most of the ideas, the envisioned free trade zone has generated controversy.
Visa relief -- a key concern in many Balkan countries -- will be negotiated with each country separately, starting with Macedonia, the EC said in the report, titled "The Western Balkans on the road to the EU:
Consolidating stability and raising prosperity".
The initial steps, the EC said, will include relaxing application procedures, eliminating visa issuance fees and authorising multiple entry.
During the first phase, these privileges will apply to students and scholars.
The EC is also calling for the establishment of a local border traffic regime at the external borders of EU member states.
Residents of border regions, including along EU borders with Western Balkan countries, could be authorised to cross the border with a local border traffic permit, without requiring a visa.
Formal adoption of the proposal by the European Parliament and the Council is expected this month.
Another key proposal -- to set up a regional free trade zone -- has been criticised by Croatia, which claims that it could lead to a restoration of Yugoslavia, minus Slovenia but including Albania.
The proposed South East European Trade Agreement would be meant to replace the existing Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), which includes Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania.
Two of the members, Bulgaria and Romania, will be leaving the organisation once they join the EU.
Macedonia is in the final phase of entering CEFTA.
As an alternative to creating a new zone, Croatia has floated the possibility of expanding CEFTA.
The EU and the Stability Pact have been receptive to the idea, while cautioning that CEFTA's 15-year-old trade regulations will need to be upgraded.
The EC's proposal, says Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska, is not about setting up a customs union, but about fostering free trade.
Whether through CEFTA or some other agreement, it should benefit everyone, she added.
The EC report suggests other assistance measures as well.
The Commission is extending the process of small enterprises managed under the European Charter for three years -- this year it is expected to bring in 60m euros.
The funds will be allocated to the recently established European Fund for Southeast Europe.
Additionally, the number of scholarships for students and post-graduates and scholars will increase, and a Regional Higher Education and Public Administration School will be launched.
