31/05/2010
ANKARA, Turkey -- The foreign ministry announced on Monday (May 31st) that Israeli commandos have attacked six ships carrying mostly Turkish pro-Palestinian activists on an aid mission to the Gaza Strip, killing more than ten people and wounding dozens. 
Media outlets with journalists onboard the Turkish vessel leading the group said Israeli forces fired at the ship and boarded it overnight, seizing other ships in the flotilla. 
But Israeli security officials tell a different story, insisting pro-Palestinian activists fired on the Israeli forces and then attacked them with knives and iron rods. 
Turkey says the bloody clash may result in "irreparable consequences in our bilateral relations. 
We firmly reject these inhumane actions of Israel. 
This incident in open sea is an obvious violation of international law."
Turkey is asking that the UN Security Council hold an emergency session on the situation. 
Ankara is also withdrawing its ambassador to Israel and is cancelling all military exercises with the country, as is Greece, which has nearly three dozen citizens onboard one of the ships. 
Both Turkey and Greece summoned the Israeli ambassadors Monday for explanations. 
Turkish media reported that police prevented dozens of rock-throwing protesters from storming the Israeli consulate in Istanbul.
Bulgarian media reported that a journalist and a cameraman from local channel bTV were arrested by the commandos. 
The EU is calling for an inquiry and the "immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of the crossing for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza". 
EU ambassadors are to meet later Monday to discuss the situation. 
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon expressed shock over the raids and urged Israel to provide a full explanation. 
League of Arab States Secretary-General Amr Musa said that the organisation would hold an emergency meeting Tuesday to discuss Israel's "terrorist attack". 
Palestinian President Mahmud Abbas described the raid as a "massacre" and announced a three-day mourning period for the victims.
In Washington, the White House said it is "working to understand the circumstances surrounding the deadly raid".
Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Daniel Ayalon accused the flotilla organisers of having ties to a terror group and described their action as a provocation, adding that Israeli forces found weapons onboard. 
At the same time, he said his country regrets the loss of life. 
(Zaman, DPA, Imerisia, AFP, Ta Nea, News In, Hurriyet, Ynetnews, NTV, Al Jazeera, AFP, CNN Turk, NBC, BBC - 31/05/10)
