07/02/2006
(AP, AFP, RFE/RL, DTT-NET, Xinhua, SEE Security Monitor - 06/02/06; AFP, AKI, DTT-NET - 03/02/06)
Montenegro's Parliament was due to meet for a special session on Tuesday (7 February) to determine the date of the republic's independence referendum. 
But President Filip Vujanovic decided on Monday to put off the debate, to give the ruling and opposition parties more time for talks on the terms of the plebiscite.
"The session was postponed for a week but the precise date has not been determined yet," the AFP quoted presidential adviser Radmila Buric as saying Monday.
Vujanovic's decision followed a request for a delay by EU special envoy Miroslav Lajcak, who is mediating talks on the terms of the vote.
Following the secession of Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia in the early 1990s, Montenegro is the only former Yugoslav republic still tied to Serbia. 
An EU-brokered agreement of February 2003, establishing the state union of Serbia-Montenegro, stipulated that either of the member states could opt out of the union after a three-year period.
The plebiscite, which is expected to be held in April, could lead to the emergence of a new independent state in the Balkans. 
Forty-one per cent of respondents in a recent survey in Montenegro said they favour independence, while 32 per cent opposed it and 25 per cent said they were undecided.
While acknowledging Montenegro's right to hold a referendum, the EU has stressed the need for clear rules, leaving no room for doubt over its legitimacy or outcome.
One of the most contentious issues is the specific majority that will be required for a "yes" vote on independence to succeed.
Montenegro's elections law does not stipulate a specific voter turnout requirement and its law on referendums reportedly states that the decision is to be taken by a majority vote of those citizens who take part in the poll.
The republic has a population of 650,000, including 440,000 eligible voters.
The opposition insists that Montenegro should only leave the state union if at least 50 per cent of all registered voters back independence. 
It has threatened to boycott the vote if its demand is rejected.
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic maintains that approval by 30 per cent to 40 per cent of eligible voters should suffice.
