06/12/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/12/05
After talks with Serbian officials in Belgrade, EU security chief Javier Solana said the moment will come, in relations between Serbia-Montenegro and the EU, when the full realisation of co-operation with the tribunal will become necessary. 
Solana added that certain progress had been made, but stressed that "co-operation is not full."
During his visit to Belgrade Monday (5 December), Solana met with Serbia-Montenegrin President Svetozar Marovic, Serbian President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, Serbia-Montenegrin Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic and Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, and Montenegrin opposition Socialist People's Party leader Predrag Bulatovic.
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte wants Belgrade to extradite several indictees -- chief among them Bosnian Serb General Ratko Mladic. 
Serbia-Montenegrin Defence Minister Zoran Stankovic, in Washington on Monday, said that "based on the latest checks, it is improbable that Mladic is hiding in any military facility". 
He added, however, that if this turns out to be the case, Mladic will be arrested and handed over to The Hague tribunal.
Solana said that the EU would fully co-operate with the UN Secretary General's special envoy for Kosovo status talks, Marti Ahtisaari. 
He stressed that co-operation between Belgrade and Pristina "is of essential importance". 
Solana said the protection of minorities, religious and cultural heritage and the issue of standards would "be the essential segment of the talks".
He also said that, in talks with Montenegrin authorities and the opposition, he had the impression that after the Venice Commission provides its report by the end of the month, a dialogue could be launched between the government and the opposition concerning conditions for organising Montenegro's independence referendum.
According to Solana, the EU offered to be a mediator in the dialogue --providing the two sides consented -- to agree on the best conditions and time for holding the referendum.
Vujanovic and Djukanovic told Solana that authorities would organise a referendum on the state's status that meets with international standards, with respect for the suggestions of "partners" from abroad and pays "full attention" to strengthening regional stability.
