06/12/2005
(AP, Reuters, DTT-NET, Radio B92, OSCE - 05/12/05)
US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns has indicated that Washington will not support a solution to the Kosovo status issue implying a division of the province along ethnic lines, or a change of its current borders.
"We do not believe partition [of Kosovo] could be a solution," the AP quoted the senior US diplomat as telling Slovene daily Delo in remarks published Monday (5 December). 
"We are opposed to that. 
We oppose any change to the borders of Kosovo. 
We oppose changes of borders in the Balkans in general."
While technically part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been a de facto UN protectorate since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict there. 
Viewing that status quo as no longer viable or acceptable, the international community has launched a political process aimed at determining the province's final status. 
Former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, who was appointed UN special envoy for the Kosovo status talks in October, began shuttle diplomacy through the region last month ahead of the negotiations process, which is expected to kick off in January.
The Kosovo Albanians, who constitute the vast majority of the province's 2 million population, are pushing for full independence from Serbia, while Belgrade wants to retain some sovereignty over Kosovo.
The EU and the Contact Group for Kosovo, including Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, have ruled out a return to the pre-1999 situation.
The United States, which last week appointed Frank Wisner -- a high profile, career diplomat -- as its special envoy for Kosovo status, is expected to play a key role in the UN-led negotiations.
Expressing Washington's full support for Ahtisaari, Burns noted that the people most concerned about Kosovo's future should be the ones to decide its final status. 
In his remarks to Delo, he stressed that "the only people who can make a decision on the future of Kosovo are the people who live there: the Kosovo Albanians, the Kosovo Serbs as well as the Serbian government, of course." But, given the fact that the Kosovo Albanians account for 90 per cent of the province's population, "their views have to be listened to and respected," the US diplomat added.
Burns is currently in Ljubljana for the OSCE's two-day 13th Ministerial Council, which ends Tuesday and is attended by more than 40 foreign ministers from the organisation's 55 member nations.
Addressing the forum Monday, Serbia-Montenegrin Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic said "I hope that agreement will be reached in the negotiations on the future status of Kosovo to the effect that the status be humane and European, with the highest respect for the rights of both the Albanian majority and non-Albanian minorities, of Serbia and of the entire region. 
I trust and believe that the OSCE will make an important contribution to the achievement of such a solution."
From the sidelines of the forum, Draskovic also warned that a move to give Kosovo independence would encourage separatist sentiments elsewhere and would jeopardise stability in the region. 
He also reiterated the position maintained by Belgrade as regards the best possible solution: the formula of "more than autonomy, less than independence".
"Kosovo can have independent representation internationally, everywhere except at the UN and other organisations that stand for state sovereignty," said Draskovic.
