06/09/2005
(AP - 05/09/05; SEE Security Monitor - 04/09/05; AFP - 03/09/05; Wikipedia)
After eight years in opposition, Democratic Party (DP) leader Sali Berisha is set to return to power this week, two months after his party's victory in the 3 July parliamentary elections. 
The 60-year-old cardiologist was officially nominated Saturday (3 September) as the country's new prime minister. 
On Monday, he announced the members of his proposed coalition cabinet, which includes representatives of four other parties as well as the DP.
President Alfred Moisiu is expected to ask MPs to vote on Berisha's government later this week, according to presidential spokeswoman Aferdita Sokoli. 
Berisha's DP and its allies -- the Agrarian Environmentalist Party (AAP), the Republican Party (RP), the Reformed Democratic Party (PDR) and the Union for Human Rights Party (UHRP) -- control 81 of the 140 seats in the newly-elected parliament.
As he had pledged earlier, Berisha has reduced the number of ministries from 19 to 14. 
The proposed cabinet will include one deputy prime minister -- lawyer Ilir Rusmajli. 
One of the key members will be the former Albanian ambassador to Paris, writer Besnik Mustafaj. 
He is expected to head the foreign ministry.
At least five of his proposed ministers are in their thirties. 
The interior ministry, a merger of the current public order and local government ministries, will be headed by Sokol Olldashi, 32. 
The current ministries of territory and tourism and of culture, youth and sports will be merged to form the ministry of culture and tourism, to be run by Bujar Leskaj, 39.
Arenca Troshani, a 32-year-old lawyer, is expected to be appointed integration minister, while Aldo Bumci, 31, becomes minister of justice. 
The transport and telecommunications ministry will be headed by Lulzim Basha, 31.
The finance ministry will be run by Ridvan Bode, and the agriculture ministry by Jemin Gjana. 
The current economy, energy and trade ministries will merge into a single body, to be led by Genc Ruli as economy minister. 
Maksim Cikuli will take over the health portfolio.
The DP's coalition partners will get one ministerial seat each. 
The defence ministry will be run by RP leader Fatmir Mediu. 
The ministries of environment and education will be led by the AAP's Lufter Xhuveli and the RDP's Genc Pollo, respectively. 
Kosta Barka of the UHRP will be in charge of the ministry of social affairs and equal opportunities.
During the campaign, Berisha pledged to speed up reforms needed for EU and NATO integration, to fight corruption and mass poverty, and help small business.
"The priority for my government is the fight against corruption, organised crime and poverty," Berisha told the AFP on Saturday. 
"Albania's main challenge is integration into the EU and NATO," he said, voicing confidence that his country "will be a factor of peace and stability in the region"
