05/09/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/09/05
Montenegro's leading police operative, Slavoljub Scekic, was gunned down outside his home in Podgorica on 30 August. 
The assassins waited for Scekic in the darkness of a neighbouring house and killed him with several shots to the back from automatic weapons.
The public has been deeply shaken by the murder. 
Authorities pledged they would quickly arrest the killers, while NGOs and experts have expressed their concern over public safety.
Dozens of individuals have been detained and questioned by police, though no one has been named a suspect. 
Police also found a jeep thought to have been used by the killers to flee the crime scene. 
However, it was blown up before an examination could take place.
Scekic is the third senior Montenegrin police official killed in the last five years. 
Presidential adviser Goran Zugic died in a 2002 attack, while Montenegrin State Security official Darko Raspopovic was assassinated in 2001. 
In all three cases, gunmen ambushed the victims at the doorsteps of their own homes.
At the time of his death, Scekic was investigating a number of cases, including the bomb attacks on the Splendid Hotel earlier this summer. 
According to media reports, Scekic had discovered the attacks on the coastal hotel occurred after the owner refused to pay 2.5m euros in protection money to a crime racket. 
Two suspects were arrested and remain in detention.
According to the late inspector's brother, however, Scekic's murder is more likely to have been connected with the inquiry into the assassination of Dusko Jovanovic, the owner of the pro-opposition daily <I>Dan</I>.
Speaking on Saturday (3 September), Zoran Scekic told Podgorica media that his brother told him he had discovered who ordered the hit. 
He added, however, that Scekic had not mentioned any names.
Police experts have termed the story plausible, expressing concern that criminals are gaining access to criminal investigations.
"Information was leaking from the police, which indicates that a part of the police structure is connected to the underground," expert Marko Nicovic told Podgorica media.
Opposition politicians, meanwhile, are accusing the government of being helpless in the face of organised crime. 
"This proves that criminals can do whatever they want in Montenegro and are more powerful than state institutions," said People's Party president Predrag Popovic.
