05/09/2005
(Blic - 05/09/05; Beta, Tanjug - 04/09/05; AP, Reuters, Radio B92, Makfax - 02/09/05)
Revelations about a package of controversial military equipment contracts have led to calls for Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic's resignation. 
Under the deals, the government would have to fork out 296m euros for the purchase of gear exceeding the needs of the Serbia-Montenegrin Army, paying highly inflated prices.
Davinic must step down at once, as he is responsible for the present situation in his ministry, Serbia-Montenegro Parliament Speaker Zoran Sami said Sunday (4 September). 
Calls for his resignation have also come from Serbian President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
"Life in Serbia is too difficult today to allow anyone to spend even a single dinar, never mind 300m euros, if it's not the utmost necessity and in the essential interests of the country," Kostunica said.
A statement issued by the Serbian government said the deals could "inflict immeasurable damage" to the Serbia-Montenegrin Army, as well as to Serbia-Montenegro and Serbia, and should be cancelled immediately by the federal Council of Ministers.
On Friday, Davinic was expelled from G17 Plus, a member of the ruling coalition. 
"By the abuses and offences he has committed, Prvoslav Davinic has disqualified himself as a person capable of carrying out any duty in a serious and democratic state," the party said in a statement.
According to Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic, a leading G17 Plus figure, the 5-year equipment contracts were signed with local businessman Mile Dragic's company. 
They envision the purchase of about 74,000 helmets and 69,000 flack jackets for the country's 28,000-strong army and of about 500 pilot jackets for an air force of less than 30 planes.
After originally saying he would leave his post, the minister has since reversed his decision, saying he would resign only after the accusations against him have been "clarified".
According to a report Belgrade-based daily <I>Blic</I> carried Monday, the Serbian-Montenegrin Council of Ministers made the decision for the purchase of the equipment during a teleconference.
"At that telephone session of the council of ministers held in August by (Serbia-Montenegro Prime Minister) Svetozar Marovic, nothing was mentioned about the value of the contract and the kind of equipment for the army," the paper quoted a member of the council as saying on condition of anonymity. 
"It was only mentioned that the equipment was necessary, that it was a request by the Serbia-Montenegrin Army headquarters, and that the request should be accepted. 
We all understood this as a pure formality."
The army, however, said that it had only learned about the contract from the media and did not even have copies of the contracts.
Claiming to have seen the contracts, Blic revealed some price details Friday, showing them as much higher than those on the international market. 
The prices for bulletproof vests, for example, were between 1,664 euros and 1,928 euros per piece, while they could be obtained for between 490 and 800 euros on the European market. 
Serbia would also have to pay Mile Dragic's company 250 euros per helmet, while it could buy it from neighbouring Macedonia for only 150 euros a piece.
A former company official claimed that, under an earlier contract worth about 100m euros, the Serbia-Montenegrin Army had already obtained equipment sufficient for 50,000 soldiers.
