05/01/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 05/01/06
A law on protection against smoking went into effect in Macedonia on 1 January, with rigorous penalties for noncompliance.
The law was passed in June 2005, but enforcement was delayed for half a year to allow enough time for adjustments.
The law prohibits smoking on public premises such as schools and other educational institutions, health and welfare institutions, Internet cafes, government buildings, companies, stores and facilities -- both outdoor and indoor -- for sports, culture and entertainment.
Smoking on stairs in building and lifts is also prohibited.
Smoking in restaurants and cafes is still allowed, but only in separate rooms.
Those who violate the law and smoke in a public place will now be subject to severe fines, ranging from 85 euros to 225 euros.
Companies and public institutions face fines ranging between 1,600 euros and 4,000 euros if they fail to comply with the law.
Advertising cigarettes and other tobacco industry products in the media and on buildings and on any means of transport is now prohibited.
Tobacco companies are banned from sponsoring sports, cultural and entertainment events if their products are advertised in exchange.
Indirect advertising of tobacco and tobacco products is severely restricted.
Meanwhile, the price of a package of cigarettes has already risen -- with more increases possible in the future -- because of a hike in taxes on these products.
Proceeds from the taxes will be used to fund 13 health programmes as well as efforts to provide treatment and diagnostic equipment for tobacco-related illnesses.
In all, the new measures are expected to reduce cigarette sales by 20 per cent.
At the same time, a new campaign entitled "Passive smoking -- there is nothing passive here" is being conducted in collaboration between the health ministry and USAID.
An estimated 40 per cent of Macedonians over age 15 are smokers, each consuming about 2,310 cigarettes per year.
In addition to losing an average of 17 years of their lives to smoking, officials say they also endanger the lives of non-smokers around them.
