05/12/2005
(Washington Post, The Guardian, UPI, VOA - 05/12/05; AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, Eurosport, HINA -- 04/12/05)
With a 3-2 victory over Slovakia, Croatia won its first Davis Cup on Sunday (4 December), becoming the 12th nation to earn the title in the competition's 105-year history.
Croatia entered the final day of the prestigious tennis competition in Bratislava with a 2-1 lead over the Slovak team. 
In a nail-biter of a match, Slovakia's top player Dominik Hrbaty defeated Croatian counterpart Ivan Ljubicic by 4-6, 6-3, 6-4, 3-6, 6-4, levelling the tie at 2-2. 
In the decisive fifth match, Mario Ancic beat Slovakia's Michal Mertinak by 7-6, 6-3, 6-4, securing the title for Croatia.
"I played very aggressively, I felt everything was under my control," said Ancic. 
"It's an unforgettable match and an unforgettable day. 
This has been a spectacular year for me."
Overcoming Mertinak's stiff resistance in the opening set, Ancic, ranked number 22 in the world, came through after a nervous 7-1 tiebreaker. 
Despite a brief wobble in the third set, he defeated number 165 in the world in 2 hours 50 minutes.
"It was 2-2, a must-win situation, there could be no excuses," said Ancic. 
"I think I stepped up in the tie-breaker and from that moment I was in control."
It was the first time both countries made it to the Davis Cup final. 
The Croat team, including Goran Ivanisevic and Ivo Karlovic, became the first unseeded team ever to win the title.
The 2001 Wimbledon champion Ivanisevic came out of retirement for Sunday's final, but did not play in either the singles or doubles.
World number nine Ljubicic, who played his three-hour, 20-minute match against Hrbaty sick and with a painful stiff neck, fell one win short of matching John McEnroe's 1982 feat of 12 straight victories in a Davis Cup year.
"Dominik still played an unbelievable match, the best he has ever played against me," he said of his opponent Sunday, adding that he was "the happiest loser in the world today".
Miroslav Mecir, the captain of the Slovakian team, applauded the Croats for their play.
"We saw three days of world-class tennis and in the end the better team won. 
I congratulate Croatia," he said.
