04/08/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 04/08/05
PAA Greek proposal to use its state-of-the-art police surveillance system to help fight the threat of terrorism has been rebuffed by EU officials, who say that it violates the Union's directives. 
During a recent visit to Brussels, senior members of the public order ministry and the Greek police were told by the European Data Protection Supervisor, Peter Hustinx, that the proposed measures are "unnecessary".
The C41 surveillance system, established to help protect the 2004 Athens Olympics, consists of 342 cameras placed around the streets of Athens. 
It is currently being used to monitor traffic and circulation. 
In the aftermath of the 7 July bombings in London and ongoing threats by terrorists to attack European capitals, police want to use the system for security reasons as well.
Installation of the costly system was a major drain on Greece's budget, the result of international pressure on the country to take unprecedented measures to protect the Athens Games. 
But with the Games now long over, debate continues within the country on how to benefit from the investment in the long-term.
"Since we have them, let's use them," the police argue.
That line of thinking doesn't sit well with civil rights groups in Greece, or with many members of the public. 
Recalling the police and military repression during the country's turbulent past -- particularly the 1967-1974 junta -- they say the cameras could be used against Greeks exercising their democratic rights through protests or other public activities, or to monitor anyone who the authorities deem of interest.
Hustinx agrees. 
During talks with the Greek delegation in Brussels, he said the equipment is much more than required for the supervision of urban circulation and traffic, and that the proposed use for security goes against EU rules. 
Greece would be better off selling the system, he said.
"It's not necessary to use all the equipment simply because you bought it. 
It should have occurred to you from the beginning that some of the equipment may be of no use to you now," Hustinx was quoted as saying.
Efforts to boost security must take into account the right to privacy, the EU official recently told Euractiv, arguing that Europeans must not rush to give away their freedoms due to fears of terrorism.
The issue of reconciling security and civil rights is on the agenda of the European Parliament. 
A 150-point plan under consideration envisions the exchange of information between security services, biometric passports, and an extended registration system for immigrants.
