05/07/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 05/07/05
Albania's main opposition party, headed by the country's former president, has taken the lead in parliamentary elections, but foreign monitors criticised Sunday's (3 July) vote as falling short of international standards.
As of early Tuesday, Sali Berisha's Democratic Party (DP) was ahead, with 45 per cent to the ruling Socialist Party's (SP) 30 per cent, according to the Central Election Commission (CEC).
Ilir Meta's Socialist Movement for Integration Party was trailing in third place, with 8 per cent.
Results from an exit poll -- the first ever in Albania -- also showed Berisha's DP leading.
Both DP and SP claimed victory Sunday night.
"I believe it is a wide victory," Berisha told supporters.
"I am not saying these are the final results, but we will follow case by case and ballot by ballot."
SP Secretary General Gramoz Ruchi in turn claimed his party would take "60 to 70 per cent of the votes".
Also Sunday, incumbent Prime Minister Fatos Nano appraised the voting process as a "victory for Albania".
"The real winners of these elections are the democracy and Albania.
I am happy that Albania, with the high turnout and the plebiscitary vote of Albanians, opened the last door for association and integration into the EU and NATO," Nano told journalists and supporters at SP headquarters.
International monitors, however, said the elections complied only partially with democratic norms.
"The election day was generally peaceful but a few violent incidents, one fatal, cast a shadow over the process," the OSCE said in a report, referring to the shooting death of an election official.
On Monday, two men were killed during post-election celebrations.
According to the OSCE report, authorities failed to introduce a uniform system of addresses and personal identification documents, throwing doubt on voter lists.
Bickering between political parties had hampered other preparations, it said.
The vote was monitored by about 500 international observers from the OSCE, the Council of Europe, the European Parliament and the European Network of Election Monitoring Organisations (ENEMO).
About 4,000 local monitors also took part.
"The election process was held in the proper way.
The observer's comments of this organisation are positive, although irregularities have occurred," ENEMO said in a press release.
US Congressman Eliot Engel, who observed the voting process, told reporters that the election represented "democracy in action.
For this I commend the Albanian people."
In Brussels, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana called for an investigation into reports of irregularities, though he said he welcomed the high voter turnout and "generally peaceful manner" of the vote.
Some 2.8 million Albanians were eligible to vote, choosing among 22 political parties and coalitions running for the 140-seat parliament, 100 elected directly and 40 from party lists.
Turnout was 56 per cent, according to the CEC.
