05/10/2005
(AP, Xinhua - 05/10/05;
UN, Kosovareport - 04/10/05;
AFX - 03/10/05;
The New York Times - 02/10/05)
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has received a key report on Kosovo that could influence the timing of talks to determine the province's final status, the UN said in a statement Tuesday (4 October).
After studying the document submitted by his special envoy, Norwegian Ambassador Kai Eide, Annan will forward it to the Security Council later this month along with his recommendations.
Eide was appointed in June with the task of conducting a comprehensive review of Kosovo's progress in implementing a set of internationally endorsed standards, covering eight areas -- including democratic institutions, the rule of law, human and minority rights, refugee returns, economic development and Pristina-Belgrade dialogue.
Over a period of more than three months, Eide held extensive consultations in Serbia and Kosovo, as well as with key member states, regional organisations and UNMIK, Annan's spokesman, Stephane Dujarric, noted in a statement.
"He has also spent considerable time meeting with people from all walks of life in Kosovo as he assesses the progress made so far towards building a stable, tolerant, multiethnic and democratic society in the strife-torn province where ethnic Albanians outnumber other communities, mainly Serbs, by about 9 to 1," the statement added.
The international community has made clear that a positive assessment of the implementation of the standards would precipitate the launch of final status talks.
Acknowledging that none of the standards have been fully met, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen indicated last month that the UN would likely give the green light for the launch of status talks, as it recognises that it cannot continue to run the province forever.
The United States, which is a member of the six-nation Contact Group for Kosovo along with Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Russia, also considers the status quo as no longer sustainable or desirable.
While noting that they do not favour a specific outcome of the status talks, the Contact Group members have agreed that negotiations cannot lead to a return to the pre-1999 relationship between Serbia and Kosovo, to Kosovo's partition, or to a change of its current territory.
In other news, a blast Tuesday destroyed a UN vehicle in Kacanik, in southeastern Kosovo.
The car was parked in front of a UN police officer's home there, a police spokesman said.
The explosion, shortly after midnight, shattered shop windows and damaged several cars but caused no injuries.
