05/07/2005
(MIA, Makfax - 04/07/05; International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia)
Macedonia asked the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on Monday (4 July) to release war crimes indictees Ljube Boskovski and Johan Tarculovski pending trial.
"The Macedonian government guarantees that the defendants will be available to The Hague tribunal if they are provisionally released and allowed to return to Macedonia," Justice Minister Meri Mladenovska-Gjorgjievska said at a hearing at the ICTY on Monday. 
"The Macedonian state institutions have a capacity, legal mechanisms applicable on the entire territory, and capability to fully respect the decision of the Court Chamber regarding the guarantee," the minister added, pledging Macedonian authorities' full co-operation with the court.
"The government will inform the tribunal and on its request will undertake activities if the defendants violate the court's order," Mladenovska-Gjorgjievska said.
Boskovski and Tarculovski are the only Macedonian war crimes indictees. 
Under a joint indictment that the ICTY released on 15 March, each faces three counts of violations of the laws or customs of war in connection with the 2001 inter-ethnic conflict in Macedonia. 
The atrocities for which they have been charged were committed between 10 August and 12 August 2001, during a police raid on the village of Ljuboten.
Tarculovski, 30, is said to have commanded the raid, while Boskovski, 44, was the interior minister at the time and had command responsibility, according to prosecutors.
William Smith, who represented the ICTY prosecutors at Monday's hearing, argued that the provisional release request should be turned down.
"Regardless of the good intentions of the Macedonian government, there are not absolute guarantees that Boskovski would be available any time to the court and that he would not put pressure on victims and witnesses," Smith said.
Boskovski, who has a dual Macedonian and Croat citizenship, faces charges in connection with another criminal case, in which six Pakistanis and one Indian were killed by Macedonian police at Rastanski Lozja outside Skopje on 2 March 2002. 
The former interior minister fled to Croatia last year, but was arrested there and kept in detention in the town of Pula until 24 March, when he was transferred to The Hague.
Tarculovski was arrested in Macedonia on 14 March and was transferred to The Hague two days later.
