05/07/2005
(Office of the High Representative - 24/06/05; FENA - 23/06/05)
The international community remains determined that the perpetrators of the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and other war crimes must be brought to justice, the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) said late last month.
"It is -- and will remain -- a firm condition for BiH's integration in Euro-Atlantic structures," the PIC said in a communique at the end of a two-day meeting in Sarajevo. 
While welcoming the recent transfers of war crimes indictees to the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague, it stressed that the process would not be complete until former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, have been extradited.
The 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre, Europe's worst since World War II, is being commemorated on 11 July. 
Welcoming the BiH presidency's decision to invite Serbian President Boris Tadic to the memorial event and his acceptance of the invitation "as an important step on the road to reconciliation", the Steering Board also praised Republika Srpska (RS) President Dragan Cavic's intention to attend the ceremony.
The PIC, comprised of 55 countries and agencies that support the peace process in BiH, provides the High Representative in BiH with political guidance.
In its statement, the Steering Board voiced regret over BiH's failure so far to meet the conditions for starting talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU, noting that the country still has a chance to achieve that goal in time for the tenth anniversary of Dayton at the end of this year.
BiH's failure to adopt legislation on the public broadcasting service and a decision by RS authorities to block an EU-sponsored police reform proposal are considered the two main hurdles to talks.
"If the RS continues to choose isolation over integration, the consequences of this will be grave," the Steering Board said. 
"Bosnia and Herzegovina's road to Europe would remain blocked. 
This would result in BiH falling behind the other countries in the region."
The board's communique also reaffirmed plans to proceed with the transfer of responsibilities to BiH authorities, a process that will eliminate the Office of High Representative. 
The board said it would recommend that the post be replaced by an EU special representative. 
That would require approval by the UN Security Council.
"The end point of this process will be an important milestone in BiH's development -- the point at which BiH takes its destiny into its own hands, and moves forward towards integration with the EU," said the Steering Board. 
"But the PIC will want to ensure that such a process of transition is tied to actual progress in BiH."
