12/10/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 12/10/09 Photos by Nikola Barbutov
One of the most popular theater actors in Serbia, Tihomir Stanic, has performed on the stages of various major theatre companies;
he is well remembered in his roles in Goethe’s "Faust", Chekhov’s "Wild Honey", "Don Quixote", and, his personal favorite, "Childishness" at the Bitef Theater.
Stanic first appeared on stage at age three, reciting a poem at the village school where his father taught,.
His love for theatre continues to this day and he has launched a film production company called Balkan Film in Republika Srpska.
In an exclusive interview with Southeast European Times, Stanic discusses his beginnings, the country's theatre today and his new production company.
SETimes:
Your acting career can be traced back to your earliest childhood?
Stanic:
I was only three years old.
My father, the village teacher, used to organize school recitals, which gave me the opportunity to appear on stage early on.
I recited "The Hero’s Mother" [a poem] by Branko Copic.
Since I was only three, my father had a backup, an eighth grade student to continue in case I got stuck at some point.
I stopped for a moment to take a breath and my father told the eighth-grader Gina to continue.
I then started to cry and said I knew how to continue the poem, and recited everything.
That was my big success that earned me a lot of money, as everyone in the village rewarded me.
My entire professional life evolved in the same way later on in life.
First people do not trust me, after they do, I do well, then I do not get paid or my wages are spent elsewhere.
In the end, I did not work with those that would not let me drink.
Some would sooner admit that I'm a big drunk than a great actor.
Today, it's a different story;
I have been sober for seven years and my life has absolutely improved, as I have a say in more things than I did before.
SETimes:
At the age of 17 you enrolled at the Novi Sad Academy of Dramatic Arts.
What was the beginning of your professional career?
Stanic:
I headed to Novi Sad following a girl that went to study agriculture.
That was a fortunate circumstance, because I definitely would not have made it into the Belgrade Academy of Dramatic Arts, given the fact I was not prepared.
The entrance committee refused to accept me to the academy, except for one teacher, Dejan Mijac.
When, years later, I asked my teacher what it was that made him accept me, he replied:
"Well, you had something." I asked him what it was, the answer was:
"You had a great desire."
SETimes:
You have played many important parts in works of the big writers like of Goethe and Chekhov.
Is anything missing from that list?
Stanic:
No, not a single part is missing, an actor plays only what belongs to him.
Everything falls into its own place in art.
There is no injustice in art, there is no "I should’ve got that part, but didn’t".
There's no injustice, because a person gets what they deserve sooner or later.
If an injustice was done, there is a higher justice that will make it right.
I have played many great parts, but I have also had many bad ones.
What may be the quality of my expression as an actor is that everything seems very easy as a product of some playfulness and chance, but not because I am a precise actor.
SETimes:
What do you think about the Serbian theater today and the quality it offers to its audience?
Stanic:
There is something in theater that we are all disgusted by in Serbia -- clannishness.
At one point I realized that I had become part of that which disgusts me.
We are miserably enclosed, an incestuously enclosed environment.
I am positive everything will change when our visa restrictions are lifted, maybe not the same day, but, in time, things will change
Serbian theater has shut itself into a self-satisfied and meaningless production.
The same actors play in all theaters, the same people direct plays.
Whether one play is better or more important than the other is irrelevant.
Theater does not really seem to exist in Serbia, it is completely irrelevant.
SETimes:
You also opened a production company, Balkan Film, in Republika Srpska.
What plans do you have for that area of your career?
Stanic:
I plan to make a film about the Jasenovac concentration camp, a big project I am excited about.
We should start shooting in 2011.
The film will be titled "Nameless Children".
The story is about Diana Budisavljevic, an Austrian woman married to Dr Julije Budisavljevic who saved 12,000 children from the Ustasha concentration camp.
She kept a journal, files and documents through which the children could be traced.
After the war, the Yugoslav intelligence took the documents from her and no one knew anything about her for a long time.
These children could not be traced afterward, since the documents were destroyed.
In 2003, the Croatian History Museum and the Jasenovac Public Institution printed excerpts from her notes titled "The Diary of Diana Budisavljevic".
The diary is the inspiration for the film.
By tracing her fate and her humane action, the Jasenovac camp story will be told.
