03/11/2005
By Avni Zogiani for Southeast European Times in Prishtina -- 03/11/05
Despite repeated pledges of unity over the past months, the Kosovo delegation for upcoming status talks faces serious internal disputes as individual members vied for authority. 
The team consists of President Ibrahim Rugova, Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi, Parliament Speaker Nexhat Daci, Democratic Party of Kosovo head Hashim Thaci, and ORA leader Veton Surroi. 
All but Daci participated in the Ramboulliet negotiations that preceded NATO's action in Kosovo in 1999.
According to local press reports, the trouble started at a meeting with US Deputy Secretary of State Nicholas Burns. 
Co-ordinator Blerim Shala -- appointed by Rugova -- was the first to speak, jumping in ahead of Daci.
A furious Daci later dismissed Shala's proposal for the composition of working groups. 
Thaci then joined in, charging that Shala "lacks the legitimacy needed to be a policymaker".
Shala, publisher of the daily newspaper Zeri, fought back in his publication, writing that Daci and Thaci are sabotaging the negotiating team. 
He made similar comments on the television channel KTV, owned by another team member, ORA party leader Veton Surroi. 
Some speculated that Surroi and Shala have joined in an alliance against Daci and Thaci. 
Not longer afterwards, however, Surroi and Thaci were seen drinking tea together at a local bar.
"At this moment the drinking of tea is from a very big importance," said Ylber Hysa, an aide to Surroi.
Rugova has since moved to calm the waters, affirming that the "working group will be institutional". 
That amounts to an endorsement of a strong role for the parliament speaker.
However, the team now faces a new conflict over whether the negotiating strategy should be based on expert-based proposals or drawn up by the political institutions.
As if the internal feuding wasn't enough, Kosovo's negotiators have also had to deal with threats from an extremist formation, the "Army for Independence of Kosova". 
An e-mail from the group demanded that the Rugova-led team unilaterally declare Kosovo's independence prior to the negotiations and challenge Belgrade's sovereignty in the Presheva Valley, a mainly Albanian-populated region in south Serbia. 
"
If members of parliament don't behave in accordance with the mandate they got from the voters, they would face a very difficult period," the e-mail from a "Commander Luigji" threatened.
The email message came just in time for the Contact Group's closed-door meeting on Wednesday, at which a plan for conducting the status talks was to be approved, as well as a date for launching the discussions.
In response to the email, KFOR spokesman Pio Sabetta said the new paramilitary formation could not jeopardise security in the province, adding that KFOR, UNMIK and local police are investigating who is behind the effort.
