04/10/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 04/10/05
Hoping to speed up the passage of a law on free access to information, the NGO Transparency Macedonia organised an unusual public campaign last week.
On 28 September, designated by the group as World Day of the Right to Free Access to Information, Macedonian citizens were invited to send questions to officials and institutions on topics that concern them.
Participants wrote down on cards such questions as "What are high-level officials' salaries?", "Who gets tenders?", "What is the level of pollution in my municipality?" among many others.
"Clearly, no government in the world would [voluntarily] divest themselves of power by governing transparently, openly to everybody in the society," Transparency Macedonia director Zoran Jacev said. 
For that reason, he added, it is up to citizens to press for the quick adoption of free information laws.
"I am convinced that our campaign will be successful because transparency of the state-run institutions is an important prerequisite for Macedonia's joining the EU. 
People constantly complain that they rarely receive answers to questions they make to state-run institutions. 
That must change," Jacev said.
The justice ministry says the information access law has been delayed because of the need to adopt constitutional amendments, which should be in place by November. 
"We expect this law to be finalised by the New Year. 
Constitutional amendments are important because it depends on them how the second instance proceedings before administration bodies are regulated," said ministry spokesperson Ubavska Mitevska.
According to the justice ministry, the European Commission has been informed of the delay.
The legislation, drafted in line with European standards, consists of 44 articles aimed at establishing better transparency and accountability in state institutions, as well as ensuring that citizens are informed of government activities.
Among other things, it stipulates that every citizen seeking information has the right to receive a printed answer. 
Information will also be available electronically, for a fee.
Should an institution refuse an information request, the person who has submitted the request is entitled to appeal to the National Commission for Free Access, which consists of three members appointed by parliament for a term of four years.
Macedonia is the only country in the region that has yet to adopt such a law.
