03/11/2005
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/11/05
Over the past several years, leasing companies have expanded their business in Serbia at lightning speed. 
So much so, in fact, that the National Bank of Serbia (NBS) is having to cool them down with new regulations.
The leasing industry has become a lifeline for individuals and companies alike. 
The most frequent items purchased through leasing in Serbia are commercial and passenger vehicles, consumer goods such as television sets and appliances, and manufacturing equipment and machines. 
Serbs, who have developed a sharp appetitite for such goods over the years of disintegration and economic stagnation, are drawn to the short-term convenience of leasing -- and often indifferent to the long-term expense.
According to official data, turnover in the Serbian leasing market amounted to as much as 220m euros during the first ten months of 2004. 
That is four times the amount registered in the first six months of 2003, when this type of financing was introduced.
Under the new regulations, leasing companies will be obliged to deposit reserve funds with the NBS, while the cost of financial leasing will have to be expressed uniformly. 
The Central Bank will conduct licensing of all participants in the market, and leasing firms will be required to have at least 100,000 euros of equity capital, a serious plan for future business activities and adequate staff.
To the dismay of many consumers, leasing will be allowed only for items worth at least 2,000 euros -- a sum close to the average annual salary in Serbia -- and will not be allowed for general consumer products, including cars and home appliances. 
The transportation sector will likely be the first to feel the pinch. 
In Serbia, the average automobile or commercial vehicle is over ten years old, while the demand for newer vehicles will increase with the opening of the economy towards the EU.
However, NBS officials insist the new rules are not aimed at inconveniencing citizens, but motivated by micro-financial logic. 
In addition, officials say, consumers are often vulnerable to questionable leasing schemes, signing up for arrangements without knowing all of the terms.
"We will insist that leasing companies will be required to present all the expenses that a consumer will have during the five to six years, just as we have done with bank credits," says NBS Vice Governor Dejan Simic.
Leasing companies claim that this will increase the price of their services. 
It was precisely because no Central Bank deposit was necessary, they argue, that better leasing terms could be offered to customers.
