04/01/2006
(AP, Reuters, CNN, BBC, RFE/RL, Independent, The Guardian - 04/01/06; AP, FT, AFP, EUobserver, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool - 03/01/06)
The EU's Gas Co-ordination Group went into an emergency session Wednesday (4 January), prompted by a gas dispute between Russia and Ukraine that triggered shortages across the continent earlier in the week. 
The energy experts, assembling in Brussels only hours after the two countries announced a deal, met to discuss ways to cope with such crises in the future and to insure against possible new gas supply threats.
"The situation has shown how vulnerable the Union is to shortages of gas supply," EU Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs said Tuesday. 
He said he expected an agreement on the establishment of "some form of community solidarity mechanism in case there is a gas disruption" in the future.
Europe imports about a quarter of its gas from Russia, 80 per cent of which flows through pipelines that cross neighbouring Ukraine. 
The Russian giant Gazprom halted deliveries to the former Soviet republic on Sunday following Kiev's refusal to agree to the company's demands for a more than fourfold price increase -- from $50 per 1,000 cubic metres in 2005 to $230 as of 1 January 2006.
The move led to a sharp drop in gas supplies among some of the 28 countries in Europe and the former Soviet Union that rely on Russian gas. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia were among the Gazprom customers that reported a reduction in natural gas supplies of between 30 per cent and 50 per cent since Sunday.
Following strong criticism from Europe, Russia increased the amount transited through Ukrainian pipelines. 
Although supplies appeared to be returning to normal on Tuesday, the crisis revived European concerns over Russia's reliability.
Some countries, including Poland and Romania, suggested they would likely reconsider their energy policies.
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu said his country was considering possible alternatives to reduce its dependency on imported gas and energy expenses. 
These could include a return to coal for energy production and construction of two new hydroelectric plants on the Danube River.
"With the higher cost of gas and oil nowadays, it may be feasible to return to coal to reduce the costs of producing electricity and heat," the AP quoted Tariceanu as saying. 
Other possible options include building new underground tanks to double the country's gas storing capacity, as well as the construction of new gas pipelines.
Romania, which imports 40 per cent of the gas it needs from Russia, was paying $250 per 1,000 cubic metres until the beginning of this year. 
It now pays about $280 per 1,000 cubic metres for Russian gas, but that price will be valid until the end of March, after which it can be renegotiated.
Under a 1997 contract, neighbouring Bulgaria is paying about $120 per 1,000 cubic metres of gas. 
Although the agreement expires in 2010, Russia is said to be planning to demand this month a new price of between $230 and $260 per 1,000 cubic metres. 
Officials say this could lead to an increase of up to 60 per cent in the price of natural gas on the domestic market. 
Bulgaria gets more than 97 per cent of the gas it needs from Russia.
Ilko Yotsev, a former Bulgarian deputy energy minister currently working for Gazprombank, has told reporters that the price change would be for transited gas only. 
According to him, if Bulgaria agrees to the new terms, it could attract about 5 billion euros in Russian investments, including in the construction of Bulgaria's second nuclear power station at Belene, the privatisation of gas distributor Bulgargas and the building of an energy trade bourse.
