04/07/2005
(CNN, SBS, Kathimerini, Reporter.gr - 04/07/05;
AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, The Hellenic Radio, Athens News Agency - 03/07/05)
The prime ministers of Greece and Turkey met at their countries' common border on Sunday (3 July) to inaugurate the construction of a gas pipeline that will link the two Aegean neighbours.
At the same time, Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis accepted an invitation from his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, to visit Ankara.
He will become the first Greek leader to visit Turkey in more than 46 years.
During the inauguration ceremony, held at the middle of a bridge over the river that forms the natural frontier between Greece and Turkey, the two prime ministers described the project as "historic" and "strategic".
"It's time to look forward and make things better," Karamanlis said.
"We inaugurate a historic project that will turn Greece and Turkey into energy hubs."
The nearly 300km pipeline -- 209km of which will be on Turkish territory -- will run from Karacabey in northern Turkey to Komotini in Greece, serving as a key link for transporting Caspian natural gas to Italy and other Western European countries.
The project is expected to be completed by 2007.
Initially, the pipeline will supply about 3.5 billion cubic metres of gas per year, with its capacity expected to eventually reach 11.5 billion cubic metres per annum.
The project's total cost is estimated at 250m euros, 29 per cent of which will reportedly be covered by an EU subsidy.
The pipeline will later be extended to Italy as part of the Southern Europe Gas Ring Project.
During their meeting on Sunday, Erdogan praised Greece, and Karamanlis in particular, for backing his country's EU bid.
During their December 2004 summit, the leaders of the 25 EU nations, including Greece, set 3 October as the starting date for Turkey's accession talks.
It was impossible, Erdogan said, "to forget the support that my friend Costas Karamanlis gave at the EU, especially during the 17 December process".
Last year, Erdogan became the first top Turkish official to visit Athens in 16 years.
According to the AFP, the last Greek prime minister to pay an official visit to Turkey was Constantinos Karamanlis, the uncle of Greece's incumbent prime minister, in 1959.
