04/07/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia – 04/07/05
Eight days after the 25 June parliamentary elections in Bulgaria, the composition of the country's next government remains unclear. 
After failing to win an outright majority, the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) has been consulting with possible partners about forming a government coalition. 
Only one party, the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), has declared its readiness to team up with the Socialists.
After eight years in opposition, the BSP won the elections with 31 per cent of the vote, or 82 seats in the country's 240-member legislature. 
The ruling National Movement for Simeon II (NMS-II) came in second with 20 per cent, or 53 seats, and the MRF was third with 13 per cent, or 34 seats. 
Four other formations also passed the 4 per cent threshold for entry into the parliament, taking a total of 50 seats, while a radical national coalition came in fourth, winning 21 seats.
Addressing a meeting of the BSP-led Coalition for Bulgaria on Sunday (3 July), the Socialists' leader, Sergey Stanishev, outlined four possible scenarios for a coalition government.
The first envisions a coalition including the BSP, the NMS-II and the MRF. 
Such a cabinet, according to the BSP leader, would be stable and have both European and domestic legitimacy. 
Alternatively, the BSP could form a coalition with the NMS-II alone. 
That, however, could trigger a negative reaction from the EU because of its failure to include the MRF, which represents Bulgaria's ethnic Turkish population, Stanishev said.
Both scenarios involving the NMS-II pose a major hurdle -- working out a compromise on the prime minister's post. 
The NMS-II has insisted that it should get the post.
A third possible scenario the BSP leader outlined was for a BSP-MRF coalition, relying on the support also of individual lawmakers from other parliamentary parties. 
In Stanishev's view, this formula is the most beneficial for his party, allowing it to follow its own policy as well as to name the prime minister. 
However, it is also the least stable option, he said.
The fourth possible scenario he listed was for an even broader coalition, including the BSP, the NMS-II, the MRF and the right-wing Bulgarian People's Union, which won less than 6 per cent of the vote, or 13 parliamentary seats.
Two separate opinion polls late last week suggest wide public preference for a BSP-NMS-II coalition cabinet. 
Conducted by the Aphis polling agency and the daily newspaper 24 Chasa, the surveys found that 27 per cent and 33 per cent, respectively, favour that scenario. 
The broader coalition formula including the BSP, NMS-II and MRF has 15 per cent support according to the Aphis poll, and 17 per cent according to 24 Chasa. 
The results, published Monday, are split when it comes to preferences for prime minister. 
According to Aphis, 38.7 per cent prefer Stanishev to 24.4 per cent for Saxe-Coburg. 
But the 24 Chasa poll gave the opposite results -- 34.8 per cent for Saxe-Coburg and 24 per cent for Stanishev.
