02/09/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 02/09/05
Albania's Central Election Commission (CEC) on Thursday (1 September) announced the results of the 3 July parliamentary elections, confirming the Democratic Party (DP) of former President Sali Berisha as the winner.
According to the unanimous decision, which came nearly 60 days after the vote was held, the DP will have 56 members in the new parliament, while the former ruling party, the Socialists, will have 42.
Eleven seats will go to the Republican Party, three to the Union of Human Rights and seven to the Social Democrats.
Other parties with seats in the new parliament include the Socialist Movement for Integration, the Agrarians, the Christian Democrats and the New Democratic Party, the Democratic Alliance Party, the Party of Social Democracy and the Liberal Democratic Union.
Responding to critics who charged that the process had taken too long, CEC head Ilirian Celibashi said the institution had only respected the law.
Within hours of the CEC's announcement, Socialist leader Fatos Nano acknowledged his party's defeat and announced that he would step down as its leader, saying that he would take responsibility for the loss.
He also took the opportunity to launch an attack on the DP, accusing it of manipulating the vote.
Socialist Secretary General Gramoz Ruci now takes over as head of the party.
The first parliamentary session opened on Friday, following a go-ahead from President Alfred Moisiu.
A total of 140 members were present.
Berisha, 60, will head Albania's new government.
He has already chosen his team, reducing the number of ministries to 14 from the current 20.
A cardiologist by training, Berisha became Albania's first elected post-communist president in 1992.
He was forced to step down in 1997 following the collapse of investment schemes that sparked violent riots in one of Europe's poorest countries.
The new prime minister has pledged to speed up reforms needed for EU and NATO integration, to fight corruption and mass poverty, and to help small business.
Meanwhile, the OSCE has welcomed the completion of the election process in Albania.
In a special declaration issued Thursday, OSCE Chairman-in-office Dimitrij Rupel, who is also Slovenia's foreign minister, said two months of hard work have finally yielded results.
The OSCE will continue to monitor and assist the country's reform process, the statement said.
