03/01/2006
(Mediapool - 03/01/06; Dnevnik, Sega - 02/01/06; Bloomberg, AP, BNN, Mediapool - 29/12/05; Economist Intelligence Unit, Mediapool - 28/12/05)
Sunday (1 January) marked the first of the 365 days before Bulgaria's scheduled entry into the EU. 
To join the 25-nation bloc on schedule, the country faces challenging tasks, including fighting organised crime and corruption.
Bulgaria and Romania completed their entry talks with the EU in 2004. 
The accession treaty the two countries signed with the Union on 25 April 2005 envisions that they will become full-fledged EU members on 1 January 2007. 
Under safeguard clauses included in the accord, however, their accession could be delayed by at least one year if they fail to meet the requirements.
The European Commission (EC) is due to issue its last monitoring reports on Bulgaria and Romania on 17 May, together with recommendations regarding their admission. 
European leaders are then expected to confirm during a two-day meeting in mid-June whether the two countries will join on 1 January 2007 or see their membership delayed.
"It's possible Bulgarian and Romanian accession will be put off," Bloomberg news agency quoted Katinka Barysch, chief economist at the London-based Centre for European Reform, as saying on 22 December. 
"The reason would be not enough progress in fighting corruption."
The EU has also highlighted a number of other commitments Bulgarian authorities must address, including judicial reform, border controls, food hygiene standards and protection of intellectual and property rights.
"These countries must fulfill the conditions," Bloomberg quoted Elmar Brok, German chairman of the European Parliament's foreign affairs committee, as telling the assembly in mid-December. 
"In the eyes of our citizens, entry at the desired time can't be automatic."
According to a report Monday by the Sofia-based daily Dnevnik, key tasks on Bulgaria's agenda for January include the adoption of an anti-corruption strategy and a border management plan, as well as development of criteria for monitoring the application of the penal code. 
New laws on concessions and public procurement are expected to be passed in February and on public administration and on health insurance the following month.
During a one-day visit to Vienna last week, Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev assured Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schussel, whose country took over the rotating six-month EU presidency from Britain on Sunday, that Bulgarians would "be good Europeans". 
He also urged Austria to ratify Bulgaria's accession treaty before the EC report in May, which he said would be "an extremely important political sign for solidarity".
The treaty must be ratified by all 25 EU member states before Bulgaria joins the Union. 
Only nine countries have done so at this point.
