03/02/2006
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 03/02/06
Dr Faris Gavrankapetanovic, a surgeon from Sarajevo, was named the Max Magazine Man of the Year in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) for 2005 in a public ceremony on 20 January.
Currently director general of the University of Sarajevo Clinical Centre, he is also a government expert on landmine injuries and has authored or co-authored more than 180 scientific papers and books.
He became particularly famous for a landmark 1998 operation involving the re-attachment of a human hand.
It was the first such operation in BiH, and was regarded as one of the major post-war successes for BiH medicine.
"I am happy about the award, but I found I won it thanks to all the wonderful people in my medical team," said Gavrankapetanovic.
"A recent article in the Economist magazine said the Balkan region is marked as one of the world's most expanding regions in the near future.
All of us in BiH have to prepare for this and we in medicine are doing our part."
It is the third year in a row that Max, a lifestyle magazine based in Sarajevo, has organised the award, which honours distinguished individuals in ten categories.
This year's laureates were sculptor Senad Pezo for Art, author Asmir Kujovic for Literature, director Benjamin Filipovic for Motion Pictures, director Haris Pasovic for Theatre, singer Mladen Vojicic Tifa for Show Business, announcer and news editor Ognjen Blagojevic for Television Personality, TV journalist Damir Kaletovic for Journalism, basketball player Nenad Markovic for Sport, Gavrankapetanovic for Medicine and the general manager of Reckitt Benckiser BiH, Resid Muratovic, for Business.
"In a flood of a female beauty contests we decided to organise the elections for the most successful man in BiH," said Max journalist Boris Jovanovic.
"We did not want to promote politicians or some macho men, but to award real experts in BiH public life.
We believe that the third Man of the Year award proves that we have succeeded in doing the right thing."
Gavrankapetanovic won both the Medicine award and the overall Man of the Year title.
In addition to his University of Sarajevo post, he is a guest lecturer at the universities of Little Rock (Arkansas), Yale and Memphis.
Gavrankapetanovic is also a lecturer and instructor at the AO International School at Davos, and a member of the International League of Humanists.
In April 2005, he became a member of the World Academy of Art and Science in New York, and in November he became a member of its Steering Board.
