03/02/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 03/02/06
The US special envoy for the Kosovo status talks, Frank Wisner, has wrapped up a visit to Pristina and was due to arrive Friday (3 February) in Belgrade for his first visit there since taking up his post.
He is scheduled to meet with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Serbian President Boris Tadic.
While in Kosovo, Wisner met with officials and political leaders, as well as with representatives of the province's Serb minority.
He said Washington backs completion of the status negotiations process during 2006.
"The United States supports the negotiations of [UN envoy] Martti Ahtisaari, the efforts to find peace within the region, and an outcome providing for no return to the conditions that existed before 1999," Wisner said.
Acting Kosovo President Nexhat Daci assured him that Kosovo would not allow the process to be delayed.
"The Kosovo delegation is prepared for the Vienna talks and we will be there around 20 February," Daci said.
"Very soon we will appoint the Kosovo delegation, which will be composed of seven persons from institutions, as well as politicians.
Of course the new president of Kosovo will be head of the delegation."
The leader of the Kosovo Serbs, Oliver Ivanovic, said representatives of his community would soon return to Kosovo institutions.
The Serbs have been boycotting them, to protest alleged discrimination.
"We will return to the Kosovo institutions as soon as possible.
But Albanians should acknowledge that Serbs cannot be there just for decor.
It's their responsibility to accept Serbs as an equal part in the talks and to show that our participation in institutions is important," Ivanovic said after his meeting with Wisner.
Ahead of the Vienna talks, the Kosovo negotiating team is expected to approve a platform on decentralisation drawn up by Local Government Minister Lutfi Haziri.
It calls for dismantling all parallel institutions, stresses the "territorial integrity of Kosovo and its unitary character", and rules out the creation of ethnic corridors, enclaves, or any other proposal aimed at the territorial division of Kosovo along ethnic lines.
Belgrade has been urging the creation of Serb enclaves with close ties to Belgrade, saying these are necessary to protect the community's rights.
