03/10/2005
(CNN, AP, Reuters, AFP, FT, BBC, Independent, The Guardian, The Telegraph, VOA - 03/10/05; AFP, AP, CNN, International Herald Tribune - 02/10/05)
Following intense negotiations Monday (3 October), officials say that Austria has "fallen in line", allowing EU foreign ministers to clear the way for Turkey's negotiations with the EU. 
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul confirmed that his goverment has accepted the new draft framework and said he would fly to Luxembourg for the start of the talks.
Europe's top diplomats held emergency meetings late Sunday and early Monday in Luxembourg aimed at convincing Austria to endorse the negotiating framework for Turkey's talks.
The framework has been held up over Vienna's insistence that the ultimate goal of negotiations should be some sort of "privileged partnership" instead of full membership -- an option Turkey has repeatedly rejected. 
In recent days, top officials in Ankara have said their country, an EU aspirant since 1964, may drop its entry bid altogether if the bloc changes the conditions agreed on last December, when the date for the talks was set.
At the time, EU leaders determined that the shared objective of the negotiations would be accession. 
That is the goal called for in the current draft of the negotiating framework, which all member states other than Austria have approved. 
The document requires endorsement by all 25 EU member nations for the talks to go forward.
British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, is hosting the emergency talks in Luxembourg. 
He warned Sunday that the bloc is facing a critical moment in its history as it prepares for opening accession talks with Turkey.
"This is a crucial meeting for the future of the EU," Straw said. 
"I don't want to contemplate failure ... 
It would represent a failure for the EU given the decision we made in December."
After eight hours of last-ditch negotiations, including several face-to-face discussions with Austrian counterpart Ursula Plassnik, Straw described the situation as "frustrating," but voiced hope that a compromise would be reached.
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said Sunday that he would not fly to Luxembourg for the formal launch of the talks, until he has seen the negotiating mandate approved unanimously by the EU.
Sources in Ankara have described the mood there as tense. 
"Every minute that passes is making things more bitter and it won't be nice starting negotiations with all these bruises," Reuters quoted an unnamed official as saying.
On Sunday, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan urged the Union to fulfil its commitment to his country.
"Either it will show political maturity and become a global power, or it will end up a Christian club," Erdogan said.
He said the country would stay the course of democratisation and reform regardless of what decision the EU makes. 
"We will, however, be saddened that a project for the alliance of civilisations will be harmed" should the talks fail to go ahead, he added.
