01/07/2005
(AFP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, ITN, NTV MSNBC, Xinhua - 01/07/05)
Turkish police killed a suspected suicide bomber on Friday (1 July) after he tried to detonate an explosive device at the justice ministry.
The incident occurred at about 9:15 am local time, according to Reuters.
Television footage showed a man in his thirties running towards Ankara's crowded Guven Park with his hands cuffed behind his back.
He was then shot by policemen chasing him.
The man was reportedly trying to enter the justice ministry when a device, believed to have been a bomb, set off the metal detectors.
As police began to search him, the man reportedly panicked and pulled the bomb's fuse, but the main explosive did not ignite.
Two policemen were slightly injured, however.
The man eventually managed to escape into the street in the direction of the park.
The Anatolia news agency identified him as Muhammed Akyurt.
According to CNN Turk, he was believed to be a member of the illegal group Great Eastern Islamic Raiders Front.
After the incident, police cordoned off the area, located in the capital's busy administrative centre, while bomb squad agents searched the body.
Reporters on the scene said a bomb disposal expert, wearing protective clothing, removed the man's shirt and then a tan coloured cylinder with wires coming out of it.
Justice Minister Cemil Cicek sought to downplay the incident, which occurred near other government buildings, including the offices of Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
"The event is not important and doesn't affect our duties," Cicek told reporters outside the ministry.
Without offering further details, he said, "An investigation is under way."
A similar incident occurred in the eastern town of Siirt about six weeks ago, when two suspected members of the rebel Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) died in a botched attempt to blow up the regional governor's office.
In June of last year, a leftist group claimed responsibility for a bomb blast in an Ankara hotel where US President George W. Bush and other officials were due to stay during a NATO summit.
In November 2003, more than 60 people were killed as a result of four devastating suicide bomb attacks on Jewish and British targets in Istanbul.
A group linked to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda network claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Dozens of people are now being tried in connection with them.
