01/08/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 01/08/05
The financial intelligence department of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) State Information and Protection Agency (SIPA) has formally become a member of the Egmont Group, a worldwide network of law enforcement agencies. 
The decision to invite BiH to join was approved at a recent meeting of the Egmont plenary session in Washington.
The group, which gathers and shares financial intelligence on money laundering, was founded on 9 June 1995 in Brussels. 
It now encompasses 85 countries.
"The Egmont membership will allow us to share information and co-operate in the fight against regional and wider international money laundering and funding of terrorist activities," said SIPA Director Sredoje Novic. 
"This also emphasises the further commitment of our country to counter all contemporary criminal and terrorist activities," Novic added.
International community High Representative Paddy Ashdown welcomed the Egmont Group's decision. 
The invitation reflects the fact that SIPA is "concerned with doing the job of policing, its mandate being to focus on the most serious crimes, rather than on politics," Ashdown said.
"It is recognition of the progress SIPA has made since receiving its expanded mandate less than a year ago. 
SIPA's acceptance in Egmont shows that BiH is taking its place in the international fight against crime," he added. 
Commissioner Kevin Carty of the European Police Mission also praised the development. 
"This marks an important step forward for BiH in its fight against money laundering. 
The Egmont Group's invitation to BiH is a clear signal that SIPA's continued efforts and development has been recognised by the international partners," he said.
SIPA was established less than a year ago. 
In the past six months, its financial intelligence department compiled reports on 28 people allegedly involved in laundering more than 26m euros. 
Eight have since been arrested. 
SIPA also has opened 13 international investigations into money laundering.
