01/11/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 01/11/05
This year, Serbs welcomed an important milestone for the future -- the EU's decision to launch Stabilisation and Association talks with the state union of Serbia-Montenegro. 
They also commemorated a key historical anniversary. 
Two hundred years ago, the first modern-era Serbian government was formed, during the course of the Serb uprising against Ottoman rule.
Commemorating the occasion, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and his government assembled at the Voljavca Monastery, where the "Governing Serbian Soviet" -- established by Father Mateja Nenadovic -- held its inaugural session in 1805.
Contrasts between now and then are sharp, Kostunica said. 
"Conditions were difficult, and there were few literate people," he noted. 
As of 1807, the Council of Governing Soviets numbered 12 members, eight of whom couldn't read or write. 
Of the other four, two could only sign their first and last names.
At the same time, the prime minister drew parallels with the past, stressing the importance of the rule of law. 
The "state cannot act just as it wants" and no individual or group should consider themselves above the law, Kostunica said.
Moreover, just as it did 200 years ago, Serbia must "vie for its status" while preserving its identity, Kostunica said.
The Serb uprising began in 1804, triggered by abuses against the local population committed by powerful janissary chiefs as the central Ottoman government weakened. 
As gangs sent out by these warlords rampaged through villages, murdering priests and local leaders in a bid to impose the janissaries' power, Serbs fled to the forests, where they eventually formed an army of 30,000 peasants and moved against the janissaries. 
The era of change had begun.
In addition to armed struggle, the uprising's leaders also sought to establish a modern European state, drafting constitutional texts in 1805, 1808 and 1811 that outlined the division of power. 
They established local administrative structures and set up post offices and schools, as well as an institution of higher learning that eventually became the University of Belgrade.
With these events, Serbia began its return to Europe after centuries as part of the Ottoman Empire. 
Two hundred years later, following the collapse of communism and its bloody aftermath, Serbs again find themselves on the threshold, this time of the EU and NATO.
