01/09/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 09/01/05
During the summer season, tourists in Albania head for the beaches on the Adriatic and Ionian coast in order to swim, soak up the sun and relax with a good book. 
This year, thanks to a regional book fair that toured a number of popular destinations, vacationers in search of summertime reading had thousands of titles to choose from.
Organised by the Association of Albanian Publishers (AAP), the fair toured the coastal cities of Ulcinj in Montenegro and Struga in Macedonia before moving to Albania, where it made stops in two locations: Saranda and Vlora. 
Nearly 60 publishers from Albania, Kosovo and Macedonia participated, offering new releases for Albanian-language readers across the region.
During its stop in Ulcinj, Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic and his Albanian counterpart, Alfred Moisiu, paid a visit to the fair. 
They used the occasion to praise relations between their two countries, describing the fair as a sign of ever-improving ties.
"We support the initiative as a good way to bring closer the cultures of two neighbouring countries. 
This initiative comes in the framework of other political engagements. 
Albania and Montenegro have to intensify the co-operation [between their] two cultures," the two heads of state said.
According to AAP president Fatmir Toci, the goal of the book fair is to "improve and enrich the atmosphere of tourism".
Each summer, the resorts are flooded not only with local tourists, but also by expatriates returning home to spend time with relatives and friends."We make a 'spiritual offering' for Albanian immigrants who are back on holidays during this summer season and fill the lack of Albanian literature in the Western countries where they live," Toci said.
The fair has received support from regional government authorities, local libraries and universities of the hosting cities. 
Held in conjunction with the fair are other literature-related events, such as discussions with authors or promotional events launching new releases.
