01/08/2005
(Telekom Austria, AP, Reuters, BBC, Reporter.gr, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool - 14/07/05)
Telekom Austria said on 14 July that it has closed the acquisition of Mobiltel AD, Bulgaria's leading mobile phone operator, about six weeks after the share purchase agreement was signed.
Telekom Austria acquired 100 per cent of Mobiltel for a total consideration (Enterprise Value) of up to 1.6 billion euros, the Austrian company said in a statement.
The Bulgarian operator will be consolidated into Telecom Austria's wireless segment.
Welcoming the successful conclusion of the acquisition, Telekom Austria Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Heinz Sundt told reporters that the deal represented the largest ever takeover by an Austrian company.
The move gives the firm access to potential new customers in a country with a population of about 8 million.
Currently, Mobiltel has over 3.2 million subscribers, more than Bulgaria's total of fixed-line customers, and a 65 per cent market share as of 31 March.
Days before the closing of the acquisition, the Bulgarian operator, which also has licenses for fixed-line and third-generation mobile services, was given a BB+ long-term corporate rating by Standard & Poor's.
Mobiltel's revenue for the first quarter of this year stood at more than 119m euros, up 11.8 per cent, and its net income rose 6 per cent to 51.6m euros, Reuters reported.
Its annual revenue for 2004 exceeded 486m euros and its net income was almost 203m euros.
Sundt said Telecom Austria plans no major changes at Mobiltel.
"The company is Bulgaria's success story," Josef Vinatzer, Mobiltel's new CEO, said at a news conference on 14 July.
"It is the undisputed market leader, and we intend to keep it that way.
We are going to build on the brand, offer competitive pricing, and come up with new services and products."
Vinatzer led a team of experts from Telecom Austria's wireless subsidiary Mobilkom Austria, who began preparations for Mobiltel's integration back in February, to ensure a smooth transition of ownership.
Before the deal, 40 per cent of Mobiltel was owned by a private equity group led by ABN AMRO Capital, Citigroup Investments and Communications Venture Partners.
The other 60 per cent was in the hands of Austrian businessman Herbert Cordt and two other Austrian interests.
"Telekom Austria has acquired a very profitable operator with good growth prospects," Reuters quoted Erste Bank analyst Konrad Sveceny as saying.
"Penetration in Bulgaria is slightly over 50 per cent, so the growth potential is still very good."
According to official statistics, Bulgaria's telecommunications market grew by 13 per cent in 2004 and reached a volume of about 1.25 billion euros.
Citing Bulgaria's telecommunications regulator, the AP reported that wireless services in the country grew by 13 per cent last year.
According to Boris Nemsic, CEO of Mobilcom Austria -- one of Telecom Austria's seven wireless divisions -- the acquisition of Mobiltel was a positive step towards Telecom Austria's expansion into Southeast Europe.
The company already operates in Croatia via its VIPnet division.
As part of its ambitions to become a leading player in Southeastern Europe, Telecom Austria is reportedly also looking to buy 49 per cent of Serbia's second-largest operator, Mobtel
