01/02/2006
(FT - 01/02/06; AP, Reuters, Beta, Xinhua, British Foreign Office, UN News Centre - 31/01/06)
The Contact Group on the future of Kosovo urged Belgrade and Pristina on Tuesday (31 January) to work constructively towards a settlement to the province's status issue, before the end of this year.
"All possible efforts should be made to achieve a negotiated settlement in the course of 2006," the foreign ministers of the six-nation group -- which includes Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States -- said in a joint statement after talks in London.
Also attending were EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's special envoy for the status talks, Martti Ahtisaari, and UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen.
The ministers urged Belgrade and Pristina to work closely with Ahtisaari in resolving the many difficult issues that must be addressed. 
Among them are freedom of movement, links between local communities in Serbia and Kosovo and protection of religious communities and sites. 
Decentralisation is expected to be another critical issue.
Direct, UN-mediated negotiations between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials were due to begin on 25 January, but were postponed following the death of Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova four days earlier. 
The talks are now expected to open in late February.
In November, the Contact Group spelled out a set of guiding principles for a settlement to the status issue, providing inter alia that there should be no return to the pre-1999 situation, no partition of Kosovo, and no union of Kosovo with any part of another country.
Stressing that any solution should be acceptable to the people of Kosovo, the Contact Group reminded Belgrade that "the disastrous policies of the past lie at the heart of the current problems". 
The international community stands ready "to support Serbian democratic forces in taking this opportunity to move Serbia forward," the statement said. 
But it also called on the Belgrade authorities to fulfil their "repeated pledges" for full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
The Kosovo Albanian leaders should recognise that a multiethnic solution is the only feasible option, said the ministers, warning that those thinking of using violence as a means for achieving their goals would only "undermine their own cause".
Meanwhile, in his latest six-month report to the UN Security Council, Annan voiced concern about Kosovo's slow progress in implementing internationally endorsed standards. 
He urged the province's leaders to renew their efforts towards achieving the goals.
Another issue of concern for the UN chief was an "increase in serious security incidents, including of incidents that may have targeted Kosovo Serbs for ethnic reasons" between May and December last year. 
The province's leaders and institutions should "work closely with UNMIK to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice," Annan stressed.
