01/12/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 01/12/05
Starting next year, a so-called "vice tax" of about one euro will be added to the price of every pack of cigarettes sold in Romania, doubling costs for local smokers.
People who enjoy hard liquor will also find themselves paying more for it;
the tax on some alcoholic beverages will rise from 0.5 euro to 2 euros per bottle.
These tax hikes are expected to generate between 30m euros to 40m euros monthly, with the revenues going directly into the health system's budget.
"It's obvious that smokers and drinkers of alcohol are getting ill more often than the other people, so they should pay more," says Health Minister Eugen Nicolaescu.
Not everybody is 100 per cent optimistic.
"This tax won't be efficient if the authorities aren't able to control the cigarettes and alcohol smuggling," said Finance Minister Sebastian Vladescu during a press conference.
Among ordinary people, reactions are mixed.
"I don't think it's right.
I already pay some pretty large amounts each month for health insurance," says Dan Burcica, a 46-year-old smoker.
"Tobacco and alcohol destroy the health, so maybe if the prices are bigger the people will think twice before buying cigarettes or strong drinks," believes Mariana Lucescu, 63, a retired civil servant.
Romania's state-run medical network faces serious financial difficulties.
The system currently owes drug and medical product suppliers more than $350m.
Scarce funds are affecting the quality of treatment.
Especially in the smaller hospitals, patients often have to buy their own drugs, syringes and bandages.
Along with the "vice tax", authorities hope to increase the health budget by requiring more people to pay for health insurance.
At present, only about 5 million Romanians are contributing to the system.
The 6 million retired people, exempt until now, may soon join them.
But only 12,000 of the retirees -- those with pensions of over $275 -- will actually have to reach into their own pockets.
All others will see their "contributions" covered by the state.
Health ministry officials are seeking to collect fees from farmers who officially report no revenue, but who own large amounts of land and numerous animals.
They will be charged according to the medium-wage health insurance bracket.
Also liable to pay will be the approximately 2 million Romanians who work abroad.
"They usually go to Romania for their non-urgent medical problems, even if they don't have insurance," says Nicolaescu.
Hospital privatisations could be another source of revenue.
The health ministry plans to start the process by turning over local clinics to their communities.
"We'll also give some money for funding the hospitals, but if they feel they can't manage the institutions, they could sell them," Nicolaescu explains.
In all, the ministry is launching the most concrete reforms to the healthcare system in the last 15 years.
Most Romanians do not appear especially concerned, however.
Those with higher-than-average incomes have already started to pay for private health insurances or to rely on private medical facilities.
As for the others, they simply hope for good health.
