01/02/2006
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade –01/02/06
Both the local and international community heralded the arrest of former Republika Srpska Army Colonel Jovo Djogo on 25 January.
He is suspected of co-ordinating efforts within the Republika Srpska (RS) Army and the Serbia-Montenegro Army to help one of the UN war crimes tribunal's top fugitives, Ratko Mladic, evade justice.
The arrest appeared to confirm charges by UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte, who has repeatedly said that military structures -- especially military intelligence -- are still protecting Mladic.
The EU has indicated that failure to apprehend Mladic could undermine Serbia-Montenegro's recently launched Stabilisation and Association talks with Brussels.
Djogo was a former high representative in the Bureau of Republika Srpska in Belgrade during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
His attorney, Djordje Kalanj, said he has appealed the investigative judge's decision to declare his client's case a state secret and to put him in custody for 30 days.
"I attended his hearing at the court.
Djogo declined to give any statements in this phase of the legal procedure.
He will defend himself with silence until further notice," Kalanj said.
Local media are suggesting that the Djogo case may help shed light on the whereabouts of Mladic.
According to Belgrade Humanitarian Law Fund Director Natasa Kandic, however, the key collaborators have not been arrested.
She says that Djogo's arrest is simply a signal the Serbian government is sending to international structures that they are "doing something about Mladic".
"If Djogo doesn't reveal where Mladic is, then all of this is a simple manifestation for the public, nothing else," she said.
But there is also speculation that by arresting Djogo the government and the army have set in motion the complicated process needed to arrest Mladic.
"Until now, the officials kept reiterating that they didn't know where Mladic is, and that he was not being protected by state institutions.
Now we have finally seen some concrete action, and these just may be the first steps towards finding and arresting Mladic," Dejan Anastasijevic, a Belgrade journalist, told B92.
Serbian special prosecutor for war crimes Vladimir Vukcevic has publicly warned "all that have any kind of contact with top Hague indictees" are being watched, and will be prosecuted.
The Serbia-Montenegro Supreme Defence Council is expected to hold a session this week, during which Defence Minister Zoran Stankovic will present a Military Security Service report with the names of all those whom the army has found to be assisting Mladic.
So far, two names have been publicly mentioned -- pensioned Serbia-Montenegro Army Colonel Dragomir Krstovic, said to be the chief of Mladic's security from 2000 to 2002, and Branislav Puhalo, who was authorised to collect Mladic's pension every month.
Stankovic said this is the first time that the army is collecting such facts about Mladic, with precise dates, names and other data.
