01/12/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 01/12/05
Senior officials representing the 34 members of Operation Iraqi Freedom gathered in Tirana on Monday (28 November) for a two-day conference.
The event was organised by the US Central Command (CENTCOM) as part of regular talks among Iraq coalition members about the operation's progress and the ongoing security challenges.
Conference host Albania currently has 120 troops in Iraq.
Among the participants were CENTCOM head General John Abizaid and the top US commander in Iraq, General George Casey, who met with Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and President Alfred Moisiu.
Albania and the other coalition members have helped bring about a democratic transformation in Iraq after decades of tyranny, Casey said.
"Within several weeks, Iraq will hold elections to choose a constitutional government and Iraqis will continue to go on in their way to build a better life in democracy," he said.
Abizaid, meanwhile, said that the coalition has made progress in the broader fight against terrorism.
"We are optimistic on the outcome of the operation in Iraq, and in Afghanistan, but we also know that an important war like this requires an international coalition," Abizaid said.
For his part, Moisiu reiterated his country's commitment to the global war on terror.
"Terrorism is a risk, if left aside, in the future will be very difficult to tackle," he said.
However, he also noted Albania would not increase its troop levels in Iraq.
The country was one of the first to join the US-led effort to oust Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq.
The Albanian commando unit operates in the area around Mosul's airport.
Albania also has contributed troops to the peacekeeping mission in Afghanistan.
Together with Croatia and Macedonia, Albania is part of the Adriatic Charter -- an initiative to co-ordinate efforts by the three countries to achieve Euro-Atlantic integration.
In recent years, Albania has hosted military exercises within the framework of NATO's Partnership for Peace programme, and is undertaking defence reforms in an effort to meet the Alliance's standards.
Earlier this year, Washington granted $8m to Albania in recognition of its role in international peacekeeping and the global war on terror.
The money is being provided through the US Coalition Solidarity Fund and President George W. Bush's Global Peacekeeping Operations Initiative.
