01/12/2005
(AP, AFP, FENA, European Commission Enlargement Newsletter - 30/11/05)
The EU integration path is laden with difficult reforms, but their implementation is essential for a successful completion of the accession process, Slovak President Ivan Gasparovic said in Sarajevo on Wednesday (30 November). 
The measures a country must implement to join the Union might not bring immediate gains, he also warned, offering Slovakia's assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) as it moves towards EU membership.
Slovakia joined the EU on 1 May 2004 along with nine other Central and East European countries, while BiH began its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) -- the first step towards eventual membership -- only last week.
Gasparovic arrived on a two-day visit to BiH on Wednesday, becoming the first Slovak president to visit the Balkan nation. 
Strengthening co-operation with the Western Balkan countries is one of Slovakia's priorities, he said.
During the first day of his visit, Gasparovic met with members of BiH's tripartite presidency, BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic and other officials.
"We spoke about not only the successes but also about the difficulties Slovakia had to overcome on its path," Gasparovic told reporters after talks with the BiH presidency members. 
Former communist states, like Slovakia and BiH, face many challenges on their path, he said.
"If you meet the political conditions, Europe will help you in every way to ensure that you do not stay behind on this road. 
In meeting the political conditions, all essential elements will be in your hands, and in this case, the obstacle could only be yourselves."
According to the European Commission, the prospect of an SAA -- which will ease BiH's trade with the EU, as well as reinforcing political and economic co-operation -- is intended to encourage further reforms. 
"Policing, public broadcasting, and full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia are at the top of this agenda," the Commission said in the latest edition of its Enlargement Newsletter, published Wednesday.
The launch of the SAA process made BiH's European prospects much clearer, according to Gasparovic. 
"We shall be together in the EU, which means that in the future we will share common values, have the same foreign and security policy and we will be a part of a single economic space."
