29/03/2006
(AP, US Embassy in Belgrade, Tanjug, Xinhua, Stratfor, Makfax, Washington Post - 28/03/06;
AP, AFP, UPI - 27/03/06)
US Air Force General Charles Wald, deputy commander of the US European Command (EUCOM), visited Belgrade on Tuesday (28 March) to discuss with Serbian officials ways to boost military co-operation between Serbia-Montenegro and the United States.
Wald, the first four-star US general to visit Serbia in more than six years, met with Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Zoran Stankovic and Chief of the General Staff, General Ljubisa Jokic.
"The focus of the meetings was to discuss the importance of improved ties with Serbia-Montenegro and to establish senior level dialogue with the ministry of defence of Serbia-Montenegro on the status and future of our bilateral military to military relationship," the US embassy in Belgrade said in a statement Tuesday.
After his talks with Wald, Stankovic said they had agreed on the course of signing four bilateral military agreements.
The first -- reportedly to be concluded in the near future -- would include provisions for strengthened co-operation on preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction and the promotion of defence and military relations.
Preparations for the three other agreements are said to be under way.
"General Wald's visit is an opportunity to brief him about our activities and to make even richer our growing co-operation," Stankovic told reporters after the meeting.
The reorganisation of Serbia-Montenegro's Army and the country's Euro-Atlantic integration bid were among the issues discussed, according to media reports.
Wald, who has been serving as EUCOM deputy commander since December 2002, "used the visit to encourage political and military support for the defence reform process, and stress the importance of concluding a Security Co-operation Agreement, which is critical for continued progress in building our bilateral military to military ties," according to the US embassy's statement.
Serbia-Montenegro is seeking admission into NATO's Partnership for Peace programme.
However, the Alliance has made clear this hinges on Belgrade's full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), including the arrest and handover of all indicted war criminals.
In recent months, Belgrade has come under increased international pressure to capture and extradite to The Hague one of its most wanted indictees, former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, who has been on the run for ten years now and is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia.
A report prepared by Serbia's military intelligence agency, delivered to the Serbian government in January, acknowledged that some 50 intelligence and army officials were part of a support network helping the fugitive evade justice.
Mladic has been charged with genocide stemming from the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of some 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys.
"The findings might lead to the prosecution of certain people who were in contact with war crimes suspects," a report Tuesday in the Washington Post quoted Stankovic as saying.
"Those officials were removed from their posts just several months ago.
That means that we have just now managed to create circumstances for more efficient and more engaged work" in making an arrest.
The EU has warned that it may suspend its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Belgrade if it fails to hand over Mladic by 5 April.
During his visit to Belgrade, Wald "highlighted the political importance of Belgrade's full compliance" with the ICTY, the US embassy said.
