31/10/2006
(EUobserver - 31/10/06;
AP, International Herald Tribune, Deutsche Welle, DPA, The Guardian, FENA - 30/10/06;
Reuters, AP - 02/10/06;
EUFOR)
Hours after Germany's defence minister said his country could begin pulling out its troops from Bosnia and Herzegovina within weeks, his British counterpart suggested Monday (October 30th) that London could follow suit in the spring.
The EU mounted its largest joint military operation ever in early December 2004, when it took over responsibility from NATO for ensuring a safe and secure environment in BiH and the country's continued compliance with the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The 6,300-strong EUFOR includes 850 German troops, while Britain's contribution to military operations in the Balkans -- including in BiH and Kosovo -- totals around 900 soldiers.
The future of EUFOR was one of the items on the agenda of an informal two-day meeting of EU defence ministers in the northern Finnish ski resort of Levi, which opened a day after the October 1st general elections in BiH.
Praising the country for its successful vote, the ministers discussed transformations the EU-led force could undergo, including downsizing of troop levels and an increasing shift to civilian matters, such as police activities.
As no agreement was reached on the timing of a move in that direction, the issue may be revisited in November, when a final decision could be made.
Citing the recent BiH elections, which he said "went very well", German Defence Minister Franz Josef Jung told ZDF television late Sunday that Berlin "will want to speak in December about how the exit strategy, in other words the repatriation, looks in concrete terms." According to his remarks, which were repeated on Monday, the plan appears to be for a "step-by-step" reduction of the German contingent in BiH.
Nearly 9,000 troops of the 245,000-strong German Army are taking part in NATO, EU, or UN-led operations.
In addition to the 850 soldiers deployed in BiH, Germany has another 2,800 troops in Afghanistan, about as many in Kosovo and 750 in Congo.
Last month, it agreed to contribute more than 1,000 marines to the UNIFIL mission in Lebanon.
"In some areas, we have already hit the limit," the AP quoted Jung as saying.
Meanwhile, British Defence Minister Des Browne suggested on Monday that his country could start pulling its troops from BiH in the spring.
Citing a certain "stretch" the British Army has been experiencing for quite some time, a Labour MP asked Browne whether it would not ease the situation if Britain drew down its contingent in BiH "now that the majority of that task is complete".
"You raise a specific point about Bosnia and I am able to tell you that we are looking at that very possibility of course in the context of the European force which is there and its command and control," The Guardian quoted Browne as responding.
"I would be confident that in or about the spring of next year we would be able to do just what you are urging upon us." Some analysts, however, seem to consider such moves premature.
"The announcement by the German defence minister sends all the wrong signals," the International Herald Tribune quoted Ivan Vejvoda, executive director of the Balkan Trust for Democracy, as saying.
"Of course countries want to downsize, but it is far too early to take our eye off the ball in the Balkans.
The international community has to be extremely careful in how it continues to deal with the region, especially Kosovo."
