30/03/2006
(Sofia News Agency, Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg - 30/03/06;
Sofia News Agency, Europe.bg, Vseki Den, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg, Sofia Echo, Makfax, Reporter.gr - 29/03/06)
Geoffrey van Orden, the European Parliament's (EP) rapporteur for Bulgaria, appeared confident Wednesday (29 March) that the Balkan country will join the EU in January 2007, as planned.
But Bulgaria's problems with organised crime and corruption could lead to the enforcement of a specific safeguard clause for justice and home affairs, the MEP warned at the start of a visit to Sofia.
Under the accession treaty Bulgaria and Romania signed with the EU in April 2005, the two countries are to join the Union on 1 January 2007.
A general safeguard clause allows the bloc to postpone their entry by one year if they fail to meet the EU requirements for entry.
In addition, Bulgaria faces two other more specific safeguard clauses -- for internal market and justice and home affairs.
Safeguard clauses may be activated and accession can still take place on 1 January 2007, van Orden said on Wednesday, stressing that no decision has been taken yet for a postponement of Bulgaria's EU entry.
Van Orden arrived in Sofia on a fact-finding mission for a report on Bulgaria's accession progress he is expected to complete by 7 April before presenting it to the EP towards the end of this month.
On 16 May, the European Commission (EC) is due to issue recommendations as to whether the country's admission into the Union should take place as scheduled.
The leaders of the 25-nation bloc are expected to make a final decision on this issue during a summit in June.
If they decide that Bulgaria can enter the EU in January 2007, but with the safeguard clause for justice and home affairs enforced, it will mean that rulings issued by Bulgarian courts may be invalid within the bloc and that Bulgarians visiting the Union will continue to be subject to the currently effective border paper checks.
Van Orden's warning followed comments by EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn on Tuesday, in which he praised Romania's progress in the fight against corruption and in strengthening its judiciary, but appeared more cautious in his remarks on Bulgaria.
Speaking to Reuters, the commissioner urged Bulgaria to amend its constitution quickly, so that it can complete the required judicial reforms before its EU entry target date.
Parliament adopted amendments to the constitution Thursday after changes to texts in several parts.
However, some of the amendments -- including the granting of increased power to the executive, and provisions allowing the legislature to cut short the terms of Supreme Court chiefs with a two-thirds majority -- have been criticised by EC experts.
