30/03/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 30/03/06
Chief UN prosecutor Carla del Ponte claimed on Wednesday (29 March) that former Bosnian Serb wartime commander Ratko Mladic was within the reach of Serbia-Montenegro's leaders but that they are hesitant to arrest him.
During meetings with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, President Boris Tadic and other top officials, she stressed that resolving the Mladic case is of prime importance.
The prosecutor's visit came ahead of a report she is to issue Friday, assessing Belgrade's co-operation with The Hague.
That assessment, in turn, will likely play a key role in an EU decision on whether to continue talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Belgrade.
In late February, the EU Council of Ministers warned that full co-operation with The Hague tribunal is absolutely necessary to "avoid disruptions" in the SAA talks, the next round of which are due to begin on 5 April.
During their talks with del Ponte, Serbian officials said it was important that the SAA process move forward and asked for "understanding" with regard to the politically difficult Mladic case.
Kostunica vowed that the government is determined to finalise co-operation, which he described as being in Serbia's interest.
Tadic warned against measures that could undermine the Serbian government, and federal Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic said suspending the SAA talks could have "a far-reaching, adverse effect on political stability and further democratic reforms".
In an interview with Reuters, EU Enlargement Commissioner Ollie Rehn stopped short of saying he would order the suspension of talks unless Serbia arrests Mladic this week.
But he urged Belgrade to assert political control over its security forces to make the move now.
Support for Mladic among some elements in the military has been cited as a key factor in Belgrade's failure to hand him over.
"I hope Serbia will be able to find the required political courage to achieve this important objective ...
Time is running out," Rehn said.
Meanwhile, US Ambassador to Serbia-Montenegro Michael Polt said that he did not think the level of co-operation with the ICTY so far was sufficient for the State Department to make a positive decision on continuing US aid to Serbia-Montenegro.
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will decide on the matter by the end of May, Polt told a group of Belgrade journalists.
As for Mladic's eventual extradition, he said, "the only thing that can really prove that the action has been done right is the extradition itself."
