29/03/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Durres – 29/03/06
A groundbreaking meeting on the situation of minorities in Kosovo wrapped up Tuesday (28 March) in Durres, Albania. 
Kosovo Albanian officials and politicians, representatives of the Serb and other minority communities, and international diplomats gathered for the three-day event, which was organised by ORA, a reformist political party in Kosovo.
According to Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Lutfi Haziri, who also heads the local government ministry, the Durres meeting signalled "political authorities are working for a democratic Kosovo, where the minorities will be treated equally." The rights of minorities would be guaranteed through mechanisms to be drawn up together with the representatives of their communities, he said.
ORA leader Vetton Surroi also stressed the need for strong and democratic institutions in Kosovo. 
"We need these standards in order to concentrate in the main issues," he said.
The Kosovo Serbs' leader, Oliver Ivanovic, surprised journalists by addressing them in the Albanian language. 
He said he would follow directives coming from Belgrade regarding the future status of Kosovo.
"We are here to learn more about the position of the Pristina delegation for the talks in Vienna, and we want the requests of the Serbs to be taken into account. 
We are interested in the creation of new communes, in the framework of the decentralisation plan. 
These structures should be strong and functional. 
We are also looking forward to creating the proper mechanisms for the protection of minorities," Ivanovic said.
Kosovo Albanians and Serbs have held two previous rounds of talks that ended without any clear agreement, but pledged to meet again in Vienna on 3 April to discuss reforms that could give Serbs more of a say in areas where they live.
The UN has run Kosovo since mid-1999, when a NATO air war halted a Serb crackdown on ethnic Albanian separatists, forcing Belgrade to relinquish control of the province. 
Kosovo officially remains part of Serbia, with its final status yet to be determined.
Albania has made clear that it would not be a key actor in the process of determining that status, but has offered to help facilitate the talks.
Philip Goldberg, the top US diplomat in Kosovo, and a representative of the European Centre for Minority Issues, a Germany-based think tank, were among the international figures taking part in the Durres meeting, according to ORA.
