28/03/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 28/03/06
The EU's special envoy for Kosovo status talks, Stefan Lehne, arrived in Pristina on Thursday (23 March) for a two-day visit. 
During talks with Prime Minister Agim Ceku, Interior Minister Fatmir Rexhepi and opposition leader Hashim Thaci, he highlighted the need to improve the situation for Kosovo's minorities and implement UN-set standards for the province.
"If the Kosovar side manages to secure better conditions for minorities that are living here, the process of status talks will be much easier," said Lehne, who also met with UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen and other UN officials. 
"Without progress towards implementing of standards we will not have real progress in the talks," he added.
"I believe that everyone in Kosovo, the president, the prime minister and also the opposition have to work together over the coming months" to meet these goals, Lehne said.
For his part, Thaci, head of the Kosovo negotiating team, stressed that Kosovo wants a "final status that is acceptable to the international community".
Reiterating his side's goal of independence and EU prospects for Kosovo, Thaci also said the province's political leaders are committed to democratisation.
While legally part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been run by the UN since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict. 
Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90 per cent of the province's population of 2 million, are pushing for independence, while Belgrade, which wants to retain at least some sovereignty over the province, is offering it substantial autonomy. 
The two sides have participated in two rounds of direct talks, focused mainly on decentralisation and local governance reforms.
The UN's deputy special envoy for the status talks, Albert Rohan, was due to arrive Tuesday in Pristina to present a UN document on the decentralisation issue. 
It reportedly contains a summary of the direct talks so far, and outlines a comprehensive proposal worked out by UN negotiators.
