18/11/2010
WASHINGTON, United States -- Attacks and discrimination based on religious identity continue in the Balkans, but due to the interconnectedness of ethnicity and religion it can be hard to determine the motive for these acts, the State Department said in its annual International Religious Freedom Report, published on Wednesday (November 17th).
In the part on Albania, the document praises religious tolerance in the country, but notes the lack of action in cases involving property confiscation by the former communist regime.
Legislation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) generally provides for religious freedom, but discrimination against religious minorities exists in almost all parts of the country, the document pointed out.
In Montenegro, relations between the major religious groups are generally good, with the exception of the long-term tension between the Serb Orthodox Church and the Montenegrin Orthodox Church.
In Croatia, there are incidents of vandalism and threats based on religious affiliation, especially in areas affected by the war.
In Kosovo, religious freedom is guaranteed by the constitution, but problems remain, including reported threats against the Serbian Orthodox Church and its property.
Authorities in Macedonia generally respect the freedom of practicing religion, but some communities have met difficulties in gaining legal status.
Religious freedoms in Bulgaria are generally respected, according to the State Department, but the government is not pro-active in preventing some cases of obvious violence.
Greece too generally respects religious freedoms, with the exception of some cases of incidents involving Muslims and vandalism against mosques.
Some improvement has also been marked in Romania, where minority religious groups complained less frequently than in prior years that low-level government officials impeded their efforts at proselytising, and interfered with other religious activities.
There is discrimination against some religious groups in Serbia, the report warned.
Turkey meanwhile, was among the countries where religious freedom seems to be improving.
Some limitations remain in place however, such as the ongoing ban on Muslim religious expression in government offices and state-run institutions.
No major concerns were mentioned regarding Cyprus.
(State Department website, Radio Free Europe, MIA, VoA, BBC, Top Channel, Telegrafi - 17/11/10)
