27/03/2006
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 27/03/06
The constitutional reforms agreed on by seven main political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have been welcomed by the international community. 
At home, however, they have sparked heated debate.
Among other things, the seven parties agreed to replace the current three-member presidency with a single, rotating president and two vice presidents, all of whom would be elected by parliament and not directly, and for a four-year term in office. 
Each of them should represent one of the country's main ethnic groups -- Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs.
The EU Council hailed the deal as representing a significant step towards strengthening BiH state institutions and boosting the country's ability to meet European standards. 
Similar comments came from High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling and US Ambassador to BiH Douglas McElhaney.
"No party got what it wanted. 
But the real benefits of the agreed reforms will be for BiH itself and its citizens," said Sulejman Tihic, BiH Presidency chairman and head of the Party of Democratic Action, the major Bosniak formation.
However, three opposition parties -- the Party for BiH, BOSS and the Social Democratic Union (SDU) -- have refused to support the reforms. 
They had wanted to remove the principle of ethnic voting in the BiH House of Representatives, under which a certain percentage of deputies from each entity must support a decision.
"They agreed on a mechanism that allows four members of the parliamentarian House of Peoples to block the election of the presidency," said Ivo Komsic of the SDU. 
"In that case it would not be possible to elect the prime minister or the Council of Ministers. 
That means there would be no government and there would be a need for new elections."
The proposed reforms have also drawn objections from the Catholic Bishops' Conference (CBC), which said they would leave BiH's Croats at a disadvantage.
"The principle of entity decision-making in the House of Representatives would place the destiny of the country in the hands of the representatives of only two of the constitutive peoples (Serbs and Bosniaks). 
The two peoples alone would be able to ensure one third of members of parliament needed for the vote," the CBC said.
The constitutional reform agreement must be approved by the BiH Parliament to become effective in time for the October general elections. 
On Saturday, the BiH presidency formally adopted a draft reform package and forwarded it to lawmakers, who will now consider the proposed changes.
