27/03/2006
(Turkish Press - 25/03/06;
AP, AFP, VOA, American Forces Press Service - 24/03/06;
Hurriyet, Turkish Press, Xinhua, VOA, Zaman, American Forces Press Service - 23/03/06)
Terrorism is the most serious threat humanity faces in the 21st century, Turkish Army chief General Hilmi Ozkok said at the end of a two-day international anti-terrorism conference that ended in Ankara on Friday (24 March).
"We will achieve a great victory in our fight against terrorism when our states, armies, judicial organs, international organisations, non-governmental organisations, media, local administrations and people assume a joint stance against terrorism," Ozkok said in his closing remarks at the Global Terrorism and International Co-operation symposium in the Turkish capital.
"Success in the fight against terrorism depends on adoption of a common culture by all states and nations in the world."
He also issued a warning to states that sponsor terrorism.
"With the new level of communication abilities and ties, the walls are now so transparent that any ties or relations made with terrorists are no longer secret," he said.
"Nations which support and nourish terror may think that they will grow strong as other nations suffer from terrorism.
But history shows that, in fact, terror is an ungrateful progeny, and it shows its ungratefulness by, in the end, hitting at the one who nourished it."
The forum, hosted by the Turkish Army's General Staff, brought together senior military and political officials from 82 countries, including Afghan President Hamid Karzai;
the Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Peter Pace;
and the chiefs of staff of other NATO member nations.
Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan attended the symposium as it opened Thursday.
Pace, one of the keynote speakers, stressed that no country can win the war against terror on its own and that even the smallest nation can play an important role.
"There is no nation so large that it can do it all by itself," he said.
"And there is no nation that is so small that it cannot have strategic impact and participate in a very meaningful way."
According to Pace, military might can be instrumental in providing security, but other elements, such as good governance, economic development, and good education systems that do not teach hate are "the keys to the long-term victory in the war on terror".
Karzai, also a keynote speaker at the forum, described terrorism as "the worst menace" facing the world today and said broad international co-operation is needed to fight it.
Terrorism "is a challenge that we all have to address together," the Afghan president said.
Rejecting any association of terrorism with a single religion, such as Islam, Karzai said it "has no tradition, has no religion and has no system of values".
