29/09/2006
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 29/09/06
During the 61st session of the UN General Assembly in New York, the Croatian delegation -- headed by President Stipe Mesic -- officially declared its candidacy to become a non-permanent member of Security Council in the 2008-2009 term.
It is the first time that the country has sought a seat on the Council since gaining its independence in 1991.
Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, Foreign Minister Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic and other officials also came to New York to promote the bid.
Grabar-Kitarovic met with other foreign ministers, including her US counterpart, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.
Returning to Zagreb, Sanader said he was satisfied with the Croatian delegation's participation at the UN General Assembly meeting.
He praised the joint effort by the government and the president's office, saying that both institutions have contributed to the country's international position.
For the better part of a decade, Croatia was a focus of the Security Council's attention, first as conflict erupted in the Balkans, and later as efforts at post-war rehabilitation and reconciliation got under way.
Now the country wants to take on a new role and make a contribution to international peace and stability.
The Security Council's non-permanent members are elected for two-year terms by the General Assembly.
Croatia's most serious rival for the spot is the Czech Republic.
Czech officials were also in New York to lobby for their country's candidacy, and they won considerable support.
The third candidate of the so-called East European group is Georgia.
The former Yugoslavia was a non-permanent member of the Security Council four times -- in 1950-1951, 1956, 1972-1973 and 1988-1989.
Since its break-up, the only former Yugoslav republic to have had this opportunity was Slovenia, which was a member during the 1998-1999 term.
To gain broader backing for Croatia, Mesic attended the Non-Aligned Movement summit in Havana this month.
"The effort President Mesic and I invested was certainly important … every vote will count," Sanader told reporters.
The lobbying efforts are now continuing in Europe, with Croatian officials hoping to garner support from other Balkan countries as well as EU members.
