30/08/2006
(The Independent, AFP - 30/08/06; Evening Standard, Daily Mail, International Herald Tribune, Sofia News Agency - 29/08/06)
A group of top business leaders on Tuesday (29 August) urged the British government against changing its immigration policy ahead of Bulgaria and Romania's scheduled EU entry in January 2007.
There is heated debate on the issue in Britain, with opposition conservatives and cabinet members calling for restrictions to ensure that workers from the two Balkan nations will not flood the country's labour market after joining the Union.
Britain was among a very few EU member states that fully opened their labour markets to migrant workers from the ten countries admitted into the bloc in May 2004. 
Recent reports suggest that while the government expected about 13,000 people from those countries to come to work in Britain, the actual figure exceeded 600,000.
Arguing that the British economy has benefited from this huge influx of workers, members of the Business for New Europe (BNE) signed a statement Tuesday that says Bulgarians and Romanians also should be allowed access to the country's labour market.
"If Bulgaria and Romania join the EU at the beginning of next year, the UK should continue with its open door policy," British daily Independent quoted from the BNE statement. 
"A so-called pause in migration from these countries would be tantamount to a reversal of policy and could work against Britain's interests."
Citing recent economic reports, the Independent referenced figures showing that the contribution to the British economy by Eastern European immigrants last year equalled £2.54 billion. 
Between 0.5 per cent and 1 per cent of British economic growth in 2005 and 2006 also is attributed to migrants.
"We've seen some real contributions to our labour market from, for example, young Polish workers coming to meet skills shortages in Britain," Treasury Economic Secretary Ed Balls said in an interview with the BBC. 
"At the same time, we're going to have to look very carefully at these issues in the next few months because we need to make sure we continue with a disciplined and managed approach."
The BNE, whose 20-member advisory council includes the heads of companies like Sainsbury, Centrica, Merrill Lynch, the London Stock Exchange, KPMG and energy giant BP, urged the government to be rational when deciding on the issue. 
"We believe that in reaching its decision, the UK should be guided both by economic reason and by recent historical experience," the group said.
Romanian President Traian Basescu said fears that hundreds of thousands of workers from his country would flood the EU labour market were unfounded. 
"The increase in salaries at private companies has exploded, and Romania also faces a labour shortage, especially in construction. 
We believe that the Romanian market will remain an incentive, so that migration will not be an issue," he said in an interview with the International Herald Tribune.
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin also sought to dispel such concerns, saying Bulgarians would pose no threat to the British labour market after the country joins the EU.
