28/08/2006
(Reuters, International Herald Tribune - 27/08/06; AFP, VOA - 26/08/06; AP, AFP, BBC, CNN, EUobserver, Finnish EU Presidency Web Site, UN News Centre - 25/08/06)
The EU pledged to contribute nearly 7,000 troops to the expanded UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) during a meeting of the bloc's foreign ministers in Brussels on Friday (25 August).
"The significant overall contribution of the member states to UNIFIL demonstrates that the EU is living up to its responsibilities," the ministers said in a statement on the meeting's conclusions. 
In addition to the troops, amounting to more than half of those needed for the UN-authorised reinforcement of UNIFIL, the EU nations also pledged "significant maritime and air assets, command, communications and logistical support," as well as possible further contributions in the future.
Established in 1978, UNIFIL currently numbers 2,000 troops and is under the command of French Major General Alain Pellegrini.
UN Security Council Resolution 1701, adopted on 11 August, authorised the mission's expansion to a force of up to 15,000 troops. 
Operating alongside Lebanese Army soldiers, the key tasks of the bolstered force include keeping Hezbollah fighters out of a 30km-wide zone in southern Lebanon, but not disarming the militant group.
With a promised contribution of up to 3,000 troops, Italy will have the largest contingent within the expanded force, which some have now begun referring to as UNIFIL 2. 
France said it would send a total of 1,800 soldiers, in addition to the 200 already deployed in Lebanon. 
Spain has offered to provide up to 1,200 troops and Finland up to 250 troops. 
Poland and Belgium said they would initially contribute 500 and 302 soldiers respectively, but would consider additional contributions in the future. 
Belgium's participation could eventually reach nearly 400 troops, the Herald Tribune reported on Friday.
Contributions from other EU member nations include at least two warships from Denmark and a frigate, helicopter and special forces from Greece. 
Portugal, according to the AFP, is willing to contribute a yet unspecified number of troops, while Germany is expected to provide several surveillance warships and a 1,000-strong force comprising mainly sailors, but no combat troops.
Attending the Brussels meeting Friday, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan said, "More than half the force has been pledged today. 
Not only troops on the ground but we also got naval assets as well as air assets and when you put it altogether, Europe is providing the backbone to the force."
Two weeks after the cessation of hostilities between Israel and Hezbollah, the situation on the ground remains fragile. 
The UN chief said it is essential for the deployments to be made as soon as possible. 
"We're approaching this in three phases," Annan explained. 
"The first phase, we would want to get in about 3,000 to 4,000 men very quickly, in the next few days or a week. 
And then we will have a second and a third phase to complete our deployment."
The EU member states' pledges were welcomed by both Israel and Lebanon.
Following an earlier dispatch of 50 troops, a group of an additional 170 French troops specialising in mine clearing and reconstruction arrived at the southern Lebanese port of Naqoura on Friday. 
France will continue leading the expanded UNIFIL until the end of February, when Italy will take over the command.
