29/08/2006
(BBC, Irish Times, The Independent, The Guardian, The New York Times - 29/08/06; AP, AFP, Reuters, AKI, DPA, Turkish Press, Journal of Turkish Weekly, Washington File - 28/08/06)
Three people were killed and 20 others were injured in a bomb blast in the Mediterranean resort city of Antalya on Monday (28 August), the fifth terrorist attack in Turkey in less than 24 hours.
Late Sunday, three nearly simultaneous explosions in Marmaris, another popular resort on Turkey's Mediterranean Sea coast, left 21 people wounded, including ten British tourists. 
The strongest blast ripped through a shuttle bus ferrying tourists through the city, at a time when its streets were crowded with tourists. 
Earlier in the day, six others were injured when a bomb went off near a school in Istanbul.
The Kurdistan Freedom Falcons (TAK), said to be linked to the outlawed Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), claimed responsibility on Monday for the weekend attacks. 
Citing a statement on the militant group's website, an AFP report said the attacks were in revenge for the imprisonment of PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan, who has been behind bars since 1999.
The attacks in Marmaris and Istanbul were viewed as TAK's new attempt to hit the tourism sector, an important source of revenue for Turkey. 
The group is believed to be behind 12 bombings this year that have killed six people and injured more than 100.
No one has yet claimed responsibility for Monday's late afternoon attack in Antalya, which occurred in a busy shopping area in the heart of the city.
Turkish news agency Anatolia quoted local police spokesman Akif Aktug as saying Monday’s bomb exploded between two mopeds parked in front of a municipal building, whose facade was ripped off by the blast. 
Several buildings were badly damaged by the explosion, which triggered a fire.
Authorities reportedly are looking for two suspects.
Meanwhile, police sources said a PKK member was detained in the western port city of Izmir on Monday over his suspected involvement in a planned attack there. 
Plastic explosives were seized in the operation, Anatolia reported.
PKK, defined as a terrorist group by the EU, the United States and Turkey, launched an armed campaign for self-rule in Turkey's Kurdish dominated southeast in 1984. 
Fifteen years of fighting has left more than 37,000 people dead.
The group is said to number up to 5,000 people, primarily Turkish Kurds. 
The majority reportedly have found shelter across the border in northern Iraq, from where they stage attacks inside Turkey.
On Monday, the US State Department announced the appointment of retired Air Force General Joseph W. 
Ralston as US special envoy for countering the PKK. 
A former NATO supreme allied commander, Ralston will be responsible for "co-ordinating US engagement with the government of Turkey and the government of Iraq to eliminate the terrorist threat of the PKK and other terrorist groups operating in northern Iraq and across the Turkey-Iraq border," State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said. 
The appointment "underscores the commitment of the United States to work with Turkey and Iraq to eliminate terrorism in all its forms," he said.
