28/09/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 28/09/06
Traffic safety has deteriorated in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) in recent years, with statistics showing a 7% increase in the number of people killed on the road annually.
Each year, seven people die per 10,000 cars in BiH -- twice as many as in Western European countries such as Great Britain or Sweden.
New legislation adopted last month seeks to change this.
It includes a number of restrictions, designed to impose European standards on Bosnian drivers, and stiffens penalties for infractions.
Under the new law, the maximum legal blood alcohol concentration while driving is 0.3%.
For persons under 21, the amount is zero.
In addition to the tightened alcohol limits, mobile phone use while driving is now banned.
The minimum ticket is now 15 euros, instead of 5 euros.
For more serious offences, drivers risk having to pay several hundred euros in fines.
The most severe tickets -- amounting to half the monthly average salary in BiH -- are for speeding, technical malfunction, driving without a licence and driving an unregistered car.
In addition to tickets, drivers can receive punitive points.
Those who get ten points in a year must take classes in traffic security, and those who collect 15 points must retake their driver's test.
BiH faces a number of challenges in enforcing traffic and driving laws.
Jurisdiction is divided among cantons, entities and the state.
Upholding the law could depend on the introduction of a central database of drivers and vehicles.
Some traffic safety experts say the new legislation is unsatisfactory because it does nothing to change the system for testing drivers.
In particular, they say, there is no real control imposed on the test commissions, which many Bosnians see as corrupt.
The law also has been criticised for not doing more to encourage driver education.
During the Yugoslav era, BiH had traffic schools for young people, and these were seen as helping greatly to reduce the number of accidents involving youth.
Moreover, the new regulations and penalties will not change the fact that most cars on the road in BiH are old -- on average, 17 years.
Such cars are frequently unsafe, a fact which -- together with speeding and alcohol -- contributes to high accident rates.
