28/09/2006
(Blic - 28/09/06;
AP, DPA, UPI, AKI, B92, Beta - 27/09/06;
AP, Reuters - 21/09/06;
Reuters, DPA - 19/07/06;
Beta - 14/07/06)
The trial of eleven people accused of helping war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic evade justice kicked off at Belgrade's Second Municipal Court on Wednesday (27 September).
The defendants, most of them Bosnian Serbs, are Jovo Djogo, Stanko and Predrag Ristic, Sasa Badnjar, Ratko Vucetic, Marko Lugonja, Blagoje Govedarica, Borislav Ivanovic, and Tatjana, Bojan and Ljiljana Vaskovic.
They were arrested by Serbian authorities earlier this year following a secret military intelligence report, which claimed over 50 individuals were conspiring to help Mladic avoid arrest.
One of the most wanted war crimes indictees in the world, the former Bosnian Serb military chief has been on the run for more than ten years now and is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia.
He was indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in 1995, along with former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
Mladic faces multiple counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war and also has been charged with genocide, stemming from the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo.
Citing the indictment against the fugitive's alleged helpers, the Belgrade daily Politika reported in July that Mladic hid in "relatively modest" flats in the Serbian capital's Novi Beograd residential district between June 2002 and January of this year.
The suspects are said to have paid the rent for the apartments, supplied him with food and cell phone cards and helped him move between locations.
Shortly after the trial began Wednesday, the three-judge panel announced that the hearings would be held behind closed doors.
The judges cited the still ongoing investigation against one of the suspects, which involves classified information.
According to the AP, only Djogo and Lugonja are currently being held in custody.
Before the end of Wednesday's hearing, however, the judges decided that the passports of the other nine should be taken away.
They are also forbidden to leave their residences and must report to the court on a weekly basis.
Full co-operation with the ICTY, including the arrest and handover of Mladic and other indictees still sought by The Hague-based court, is a key condition for Serbia's progress on the path to Euro-Atlantic integration.
In May, the EU put talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Belgrade on ice, following the authorities' failure to keep their promise to capture Mladic by the end of April.
Consequently, the Serbian government adopted an action plan for full co-operation with the ICTY, saying the main goal was to ensure Mladic's arrest.
The EU has made it clear that if and when this happens, the SAA talks will resume.
