30/10/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 30/10/06
In a referendum at the weekend, Serbian voters gave the thumbs up to a new constitution, the first of the post-Milosevic era.
The document contains a preamble referring to Kosovo as an integral part of Serbia, though with broad autonomy.
It has been strongly condemned by the province's Albanian majority, who for years have boycotted any vote held under Serbian auspices.
According to preliminary results from the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy and the Republican Electoral Commission, 51.4% of voters approved the constitution.
Now the political parties have to agree on a date for early parliamentary and presidential elections.
It is widely believed they could be called for December.
For the constitution to be approved, over 50% of eligible voters -- at least 3.3 million people -- had to support it.
In all, 6.6 million people were registered to vote in the two-day referendum, which began Saturday (October 28th).
Total turnout over the two days of polling was 53.5%.
A last-minute surge to the polls saved the measure from failing due to insufficient turnout.
The first day of the referendum saw a turnout of just 17%, except in Serb-populated areas of Kosovo, where it ranged from 35% to 37%.
In the end, the highest turnout was in Kosovo (90.1%), and the lowest in Vojvodina (45.9%).
Government opponents and NGOs, particularly from Vojvodina, have criticised the charter as hastily drafted and flawed in a number of areas, including independence of the judiciary, equal rights for minorities and autonomy for local governments.
Serbia's opposition Liberal Party claimed "massive fraud" had taken place at polling stations in the final hours of voting, with individuals allegedly voting several times and without identification papers.
As results came in Sunday evening, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Serbian President Boris Tadic congratulated the public.
"This is a great moment for Serbia …This is a historic moment, a beginning of a new era," Kostunica said, adding that the confirmation of the document proved Serbia's legitimacy before the world.
Tadic said the referendum outcome was "very good news".
He added that new elections must be announced to contribute to the political stability of the country, the region and Europe.
Ahead of the poll, senior representatives of the Kosovo government and UNMIK said it would have no legal impact on the UN-led process of establishing the province's final status.
After his meeting with Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku, UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker said that the referendum and the resolution of Kosovo's status are two separate processes.
