30/05/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 30/05/06
Oil transit from the Caspian Sea Region through the Balkans and into Europe and the United States is so significant that there are plans to build a total of three oil pipelines.
However, experts agree that there is room for only two players.
That was the message at a recent summit in Belgrade, attended by 150 representatives of governments and energy companies from the region, the EU, the US and Russia, as well as international institutions such as the IFC and the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
The interest in running pipelines through the Balkans is global.
Countries in the region would be getting cheaper oil and would charge duties and taxes and other services, while tankers that currently wait up to 20 days to pass these straits would reach the US that much sooner.
Russian interests are clear, according to analyst Dejan Stojadinović:
a reduction in dependence on Turkey, which controls the Bosphorus Straits.
"The Balkan pipelines and associated natural gas pipelines could also be an opportunity for Europe to reduce its dependence on Russia," Sijka Pištolova, an energy analyst and editor of the Energyobserver Web site, indicated.
The Energyobserver, together with Miroljub Labus, who stepped down recently as deputy prime minister of Serbia, organised the Belgrade summit.
The plan for the 300km pipeline from the Bulgarian port of Burgas to the Greek port Aleksandropolis was approved in 1997.
Investment in the project was rubber stamped by several partners -- Greece's Hellenic Petroleum, Latsis Group and Prometheu gas, Bulgaria's Bulgargaz and Univerzalni terminali Burgas, and Russia's TNK-BP, Rosneft and Gazprom.
Moscow is urging companies to open these channels as soon as possible.
Bulgaria is also working on another project, a pipeline west from Burgas -- through Macedonia -- to the Albanian port of Valona.
Though in principle, Washington supports all projects that could assure better access to Caspian "gold", this pipeline is proving the most interesting.
The US government financed a feasibility study for a 900km pipeline, while the AMBO Corporation was founded in the States with exclusive rights to select partners for implementing the $1.24 billion project.
Shortly after the Belgrade summit, Macedonia's Economy Ministry indicated that companies managing and exploiting the pipeline will be "entitled to all rights".
Countries in the northern Balkans want a piece of the action too.
Romania, Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia and Italy are trying to find common language regarding the Pan European pipeline.
It would run from Konstance, through the Serbian oil refinery in Pancevo, to the Italian port of Trieste on the Adriatic.
Though this project has enormous advantages over its competitors -- at least twice the capacity, refineries and consumers along its route, partial construction under way, and an existing "pipe-to-pipe" connection to a line that crosses the Alps in Trieste -- its far less advanced than others.
In this race, likely to start bearing fruit at the beginning of the next decade, the winner could take all.
