27/09/2006
(FT, The Guardian, Independent, Washington Post, BNN - 27/09/06; AP, AFP, Reuters, International Herald Tribune, RFE/RL, VOA, EUobserver, EUpolitix, Sofia News Agency, EU, Bulgarian government - 26/09/06)
Although it did not come without strings attached, Bulgarian officials hailed on Tuesday (26 September) European Commission (EC) decision, which clears the way for their country and neighbouring Romania to enter the EU on 1 January 2007.
"This is the genuine and final fall of the Berlin Wall," Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev said.
Joining the EU is the most meaningful historical project for Bulgaria's future, Bulgarian Darik Radio quoted President Georgi Parvanov as saying. 
Bulgaria, he added, has signed a number of treaties in its history, but it is this step that finally puts it on an equal footing with the rest of the European nations.
In its final monitoring report on the two Balkan nations' progress towards EU accession, released Tuesday, the EC said both "have carried out an extraordinary reform process and they have gone through a remarkable transformation" since the fall of communism in late 1989.
EU membership will give a powerful momentum for Bulgaria's economic and social development and will make the Union stronger, EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said at a news conference in Sofia on Wednesday, following talks with Stanishev. 
There is reason to celebrate, but there is no room for complacency, he stressed, urging the authorities to focus on implementation of still needed reforms.
Stringent conditions have been imposed on Bulgaria and Romania as they prepare to become the 26th and 27th members of the Union. 
Failure to meet the requirements could lead to the activation, during the first three years of membership, of tough safeguard clauses included.in the two countries' accession treaty.
The EC said it will establish strong monitoring mechanisms to ensure that both countries carry out the prescribed actions. 
In addition, Sofia and Bucharest will have to submit reports on their progress in implementing the required measures every six months, with the first one due on 31 March.
Bulgaria must also take immediate corrective action to rectify all deficiencies in the area of air safety. 
Otherwise, the EC may move to restrict Bulgarian aviation companies' access to the bloc's aviation market.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, who was with Barroso in Sofia on Wednesday, said it was up to Bulgaria to make sure that the safeguard clauses envisioned in the treaty will not be triggered.
