27/09/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 27/09/06
"Size matters," European Liberal lawmaker Graham Watson told the European Parliament (EP) as it debated the bloc's future. 
"The EU needs as many countries as possible which share our values to help us tackle the serious challenges of our age."
Along with most of the Group leaders in the European Parliament, Watson welcomed the European Commission's (EC) decision to recommend 1 January 2007 as the accession date for Romania and Bulgaria.
According to EC President Jose Manuel Barroso, the entry of the two Balkan countries is "a historic achievement that makes our Union safer and stronger". 
Although he called for a pause in the enlargement process while the bloc resolves the issue of a European Constitution, he also gave assurances to other aspiring members that they are not being shut out.
"We will respect our commitments towards countries to whom we have opened an accession perspective," Barroso said.
Romanians, meanwhile, were cautiously celebrating. 
President Traian Basescu warned the country not to indulge in wishful thinking. 
"Any illusion that once we enter the EU, wealth will be for granted cannot be anything but a grave error. 
We have to get used to living in an environment which continuously calls on us for performance," he said.
After a long and painful process of reforms, Romania has reached its objective. 
Nevertheless, Basescu said, there are "areas with mediocre performance".
The shortcomings were laid out in the new monitoring report that the EC has submitted to the European Parliament. 
A particular area of concern is agriculture. 
There is "still a real risk that the paying agencies will not be functioning properly by the time of the accession", the report warns. 
As a result, Romania risks losing up to 25% of EU agricultural funding.
The EC was faced with a difficult task. 
In giving the green light, it also had to appease some reluctant EU member states -- notably France and Germany, which have not yet ratified the accession treaty with Bulgaria and Romania.
While praising the "sustainable progress both countries have achieved," Barroso also assured European lawmakers that the EC would set up a mechanism for co-operation and verification of progress after accession.
Both will have to report every six months to the EC. 
They will still have to meet benchmarks in judicial reform, anti-corruption measures and the fight against organised crime.
Should either country fail to meet these benchmarks, the EC could apply a specific safeguard clause that would suspend judicial co-operation and the obligation of the current EU member states to recognise the court rulings issued in that particular country.
Some EU officials, such as Jonathan Scheele, head of the EC Delegation in Bucharest, acknowledge that this safeguard cause could be "a blunt edged weapon", mainly affecting ordinary citizens. 
In Brussels, however, it is viewed as a means of pressure on Bucharest and Sofia to continue needed reforms.
