28/07/2006
By Balkanblogs for Southeast European Times – 28/07/06
Every promotional campaign needs a theme. 
Writing from Belgrade, Desperate Serbwife thinks spring could be an ideal motif for remaking Serbia's international image. 
It's the time, after all, when things grow and bloom -- a perfect analogy.
"It could show that, after the problems of the 1990s, a rejuvenated Serbia has started to blossom in so many ways -- in business, in tourism, in democratic government. 
It could also be used to give the impression that, just as in spring, the process has not yet finished but it is well on its way and people should invest here at the very beginning," she writes.
"You could do a TV commercial, showing photos of Microsoft and other international companies that have invested here. 
You could show students at universities to symbolise the highly educated workforce. 
You could show a mayor at a town hall meeting listening to small business owners talk about how businesses are growing in their town. 
And you could definitely show beautiful photos of the mountains in the springtime."
On a similar note, Biljana Srbljanovic is opening a competition on "what's best in Serbia". 
It's time the country becomes known for products other than food and beverages, she thinks. 
One suggestion: skin cream. 
For years, according to Srbljanovic, Belgrade pharmacies have been selling their own counterparts to Strivectin and Botox -- for a fraction of the cost.
The Serbian products "have no preservatives, are plant based and what's most important -- they really work," writes Srbljanovic.
Perhaps, building on the success of the Exit Festival, the country could hone a reputation as a venue for great music. 
Certainly it's been attracting its share of top stars, most recently Bryan Ferry. 
Lonely Rider caught Ferry's "phenomenal concert" at the Sava Centre. 
The veteran British art-rocker was "tireless on the stage; playing keyboard, jumping, dancing and singing with his magical voice! 
Women will probably talk about his good looks for a long, long time, although he is already 60!"
Elsewhere in the Balkans, Romania also is trying to boost its profile through new campaigns meant to drawn tourists. 
According to Andreea Mira, though, it's no use simply telling the world that the country is gorgeous and has much to offer.
What's really important, Mira writes, is to improve the capabilities of the tourism industry.
"They should better start a training programme for tourism managers, because the quality of tourism depends on their investments: better hotels, flawless services, professional personnel … Offering satisfaction for their customers is the winning solution."
Neighbouring Bulgaria, meanwhile, has succeeded in attracting more and more international visitors to its Black Sea resorts. 
The downside is that many Bulgarians say they can no longer afford a vacation there. 
According to Rayna Ivanova, though, some who find themselves hard up are really suffering from a case of misplaced priorities.
It's not unusual for an individual to spend around 1,000 leva (510 euros) a year on mobile communications, writes Ivanova. 
"This is also the amount of money that would take a family of four to a vacation on the southern Black Sea coast towards the end of the season. 
Thus, by carrying out the global revolution, the gentlemen who sell the mobile phones have actually reshuffled our budgets. 
We might not be able to afford a vacation, but there is always that mobile phone."
"If we want to live a better life … perhaps we should do something to reshuffle the budget of a group of people, society, or the nation," she concludes.
And that's some of what bloggers are talking about this week. 
Enjoy your holidays (or brand new ring tone) and check back here next week for more comment from around the Balkans.
