07/12/2009
By Aleksandar Petrovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/12/09 Photos by Tomislav Georgiev
Georgi Spasov is one of the founding members of the Social Democratic Party and the founder of the new think-tank Demos.
Spasov sat down with SETimes correspondent Alekandar Petrovski to discuss his new organisation.
SETimes:
Recently, you formed think-tank organization Demos.
What is the purpose of this initiative?
Was it modeled after the US or UK Demos organisations?
What do you see for its future?
Georgi Spasov:
Demos is an alternative communication space [for] politicians and intellectuals … to freely meet.
They will show that it is possible, through their debates and talks, to have cultivated and tolerant dialogue about issues that are of vital interest for Macedonia.
The country must be introduced to the best practices of building a productive [economy] and a socially just society.
That is one of Demos's tasks.
Demos has similarities with those in the UK and in the United States.
We would be happy if we could foster closer ties and [work on] projects with them.
SETimes:
Some say that Demos was formed by former President Branko Crvenkovski as a satellite organisation to help him win the next election.
What is your response to these accusations?
Spasov:
No.
Demos's task is not to help Branko Crvenkovski come back to power.
Its founders are ex-ministers, ambassadors, university professors from different political parties, including the ruling DUI.
We are united by the cogency that Macedonia has a problem with authoritarian party leaders and that an alternative to a non-democratic government cannot be similar to that.
Our task is to show that we can talk about politics without using the language of hatred, that Macedonia is capable of making tolerant political dialogue and that there should be an awareness of the interdependence, not only between the people in Macedonia, but also in the whole region.
SETimes:
You are one of the founders of the Social Democratic Party.
Why did you decide to leave the party and form Demos?
Spasov:
I have not left SDSM.
I am not in the leadership of the party, I disagree with the way the changes were made in it, and with the way Crvenkovski became its leader once again.
I was invited by Crvenkovski to be a member of the diplomatic council of the party.
But, as with many other respected and experienced members of the party, we don't only want to be décor and to give him legitimacy.
We, as founders of the party, are obliged to say that what is now happening in SDSM is no good for the party.
SDSM is moving away from the contemporary practice of the social democracy.
SETimes:
Recently, at a meeting of the Social Democratic Party's Central Committee, former party leader Radmila Sekerinska was put under pressure by Crvenkovski due to her active membership in Demos.
How do you explain this incident, and did something similar happened to you when you left the party?
Spasov:
No, I have already said that I did not leave the party.
I only have very different point of view from Crvenkovski's about how it should function.
Radmila Sekerinska also thinks that with this kind of think tank, organizations could be promoted and encouraged a different kind of policies than what we have today in Macedonia.
Both, [Prime Minister Nikola] Gruevski and Crvenkovski understand political unity (in their parties and in the country) only as obedience and confirmation of their views.
Demos is formed to help change such rhetoric and this kind of ruling.
There are members of Demos who are not only from SDSM, but also people from other parties, and also people who have never been members of any political party.
