28/07/2006
(Bucharest Daily News - 28/07/06; Bloomberg, Sofia News Agency, FENA, Dnevnik.bg - 27/07/06; World Bank, Reuters, VOA, RFE/RL, HINA - 26/07/06)
Although still higher than in many Western European countries, in recent years the level of corruption has declined in quite a few of the transition economies in Europe and Central Asia, according to a World Bank report published on Wednesday (26 July). 
The Southeast European countries are showing mixed results.
The survey is the third in a series of studies on the issue since 2000. 
It examines corruption patterns and trends in 26 former socialist countries and Turkey between 2002 and 2005. 
In addition, data for five EU member states -- Germany, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain -- are used for comparison purposes.
The former socialist countries' efforts to curb corruption are showing positive results, the World Bank said in a statement.
"Since 2002, firms in most countries are paying bribes less frequently and in relatively smaller amounts, and they report corruption to be less of a problem than in the past," said co-author James Anderson, a senior economist at the Bank's Europe and Central Asia region.
The report cites Georgia and the Slovak Republic as leaders among the countries showing improvement.
At the other end of the scale are Albania and the Kyrgyz Republic, which continued to have the worst corruption indicators of the countries surveyed. 
With about two-thirds of companies citing corruption as a problem in Albania, the country remains the worst performer among all transition economies, the report noted.
The situation is said to have also worsened in Serbia-Montenegro, where the surveyed firms reported increases in the frequency of bribery.
Croatia's results for 2005 were better than those for 2002, the Bank said, noting that the incidence of bribe taking has fallen in many sectors, particularly in customs. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina also has shown a slight improvement, but the level of corruption there is still high, with nearly 50 per cent of surveyed firms citing it as a problem.
The goal of joining the EU has served as a driving force for anti-corruption reforms in countries like Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, according to the report. 
"Indeed, the desire to meet European standards is a motivator for governance improvements far beyond the borders of the EU," the Bank said.
Bulgaria and Romania have both shown significant improvement, although levels are still high. 
Turkey has overhauled its courts, which are now less corrupt than in many countries in Eastern Europe.
The most visible progress in curbing corruption the transition economies made in recent years was in the areas of tax and customs administration. 
The report described them as "worldwide leaders in adopting simplified low or flat-rate income taxes with broad bases and few exemptions".
However, judicial reform remains a weak point and corruption in courts does not appear to have declined overall. 
Public procurement also remains an issue.
