25/08/2006
(BBC, EUobserver, The Guardian, The Times, Financial Mirror - 25/08/06;
AP, AFP, Reuters, FT, CNN, AKI, VOA, TIME, EUobserver, Financial Mirror, Cyprus News Agency - 24/08/06)
The UN wants Cyprus to host the command centre of the expanded UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister George Lillikas said on Thursday (24 August).
The UN informed Nicosia of its plans several days ago and talks are currently focusing on the technical aspects of "the rear command and staging centre for the peacekeeping force," he told reporters.
According to Cyprus's Financial Mirror, the UN and EU would be able to use the Larnaca and Limassol ports and the Andreas Papandreou military air base for the deployment of new peacekeepers joining the force, which has been operating in Lebanon since 1978 and currently numbers 2,000.
UN Security Council Resolution 1701, adopted on 11 August, authorised UNIFIL's expansion to a force of up to 15,000 troops.
Under the resolution, the peacekeepers are expected to keep Hezbollah fighters out of a 30km-wide zone in southern Lebanon, monitor the cessation of fighting, support the Lebanese armed forces' deployment and ensure that humanitarian aid reaches civilians.
Citing insufficient clarity about the mission's mandate, many countries that expressed readiness to contribute troops have been slow to make specific commitments.
France, which co-authored Resolution 1701 and whose Major General Allain Pellegrini is in charge of the peacekeeping force, signaled last week that it would only send about 200 more soldiers.
But in a televised address Thursday evening, French President Jacques Chirac announced the country's contingent in Lebanon would reach 2,000 troops.
"I have decided to send two extra battalions into the field to expand our UNIFIL contingent," the AFP quoted him as saying, adding that his country was ready to retain command over the expanded force.
His statement came on the eve of a crunch meeting of EU foreign ministers in Brussels Friday.
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, who is scheduled to take part in the discussions, is expected to reassure the Europeans that UNIFIL will have a stronger mandate than that given to previous UN-led missions.
Finnish Foreign Minister Erkki Tuomioja, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, voiced hope that the EU would be able to provide up to half of the troops needed for UNIFIL's envisioned expansion.
Spain is expected to pledge between 700 and 1,000 troops.
Other EU member nations said to be contributing to the force include Belgium, Greece, Finland, Denmark, Germany and Hungary.
Lillikas said on Thursday that Cyprus would participate in the force with two National Guard officers and will continue to offer its services for the transfer of humanitarian aid to Lebanon.
