24/03/2006
(Athens News Agency, Scoop - 24/03/06;
AP, Athens News Agency, Macedonian Press Agency, Reporter.gr, ABHaber, Turkish Daily News - 23/03/06;
AP - 22/03/06)
Talks between Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in Washington on Thursday (23 March) focused on bilateral co-operation in solving international problems.
Describing Greece as "a stalwart partner in the spread of democratic values," Rice said she and her Greek counterpart had a "very useful discussion" that touched on a broad range of issues.
"We discussed developments in the Western Balkans, a region of strategic importance for Greece, where we have a strong political and economic presence," Bakoyannis said after her half-hour meeting with Rice.
"We agreed that the future of the Western Balkans lies in Europe," she added, noting that both also shared the view that any solution to the Kosovo status issue should ensure regional stability.
Other issues they discussed included the Cyprus issue, which, Rice said, should be solved "on the basis of democratic values".
"We believe in a united, bicommunal Cyprus," Bakoyannis said.
"As I had the opportunity to stress to my colleague, a solution to the Cyprus problem will only be viable if it is based on relevant Security Council resolutions, the UN secretary general's sets of proposals and the norms of the EU to which Cyprus belongs."
Greek Cypriots rejected a reunification plan proposed by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan during a referendum in April 2004.
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots voted in favour of the settlement, only the internationally recognised, Greek-run part of the Mediterranean island was admitted to the EU on 1 May 2004.
Efforts are under way to revive re-unification talks.
Voicing Washington's strong support for all steps aimed at improving ties between Greece and Turkey, Rice cited the help the two countries provided each other following the 1999 earthquakes as demonstrating that they had come "a very long way in their relations".
Bakoyannis said the United States and Greece both back Turkey's EU membership aspirations.
"But I must say that Turkey's European future lies in its own hands, on the application of European norms and practices, both inside Turkey and in their relationships with their neighbours, Greece and Cyprus," she added.
The two top diplomats also discussed Greece's role in the Middle East initiative to spread democracy, the fight against terrorism, NATO operations in Afghanistan, the EU training programme for Iraq and the debate at the UN on Iran's nuclear weapons programme.
Greece currently is a member of the Security Council.
Bakoyannis's talks with Rice were preceded by a 45-minute meeting with Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns.
She later met with Senator Paul Sarbanes, who is of Greek origin, and attended a reception in her honour given by Director of National Intelligence John Negroponte.
Bakoyannis and US President George W. Bush meet on Friday, after a special ceremony at the White House in observance of Greek Independence Day.
The Greek foreign minister will then leave for New York, for talks with the UN mediator for the Macedonia name issue, Matthew Nimetz.
Bakoyannis, who will attend a Security Council discussion on the situation in Haiti on Monday, might also meet with Annan, according to some reports.
