24/03/2006
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 24/03/06
Turkey broke records in tourism last year.
With the number of foreign tourists visiting Turkey jumping 20.4 percent year-on-year to 22 million, the country saw revenues of about $17.7 billion.
The increase surpassed the targets set by the tourism and culture ministry, which had predicted 20 million tourists.
Expectations are also high for 2006.
According to Culture and Tourism Minister Atilla Koc, the government anticipates 26 million tourists and revenues of $19 billion.
Optimistic forecasts have also come from Turkish Travel Companies and Tourism Agencies Association chairman Basaran Ulusoy and the head of the Turkish Hoteliers Association, Timur Bayandir.
Bayandir, however, cautioned that the targets for 2006 could be affected by concerns over bird flu.
In a possible sign of a downturn, hotel occupancy rates in January were a shaky 50 per cent -- significantly lower than last year's 70 per cent.
While tourism authorities say it is too early to assess whether bird flu is likely to have an impact on the summer season, the industry is anxious.
In fact, the areas in Turkey affected by the outbreak were in sparsely visited eastern Anatolia, far from the tourist resorts of the Mediterranean and Aegean.
Hoteliers and tour operators nevertheless worry that visitors could choose other destinations this summer because of widespread nervousness about the disease.
At the same time, Turkey faces intensified competition from rivals such as Greece and Spain, says the chairman of the EU-Turkey Labour Council, Huseyin Baraner.
"Greece has started a new campaign saying that they are aiming for second place in Europe, after Spain.
They have been challenging the European market with extra advertising.
They have renewed many hotels that had lost their competitive nature in competing with their Turkish counterparts.
They have also established a separate ministry of tourism for the first time," Baraner says.
Spain, meanwhile, has reduced family vacation package prices and boosted the number of hotels offering all-inclusive packages, Baraner added, while Croatia, Egypt, Malta and Morocco are seeking to boost their share of the market.
In the past, Turkey had enjoyed a competitive edge because of low prices -- but that edge may be disappearing.
"To re-attract tourists into the country we have to adopt new policies," Baraner said, expressing confidence that the industry would rise to meet the challenge.
