25/09/2006
(Office of the High Representative, FENA - 22/09/06)
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) urged NGOs on Friday (22 September) to press political parties -- after the upcoming general elections -- to ensure that they act in the interests of the people.
Although the country has come a long way since the end of the 1992-1995 conflict, there are still many challenges to be addressed, High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling said at a meeting with civil society activists, ahead of the 1 October vote. 
It is the NGO sector that can and should push for the implementation of reforms that are key to a better future, he told participants in the event, which was sponsored by the Citizens' Organisation for Democracy.
"We face a depressing and dangerous vicious circle," Schwarz-Schilling said. 
"Politicians are scandalously indifferent to the interests and aspirations of voters. 
This makes more and more voters apathetic about participating in politics. 
And this, in turn, makes politicians indifferent to voters' interests and aspirations."
The upcoming vote is one of the most important in the BiH's post-conflict history, as those who will be elected on 1 October will assume responsibility for the country's future following the planned closure of the Office of the High Representative next year.
Noting the steady decline in voter turnout between 1996 and 2002 -- from almost 2.4 million people to below 1.3 million -- the veteran German diplomat urged the activists to help mobilise as many people as possible.
"Anyone who chooses not to use the opportunity presented by the election will be allowing others to decide about his or her future," the high representative said.
Criticising Bosnian politicians for failing to adopt even one of a series of reforms he outlined back in May as necessary to improving the quality of life, he urged NGOs to pressure politicians even after the elections.
In his regular weekly column published in Bosnian dailies Dnevni Avaz, Nezavisne Novine and Vecernji List on Friday, the high representative said they were "behaving as though they inhabit a fantasy world". 
He was referring to two recent cases, in which the so called veterans' law and the Foreign Currency Savings Law were passed swiftly, although both were fiscally unsustainable and could have a negative impact on the budget.
"Politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina seems to have nothing to do with what is possible and everything to do with what sounds good, irrespective of the consequences," Schwarz-Schilling wrote in the article.
