23/03/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/03/06
Besides Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia-Montenegro is the only country in Southeast Europe that is not a member of the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
WTO membership is a precondition for achieving EU membership, and in itself would contribute significantly to increased investments and job openings.
Although Serbia and Montenegro are joined by their state union, the two republics have separate economic policies and systems.
Working in parallel to realise the two objectives, in the past two years alone Serbia passed 150 new laws.
Preparations for the WTO and the EU included the signing of 28 regional agreements on free trade.
The latest among these, a renewed agreement with Macedonia, was signed last October.
Across the Western Balkans, trade is in the process of being liberalised.
On paper, at least, free trade policies now cover 90 per cent of agricultural products and 98 per cent of industrial products.
In practice, however, barriers remain, including complex customs procedures and the simple difficulty of getting around.
To travel from Zagreb to Thessaloniki, for instance, requires as many as 17 hours.
This time "needs to be halved", says the head of the WTO department in the Serbian International Economic Relations Ministry, Jadranka Zenic Zeljkovic.
According to Mary Mahoney, Secretary of the Stability Pact for Southeastern Europe, what is needed is less administration and a faster flow of people, goods and capital.
Adjustments must be made quickly in Serbia, analysts say, because the situation in the region is undergoing rapid transformation.
For instance, the visa regime with neighbouring Romania will change when that country becomes a member of the EU -- either on 1 January 2007, or a year later if the EU's "safeguard clause" is activated.
Bulgaria will be joining at the same time.
Opening up of borders will increase Serbia's trade with the region, where the only countries with which it enjoys a trade surplus are located -- namely, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Romania.
Moreover, liberalising the regional market -- through WTO regulations and bilateral agreements -- will boost the level of foreign direct investment, which is currently very low.
Investments from the region in Serbia amounted to just 0.4 per cent of $714m in 2005, according to official statistics.
Thus, the development of a regional market could have an enormous impact.
