23/03/2006
(VOA - 23/03/06; AP, Reuters, UPI, EUpolitix, DTT-NET, Xinhua, BETA - 22/03/06)
Kosovo's ethnic Albanian government must take action now to ensure the full protection of the province's Serb minority, the EU said on Wednesday (22 March), stressing this was essential for progress in the UN-led talks on Kosovo's future status.
"For a long time there has been a lot of talk but not much action," EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said after his meeting with Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku in Brussels. 
"I think we have to reverse that now, to talk less and act more."
A statement issued by Solana's office after the meeting said he had urged Ceku to accelerate government efforts "to produce concrete results" in the implementation of the standards set by the international community, covering such areas as rule of law, democratic institutions, human and minority rights, and economic development.
Voicing satisfaction with the progress achieved in the Kosovo status talks since their launch in Vienna last month, Solana also encouraged Ceku to do his part in ensuring the province's continued constructive involvement in the negotiation process. 
He reiterated the EU's support for the UN special envoy for the status talks, Martti Ahtisaari.
The third round of the UN-led direct negotiations between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials is scheduled for 3 April. 
Minority rights and cultural heritage are expected on the agenda soon.
Ceku, making his first visit to Brussels since his appointment as prime minister on 10 March, pledged to work to meet the EU demands for improving the rights of the Serb minority, which accounts for about 10 per cent of the province's population of 2 million people.
"We would like to make gestures in the coming months, to send signals that we are very clear on integrating minorities," he told reporters at EU headquarters. 
"We are very clear on wanting Serbs to stay in Kosovo, to be equal, to be free, to be secure, and to love Kosovo and make [it] home."
Speaking in the Serbian language, Ceku also invited Serbs wishing to live in Kosovo to return there, assuring them that "they are welcome to participate in public life." It is up to the Albanian majority, he added, to "guarantee their safety, freedom of movement, economic development and progress".
While legally still part of Serbia, Kosovo has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict.
The Kosovo Albanian majority hopes the status talks, which are expected to be completed before the end of this year, will lead to the province's full independence from Serbia. 
Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs want it to remain part of Serbia.
The gap between the sides in the Kosovo conflict is unbridgeable, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen told the Austrian state radio Wednesday. 
"Eventually, the ball will be in the court of the UN Security Council in New York," he stressed. 
"However, many things will be accomplished with the Albanian majority for the minorities," he said.
According to Jessen-Petersen, the EU will begin setting up an office for planning in Pristina in April. 
However, the office would only start operating after the status issue has been resolved.
