23/03/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 03/23/06
Efforts to reform public administration in the Western Balkans will receive a boost from a new educational institution being established in the region. 
The School of Higher Education for Public Administration (SHEPAR) aims to improve regional co-operation in the training of civil servants.
The institution will facilitate the improvement of public administration by acting as a catalyst for sharing best practices, education and training among Stabilisation and Association Process (SAP) countries and the EU, and within the region itself.
Experts from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro, as well as from the UN-administered province of Kosovo, met in Brussels earlier this year to discuss establishing the school and to launch co-operation among training and educational institutions in the SAP region.
Among other activities, SHEPAR will organise summer and winter training programmes for public administration professionals, as well as annual conferences for institutions that deal with education and training. 
Through the school, civil servants will be able to gain additional experience and learn about practices in other countries. 
An electronic library will be established, along with various publications.
The 2005 SAP annual report called on Western Balkan states to strengthen administrative capacity while promoting EU standards and best practices in public administration reform. 
Likewise, the Regional CARDS Multi-Annual Indicative Programme 2005-06 prioritises "institution building", including administrative capacity building, acquis approximation and public administration reform.
The SHEPAR feasibility study recommends a step-by-step, multiphase strategy. 
In the preparatory phase, a working group will be established, with the aim of developing an action plan. 
In the next phase (2006-2007), SHEPAR is to be formed as a Professional School Co-ordinating Centre and Network, to be administered by a secretariat comprised of representatives of member countries. 
The secretariat will be co-ordinated and financed by the European Commission.
In the following phase (2008-2010), SHEPAR is to develop into a Professional Corporate Institution. 
Finally, starting in 2010, it will become a combined academic and professional school, based on the Corporate Institution concept.
