03/08/2009
By Brian Salmi for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 03/08/09
On October 3rd 2008, opposition Socialist People's Party (SNP) leader Srdjan Milic stood in the Montenegrin parliament and made a bold, headline-grabbing statement about the widespread rumours that Prime Minister Milo Djukonovic's government was on the verge of recognising Kosovo.
"Montenegro can recognise Kosovo the day after Serbia does," said Milic.
Less than a week later, Montenegro recognised the former Serbian province as an independent country.
SNP draws a majority of its support from Montenegro's large Serb minority -- about 30% of the population.
The SNP captured 54,545 votes in the March 2009 election and holds 16 seats in parliament.
In an exclusive interview with Southeast European Times Milic made another Kosovo-related statement.
"The Albanian question is not closed in Montenegro.
Let's wait and see what the International Court of Justice in The Hague says," Milic said.
Montenegrin membership in NATO?
The question of Kosovo's status is not the only question weighing on the country.
Montenegro became a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace Programme, an entry-level step towards potential full membership, on December 14th 2006.
There is a great deal of lingering resentment and animosity in Montenegro towards the Alliance because of its 1999 Balkan intervention.
Milic hints that the campaign for Montenegrin membership in NATO has, so far, been effective.
"Two years ago I would have said you were out of your mind if you were to say that Montenegro would join NATO," he says.
Milic says the SNP is yet to come to a position on NATO membership, and he will not have the party faithful learning his thoughts via the media.
However, a survey conducted by the Centre for Democracy and Human Rights (CEDEM) reported that 30% of respondents favoured NATO membership, 43.3% were against joining the Alliance and 26.7% expressed no opinion on the matter.
Those numbers have not changed by more than 4% since October 2007, when CEDEM began tracking Montenegrins' opinion on the issue.
Milic says NATO has changed in the ten years since the its three-month military campaign against Serbia and its then joined-at-the-hip brother Montenegro.
The effort to sell Alliance membership to his countrymen may not necessarily be an exercise in Sisyphean futility because of that fact.
"I don't think NATO is the same thing in 2009 as it was in 1999.
I think NATO today is more a political organisation than it is military," says the opposition leader.
The CEDEM survey shows that a slight majority of Montenegrins disagree with Milic -- 20.3% said NATO is a "military organization", 30.6% called it a "military/political organisation", while 21.7% think it's a "political/military organisation".
"I think we are moving away from a bipolar world towards one that fights against poverty, that gives aid when natural catastrophes occur, that works on the challenges of the modern age and does not resemble the cold war of NATO and the Warsaw Pact," says Milic.
Milic says something must be done to enlighten the almost 50% of Montenegrins who profess ignorance on issues regarding the country's defence and its relationship with NATO.
"That is something we must address now.
We must not stay behind our barricades and divide ourselves about this."
Montenegro's EU membership aspirations
Milic's one-year term as the country's National Council for European Integration president ended last week.
While he held the post, he had a strong belief that the country could and will join the Union.
He believes that, "in the next five or ten years the countries of Southeast Europe will be together in Europe."
"In 1990, Yugoslavia was on the door of the EU.
In this period we had many young, clever politicians and we have lost 18, 19 years.
My generation is a lost generation.
I don't want to lose another generation."
Despite that, Milic says Montenegrins should not rush to meet EU standards.
"We need to be the owners of that process.
I don't think it's good to say, 'If you finish your job, you will be, in 2011, a member.' No deadlines about when we will become a member of the EU."
"Montenegro can be a successful European story, but first of all we have to integrate Montenegrins into Montenegro and then we can talk about [European, Euro-Atlantic] integration."
A step towards regional peace
"Would you allow any of your children to marry an Albanian?"
"Yes," Milic says, without hesitation.
"That [whom his children marry] is not about me."
After pausing, Milic says, "I want to tell you a story."
On March 23rd 1999, at the outset of the NATO intervention in the Balkans, Milic received a phone call from an old Albanian friend.
The first bombs would be dropped just 10km from Milic's home, mere hours after the call.
The two had studied economics together in Dubrovnik, Croatia.
The Albanian had been living in Germany for the previous nine years.
"My friend said, 'I see what is going to happen.
Please send your wife and children to stay with me.'"
Milic pauses, then adds solemnly, "That kind of spirit gave me hope that this region can know peace."
