26/07/2006
(AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, International Herald Tribune, The Scotsman, Spiegel Online, Xinhua, Cyprus News Agency, Financial Mirror, Turkish Press, Turkish Daily News - 25/07/06)
The EU will help Cyprus cope with the influx of evacuees from Lebanon, EU Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas indicated on Tuesday (25 July) during a visit to the Mediterranean island. 
Located less than 250km to the West, Cyprus has become the main transit point for people fleeing the violence in Lebanon by sea, and authorities say the country's resources are overstretched.
The combined Greek and Turkish Cypriot populations on the island number less than 800,000 people. 
According to the EU, some 40,000 people have been transferred to Cyprus over the past two weeks, though 30,000 of them have already left.
At the weekend, the EU activated a civil protection programme to help co-ordinate logistics support from member states. 
Dimas, who is in charge of the programme, said his visit would allow him "to get a better idea of what is still needed on the ground and to discuss how we can further improve the situation through the civil protection mechanism".
The commissioner's visit followed an appeal by Nicosia for urgent practical assistance from the international community, and the EU in particular.
Greek Cypriot Interior Minister Andreas Christou, who met with Dimas on Tuesday, said the government's main request was for the prompt arrival of planes so that evacuees arriving by sea can be transported without delay to their final destinations. 
Cyprus has proved that it can handle crises in the region, but its capabilities are limited, the minister told Dimas.
"We have not simply reached our limits, we have surpassed them," said Cypriot government spokesman Christodoulos Pashiardis.
In a telephone interview with the AP, he later said Cyprus could face the prospect of multitudes arriving on the island with "no means, no money".
"We have to cope with this possibility in case it becomes a reality," Pashiardis noted. 
"Where are we going to house them all? 
And for how long? 
We are not talking about a few, we're talking about thousands. 
The problem concerns Europe and the international community, which cannot distance itself from the obligation and responsibility towards thousands of people seeking refuge."
Relieving some of the burden on Cyprus, Turkey has opened its Mediterranean port of Mersin to ships carrying evacuees from Lebanon. 
According to a Turkish foreign ministry statement Tuesday, a total of 6,575 foreign nationals and 1,322 Turkish citizens fleeing the fighting in Lebanon have arrived in the country so far.
Nine countries -- Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, Mexico, Moldova, Sweden and the United States -- are arranging for the evacuation of their citizens from Lebanon via Turkey.
The evacuees arriving in Mersin are being transported to the nearby city of Adana for flights home.
