22/03/2006
(Sofia Echo - 22/03/06;
AFP, Sofia News Agency, BTA, News.bg, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Makfax, Centre for the Study of Democracy - 21/03/06)
While corruption declined in Bulgaria between 1998 and 2004, it surged in 2005, a Bulgarian think-tank said on Tuesday (21 March).
Although still at about half the level observed some six years ago, the number of incidents -- including some at high-levels -- reached an average of 120,000 to 130,000 a month last year, the Centre for the Study of Democracy (CSD) said in a new report.
Only 72 individuals were convicted of corruption and abuse of office in the first half of 2005.
"It is the less important cases that are punished, while measures such as fines and confiscation of property are not applied to major perpetrators," said political analyst Alexander Stoyanov.
The CSD's seventh annual corruption assessment report, "On the Eve of EU Accession:
Anti-Corruption Reforms in Bulgaria", was presented at the 8th Anti-corruption Policy Forum in Sofia on Tuesday.
The event was attended by Prosecutor General Boris Velchev, Interior Minister Rumen Petkov, US Ambassador John Beyrle, lawmakers, heads of agencies and judges.
The 80-page report said that in 2005 alone, political parties received an estimated 160m euros to 185m euros in return for their support in public procurement tenders for companies associated with them.
Public administration officials are believed to have pocketed a total of about 28m euros in return for helping businessmen win contracts.
The quasi-tax, or bribe, charged in such cases was about 7 per cent of the total sum of the deal, according to the CSD report.
Despite the disturbing surge in corruption last year, the November 2005 indices for corruption pressure and corruption deals of 1.6 and 0.6 respectively are lower than those for June 1998 -- 2.1 and 1.0, respectively.
One conclusion the CSD report drew was that "soft" anti-corruption measures, such as public awareness campaigns and training courses for public administrators, have exhausted their potential.
More effective mechanisms and consistent efforts at the political and institutional levels are needed to curb corruption, the think-tank said.
Addressing the forum, Bulgaria's interior minister called for audits of the financing of political parties, foundations and institutions, while the chief prosecutor noted that the fight against corruption would not yield results without a change in approach.
The main weakness, according to Velchev, was in the slow exposure of corruption cases.
"In the high tiers of power, corruption is politically affiliated, which impedes the work of the ministry of interior," he said, noting a need for the establishment of an independent panel to investigate high-level corruption.
Until then the problem can be partially solved by appointing spokespersons at all regional prosecutor offices and introducing greater openness with the media, which would encourage the filing of complaints, the BTA quoted Velchev as saying.
