24/08/2006
(B92 -- 14/08/06; B92, Reuters, financial.de -- 10/08/06)
German generic drugmaker Stada purchased 98 per cent of Serbian pharmaceutical company Hemofarm earlier this month, with a sale price of 475m euros. 
The German company paid 147.97 euros per share for the Vrsac, Serbia, based company -- and purchased 3.3 million shares.
Under the deal, Stada must purchase the remaining 2 per cent of the Serbian company's shares for the same price when they become available. 
The takeover is Stada's largest investment to date -- as well as the largest investment in Serbia, with the exception of the recent 1.5 billion euro sale of Mobi63 and the 2004 takeover of the Nis tobacco company.
Just before the takeover, Stada reported that its first-half of the year net income had risen by 33 per cent -- to 42m euros, and the company expected more strong growth in the future. 
"We are very satisfied with the rates of increase in Group sales and net income in the first half of 2006. 
They represent a clear signal that Stada, thanks to the good strategic and operative positioning, can turn the structural growth potential of the markets into own growth. 
And the currently pursued takeover of the Serbian Hemofarm creates additional growth opportunities for us," Stada Chief Executive Officer Hartmut Retzlaff told financial.de.
In 2005, Hemofarm claimed 47.7 per cent of sales in the Serbian pharmaceutical market, taking in 235m euros in the process. 
The company has factories in Russia and China -- giving Stada access to eastern markets as well.
According to previous announcements from Stada, Hemofarm's shares will be withdrawn from the Belgrade Stock Exchange and will enter the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. 
Small shareholders in Hemofarm owned 35 per cent of the company's stock, while the rest belonged to investment funds and brokers. 
Hemofarm management owned 11 per cent of the total shares.
The stock sale has channeled about 70m euros into Vrsac -- which has a population of 40,000 and is located in the northern Serbian province of Vojvodina -- through the sale of shares. 
Hemofarm management, set to remain in office at least three years, organised local television programmes to advise Vrsac citizens on how to manage their windfall. 
"Don't invest in real estate and cars straight away, wait for investment funds to be set up next year and put your money in them," cautioned Hemofarm General Manager Miodrag Babic, who made 10m euros by selling his stock.
Currently, the value of the dinar to the euro is high -- 78 dinars per euro. 
However, many economists and tradespeople in Serbian are wary -- and think this is not a trend. 
Many say that the Mobi63 and Hemofarm sales are what have boosted the dinar -- and they expect it to fall back to the normal 88 to 89 dinars per euro level.
Importers have not changed their prices, and are mindful of the Serbian banks' prediction that the euro will once again rise -- as early as next month. 
"We monitor the rates. 
Since we sell our goods on 60 to 90 days delayed payment, what we sell now will be paid for in November. 
Prices remain the same since the banks say euro is to go up again," a source from the daily Politika told Belgrade's B92.
