24/08/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/08/06
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari is in Kosovo, appealing for more compromise on decentralisation and minority rights. 
"We are working," said Ahtisaari, who declined to comment further. 
On Wednesday (23 August), he met with Kosovo's political leaders and the negotiating team for the status talks, urging them to accept a set of recommendations by UN experts.
"He is planning to stay for three days and meet the leaders about the issues that remain to be solved in negotiations," the local daily Koha Ditore quoted a spokesman for the UN special envoy's office, Remi Dourlot, as saying. 
"If there is still any pending issue that cannot be solved at technical level, then, he will try to make progress in the political level."
Ahtisaari is pressing the Kosovo side to make concessions on Mitrovica and on the number of Serb-run municipalities. 
The Kosovo Albanians envision a governing board for Mitrovica that would have full competencies, but Serbs say such a plan would rob them of autonomy. 
They argue that the northern part of the city should be independent, and could even be joined to other Serb municipalities.
The UN envoy also wants Pristina to go beyond its "5+1" proposal, under which five new Serb municipalities would be created and one expanded. 
Instead, Ahtisaari reportedly is proposing as many as ten new municipalities, as well as the possibility of others in the future, depending on the number of Serb returnees.
Pristina already has indicated, though, that it is not prepared to make concessions in some areas, warning there are "red lines" it will not cross. 
The Kosovo Albanian side held an urgent meeting Wednesday to review Ahtisaari's proposals.
"We expressed our stances regarding the number of new municipalities in Kosovo, which is a fixed number. 
We don't have another stance," said President Fatmir Sejdiu.
"We also have our stance that these municipalities should have functionality and be in the citizens' service, keeping in mind that we left open the possibility that these municipalities can have more cadastral zones," he added.
At the same time, Sejdiu said his side had agreed in principle to enhanced municipal boundaries, and that discussions on the issue are continuing.
On Wednesday, Ahtisaari also met with Serb leader Oliver Ivanovic, who is calling for the municipality of Lypjani and the village of Priluza to have special status. 
"These requests are part of our political plan," Ivanovic said, adding, "Our proposals are concise, constructive and based in the interests of the people."
Meanwhile, about 100 members of the ethnic Albanian "Vetëvendosje" (Self-Determination) movement blockaded entrances to the Kosovo Parliament building in Pristina, where Ahtisaari was meeting with local leaders. 
In the afternoon, Kosovo police broke the blockade and arrested anti-Serb extremist Albin Kurti, along with 64 of his supporters.
On Thursday, Ahtisaari was due to visit Kosovo's three northern municipalities, where he will meet with the mayors and citizens, who are mostly Serbs. 
After that, he will be back in Pristina.
