09/11/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times from Beograde -- 09/11/09
Serbian Youth and Sports Minister Snezana Samardzic-Markovic has announced a number of measures that the state will use to deal with the increasing incidents of violence surrounding sports fans in the country.
In order to improve conditions for the training of top athletes, the state will invest significant funds in sports infrastructure.
In an exclusive interview with Southeast European Times correspondent Bojana Milovanovic, Samardzic-Markovic discusses the recent incidents, the steps the government is taking and the future of the country's youth.
SETimes:
Violence among sports fan groups sent shockwaves through the Serbian public after French football fan Brice Taton was beaten to death in Belgrade.
How will Serbia handle that problem?
Snezana Samardzic-Markovic:
We are handling it in different ways.
My ministry primarily handles it through prevention and education, since we do not have the instruments of force the interior and justice ministries have.
One of the recent, very important, things that has happened is the [establishment] of a government council against violence in sports led by the Serbian prime minister and comprising representatives of the judiciary, sports associations and journalists.
The signal is that only together and through institutions can we successfully combat violence in sports.
One should distinguish real sports fans from hooligans, the fans love their club, whereas the hooligans love violence.
The real fans are hostages of violence… Certain actions are already being taken, an initiative has been launched to ban sports fan groups, which are known to have called for the destruction of constitutional order and violence, that process is now being handled by the Constitutional Court of Serbia.
We are also to adopt an action plan that envisages a number of anti-violence measures.
There is also a working group researching the applicability of the so-called British model in Serbia.
SETimes:
Serbia is famous for achievements in athletes, but the conditions in which top athletes train are often much worse than the results achieved.
How will Serbia help its best athletes and ensure that they have the best training conditions?
Samardzic-Markovic:
The root of the problem lies in the fact that sports facilities in our country are in very poor condition.
Over the past two and a half years, 170 open courts have been built or reconstructed in all of Serbia, 40 sports halls in schools have also been either opened or reconstructed, and four swimming pools and an ice skating rink have also been fixed.
The National Training Centre at the Serbian Sports Bureau has been reopened after 20 years of deterioration.
The gym was completely moldy, the swimming pool was ruined, I was ashamed to even imagine any top athlete training there.
Now it is a facility to be proud of.
Soccer is a very important sport for Serbia and, in association with international sports organisations, we will open the House of Soccer next year.
By the end of the year, over 50 mini sports fields with artificial grass will also open throughout Serbia.
The state has also launched a scholarship program for athletes ranging from [250 to 600 euros] for successful athletes such as swimmer Milorad Cavic.
SETimes:
In your opinion, what is the biggest problem facing Serbia’s youth and what is the ministry doing to solve it?
Samardzic-Markovic:
When I became the youth and sports minister, Serbia was the only country in the region without a national youth strategy.
It is not merely about the document, but also about a political signal, because before it meant that Serbia was a country without any idea of what to do with its youth, a country that did not recognise young people systemically.
I am very happy that we changed that and as of May 9th 2008, Serbia is no longer the only country in the region without a strategic document concerning the youth.
When I arrived at the ministry's helm I identified another symptom -- out of 167 municipalities in Serbia, just five had local youth offices.
That was a reflection of the situation in our society.
What has changed?
Well, on November 9th we will open the 100th youth office.
The purpose of such offices is to solve the key problems identified by young people themselves.
The first problem is unemployment, the second is lack of information, and the third is a lack of quality contents of free time.
Youth offices have the instrument to help young people reach the mayor or head of a municipality, to force the local government to see them, plan and respect their activism.
The offices are also obligated to inform young people on events and activities.
Two youth entrepreneurship programs are also being implemented with the assistance of youth offices.
Eighty percent of young people in Serbia work for someone else, and I would like them to start their own business and work for themselves.
We have educated 500 users and there are already about 80 companies founded by young people, who now employ others.
SETimes:
How can we compare the quality of life of young people in Serbia with other countries in the region?
Samardzic-Markovic:
At the moment, we are ahead of the rest of the region, or at least that is how we are identified by the Council of Europe, as the only European multi-lateral body that at least has a youth policy.
This boom sparked by the National Youth Strategy has caused a great deal of enthusiasm among this population.
We are now an example of good practice and 46 other countries, members of the Council of Europe, look up to us.
SETimes:
During the 1990s, many educated young people left Serbia.
That trend is now somewhat lower, but still existent.
How can young people be persuaded to stay in Serbia and how can those who have already left be convinced to return?
Samardzic-Markovic:
In 2007, we measured the tendencies of young people to transfer from smaller to larger environments and to leave Serbia.
We compared that research now in 2009, and the tendency is down 10%.
One of the means to not completely prevent, but at least conspicuously reduce the problem of "brain drain" is the Youth Talent Fund.
It has so far given away 2,200 scholarships and prizes.
Those scholarships are given to the best students in Serbia, as well as those who wish to further enhance their skills abroad, but under the obligation of returning to Serbia and working here for at least five years after graduation.
Part of the Youth Talent Fund is also the Career Guidance and Counseling Centre, as another way to help young educated people to make use of their capabilities in the best possible manner.
