21/03/2006
(AFP, AP, Austrian EU Presidency Web Site - 20/03/06)
Despite the progress made so far, Romania must step up efforts if it wants to join the EU in January 2007 as planned, officials said Monday (20 March).
The EU "congratulated Romania on the important progress it has already made in preparing for membership and encouraged renewed and sustained efforts in order to be able to address outstanding issues in the limited time remaining," said a statement issued after a meeting of the EU-Romania Association Council.
Foreign Minister Mihai-Razvan Ungureanu, who chaired the meeting, headed the Romanian delegation. 
Austrian State Secretary for Foreign Affairs Hans Winkler, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, led the EU team. 
Director General for Enlargement Michael Leigh represented the European Commission (EC).
The Association Council reviewed the state of Romania's accession preparations, particularly in light of the EC's monitoring report of October 2005, which outlined issues the country must address to be ready for membership.
The EC is due to publish its next monitoring reports on Bulgaria and Romania on 16 May. 
These will contain recommendations on whether the two countries should be admitted into the Union at the beginning of next year, or whether their entry should be delayed until January 2008 under a safeguard clause in the accession treaty. 
The final decision will be made during a June summit of leaders of the bloc's 25 nations.
"There are a number of areas of serious concern and areas where Romania needs to make further effort," the AP quoted Leigh as saying at a press conference with Ungureanu following Monday's meeting. 
He mentioned the fight against corruption, judicial reform, border controls and veterinary standards as areas where further improvements are needed.
In its October regular progress report on Romania, the EC highlighted specific issues in the fields of free movement of goods, company law and public administration reform as also requiring immediate action.
The statement issued Monday welcomed the legislative progress Romania has made in the areas of public administration reform, and judicial reform in particular. 
At the same time, it stressed the need for effective implementation of new laws.
Describing the fight against corruption as "an issue of utmost importance," it urged Romania to make further efforts to tackle the problem. 
Authorities should focus particularly "on the enforcement of existing anticorruption laws and on the build-up of a convincing track-record of investigations carried out at all levels" and should pay attention especially to high-level corruption, it said.
Improving border controls and strengthening the fight against organised crime and the trafficking in human beings were other key priorities identified by the Association Council during Monday's review.
Voicing confidence that Romania is able to meet its EU entry target, Ungureanu said it was "high time" the government showed its determination. 
"We look forward to see a positive conclusion in mid-May," he said, referring to the upcoming EC report.
