27/04/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 27/04/06
Canadian business investors are showing a heightened interest in Southeast Europe and Turkey, seeing the region's potential as a new market and gateway to other markets.
At a conference in Toronto last month, members of the business community, investors and area experts discussed the experiences of leading Canadian companies already doing business in the region, highlighting the profound socioeconomic changes that are under way.
The goal of EU membership is the driving force behind many of these changes, said Linda McDonald, director of the Europe commercial relations division at International Trade Canada.
Two countries -- Bulgaria and Romania -- are already on the threshold of EU membership, with entry slated for 1 January 2007.
Croatia and Turkey are in negotiations, and Macedonia is an official candidate for membership.
With careful planning and strategic selection of partners, Canadian companies can benefit, McDonald said.
With a skilled labour force and investment opportunities in areas such as telecommunications and information technology, tourism, mining, energy, construction, healthcare and agriculture, the region has much to offer, conference participants noted.
As a more favourable investment climate develops, companies will be increasingly keen to explore the possibilities.
According to Ivan Vejvoda, executive director of the Balkan Trust for Democracy of the US German Marshall Fund, countries in the region are beginning to catch up with other members of the Central European Initiative (CEI).
Creating economic opportunity is needed so people can actually feel the benefits of democracy, he said.
The conference, "Business Strategies in an Enlarging EU:
Opportunities in South Eastern Europe and Turkey", was jointly organised by the Munk Centre for International Studies at the University of Toronto and the Canadian-Turkish Business Council.
It drew 110 participants, including leading Canadian business investors with significant experience in the region.
In the last decade, bilateral trade between Canada and Turkey, which is the world's 17th largest economy, has more than tripled.
In 2004, it totaled $975m, with Canadian exports at $365m and imports from Turkey at $610m.
Canadian direct investment in Turkey is now valued at over $766m.
