29/06/2006
(Dnevnik, Sofia Echo - 28/06/06;
AFP, Sofia News Agency, Sofia Echo, BNN, Dnevnik, Mediapool, US Embassy in Bulgaria - 27/06/06;
American Chamber of Commerce in Bulgaria)
The agreement signed by Bulgaria and the United States on the shared use of military facilities will have a positive impact on the Bulgarian economy, the US ambassador to Sofia said during a two-day conference that ended Wednesday (28 June).
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin signed a defence co-operation agreement in late April.
It allows US forces to use Bulgarian military facilities, namely the Novo Selo shooting range, the Graf Ignatievo and Bezmer airfields and a storage facility near the Black Sea port of Burgas.
The deal "is a strategic investment in Bulgaria's security, thanks to the opportunity it will give the Bulgarian military to improve its capabilities and its interoperability as a member of NATO," Beyrle said on Tuesday at the opening of the Sofia forum.
The conference was organised by the American Chamber of Commerce in Bulgaria and the US embassy in Sofia.
Attending it were Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov, Defence Minister Vesselin Bliznakov, Chief of Army Staff General Zlatan Stoykov, representatives of more than 200 Bulgarian and foreign companies, and US Army officers.
The conference focused on the commercial opportunities the defence co-operation agreement will create and, more specifically, on US military requirements for goods and service contracts.
"The shared military facilities will bring real economic benefits to Bulgaria, in the form of jobs and business opportunities," Beyrle noted.
Some specific advantages he mentioned included needed upgrades to the bases -- in the range of tens of millions of dollars -- as well as improvements to roads, railroads, and other infrastructure in the areas leading to and surrounding the bases.
In addition, the future presence of several thousand US troops is expected to translate into increased consumer spending.
For example, the US Army is planning to invest $60m in the Novo Selo joint training facility, according to Major Rusty Mizelle, PE Construction Management Chief, US Army Europe.
Of this, some $40m to $50m are earmarked for the construction of buildings and premises;
as much as $10m more will be spent on road infrastructure.
The annual maintenance cost for the buildings will likely range between $600,000-800,000, while the tab for the road infrastructure could total $500,000, the Bulgarian daily Dnevnik reported in its English edition on Wednesday.
Tenders for the first major procurement contracts are expected next summer.
Beyrle cautioned that not all contracts and jobs would go to Bulgarians.
"But our agreement states clearly that we should use Bulgarian suppliers for goods and services if their offers are competitive and of good value," he added.
