22/09/2006
(Blic - 22/09/06;
AP, Reuters, VOA, RFE/RL, B92, Beta, Washington File - 21/09/06;
US Department of State - 20/09/06)
Pristina welcomed a statement by the foreign ministers of the six-nation Contact Group for Kosovo on Thursday (21 September), reiterating the international community's support for resolving the province's status issue by the end of this year.
"Ministers reaffirmed their commitment that all possible efforts be made to achieve a negotiated settlement in the course of 2006," the group said after a meeting in New York on Wednesday, chaired by US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, whose country is one of the members.
The other five are Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Russia.
The Contact Group meeting, on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly, was also attended by NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, EU and UN officials, including UN special envoy for the Kosovo status talks, Martti Ahtisaari.
Seven months after the start of the UN-led negotiations in Vienna, the process is entering a crucial stage, the ministers noted, calling for a realistic and durable solution that "enhances regional stability, is acceptable to the people of Kosovo and preserves Kosovo's multi-ethnic character".
Urging Belgrade and Pristina to work constructively towards achieving a solution by the end of this year, the Contact Group voiced its support for Ahtisaari's efforts to bridge the gaps between the parties' positions on the status issue.
Legally still part of Serbia, Kosovo has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict in the province.
Its ethnic Albanian majority, accounting for 90% of Kosovo's population of 2 million people, is pushing for full independence from Serbia.
Belgrade has made it clear that it can agree to nothing more than granting the province -- the home of some 100,000 ethnic Serbs -- "substantial autonomy".
The Serbian government is planning to include a preamble in the country's new constitution, describing Kosovo as an "integral part" of its territory.
Citing diplomatic sources close to the Kosovo status process, Reuters reported that Ahtisaari has been asked have a proposal ready within weeks.
"You're looking at November, but it could be earlier," the unnamed Western official said on Thursday.
Ahtisaari briefs the UN Security Council at a closed-door session Friday about progress in the status talks.
The presidents of Serbia and Kosovo, Boris Tadic and Fatmir Sejdiju, were also expected to address the 15-nation body.
After the end of the latest round of talks between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials last week, Ahtisaari's deputy, Albert Rohan, described the chances for further progress in the negotiations as "increasingly slim".
The international community has made it clear that if the two sides fail to reach a compromise, the Security Council may decide on the status issue.
Western sources have suggested this would likely constitute some form of independence, under long-term EU and NATO supervision.
