26/05/2006
(HINA, HRT, AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, Albanian Economy News - 25/05/06;
AP, RFE/RL, Washington File, Makfax - 22/05/06)
Croatia will be among the first to recognise Montenegro as a sovereign state, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said on Thursday (25 May), four days after the majority of Montenegrin voters said "yes" to independence.
"Whatever the citizens of Montenegro have decided in their referendum, Croatia will accept, once all official conditions have been met," Sanader said.
"Croatia will be among the first states -- together with the EU -- to recognise Montenegro as an independent state."
The process of dissolving the loose union between Serbia and Montenegro should be be carried out in line with democratic standards, Sanader said, adding that his country is ready to play an active role in building political stability in the region.
According to official preliminary results, 55.5 per cent of those who participated in Sunday's poll voted in favour of independence, while 44.5 per cent supported preservation of the state union with Serbia.
A record 86.49 per cent of eligible voters cast their ballots.
The final results will only be announced after the legal deadline for complaints expires.
Montenegro's opposition, pro-union bloc has so far lodged 241 complaints and has called for a rerun of the vote in dozens of polling stations.
According to the OSCE, which deployed more than 360 international election monitors across Montenegro, the referendum was "genuine and transparent" and was generally conducted in line with international standards.
The vote affirmed Montenegro as a mature, stable, democratic and Europe-oriented society, the Croatian government said.
Zagreb also noted the "exceptionally positive and constructive part" the EU played in preparations.
The United States and the EU have both applauded Montenegro for the peaceful conduct of the referendum.
Welcoming the vote as a "legitimate" decision, the EU said on Monday it would start building closer ties with the Adriatic republic of some 650,000 people once the official final results are confirmed.
Other former Yugoslav republics and countries in the Balkans have also congratulated Montenegro on its independence.
"I have no doubts that Montenegro's independence will provide a positive contribution to the regional stability, prosperity and European future of the Balkans," Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski said in a telephone conversation with his Montenegrin counterpart, Filip Vujanovic.
