27/04/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 27/04/06
A new law drafted by the Macedonian government promotes mediation as an extra-judiciary procedure for resolving disputes.
The law -- part of an overall judicial reform package aimed at meeting EU criteria -- will be applicable in civic, trade, employment and consumer disputes, though it will not apply to collective employment relations, criminal issues and administrative issues.
As an alternative to litigation, mediation has the potential to lessen the burden on the judiciary and foster greater efficiency.
The experience of other countries where mediation has been introduced shows that small and medium-size enterprises are typically the first to turn to this approach.
In mediation, the two sides in a dispute agree to be assisted by a third party in reaching an acceptable solution.
The whole procedure is transparent and the costs are borne by mutual agreement between the two parties.
The amount of the fee is determined by a previously established list.
The mediator is often an attorney, but can also come from another profession.
In any case, anyone taking on this role must have obtained a certificate from the Chamber of Mediators.
This month, the justice ministry signed a memorandum of understanding with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) -- a part of the World Bank Group -- on developing an efficient mediation system over the next three years.
"We are very keen to promote this efficient way of resolving business disputes in Macedonia.
This is an important part of our strategy of promoting a vibrant private sector and of improving the overall business climate in the country through both our investment and technical assistance activities," said Antoine Courcelle-Labrousse of the IFC.
The initiative is part of the IFC's Alternative Dispute Resolution project, launched in 2004 with funding from the Netherlands.
Since then, a legal framework for mediation has been taking shape, three training programmes for 50 prospective mediators have been delivered, and two roundtables and an ADR conference have been organised to promote use of mediation.
