23/08/2006
(Nine o’clock - 23/08/06; AP, Reuters, Bloomberg, FT, BBC, RFE/RL, VOA, Rompres, Mediafax, Stratfor - 22/08/06)
Iranian armed forces attacked and seized a Romanian oil company's rig in the Persian Gulf on Tuesday (22 August) in an incident reportedly stemming from a contractual dispute.
Romania's Grup Servicii Petroliere (GSP), an oil services company, said its Orizont rig had come under fire from an Iranian gunboat Tuesday morning, following the Romanian crew's refusal to allow representatives of a subsidiary of the Iranian state oil company board the platform.
"We were called by one of our employees at 9:15 am, who told us a military ship opened fire against the Orizont rig, and by 9:45 am Iranian troops got on board," GSP spokesman Radu Petrescu told Reuters.
After that, all communication lines with the rig were lost. 
One of the rig's cranes was destroyed in the attack.
Later in the day, Petrescu told Romanian news agency Rompres that the 20 Romanian and seven Indian nationals on board the rig had been freed and allowed to go to their cabins, after being kept for five hours in the open air.
In a special statement, GSP President Gabriel Comanescu described the Iranian military's occupation of his company's rig as a "flagrant breach of all the international rules". 
According to him, Iranian military helicopters and ships had been "trying to intimidate the Romanian crew aboard the rig" since Monday.
GSP, a private company established in 2004, owns six offshore oilrigs that it acquired for around $100m when Romania's largest oil company, Petrom, was privatised. 
Comanescu's company also took up a contract between Petrom and Dubai-based Oriental Oil Company for two of the rigs, Orizont and Fortuna.
The contractual dispute between GSP and Oriental Oil Company emerged after the latter subleased the two Romanian rigs to Iranian companies Petroiran Development Company (PEDCO), a unit of Iran's state-owned oil company, and Oriental Oil Kish.
Last week, GSP moved the Fortuna into United Arab Emirates waters because of non-payment of fees, rejecting PEDCO's accusations that it had hijacked the rig.
The 13,000-tonne Orizont, which was built in 1987, has been moored near Kish Island in the Persian Gulf since October 2005. 
According to Romania's English-language daily Nine o’clock, the rig also had been towed out of Iranian territorial waters into international ones. 
The Iranian companies claimed the move was a violation of the terms of contract.
"Oriental Oil Company is a fictitious company, it does not exist, and the contract was legally cancelled," Comanescu told the daily on Tuesday, trying to explain the source of the dispute. 
"This firm with the main offices in Dubai has transferred, without our acceptance, the use of the oil rigs to the Iranian firms."
According to Reuters, both Oriental Oil Company and GSP have filed cases against each other with the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris.
Meanwhile, the incident prompted quick reactions Tuesday from officials in Bucharest.
The Romanian Foreign Ministry said it summoned Iran's ambassador to explain the incident and instructed the country's charge d'affaires in Tehran to lodge an official protest. 
A meeting between Romanian diplomats and Iranian foreign ministry officials was reportedly scheduled for Wednesday, as Iranians were celebrating an important religious holiday Tuesday and were off work.
For that reason, Romanian President Traian Basescu's attempts to contact his Iranian counterpart, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, also failed. 
A discussion between the two was expected to take place Wednesday.
