25/05/2006
(FT - 25/05/06; Office of the High Representative, SEE Security Monitor - 24/05/06)
Christian Schwarz-Schilling, the EU's special representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), said on Wednesday (24 May) that lawmakers in the country's central parliament were acting in "bad faith", by letting opportunities to pursue reforms slip by. 
He urged MPs to use the time until the October general elections to pass key legislation needed for improving the lives of citizens and for meeting EU requirements.
"You should waste no time in taking decisive steps to improve the situation," Schwarz-Schilling told the parliament in his first major speech to a BiH institution since taking office at the beginning of February. 
"The next 100 days -- the last of this particular parliament -- will offer you many opportunities to do so."
The veteran German politician, who also serves as the EU special representative in BiH, noted the need for reforms in the education sector -- in particular, a Higher Education Law that would harmonise standards and foster opportunities for the country's young people to study in Europe.
"I urge you not to hold the youth of this country back any more," said Schwarz-Schilling. 
"The future of this country depends on them. 
They are watching what you do -- do not let them down."
In the economic arena, Schwarz-Schilling listed three measures, which he said could bring "significant economic progress" -- the law on obligations, the salary law and the creation of a central banking supervision system.
Further reforms are also needed in the judicial sector, including changes aimed at strengthening the judiciary and ensuring the continued successful transfer of cases from The Hague tribunal, he said.
He also stressed that two major reforms -- of the country's police structures and broadcasting system -- are essential to the "very fabric of this society" and to the success of BiH's talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU.
Referring to lawmakers' recent rejection of a key constitutional reform package, Schwarz-Schilling assured parliament of his willingness to play an active role in helping achieve progress in this area. 
"Your responsibility does not end with the "no" vote -- that is just the beginning," he said. 
"Democracy does not stop when something is rejected."
Assuming his post earlier this year, Schwarz-Schilling made it clear that he views his role as an assistant, adviser and advocate to BiH and its politicians. 
Addressing lawmakers Wednesday, he stressed that he was not planning a change in action, particularly when it comes to the planned phase-out of the Office of the High Representative next year.
But he also cautioned that he would not allow lack of responsibility and political courage -- "a darker side of political life" that he had witnessed in BiH in recent months -- to "overshadow what is good and positive in this country".
