25/05/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 25/05/06
Meeting in Vienna for a fifth round of talks, the delegations from Belgrade and Pristina agreed on Tuesday (23 May) on the physical protection of all cultural and religious monuments, although differences remain on some specific issues, such as the size of protection zones and who has jurisdiction over the repair of damaged religious sites.
"Although there are numbers of conceptual differences, if you look into the individual measures to protect the church and religious sites, there are far-reaching agreements and this is a good basis for any continued work," UN deputy envoy Albert Rohan, who is chairing the talks, said at a press conference.
Both sides were in "total agreement" that access of pilgrims, authorities and others to churches and monasteries should be at the discretion of the respective institutions involved, Rohan said. 
They also agreed on tax and custom duty privileges, and on the principle that the Serbian Orthodox Church should be able to receive welfare support, social benefits, pensions and health insurance from any source that wants to provide them, including Belgrade.
According to Rohan, the parties agreed to set up an expert group -- consisting of representatives from Serbia and Kosovo, as well as from international institutions such as UNESCO and the Council of Europe -- to discuss the criteria for protective zones around the religious sites and the delimitation of these zones on a case by case basis.
Every destroyed religious site must be reconstructed and restored, the envoy said. 
"There are arrangements at present which work well, which will continue," he said.
However, Rohan noted, the two sides are at odds over who has ultimate responsibility for the restoration of Serb Orthodox religious sites, with Belgrade insisting that it does.
"Not contesting of course that the Church is the owner of the sites and takes the decision of what is to be restored and how. 
But the ultimate responsibility should rest with the state of Serbia. 
This is the Serbian position," Rohan said.
The issue is not procedural, but rather a matter of political will, he said. 
"If they had the will we could agree on substance much more easily in whatever procedure we may choose," Rohan said.
The next round of direct talks, focusing on economic issues, will take place in Vienna on 31 May.
