26/10/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 26/10/06
Twenty-one NGOs from the Balkans and Black Sea region have established an "Integrity Network" aimed at curbing political corruption in their countries and establishing new standards of integrity.
The network will press political parties in Southeast Europe to expel from their lists candidates with dubious track records, and to set up strong internal screening mechanisms.
The initiative, launched in mid-October, is modeled after the Romanian Coalition for a Clean Parliament, which played a crucial role during the last elections.
Back in 2004, through direct bilateral talks and media pressure, the Coalition persuaded the Romanian parties to bar 98 politicians from running for parliament.
These candidates were either previously involved in corruption scandals or potential conflicts of interest, or had been exposed as agents of the former Communist secret police.
"In the Western Balkans and Black Sea region, people are starting to think about what follows the 'electoral revolution'-- which is just the first step, as it happened in Ukraine or Georgia," says Alina Mungiu from the Romanian Academic Society, one of the participating organisations.
"They have elected a new government and they see the new one becoming as corrupt as the former.
That's why a 'second revolution' is needed, against systemic corruption."
"We export a good practice which worked in Romania," Mungiu adds.
At a conference held in the Romanian mountain resort of Sinaia and sponsored by the National Endowment for Democracy, Mungiu laid out the seven criteria used for evaluating the political class.
She also stressed the importance of a nonpartisan conduct and of working with local clean investigative journalists.
The whole campaign in Romania cost only 77,000 euros, although the cost of some law suits following the campaign should also be considered.
The Integrity Network plans to seize the opportunities offered by election years – "the only vulnerable moment for the politicians", as one Montenegrin participant put it.
That means Croatia and Bulgaria should be the first two countries to be roused by the "anticorruption revolution".Such a campaign has a stronger chance of winning in these countries.
In addition to having a vigorous civil society, they are under EU pressure to fight high-level corruption.
And both will hold elections in 2007.
Meanwhile, Bulgaria and Romania are joining the EU in 2007, and will elect representatives to the European Parliament next year.
The Centre for the Study of Democracy and the George Marshall Association will lead a Bulgarian NGO Coalition to promote clean candidates to become European lawmakers.
Romanian Justice Minister Monica Macovei, who attended the Sinaia conference, says the anticorruption campaign aims at more than convicting certain individuals or forcing them out of political office."A real and successful fight against corruption basically leads to the reform of the political class and the administration.
At the end of the process this is what you reach," she says.
