28/06/2006
(FT, The Times - 28/06/06; AP, AFP, UPI, AKI, Beta, RTS, Radio B92 - 27/06/06; FT - 26/06/06)
Serbia is ready for a compromise regarding Kosovo's future status, but not one that is imposed from outside, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said in London on Tuesday (27 June).
"An imposed compromise is not a compromise and Serbia cannot accept an imposed compromise," Kostunica told reporters following talks with British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
The 45-minute meeting between the two leaders, attended also by Serbia's interior and economy ministers and the head of its Co-ordinating Centre for Kosovo, Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, focused on a range of issues, including Kosovo and EU integration.
Britain is a member of the six-nation Contact Group, including also France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, which plays a key role in the process of determining Kosovo's final status.
Discussing the Kosovo issue with Blair, Kostunica made it clear that his country views "substantial autonomy" as the only possible solution. 
This, he explained, meant the province would be granted much greater autonomy than any other region in Europe currently enjoys, while Serbia's borders would remain unchanged and the rights of the Kosovo Serb minority would be protected.
Technically, Kosovo is still part of Serbia, but has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict.
Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials have been involved in direct, UN-led negotiations on the province's final status since February, but have made little progress so far, with the sides still wide apart in their positions.
The Kosovo Albanians, who make up about 90 per cent of the province's population of 2 million people, want Kosovo to become fully independent from Serbia.
The international community expects a solution by the end of this year, with some western powers reportedly backing the Kosovo Albanian majority's quest for independence.
Ruling out this as an option, Kostunica insisted on Tuesday that a move in that direction would destabilise the region. 
If such a solution were to be imposed on Serbia, he said, it would "certainly be rejected by Serbia's Parliament", and "that would inevitably mark the turning point [for]… Serbia's relations with the rest of the world," the British daily Financial Times quoted him as saying.
On the issue of Serbia's EU integration bid, Blair reportedly urged Belgrade to step up its co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to move on in the process.
In early May, the EU broke off talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Belgrade over its failure to meet a 30 April deadline for the arrest and handover of former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic to the UN tribunal in The Hague. 
Brussels has since made it clear that the SAA negotiations, a major first step towards eventual EU membership, will resume once this obstacle has been cleared.
