20/03/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 20/03/06
Between 2003 and 2005, some 454 criminal cases involving insult and slander were filed in Macedonia, including 126 proceedings against journalists and media organisations, according to statistics from the justice ministry. 
Only 94 of the cases have been resolved, and the penalties were in the form of fees and parole sentences. 
In one case, a five-month jail sentence was imposed.
Macedonian journalists object to the laws on insult and slander, saying they undermine free speech. 
Because of the laws, the possibility of a jail sentence hangs over every journalist and amounts to a form of subtle pressure, says Robert Popovski, secretary of the Macedonian Journalists' Association.
International organisations such as the OSCE say changes are needed. 
"Out of 55 OSCE member states, half of them have decriminalised insult and slander," notes Roland Bless of the OSCE. 
"Currently, a process of decriminalisation of insult and slander is under way in 18 countries."
In February, the OSCE, the Macedonian Media Institute and the Macedonian Journalists' Association sponsored a conference on the issue. 
Participants made a number of recommendations, including the abolition of fines and jail sentences for defamation, the development of independent media self-regulating panels and the raising of professional standards among journalists.
Defamation should be decriminalised and transferred to the sphere of civil law, with damages proportional to the nature of the offence, the conference also recommended.
"Freedom of expression and protection of reputation principles are based on the premise that in a democratic society, freedom of expression must be guaranteed and may be subject only to narrowly drawn restrictions which are necessary to protect legitimate interests, including reputation," said OSCE Ambassador Carlos Pais.
According to Justice Minister Meri Mladenovska-Gjorgievska, the government is willing to enact reforms. 
"Amendments to the Penalty Code erasing jail sentences for insult and slander will be soon initiated because this is on behalf of the journalists and citizens."
However, some officials insist that free speech must have limits. 
"In some societies we respect as democratic ones, the threshold is too high, while in some totalitarian societies it is very low," says the Director of the Macedonian Information Agency Zoran Ivanov, adding that restrictions are necessary in order to protect reputations.
