05/10/2009
(News agencies -- 01/08/09 -26/09/09;
World Bank;
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies;
European Commission's Joint Research Centre)
Storms, floods, wildfires, earthquakes -- most Southeast European (SEE) countries were hit by at least one such calamity this summer.
More than three dozen people were killed and many more were injured or otherwise affected by the recent natural disasters that also caused huge material damage.
Rare tornado hits Nicosia
At least 11 people were injured by a freak tornado that wreaked havoc in parts of Cyprus's capital, Nicosia, on September 18th.
Uprooted trees crashed onto cars as they fell to the ground and blocked some of the city's roads.
Accompanied by heavy rain and hail, the twister cut power lines, tore off rooftops and advertisement boards.
Flying debris smashed shop and house windows.
Panayiotis Kyprianou, the mayor of Nicosia's Latsia suburb, which was the worst affected by the storm, said 200 houses had been damaged.
A local electrical goods' vendor told Cyprus Mail daily that he had to throw away four truckloads of refrigerators, TV sets and other appliances after the tornado swept through his showroom.
"It was unbelievable, the damage is huge," Kyprianou told Reuters after the tornado.
"Thank God we had no [fatalities]."
Torrential rains trigger floods
Earlier last month, northwestern Turkey was slammed by its heaviest rainfall in the last 80 years.
The downpour triggered massive flooding in the region, with the widespread damage it caused in Istanbul and the surrounding areas estimated at more than 68m euros.
By September 14th, the death toll had risen to 41 from 32, with six people still missing.
The reported deaths caused by natural disasters in Turkey in 2008 totalled 88 people, according to the 2009 edition of the World Disasters Report, issued by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in June.
According to the Turkish branch of WWF, one of the world's largest environmental organisations, Turkish authorities have yet to establish adequate safeguards against events caused by extreme weather.
"The presence of deadly floods right in the heart of Istanbul first of all points at the insufficient infrastructure of the city," WWF-Turkey CEO Dr Filiz Demirayak said in a statement issued on September 11th.
"Unregulated urban development and infrastructure have become barriers preventing rainwater from reaching the sea via its natural path."
The NGO also cited damaged natural irrigation channels and the lack of enough green areas and forests in Istanbul as contributing factors.
"The local municipalities and the government need to resolve the infrastructural problems of the city and prepare climate adaptation plan immediately," Demirayak said.
Environmental experts point to floods as a sign of global warming's impact on Europe.
"Winter floods are likely to increase in maritime regions and flash floods are likely to increase throughout Europe," the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) said in its Climate Change 2007 assessment.
"Coastal flooding related to increasing storminess and sea-level rise is likely to threaten up to 1.6 million additional people annually."
In Greece, a police officer was killed in the floods triggered by torrential rains on the island of Evia last month.
Powerful thunderstorms, accompanied by heavy rains wreaked havoc in western Bulgaria in early August.
Flooded streets brought traffic to a standstill for several hours in parts of Sofia.
Greece relives 2007 inferno
In Greece, where a series of massive fires scorched nearly 200,000 ha of forest, farm and other land, and killed nearly 80 people around the county in 2007, high winds and temperatures, as well as arson, were blamed for the new wave of wildfires this summer.
The worst occurred in the second half of August, when a number of major blazes broke out, including in areas close to Athens.
By early September, the burned area in Greece totalled more than 42,120 ha, making the country the fourth worst affected by fires in Europe in 2009, in terms of total burned area, according to the latest issue of The European Forest Fire Information System Newsletter, published by the European Commission's (EC) Joint Research Centre (JRC).
The only victim of this summer's fires was a 55-year-old Greek pilot, whose plane crashed during efforts to contain a blaze on the island of Kefalonia.
While the government was again criticised for its reponse to the disaster, it showed it had learned its lessons from the crisis two years ago.
This time around, Athens wasted no time to seek help from the county's EU partners, while the local authorities ordered emergency measures, including the evacuation of hospitals, retirement homes and entire towns.
By early September, wildfires in Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia and Turkey scorched a total of 16,370 ha of land, according to the JRC's newsletter.
Round-the-clock monitoring of forests and the construction of hundreds of fire detection towers are among the measures the Turkish government has taken to reduce the risk of fires.
The main reason for the vast majority of some 580 wildfires in Bulgaria last year was the burning of stubble and vegetable residuals by farmers although the practice is prohibited and is punishable by a fine of up to 3,000 euros.
"The rising dangers of climate change require a response from governments equivalent to the one made to address the global financial crisis," IFRC Secretary-General Bekele Geleta said during the launch of this year's World Disasters Report in June.
While storms and floods are among the more predictable natural hazards, tornadoes are not.
Neither are earthquakes, which are not at all rare in the region.
Prone to earthquakes
The Balkan Peninsula has a far more complicated tectonic structure than the rest of Europe.
Two earthquakes with a magnitude of 7.3 and 7.8 on the Richter that rocked Bulgaria in 1904 are the strongest to have hit the continent, the World Bank said in a paper in June.
According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), the 1939 one in the province of Erzincan in eastern Turkey also measured 7.8 on the Richter scale and claimed the lives of more than 32,000.
The 7.4 magnitude quake that struck western Turkey in August 1999 and left more than 17,000 people dead and left about half a million others homeless as thousands of houses collapsed or were heavily damaged.
Milder earthquakes are quite frequent in the region.
The strongest this season was the 5.6 magnitude one that shook Albania on September 6th.
According to reports, two houses collapsed and others suffered minor damage.
A 5.0-magnitude earthquake with its epicentre off the Romanian and Bulgarian Black Sea coasts struck on August 5th, also causing minor damage.
Former Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu suggested in early 2007 that all buildings, which risk collapsing in the event of an earthquake, should be marked accordingly, irrespective of the impact of such a measure on the property market.
Earlier statistics had shown that nearly 3,000 could sustain major damage in case of a tremor, while 600 of them, including 120 in Bucharest, would likely collapse.
A recent World Bank paper on risk insurance, estimated that 50% of the buildings in Bulgaria will not be damaged at all in the event of a high-intensity earthquake in which the shaking is perceived as "severe", while 7.5% will be destroyed.
The rest will suffer moderate damage, according to the Bank.
