21/09/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 21/09/06
The common army of Serbia and Montenegro was the only joint institution of the loose federation that continued to function until the end.
After Montenegro chose independence in the 21 May referendum, the two states launched negotiations on dividing military property.
By agreement, both states have retained the military property that was located on their territories during the existence of the state union.
However, Montenegrin officials have announced that they wish to significantly reduce the number of soldiers and military potential.
This means that most of the weapons and equipment will be sold and a professional army of around 2,500 men will be formed.
The state union had a general obligation of army service and recruits were called to serve in the army for six months between the ages of 19 and 21.
The division has been facilitated by the fact that it was planned -- Montenegro had some 5.4% of the overall combat potential, which equaled the republic's share in the military budget.
This, however, did not apply to the navy, which was mainly located in Montenegro.
The end of the state union leaves Serbia landlocked.
Some in Belgrade suggest Montenegro may allow Serbia to keep a downsized navy on the Montenegrin coast.
Serbia plans to create an army that will, by 2010, consist mainly of professional soldiers, while the number of reserves will be significantly increased.
According to official estimates, by 2007 the army should have around 36,000 members instead of the current 50,000.
The number would then be brought down to less than 30,000 by 2010.
However, the Serbian Army is facing a lack of money, with the air force in particularly dire straits.
According to Deputy Air Force Commander Colonel Nebojsa Djukanovic, of the 240 airplanes and helicopters in the Serbian Army, only around 60 are still in use.
The most serious problem facing the air force -- which was badly shaken during the clash with NATO in 1999 -- is the overhaul of its MiG-29s.
That job has been constantly delayed due to insufficient finances.
The Serbian Constitution does not clearly define the authorities of the prime minister and president in commanding the army.
Former Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Zoran Stankovic and ministry officials are now under the jurisdiction of the Serbian government, but the minister still has not been given the right to vote at government sessions.
Serbian President Boris Tadic in early August said he would not allow "dual command of the army".
However, the matter is unlikely to be resolved until a new Serbian Constitution is adopted.
