27/06/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 27/06/06
Education experts from Albania, Kosovo and Macedonia are working to create a unique educational programme for pre-university studies by applying common books and methods -- in science, literature, history and philosophy -- that can be used by the two countries and the province.
"This implementation of this initiative is doable [seeing that] in the last three years, there was the same curriculum," Albanian Minister of Education and Science Genc Pollo says. 
"The idea is that a book of mathematics for the sixth grade of the elementary school which will be printed in Tirana can also be used in Tetovo (Macedonia) and Podujevo (Kosovo)."
"The same thing will happen with a biology book in Albanian printed in Skopje; it can be used in Kosovo, but also in Shkodra and Durres," Pollo told Deutsche Welle.
Groups of experts have already held meetings to discuss the ideas put forward by all the parties involved.
According to Macedonian Education Minister Aziz Pollozhani, there is no obstacle to implementing the project in his country. 
It can be up and running in a short time, and would give positive, concrete results, he says.
"We would start with the most elementary and the easiest to be implemented. 
Then we would continue with other subjects," Pollozhani said during a visit to Tirana.
The Albanian Education Ministry is keeping in contact with representatives of the international administration and its counterpart in Kosovo. 
The idea for the project was launched during Pollo's visit to Pristina in May, where he signed a co-operation agreement with Kosovo Education Minister Agim Veliu.
"Part of this agreement is also the exchange of the curricula for the pre-university education system. 
We have to work together to train teachers and adjust textbooks. 
Our aim is to use the same books in Albania and Kosovo, so the books in Albanian language can be used in both Albania and Kosovo," Pollo said in Pristina.
His Kosovo counterpart, Veliu, welcomed the initiative and the agreement. 
"It is the first step towards institutional co-operation between both ministries," he said.
