27/06/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 27/06/06
Earlier this month, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) revoked the zero customs rate for Serbia, implementing instead a 40 per cent rate on Serbian products such as milk and meat that are imported into BiH.
The decree to revoke the zero rate was passed by the BiH Council of Ministers. 
The council said that implementing the new 40 per cent rate is within their authority, and is in accordance with the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) that was signed by the two countries four years ago.
Authorities in Belgrade, however, are crying foul. 
"Bosnia and Herzegovina is violating the bilateral agreement on free trade with Serbia and the principles that the zone of free trade is based on," Serbian Minister for Foreign Economic Relations Milan Parivodic said.
For the time being, Belgrade has offered two solutions to the issue, and has requested that the South East European Stability Pact step in to negotiate. 
"We have two options -- to apply a similar measure to their products, such as steel products from Zenica, or to solve the issue in a constructive way," said Vlatko Sekulovic of the foreign economic relations ministry.
Serbian manufacturers say the rate implementation will result in significant losses to them. 
BiH is a strategic market for Serbian exports of milk and meat, and the introduction of customs could cause Serbian products to lose their competitive edge on the Bosnian market.
The authorities in Sarajevo, however, have come under pressure from local farmers and manufacturers, who say they are being driven out of the market because of excess imports. 
Many farms have shut down because they cannot compete. 
In all, BiH has a trade deficit with Serbia of about 900m euros.
Meanwhile, milk producers in newly-independent Montenegro are also pushing their government to apply customs rates to Serbia, which has been exempt because of the now-defunct state union.
Products such as milk, wheat and meat continue to be freely exported to Macedonia, although manufacturers there are restive as well.
