20/03/2006
(OHR Morning Media Brief - 20/03/06; FENA, DTT-NET - 19/03/06; AP, Reuters, AFP - 18/03/06)
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has welcomed the constitutional reform agreement the country's seven main political parties reached after months of negotiations Saturday (18 March).
"This is the first substantial step in the long process of reform towards more effective and functional state institutions," High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling said in a statement. 
"This reform should meet the needs of the citizens and support the country's path towards the EU."
The constitutional amendments set the stage for boosting the powers of the central institutions and improving their efficiency, thus facilitating the country's progress towards EU and NATO integration.
Removing the last obstacle to a deal, the leaders of the seven parties agreed on Saturday to replace the current three-member presidency with a single, rotating president and two vice presidents, all of whom would be elected by parliament and not directly, and for a four-year term in office. 
Each of them should represent one of the country's main ethnic groups -- Muslims, Croats and Serbs.
The agreement also envisions a substantial increase in the number of lawmakers in the parliament's lower house, the House of Representatives, from 42 members to 87 members. 
The current 15-seat upper house, the House of Peoples, would be expanded to 21 deputies, with an equal representation of the three main ethnic communities. 
However, its powers would be curtailed.
Previously agreed-on changes also provide for the strengthening of the country's central government by the addition of two new ministerial seats to the nine-member cabinet and by expanding the powers of the prime minister, including the right to hire and fire ministers.
The constitutional reform agreement must be approved by parliament to become effective. 
Schwarz-Schilling called for a quick adoption of the deal to allow its implementation before the October general elections in BiH.
"Parliamentarians now have the important job of assessing this agreement," Schwarz-Schilling said. 
"The timetable for putting these changes in place in time for them to be incorporated into the 2006 elections is extremely tight. 
I urge parliamentarians to seize this opportunity."
According to local press reports Monday, the parliament will discuss the agreement on Thursday.
US Ambassador to BiH Douglas McElhaney, whose country played a key role in the talks, voiced hope Sunday that parliament would ratify the agreement by the end of March. 
Pledging continued US involvement in the constitutional reform process, he also suggested that negotiations on further changes to the country's basic law could be initiated immediately after the October elections.
During the November 2005 celebrations of the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords in Washington, the leaders of the main political parties in BiH signed a declaration vowing to revamp the constitution.
After reaching agreement Saturday, they sent a letter to US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice pledging to implement the changes "in time for the next general elections scheduled for October"
