27/06/2006
(Blic - 27/06/06;
AP, Euronews, Radio B92, Beta, HINA, Makfax, SEE Security Monitor - 26/06/06)
Serbia and Montenegro must build the best possible ties in the interests of their nations and citizens, the leaders of the two countries agreed on Monday (26 June), less than a month after Montenegro declared its independence from Serbia.
In a referendum held on 21 May, 55.5 per cent of Montenegrin voters said "yes" to the Adriatic republic's split from its loose union with Serbia.
On 3 June, the Montenegrin Parliament declared the country's independence.
President Boris Tadic on Monday became the first Serbian leader and the first foreign head of state to visit independent Montenegro.
He was welcomed at the airport in Podgorica by his Montenegrin counterpart, Filip Vujanovic, and ceremoniously greeted by a Montenegrin special guard to the sound of the two countries' anthems.
The two leaders then held talks at the presidential residence in Montenegro's ancient capital, Cetinje.
"This is a new start," Tadic said later at a joint press conference with Vujanovic.
"Serbia is a friend of Montenegro and always will be."
He called for a quick resolution of all issues arising from the dissolution of the state union between the two countries, enabling them to foster co-operation.
"The way we develop our relations in the economy, defence and on the foreign policy front will determine if we qualify for EU membership, which is our priority goal," Tadic said.
"It is in Montenegro's interest to see Serbian citizens visit the country as tourists.
It is in Serbia's interest to co-operate in defence, because Montenegro is part of the strategic defence space which is also important for Serbia."
According to him, Montenegrins who want Serbian citizenship should get it and the same rule should apply to Serbians who want Montenegrin citizenship.
For his part, Vujanovic expressed satisfaction with his counterpart's visit, voicing confidence "that all obstacles that might have existed in our communication will be removed".
According to the UPI, the two presidents agreed on Monday that Montenegro would use the services of the Serbian diplomatic service in countries where Podgorica does not yet have its own diplomats.
They reportedly also confirmed a deal allowing Serbia to use a Montenegrin military training ship and discussed other types of military co-operation, including training, joint exercises and peace missions.
Later in the day, Tadic met with Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic.
Montenegro was the first stop on the Serbian president's tour of the region, which includes visits to three other former Yugoslav republics -- Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The trip comes amid stepped-up diplomatic efforts by Belgrade as it seeks to build support for its stance on Kosovo and other issues, the AP reported.
