20/09/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 20/09/06
Many of Kosovo's people have been living outside the province since the 1990s, because of the difficulty in making a living there.
With Kosovo's status expected to be resolved by the end of this year, they wonder if the situation will start to improve.
Arjeta Mucaj, a 20-year-old from the village of Korisha, near Prizren, hopes to return after having spent the last decade in Germany.
She wants to study medicine at Pristina University.
"This is my dream and I hope I can realise it," she says.
For the time being, though, Kosovo is only a place to return to on holidays with her family.
Arjeta's sister, Arbnore Mucaj-Leka, has a bleaker point of view.
"I can never come back here.
I don't think that Kosovo in the next 20 years can be a safe and democratic state," she says.
"The leaders must come to understand that they won their seats in parliament in order to work for citizens, not for their families," Arbnore says.
She adds that promises of a better future mean little when people face the basic problem of waking up in the morning with nothing to eat.
With no electricity, no water and poor roads, it is not possible to have a normal life, Arbnore says.
Others say that with the status issue settled, economic improvement can follow.
Muharrem Gashi, 45, certainly hopes so.
He has been out of work since 1995, when the Milosevic regime fired him from his job at a public organisation.
"I am optimistic that at the end of this year, after the settlement of the final status, we can have more chances for a good life," Gashi says.
Serbs in Kosovo, however, are apprehensive, especially about the prospect of independence.
Jelena Milutinovic, who lives in Gracanica, doubts she would be able to stay.
"If Kosovo becomes independent, how can Serbs live here?
I cannot live in Gracanica, if I can't go around freely," she says.
Jelena, who is unemployed, spends her time visiting friends in other Serb enclaves in Kosovo.
"Sometimes I go to Nis, where I have my mother's family.
There, life is different.
Everyone can live freely and without fear," she says.
Ferid Rasit, an ethnic Turk living in Prizren, is very satisfied with his life in Kosovo.
He works as a baker in the town centre.
"We didn't have any problems here.
Everything is good.
We work together with Albanians and I think that this co-operation will continue in the future," he says.
Ferid, together with other members of his family, have voted in all of Kosovo's elections.
He says they are satisfied with Kosovo's provisional institutions, as well as with the international institutions.
"If there is anything to mention as negative phenomenon in Kosovo, it is the electricity.
But I hope that Kosovo's government will establish a new gas burning power plant and the situation will begin to improve," he says.
