22/08/2006
(Food and Agriculture Organisation, AFP, Bloomberg - 21/08/06)
The H5N1 bird flu virus continues to threaten people, animals and economies in a growing number of countries, the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) said on Monday (21 August), citing the southern Balkan area as one of the high-risk regions.
"In Europe, we believe the southern Balkan area and Caucasus are a high-risk region for H5N1," the FAO statement quoted the head of the organisation's Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal Diseases, Juan Lubroth, as saying. 
"The region is not only a prime resting ground for migratory bird species, but poultry production is mostly characterised by rural and household husbandry with little in terms of biosecurity and strong regulatory inspection. 
In Romania, it is still too early to say if the situation has stabilised."
Turkey became the first Balkan country to report human cases of H5N1 infection this year. 
Of the 12 confirmed cases, four ended in death. 
Romania, which like Turkey, was among the first European countries hit by bird flu in October last year, has reported numerous cases of H5N1 outbreaks among poultry, but no cases of human infection.
Other Balkan countries where the H5N1 virus was confirmed as the cause of death of wild migratory birds include Bulgaria, Croatia and Greece.
While the number of countries where the disease has been confirmed has risen from 45 in April this year to some 55 today, the rate of infection among poultry has slowed in most countries, the Rome-based UN agency noted in a statement.
Several countries have contained the spread of the virus by taking different measures, including improving surveillance efforts and strengthening veterinary services.
The virus has, however, continued its advance in Asia, particularly in Indonesia, where the first human cases of infection with the H5N1 virus were detected in 2005.
"We don't expect to eradicate the H5N1 virus from possible wild bird reservoirs, but we can contain and control it fully in the poultry sector, which is the best insurance we have that it will not mutate into a virus that is easily transmissible among humans," FAO Chief Veterinary Officer Joseph Domenech said.
To contain the spread of the deadly virus, he said, veterinary and laboratory services must be improved in the poorer nations, which are at risk but lack the necessary funds for this.
The FAO also recommends that countries concentrate their containment efforts on human activities such as poultry farming, trade and live poultry markets, as these activities are most likely to spread the virus, but can be inspected, controlled and improved.
