22/08/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka –22/08/06
The final privatisation phase of the Republika Srspka telecommunications firm Telekom Srpske officially began earlier this month with the announcement of an international tender for 65 per cent of the state's share.
All interested companies must deliver their offer by 4 October.
However, the process has become mired in a dispute between the entity and the central authorities over who has authority to sell off the firm.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Prime Minister Adnan Terzic wrote a letter to High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling, requesting foreign intervention.
Terzic inists the central government should manage not only the sale of RS's Telekom Srpske but also that of the Federation of BiH's two telcos, BH Telekom and HT Mostar.
"The prime minister is disputing the sale of Bosnia's three telecom operators by the entities' governments, and is of the opinion that the central government should sell the operators," a government official told London's AFX Financial news agency.
"I am convinced that, no matter how much the privatisation of telecommunications operators is necessary, in these conditions it will not bring expected benefits to all citizens of Bosnia," Terzic wrote on 15 August.
Telekom Srpske -- with about 350,000 users in fixed telephony and about 580,000 users of mobile phones -- covers one-third of the market in BiH.
For several years the operator's annual profit has been about 40m euros.
Under the announced tender, potential buyers must meet certain criteria.
The bidding company must have at least 800,000 subscribers in fixed telephony, 1.5 million mobile phone customers, and an annual income exceeding 500m euros.
The telecom must not be moved from Banja Luka, even after the privatisation, and present obligations towards workers must be respected.
The winner must invest at least 50m euros in Telekom Srpske in the year following the purchase, and guarantee the government's right to use the company's telecommunication infrastructure.
During the last year, many foreign companies have shown interest in buying Telekom Srpske, including operators in Austria, Germany, France and Serbia.
Although a minimum price is not mentioned in the privatisation programme, RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik has said several times that bids under 400m euros will not be considered.
