24/05/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/05/06
Each year, the Foreign Investors' Council (FIC) issues a white paper assessing the state of the Serbian economy and the pace of reforms. 
Normally, presentation of the document is attended by government economics experts, but this year they stayed away. 
Instead, Serbia was officially represented by the governor of the Central Bank and the minister of international economic relations.
The likely reason is that the FIC's paper was highly critical of the government's policies, which it said "are increasingly resorting to administrative measures", while legislation to regulate markets has been shelved indefinitely.
The foreign investors represented at the Council have invested some 2.5 billion euros in Serbia, covering more than 120,000 employees. 
Along with their criticism, they commended the government for two projects that they said were especially well-implemented during the last year: the Founding Business Registration Agency, which provides a "one-stop-shop" for opening and registering companies, and the implementation of value added tax.
The investors also praised the continuation of reforms in the banking sector and progress in negotiations with the EU on the Stability and Association Agreement -- although these have now been suspended over the Ratko Mladic issue.
According to FIC Executive Board President Mike Ahern, the investors are mainly concerned that the successes this year should not be channelled into public sector salary increases, but rather invested in long-term prospects. 
The foreign investors also did not gloss over the problem of high inflation and ingrained corruption, as well as the still unreformed judiciary.
Serbia's "socialist" labour laws are overly protectve of workers and do not stimulate job creation, the investors say. 
Some elements of the law do enable competition, but there is no committee tasked with enforcing those provisions.
In addition, the current system of rental of construction land hinders the establishment of capital funds, according to Ahern. 
Because the procedure for issuing construction permits remains undefined, Serbia is effectively shooting itself in the foot in terms of the real-estate market, he adds.
Foreign investors warn that last year's 5 billion euros of foreign direct investments are mainly the result of purchases made through privatisation, while greenfield investments are still lacking. 
Around 500m euros came from one-time investments in the privatisation of banks, while the major portion of capital inflows are the result of foreign bank credits that increased the country's indebtedness.
Greenfield investments such as the American Ball Packaging and the Microsoft Development Centre remain an exception, according to the FIC.
The Council has put forward several concrete recommendations. 
Efforts need to be increased in terms of copyright protection and the curbing of piracy. 
The already drafted law on takeovers needs to be adopted. 
Finally, restitution of property seized under communism is a precondition for fair relations in the real-estate sector -- the backbone of the whole economy.
