29/03/2010
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 29/03/10 Photos courtesy of Vasilis Sambrakos
Vasilis Sambrakos's Tear up the Manual was released in November 2009 by the Ellinika Grammata (Greek Letters) publishing house.
"This is the best thing that ever happened to me in 17 years in journalism," Sambrakos said.
The book is a fictionalised account of the Greek football world. 
But the author says that despite the use of aliases, readers can easily recognise the real picture. 
Which is why, critics say, the book is so popular.
Sambrakos, who is editor-in-chief of the daily Exedra Sports, spoke with SETimes correspondent Christos Ringas.
SETimes: The main hero, Dimitris Alexandrou, decides to fix 11 football games and narrates his life story during the preparation for the voyage. 
How similar is your story in relation to the fiction presented inside the book? 
How did this idea come up?
Vasilis Sambrakos: I needed to narrate the story that always was and is my daily nightmare. 
I could be him. 
There were many points in my life when I had the same feelings as the main hero of the book. 
And that's why sometimes I wish I could be him. 
But always I am coming up to the conclusion that it isn't worth it … because nobody will do anything to clean [up] football even if there was enough proof and evidence to corroborate that Greek football is corrupt. 
This book is fiction. 
But everybody says it looks very real.
SETimes: The character wants to reveal all the wrong he has experienced in his professional career. 
He looks like an idealist who wants to change the status quo in Greek football. 
Have you ever been able to do this in your career?
Sambrakos: I wish I could change Greek football's manual. 
I tried, I try, but I don't have the power to change the world … I wrote about corruption in football. 
But nobody cares.
SETimes: In the story, Dimitris asks his colleague Giorgos what would happen "… if one day we published the newspaper with everything we know and truly believe, even with no proof, about all the key [people] in sports?" Is this something you've been thinking about for a long time?
Sambrakos: Yeah, it would be the most important day in the history of the world if every newspaper could write, even only once, what the journalists know but can't or don't want to prove about the "key people". 
It would be great if journalists, newspapers, news agencies and TV networks could tear up the manual, even for one day.
SETimes: The book tells about thugs, underworld, escort services, match-rigging managers, football club and federation presidents, referees, journalists, media lords, bookmakers and bet fixers. 
How much of this is based in reality?
Sambrakos: On the presentation of the book, the most important and well-respected Greek sports journalist -- Jiannis Diakogiannis -- said that this book is non-fiction. 
If he says so, what can I say? 
The book is fiction, but the picture of the Greek football world I gave looks real.
SETimes: The book focuses on stories involving the football club Pyrsos that many identify as AEK, one of the three major clubs of Greece. 
There are stories about football players, coaches and club presidents.
Sambrakos: As I have declared in the beginning of the book, the whole story is fiction. 
At least I never saw [any of this in real life]. 
This is a fictional story with fictional characters -- a sort of nightmarish version of the realities of Greek soccer that bears no resemblance whatsoever to the "clean, transparent, reliable, unspoiled, wholesome game we actually enjoy today in Greece".
SETimes: The book was first published in November and was reprinted in January because of its popularity. 
Have you expected such a big success?
Sambrakos: I have to say that the "journey" of the book is leaving me speechless. 
It was a dream for me to discover that there are a lot of people who still care. 
This dream came true, I find my dream in every message I receive from the readers of the book.
SETimes: Are you planning to translate the book into other languages?
Sambrakos: There were some talks about selling the book to other countries. 
Some countries from Balkans are very much interested and I was told that Tear up the Manual will be translated soon for these countries. 
It is open, the possibility of the book being released in English. 
I hope so, because this story could be every sports journalist's nightmare, all over the world.
