21/07/2006
By Balkanblogs for Southeast European Times – 21/01/07
With software companies better able to crack down on piracy, some people find they're having to make tough choices, according to Grigor Gatchev.
Nearly every day in Bulgaria, he writes, computer experts have conversations that go something like this:
"Grigor, have you heard of any new ways to register Windows XP?
"What have you tried to date?"
"Well, initially I used the Javascript command but they plugged that hole.
I then tried removing the Genuine Advantage Add-on via 'Manage Add-ons'.
They plugged this hole as well.
Then someone showed me a trick using the 'Group Policy', but that too does not work any longer ..."
"You know, I can suggest something that would take care of your registration problems for good."
"You mean, buy Windows?
Dream on!"
Since his acquaintance finds the idea outrageous, Grigor suggests an alternative:
Linux.
"It won't cost a penny," he says helpfully.
But that doesn't go over well either.
"How can you expect me to abandon my Windows and type exotic commands like the ones we used to have under DOS?
You know when that's going to happen, don't you!"
"Actually I do!" replies Grigor.
"It will happen exactly 24 hours after your Windows ceases to operate until you pay for it." The talk ends in unprintable expletives.
Writing from Romania, Opinii wishes authorities would do more to crack down on rule-bending in the job market.
"I went to 5 interviews.
After the usual tests we got to negotiating the salary.
I asked for a certain amount, and they agreed.
Fortunately I asked them if payment will be made legally (if the entire amount will be in my contract).
I got the same answer from all 5 places:
NO.
I told them I could not work for a company that did not play by the rules.
They were all surprised by my attitude.
"Unfortunately this is a common situation with Romanian companies," he writes, suggesting that few businesses view adherence to the law as an essential asset.
In the tourism industry, meanwhile, it's usually considered an asset to know a foreign language.
But not always.
As Bytiqis at Southeast Europe Online observes, knowing a language incompletely can mean trouble.
As an example, he posts a photo of a sign put up by an enterprising Montenegrin, written in Albanian, and apparently aimed at Kosovo tourists.
But due to a spelling error, the sign advertises something other than rooms.
"Instead of 'dhoma' … he or she wrote "loma" which in Albanian can mean "dirt" or 'dirtbag'.
We commend them for the initiative though!"
Elsewhere:
OXFAM volunteer Rachele De Felice has been trying to raise money to build a new bridge in the small village of Ure e Shtrentje, in northern Albania, reports peshkupauje.
Mountain torrents tore the old bridge away a few years ago, dividing the village.
Not only are half of the residents unable to visit the nurse or go to school, but the only road out of the village is on one side of the gorge.
Ironically, the village's name literally means "expensive bridge".
At Optmizmu, Bosnian blogger Treshnja takes a stunned look at rising consumer prices, which are putting the cost of running a household well beyond reach of many young people.
"Birth rates in the Federation of BiH is continuously declining," Treshja notes.
"Not surprising, as many young people are jobless."
That's just a sampling of what's been on Balkan bloggers' minds this week.
Join us again next Friday for more comments, insights and anecdotes from around the region.
