19/09/2006
(Blic - 19/09/06; Reuters, FENA, B92 - 18/09/06; VOA - 17/09/06; AP, Finnish EU Presidency - 15/09/06; UPI - 14/09/06; Serbianna - 13/09/06; Reuters - 12/09/06)
The Bosniak members of Republika Srpska's (RS) government urged the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and state institutions on Monday (18 September) to stop a planned accord between the entity and Serbia, describing it as illegal.
The agreement, announced during RS President Dragan Cavic's visit to Belgrade last week, aims to boost political ties between Belgrade and Banja Luka. 
It is expected to be signed on 26 September, five days before parliamentary elections in BiH.
"We call on relevant institutions to protect us from those who are dragging us, again, against our will, where we do not wish to go," BiH news agency FENA quoted the Bosniak representatives in the RS government as saying in a statement on Monday. 
They said the deal would represent a grave violation of the Dayton Peace Agreement (DPA) and constitute a breach of the sovereignty and integrity of BiH.
RS's status as an entity does not allow it to sign international agreements with other states, the representatives said.
Similar objections have come from the leaders of the two main Bosniak political formations in the country. 
BiH Presidency Chairman Sulejman Tihic, who also heads the Party of Democratic Action, and Haris Silajdzic, the chairman of Party for BiH, have both called on High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling to prevent the signing of the deal.
The fact that representatives of the Bosniak and Bosnian Croat communities were not involved in the negotiations on the agreement made it illegal, they said.
A report by Belgrade-based Radio B92 on Monday suggested the deal reflected political manoeuvring by Serbia and RS. 
Serbia is due to hold elections next year and is potentially facing the loss of Kosovo as the status process approaches a resolution. 
In BiH, meanwhile, the campaign is under way for the 1 October parliamentary elections.
Nationalist rhetoric has been on the rise in the run-up to the poll. 
After Montenegrins voted to end their ties with Serbia in May, Bosnian Serb officials, notably RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, made statements about a possible independence referendum in the entity.
Some say these statements serve as a bargaining tool for Serbia in its bid to prevent Kosovo from gaining independence.
"Belgrade has been using Bosnian Serbs ... 
telling them to speak up and say they'll claim independence if Kosovo goes," Reuters on Monday quoted an unnamed Sarajevo-based diplomat as saying.
According to analysts quoted by Radio B92, however, such tactics could backfire. 
Were Serbia to support an independence referendum in RS, it could find itself dealing with seccessionists in Vojvodina and Sandzak as well, they argue.
Western officials, including Schwarz-Schilling, have warned that the international community will never permit an RS independence referendum. 
The Dayton Accords contain no provision for such a vote, nor do they allow the abolition of BiH entities.
In comments from Vienna on Monday, Schwarz-Schilling warned that he might move to disallow Dodik from participating in the upcoming elections if he continues to talk about a referendum.
Voicing concern about the rise in "inflammatory rhetoric" ahead of the October poll, EU foreign ministers have urged BiH politicians to tone down their oratory.
