25/04/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 25/04/06
A Stabilisation Association Agreement (SAA) between Albania and the EU is expected to be signed in June, according to the European Commission's (EC) Ambassador to Tirana, Lutz Saltzman.
"The EC has proposed that the EU sign the SAA with Albania in June to pave the way to the ratification process by the 25 member states. 
We are willing to convince these states that Albania is ready to sign the agreement," Saltzman said during a seminar of the Parliamentary Assembly of NATO, held this month in Tirana.
He warned that Albania would still face many challenges after signing the document. 
Success in the area of institutional reforms depends on political consensus, he said.
Signing the SAA will bring economic benefits such as an expanding market, improved job possibilities and freer movement for Albanians, according to Saltzman. 
"The country has to liberalise more its economy, to improve the conditions for investment, through the regulation of property rights and to improve the capacities of the public administration," he said. 
Saltzman assured not only Albania, but also the other Western Balkan countries, of the bloc's support for the European integration process. 
"The aim of the EU is to establish this part of Europe on the safe road towards its integration to the European family," he said.
Austria, which holds the EU's rotating presidency during the first six months of 2006, is placing great significance on the integration of Western Balkan countries. 
Vienna has said it will strive to offer a "clear European perspective" to Southeast Europe.
During discussions between Albanian Foreign Minister Besnik Mustafaj and Austrian counterpart Ursula Plassnik, both agreed that signing the SAA is a "top political priority" for this year. 
Plassnik assured Mustafaj that the EU is working on technical problems with the agreement, including its translation into the member states' languages.
Albania's hopes for European integration were consolidated in February when EC President Jose Manuel Barroso and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn visited Tirana. 
Together with Mustafaj, they initialed the first page of the SAA.
Negotiations on the SAA, the first legal step towards EU membership, have been under way since 2003. 
The EU has made clear to Albania that its integration will depend on the implementation of reform, fighting organised crime and strengthening the economy.
