26/07/2010
By Sasa Ilic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 26/07/10
Although he is still largely unknown to the wider public, theatre experts already consider Petar Mihajlovic to be one of the most talented young Serbian playwrights.
In 2009, he won the country's most prestigious national award in the fields of theatre and dramaturgy – the Sterija Prize for best original contemporary dramatic text.
Born in Kragujevac in 1979, he graduated with a degree in dramaturgy at Belgrade University's Faculty of Dramatic Arts.
Several of his texts were turned into radio dramas, student films and theatre plays.
His graduation dramatic text, Anywhere but Switzerland, was given the Slobodan Selenic Award.
Since then, he has slowly but steadily climbed the ladder of success.
Mihajlovic sat down with SETimes correspondent Sasa Ilic to talk about his work, Belgrade's theatre scene and life before and after the big award.
SETimes:
What does the life of a young, still unrecognised playwright look like in Serbia nowadays?
Petar Mihajlovic:
Young, unrecognised Serbian artists live the way they must.
Whether they want to or not, they have to provide food on the table, pay bills.
A much easier way to earn money nowadays is by working in various agencies and companies rather than theatres, libraries or artistic studios.
The problem in this case is that there is little time left for practising art.
A number of my colleagues have completely given up most of the ideas that initially drew them to take up art and enroll in the academy.
SETimes:
What can you do to reach success and gain full recognition?
Mihajlovic:
In order to make a living, you have to conform to doing many things you wouldn't do otherwise.
However, the most important thing is not to give up art at any moment.
There are ways to achieve what you want, especially in the artistic field.
The alternative art scene might not offer financial security, but it sets no boundaries and gives a chance to everyone.
SETimes:
You are the winner of the most prestigious award in the field of theatre and dramaturgy.
What life-changing turn did the award bring?
Mihajlovic:
First of all, this award will help my self-promotion and a lot of theatre figures will now hear about The Workers' Chronicles, hopefully read it as well, since it will be featured in The Scene magazine, published by Sterijino pozorje.
This award also ensures the stage life of a play, so I hope that, after this one, all my other plays will find an easier way to Serbian theatre stages in the future.
Realistically, this award should truly bring some positive changes in my work.
However, since this is Serbia, I'll knock on wood ...
SETimes:
What are you working on at the moment?
Mihajlovic:
I'm finalising a novel and a short story collection and currently trying to put those manuscripts in order.
Soon enough, I'll have to find a publisher that is interested in them.
There are also a few theatre plays that should soon get the final shape.
If writing is your profession, you can easily say you are working 24 hours a day.
The only problem is that even with working hours like this, your wages can be spectacularly low.
SETimes:
For almost two years, theatre connoisseurs have been talking about Anywhere but Switzerland.
What is happening with the play?
Mihajlovic:
After all the praises, awards, one concrete theatre offer, assurances and promises, some other things that have nothing to do with theatre got in the way and the whole project fell through.
At the moment, the text of Anywhere but Switzerland is in my drawer, waiting for some better moment, theatre and director who will find the understanding and will to give it a chance.
SETimes:
What theatre plays can you recommend to an international visitor?
Mihajlovic:
Unfortunately, I think that the overall quality of plays currently performed on the stages of Belgrade theatres is poor.
The number of performances of successful plays I'd like to recommend is decreasing with each season.
However, if I have to choose, I would recommend two plays of Atelje 212 signed by the same director, Tomi Janezic, Forest Glistens and Travelling Theatre Sopalovic and also the play Dreamers, directed by Milos Lolic, performed by the Yugoslavian Drama Theatre.
