23/05/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/05/06
The UN's special envoy for Kosovo status talks, Martti Ahtisaari, was in Belgrade on Monday (22 May) for talks with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
Their meeting came a day before the latest round of talks on Kosovo decentralisation was due to kick off in Vienna.
According to a government press release, Kostunica told Ahtisaari that Serbia is not satisfied with the way international mediators have been handling the process of resolving Kosovo's final status.
"Not only has there been no progress in the implementing of standards in Kosovo but over the past few months and weeks, we have witnessed concrete examples of human rights violations and violence against Serbs in the province," Kostunica said.
He also asked how progress could be expected on the thorny issue of Kosovo's status when four rounds of talks have been unable to bring about agreement on the easier question of decentralisation.
"In such a situation, sending private messages about some sort of conditional independence or limited sovereignty of the province seems highly unproductive and exceeds the special envoy's mandate," Kostunica said.
The last round of decentralisation talks ended in Vienna on 5 May with the Serbian and Kosovo Albanian sides still far apart.
Belgrade has been pushing for creating 15 to 16 Serb-run municipalities, including one in the northern town of Mitrovica.
By contrast, the Kosovo Albanians argue that Mitrovica should remain one municipality, with two zones under the authority of a single governing body, and that only three new municipalities should be created.
During his meeting with Kostunica, Ahtisaari put forward the UN team's plans for intensifying and accelerating the talks, while the Serb prime minister outlined a proposal envisioning "dual autonomy" for Kosovo -- autonomy for the province within Serbia, and autonomy for the Serb and other non-Albanian communities within the province.
Belgrade has proposed various scenarios over the past months, all aimed at retaining some form of sovereignty over Kosovo while granting a substantial degree of autonomy.
The Kosovo Albanian side, however, has said it will not settle for anything short of full independence.
At Tuesday's fifth round of talks, the focus is on protecting cultural, historical and religious heritage in the province.
As in previous rounds, Ahtisaari's deputy, Albert Rohan, is chairman.
Technically part of the now-defunct state union of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been run as a de facto UN protectorate since 1999, when a 78-day NATO campaign forced the regime of Slobodan Milosevic to withdraw from the province.
