16/03/2006
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 16/03/06
Growing economic stability, as well as the recently launched EU accession process, have spurred an unprecedented increase in foreign investment in Turkey, official statistics suggest. 
Direct foreign capital inflow into Turkey rose 239 per cent in 2005, reaching $9.65 billion. 
Meanwhile, real GDP has risen by 32 per cent and per capita income by 120 per cent over the past four years.
According to the Turkish Treasury Ministry, 9,684 foreign companies and branches were established by the end of 2005 and around 2,001 foreign investors were in partnership with Turkish companies. 
A total of 11,685 foreign companies were operating in Turkey, active in such industries as manufacturing, real estate, and wholesale and retail trade.
A report by the Washington-based Institute of International Finance (IIF) predicts that at least $11 billion in foreign capital can be expected in Turkey during 2006. 
That would make Turkey the leader among rising European markets in terms of attracting foreign capital, followed by Romania, which is expected to pull in about $7 billion. 
According to the IIF, investors are drawn to Turkey by reduced tax rates, privatisation bids, the start of its entry talks with the EU, and by its economic growth -- which is higher than the EU average.
Political stability has also played a role. 
After a succession of coalitions, the November 2002 elections ushered in a single-party government led by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's Justice and Development Party. 
In a recent speech to the Economy Co-ordination Board, Erdogan said his administration had succeeded in bringing economic stability back to the country after the disarray of previous years. 
Along with that stability, he said, came 22.1 per cent growth and an ongoing improvement in living standards.
Clouding the picture, however, is Turkey's high level of debt -- $249 billion, according to the treasury ministry. 
Moreover, despite aggregate improvement, up to a quarter of the country's population remains below the poverty threshold, based on food and non-food consumption baskets. 
Purchasing power has risen, but this trend is not divided equally. 
According to the most recent data on income distribution, for 2003, the wealthiest 20 per cent of the population receive 48.2 percent of the national income, while the poorest 20 per cent get 6 per cent. 
The unemployment rate, meanwhile, stands at about 11 per cent.
