31/05/2010
Photos and story by Elisabeth Maragoula for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 31/05/10
Gregory Trafalis, a 38-year-old public-sector employee, has started replacing his rose garden with tomatoes.
"This is the beginning of the end of the middle class," Christina Kapianou, his wife, quipped, while glancing concernedly at their 7-year-old daughter.
The family of three lives in Penteli, an affluent suburb in northern Athens. 
They both have full-time jobs: Christina is a secretary in a private firm and Gregory is an account manager in a nearby municipality. 
Their combined monthly income of 2,200 euros is about to plummet by more than 25%.
A socialist-led country where wages and social benefits make up 75% of the government's total expenditure, according to the IMF, and corruption is rife, Greece found itself diving head first towards bankruptcy earlier this year, with 300 billion euros in debt and a deficit of 13.7% of its GDP. 
In response, the EU and IMF swooped in with a 110 billion-euro bailout package.
To cover its part of the bargain, Greece is implementing harsh austerity measures such as massive wage cuts in the public sector, pension cuts and tax increases.
"The middle class is unprotected and hit the hardest [by the measures]. 
The upper classes likely have their money abroad, and the lower classes are protected [by social programmes]," Megan Greene, an economist at the Economist Intelligence Unit, told SETimes.
Although the country's competitiveness is low, Greeks have the second longest work week, following Austria, out of the 27 EU member countries. 
Greeks work nearly 44 hours, yet minimum wage is a mere 680 euros a month -- tough in a country where coffee costs 4 euros and a litre of gas is 1.6 euros and rising.
High wages are not the problem, Greene explained. 
"The real problem is that the public sector is bloated, there is wasteful mismanagement of public funds and tax evasion runs rampant."
A full-time contract employee with a high-school education, Gregory's net monthly salary is 1,200 euros (800 euros in base salary and 400 euros in benefits), plus bonuses of 800 euros at Christmas, 400 euros at Easter and 400 euros in August.
Bonuses are integrated into the Greek labour system, allowing many workers to cover outstanding payments or take holidays.
Cuts in the public sector vary according to the wage, which corresponds to the employee's years of service, education and dependents.
In April, Gregory learned that his bonuses have been cut by 30% and benefits by 12% from January 2010, meaning that he must now pay the government 200 euros.
The next rounds of cuts were IMF-inspired: 20% in his benefits and the standardisation of his bonuses to 500 euros at Christmas, 250 euros at Easter and 250 euros in August, starting in June, he explained.
The IMF is known for implementing tough measures, but in Greece, where watchdog Transparency International warns of rising levels of corruption, an external monitoring force such as this could be vital for the country's fiscal health.
"The IMF brings with it credibility in reporting, which Greece badly needs right now if it is going to regain the confidence of investors," Greene said.
However, the public's sense of injustice here is overwhelming.
A massive protest took place on May 5th in central Athens in which three people died. 
More protests are planned for later this month.
"[The government] is stealing from us. 
I didn't steal, so why do I have to pay," Gregory said.
"The biggest risk in all my forecasts is that social unrest will inhibit [the measures]," Greene said.
This summer, Christina's office will close its doors. 
"As things are now in Greece, I'm afraid that due to my age, I won't be able to find a job," she said.
The unemployed in Greece today are mainly young people trying to enter the labour market and women, Platon Tinios, professor of Economics at the University of Piraeus, told SETimes. 
Unemployment is currently 10.3% and is due to reach 15% by 2012.
Facing a monthly unemployment check of 500 euros, Christina recalls a time not so long ago when she would go for coffee and eat out with her family. 
But now, she stays home and cooks, and is very careful at the market, replacing fresh meat with frozen goods.
In Greece, instead of government-run benefit programmes, the family has always played the role of the social safety network, Tinios explained. 
But this financial "safety net" is now in danger. 
"As the crisis deepens, these kinds of support themselves won't have as much money."
Gregory's father already told him that with the pension cuts, he can no longer help out if needed.
Private companies are cutting 2% of the staff each month and are talking of increasing that. 
Insecurity is growing among many 30-somethings, who in turn could start moving abroad for better opportunities.
"In the next couple of years there will be a lot of people leaving Greece in the face of rising unemployment, higher taxes and lower wages," Greene warned.
But for now, the Trafalis family is staying here, working on their garden and preparing for the worst.
