20/07/2006
(Blic - 20/07/06;
NATO, AP, Reuters, DPA, RFE/RL, AKI, Radio B92, Beta, Makfax - 19/07/06)
NATO wants Serbia as a member, and supports its Euro-Atlantic integration bid, but the requirements must first be met, the Alliance's Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said Wednesday (19 July), following talks with Serbian President Boris Tadic in Brussels.
Serbia's leaders have said joining the Alliance's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme -- a major first step towards eventual NATO membership -- is one of the country's strategic objectives.
Before it can join EU and NATO structures, however, it must meet the condition of full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
On Monday, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica presented his government's action plan for fulfilling that requirement to EU officials.
De Hoop Scheffer welcomed the move, but stressed the need to actually implement it.
"Allies have applauded the action plan, which has been presented to arrest [former Bosnian Serb General] Ratko Mladic, and that action plan should now be translated from paper into action," a NATO statement quoted him as saying.
In early May, the EU suspended its Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) talks with Belgrade due to its failure to deliver Mladic -- one of the UN tribunal's most-wanted indictees -- to The Hague tribunal by 30 April, as promised.
The Union has made clear that the talks will be renewed once the tribunal determines that Serbia is co-operating fully.
Following meetings with senior EU officials on Tuesday, Tadic said he expected the implementation of the action plan to bring about the extradition of all war crime indictees still at large to The Hague "in the next several months".
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Ivana Dulic-Markovic suggested this week that authorities should arrest Mladic by September -- or provide the EU with evidence of their efforts to capture him -- if they want the SAA talks to be renewed.
According to Serbian Interior Minister Dragan Jocic, however, the action plan does not specify a deadline for Mladic's arrest.
Meanwhile, quoting a recent indictment against ten people accused of helping the fugitive, Belgrade daily Politika reported on Wednesday that Mladic had been hiding in the Serbian capital from mid-2002 until January this year.
"It is matter of five or more flats in [the neighbourhood of] New Belgrade, and the persons who helped Mladic paid the rent and supplied him with food," the daily quoted a source who had seen the indictment as saying.
The Serbian government has appointed special war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic and National Council for co-operation with the tribunal Chairman Rasim Ljajic as the persons responsible for supervising and overseeing the implementation of the action plan.
