20/07/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 20/07/06
Albania and newly independent Montenegro opened their fourth border checkpoint last month.
Known as Buna Bridge, it passes through the lake at Shkodra, located west of the city.
Previously, the countries were connected via the border crossings at Hani Hotit-Bozaj, Murriqan-Sukobine and Vermosh-Grcar.
Two ferries arrived at the checkpoint carrying citizens and delegations of top officials from Albania and Montenegro, with the latter headed by Montenegrin Environment Minister Boro Vucinic.
Both sides made pledges to work together on the protection and development of the area around Shkodra Lake.
Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli also attended the ceremony.
"The opening of this new checkpoint is an important event for this region.
It creates possibilities for the sustainable development of tourism here and potential for the trade relations by giving more profits to the citizens of Shkodra," she said.
NGOs with projects for the area should implement them as soon as possible, Topalli added.
Lake Shkodra is the largest lake in the Balkans.
It has an area of 368km, of which 169km belong to Albania and the rest to Montenegro.
The town of Shkodra is one of the oldest and most historic in Albania, functioning as an important cultural and economic centre.
Its estimated population ranges between 90,000 and -- if the surrounding region is included -- 110,000.
The 40m bridge at Buna, a vital link between the town and the surrounding tourist resorts, underwent a major reconstruction in 2002, following a partial collapse.
During a May visit, Prime Minister Sali Berisha said that the authorities are working hard to develop that part of the country.
He urged local authorities in Shkodra to co-operate with the Montenegrin authorities in exchanging intelligence and creating new areas for inter-regional co-operation.
According to Berisha, such co-operation will help both countries pave the way to development of the region they share.
