18/09/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 18/09/06
Delegations from Belgrade and Pristina held a tenth round of talks in Vienna on Friday (15 September). 
Again the focus was decentralisation, and again the two sides could not overcome major differences on the issues. 
UN deputy envoy Albert Rohan, who has been chairing the talks, says the chances for further progress are "increasingly slim".
"There was no real progress, no major movement on either side," Rohan said. 
"Some of the concessions which were made in the experts' talks by the Serbian delegation are now being made contingent to the acceptance of other requests," he added.
Major sticking points have included municipal boundaries, the number of new Serb municipalities in Kosovo, and the future of the divided city of Mitrovica.
Both sides refused to budge from their positions on Mitrovica, according to Rohan. 
The Kosovo Albanians favour one city with two municipalities, with a compulsory joint board responsible for local services.
The Serbian side, however, wants to merge northern Mitrovica with Zvecan, and says any joint board should be a purely voluntary institution.
The two sides have achieved some common ground on the establishment or enlargement of Serb-majority municipalities, Rohan said. 
"There is agreement on the fact that the municipalities should be created in Gracanica, Ranillug, Partesh and Klokott; there is the question of the enlargement of Novo Brdo. 
As I said, it is only the question of how far, how big these municipalities should be."
However, he noted, differences still exist over a proposed new municipality in Obilic. 
Moreover, the Serb side continues to press for certain municipalities to be established at sites where the population falls below the agreed-on threshold of 5,000.
The Serb side wants exceptions made for important religious sites, and for so-called "return municipalities", where there is a chance that refugees might come back if they knew a Serb-majority municipality was being created there, Rohan said.
"We are approaching the moment where by talking alone we will not accomplish the goal. 
We could talk for another ten years and not change anything," the envoy concluded.
Western diplomats have indicated that, in the event the Serbian and Kosovo Albanian negotiators fail to reach a compromise, the UN Security Council likely will step in before the end of 2006 and impose a solution. 
A number of media reports have suggested that solution could be some form of Kosovo independence under long-term EU and NATO supervision.
UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari left for New York on Saturday to brief the Council and the foreign ministers of the six-nation Contact Group on the situation.
Meanwhile, signs of tension have been on the rise, with two bombing incidents in the province over the past few days. 
Early Friday, a bomb went off under the car of Kosovo Interior Minister Fatmir Rexhepi, causing damage but no casualties. 
Four vehicles, including one belonging to the Kosovo Ministry of Local Self-Government, were destroyed in another explosion the following day.
In Belgrade Saturday, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica spoke at a military parade, vowing to prevent the secession of the province.
"Serbia will defend Kosovo with all democratic and legal means," the prime minister said.
Southeast European Times correspondent Svetla Dimitrova contributed to this report
