24/04/2006
(The Washington Times, Turkish Daily News - 24/04/06;
AP, Reuters, AFP, ANA-MPA - 23/04/06;
Washington File - 20/04/06;
NATO - 19/04/06)
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will pay a working visit to Athens on Tuesday (25 April), as part of a European tour that will also include a one-day stop in Ankara and participation in an informal meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Sofia later in the week.
During her one-day visit to Athens, the top US diplomat is scheduled to meet with Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis and Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis.
Rice will then travel to Ankara, where she will hold talks Wednesday with President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and her Turkish counterpart, Abdullah Gul.
"In Turkey and Greece she will review our shared interests with these strategic partners, including advancing democracy and peace in the broader Middle East and beyond, combating terrorism, Cyprus and Turkey's EU accession, and Eurasian energy security," State Department Spokesman Sean McCormack said last week, announcing Rice's trip.
Greek and Turkish media expected Iran's nuclear programme to be a key issue on the US diplomat's agenda of talks with local officials ahead of discussions at the UN Security Council on the matter on Friday.
Greek news agency ANA-MPA listed the future of Kosovo, the situation in the Balkans and Greece's role in the rapprochement effort with Muslim countries as other possible topics of discussion during Rice's visit to Athens.
In their talks with her, Turkish officials are expected to stress their growing impatience with the presence of members of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) in northern Iraq and call for a more determined action on the part of Washington against the rebels.
Ankara blames the PKK, which is considered a terrorist organisation by both the EU and the United States, for a recent escalation of unrest in Turkey's mainly Kurdish southeast and bombing attacks in Istanbul that have left 17 people dead.
After Turkey, Rice is due to join the foreign ministers of the other 25 NATO nations for an informal two-day meeting, opening in Sofia on Thursday.
The consultations in the Bulgarian capital will focus on preparations for the Alliance's summit in Riga, Latvia, scheduled for November.
Other issues the ministers will discuss include proposals for a more structured relationship between NATO and certain countries beyond the Euro-Atlantic area, the situation in the Balkans, including the Kosovo status talks, and the progress made by countries seeking NATO membership.
"This is an informal meeting and no decisions will be adopted;
the aim is to allow ministers to discuss freely the key issues on NATO's political agenda and the preparations for the Riga meeting of NATO heads of state and government," read an Alliance statement on the upcoming Sofia meeting.
While there, Rice is expected to sign a defence co-operation agreement with Bulgaria, establishing the procedures and rules for the shared use of several military facilities on the Balkan country's territory.
