24/04/2006
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 24/04/06
Every morning, Elena Vanea, the janitor of a blockhouse from the Pantelimon neighbourhood of Bucharest, finds dozens of syringes in the downstairs hall.
"There are some traffickers here in the area and their clients don't wait to reach home, but inject the drug right here, in our building," she says.
"At the beginning I was terrified, then I thought someone, maybe myself, could get hurt with one of the needles and get God knows what disease, but now I'm getting used to them and I treat them like any other garbage I find," she says.
According to studies, there are about 25,000 heroin users in Bucharest -- a city with a population of 2 million -- and at least a similar number in the rest of the country.
"This will have dramatic long term consequences on the national health -- by the increment in number for the HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis A, B, and C and tuberculosis cases -- and on the crime rate," the Romanian Anti-Drug Agency's (ANA) experts say.
Cannabis is more widely used than heroin.
According to ANA statistics, about 1 in 60 Romanian adults and teenagers have used this drug at least once, the prevalence in the ages 15 to 24 being 1 in 37.
Taking into account that in rural areas and small towns finding drugs is very difficult, and that not everyone questioned would admit to drug use, it seems very likely that 10 per cent to 20 per cent of high-school and college students in the cities are occasional or frequent drug users.
However, the real threat seems to come from amphetamine and ecstasy consumption, which has grown tenfold since 2000, official statistics show.
This new preference was quickly noticed by the traffickers.
"In the first nine months of 2005, the number of drug confiscations increased seven times compared to the same period of 2004.
Meanwhile, we've noticed a growth in the ecstasy and heroine trafficking," says Romanian Police Deputy Commander Eugen Corciu.
"These are new and trendy drugs, much easier to use than heroin or cannabis, and more affordable than cocaine.
They, in many cases, are easier to find, too.
I guess we should expect the growth to go on steadily for the next years," said Aurora Tancu, a psychologist in Bucharest specialising in drug addiction.
According to the European School Survey Project on Alcohol and Drugs, Romanian youths have one of the lowest drug prevalence rates on the continent, along with Greece and northern European countries.At the opposite end of the spectrum are the Czech Republic, France, Ireland and the United Kingdom, where drug use is prevalent.
Experts say that EU accession, and the expected rise in Romanians' living standards, could lead to increased recreational drug use in the country.
