24/04/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 24/04/06
The introduction of VAT has brought increased revenue for the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) budgets, but distribution has been blocked because of a dispute over how the funds should be shared between the two entities.
This month, VAT officials canceled all payouts from the unique account until the entities agree on a solution.
The problem surfaced at the Governing Board, whose members were unable to reach a deal after several meetings.
Federation of BiH (FBiH) representatives are convinced the Republika Srpska (RS) authorities are responsible.
"They are extending the blockade by insisting to share the funds based on coefficients from 2005, which is illegal," says FBiH Finance Minister Dragan Vrankic.
He says his side has proposed sharing the money according to the current regulations and financial results.
But RS representatives argue that the entity stands to lose more than 20m euros that way.
RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik has called for delaying the final decision on sharing the funds until large taxpayer registration is completed.
That, say entity officials, would provide a real picture about how much money from each company is coming to the joint account.
Meanwhile, Dodik has criticised the blocking of funds as "illegal", and his cabinet has threatened to press charges against international representative Jolly Dixon, who has been trying to push through a solution.
As politicians continue to haggle over the issue, millions of euros continue to pour into the joint account, without being transferred to the entity accounts.
The first to feel the consequences of the blockade were RS pensioners, who were hit by a delay in receiving their pension cheques.
VAT was introduced in January, leading to significant rises in income and tax revenues.
Furthermore, export revenues have grown by almost 40 per cent since the VAT -- with a unique tax rate of 17 per cent -- was introduced.
At the same time, the cost of living has also increased moderately, as many predicted.
Statistics show that prices have risen about 7 per cent over the past four months.
