28/06/2010
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia - 28/06/10
Officially, it all began 82 years ago at FIFA's 17th Congress.
Meeting in Amsterdam on May 26th 1928, the body approved by a 25-5 vote the executive committee's proposal that an international football tournament be held every four years.
At its next congress in Barcelona a year later, the organisation picked Uruguay as the host of the first FIFA World Cup.
It took about 14 more months before the inaugural Cup kicked off with a match between France and Mexico on July 13th 1930.
Jules Rimet, a Frenchman with a vision
The man behind the World Cup idea was Jules Rimet.
Founder and head of the French Football Federation from 1919 to 1949 and the third president of FIFA from 1921 to 1954, he became the body's first honorary president.
During his tenure, membership in the organisation increased from 20 to 85 nations.
Born in the small village of Theuley-les-Lavoncourt in eastern France on October 14th 1873, Rimet was the son of a grocer of modest means.
He loved sport, but reportedly never played football.
He was only 24 years old, when he co-founded France's Red Star club, which still exists today.
Rimet later became a lawyer and fought in World War I as an officer.
Episodes such as the unofficial truce at Christmas 1914, when British and German soldiers put aside their enmity briefly to play soccer in "no man's land" on the battlefields of Flanders are believed to have made Rimet see the game as capable of uniting people.
He first presented his proposal during the 1920 Olympic Games in Antwerp while provisionally in charge of FIFA.
Inspired by the success of the Olympic football championships in 1924 and 1928, and believing that "soccer could reinforce the ideals of a permanent and real peace," he did not stop pushing until he saw his dream realised.
He was not easily discouraged, his grandson told British daily Independent four years ago.
"My grandfather was a gentle man but also a tough one," Yves Rimet said.
"He was difficult to argue with because he never gave up."
Let the games begin
Uruguay was picked as the host of the first World Cup not only due to its two victories in both the 1924 and 1928 Olympic football championships, but also because it would mark the centennial of its independence.
The country offered to cover the travel and accomodation costs of the participating teams.
But Europe showed little enthusiasm for the first World Cup.
One big obstacle was the three-week transatlantic voyage to South America.
Belgium, France, Romania and Yugoslavia were the only representatives of the Old Continent among the 13 teams that competed in the 1930 cup.
Aside from Uruguay, six other South American nations -- Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay and Peru -- as well as Mexico and the United States, whose team included a number of British players, took part in the new world tournament.
Given the small number of competing teams, the 1930 games were the only World Cup edition to not involve any qualifying rounds.
The 13 national squads were instead divided into four groups and the winner in each -- Argentina, the United States, Uruguay and Yugoslavia -- went to the semi-finals.
In the opening match, played in Mondevideo's now non-existent Pocitos Stadium on July 13th 1930, France beat Mexico 4-1.
Nineteen minutes after the start of the game, France's Lucien Laurent won a place in history by scoring the first ever World Cup goal.
More than 90,000 football fans reportedly attended the event's final in Centenario Stadium on July 30th, when Uruguay defeated Argentina 4-2 and Rimet presented the trophy he had brought along to Jose Nazassi, the winning team's captain.
While Uruguay boycotted the following two editions of the games -- the 1934 one in Italy and the next held in France four years later -- the World Cup had already become a big event, particularly in Europe.
Sixteen teams qualified for the 1934 tournament, in which Italy grabbed the trophy after its 2-1 victory over Czechoslovakia in the final.
The "squadra azzurra", one of the 15 national teams that made it through the qualifications, triumphed again in 1938 in France after defeating Hungary 4-2.
Aside from Uruguay, another prominent absentee from that edition of the World Cup was Argentina, which decided to join its western neighbour in boycotting the games.
Then World War II began and the 1942 and 1946 World Cups were cancelled.
The competition resumed in 1950 and was hosted by Brazil, with Argentina boycotting it again.
The Uruguayans, however, not only participated, but went to the final to win the trophy, meanwhile renamed as the Jules Rimet Cup, for the second time after a 2-1 victory over the Brazilian team.
With 1954 marking the 50th anniversary of FIFA, which had earlier moved its headquarters to Zurich, the organisation decided that the World Cup due to be held that year should take place in Switzerland.
Sixteen of the 36 national teams that took part in the qualifiers entered the competition for the trophy.
It eventually went to West Germany after its 3-2 win over Hungary on July 4th 1954.
Sweden hosted the 1958 games, which marked the rise of one of the biggest global football stars ever -- Brazil's Pele, who was only 17 years old at the time, and whose country defeated Sweden 5-2 in the final to win the World Cup for the first, but not last, time.
Pele, who scored six goals in that tournament, emerged as its second top scorer after France's Just Fonatine with 13.
The venue
The competitons since the 1962 one in Chile have been given alternately to American and European countries, the only exceptions being the 2002 World Cup that was hosted jointly by Korea and Japan and the current one under way in South Africa.
Just like in the first two editions of the games in 1930 and 1934, there are four other instances when the country that hosted the competition won the trophy as well -- England in 1966, West Germany in 1974, Argentina in 1978 and France in 1998.
Only seven countries have ever won a World Cup championship so far.
Brazil leads the table with five and is followed by Italy with four and Germany with three.
Argentina and Uruguay were the victors twice each, while England and France only once each.
Brazil is the only South American country to have ever won a World Cup tournament held in Europe, the 1958 one in Sweden, while no European country has ever been able to take the gold in a championship held outside its home continent.
Germany's Gerd Müller tops the ranking of the leading goal scorers in the history of the World Cup, with a total of 14 goals.
Fontaine's 13 goals, all scored during the 1958 championship in Sweden, make him second, ahead of Pele with a total of 12 goals.
The Jules Rimet Trophy
The trophy Rimet carried in his luggage on his way to Uruguay was created by French sculptor Abel Lafleur especially for the first World Cup in 1930.
It was a 30cm-high, 4kg gold-plated statuette of the Goddess of Victory, made of sterling silver, with its base made of lapis lazuli, a blue semi-precious stone.
Originally called "Victory," it was renamed the Jules Rimet Trophy in 1946 in honour of the FIFA president.
While Rimet was right about the future of the games, the life of Lafleur's statuette proved much shorter.
To prevent it from falling into the hand of the Nazis, Ottorino Barassi, the Italian vice-president of FIFA, secretely took the trophy from the bank in Rome where it was kept after Italy's 1938 victory and hid it in a shoebox under his bed throughout the World War II.
The precious statuette's post-war life was even more dramatic.
It disappeared while on display in London in the run-up to the 1966 games in England.
A dog named Pickles eventually found it buried under a tree in Norwood in South London.
Brazil earned the right to keep the original Jules Rimet Trophy after its third World Cup victory in 1970.
In 1983, it was stolen from a display in Rio de Janeiro, and has never been recovered.
