22/05/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 22/05/06
The civic movement Mjaft! 
has launched a Web site where the Albanian public can discuss the importance of being active and informed citizens in the decision-making process, and can also pose questions to members of parliament.
The Web site started as a source of information about the candidates and political parties that participated in the 3 July 2005 parliamentary elections. 
It has featured information about the political programmes of the main parties, campaign promises by the candidates, their backgrounds and CVs, and their sources of campaign funding.
The site now details the work of MPs in the Albanian Assembly. 
According to the group, it covers all MPs and is split into three main categories: biographic information, finances and parliamentary activity.
"After every plenary session, a report is published on the Web site for the public and the media," Mjaft! 
says.
Mjaft! 
says the main aim of this project is to close the gap between the transition period and the realisation of true democracy, by raising the awareness and educating citizens about how the Assembly works. 
It also aims to improve the image of parliament by raising the level of public participation in the decision-making process.
Mjaft! 
-- Albanian for Enough! 
-- originated as a grassroots movement among volunteers. 
It seeks to raise awareness of the many political and social problems facing the country, including inadequate health and education services, blood feuds, trafficking and organised crime, poverty and unemployment, discrimination against women and disadvantaged groups, corruption in public administration, environmental degradation and obstacles to EU integration.
"In Albania, there is a lack of open and frank public debate on political, economic and social problems. 
These are basic issues of an open and free society that have remained persistently unaddressed for over a decade since the fall of communism. 
The time is certainly ripe, if not late, for Albanian society to undergo drastic change in its attempts to move beyond a 'crisis mentality'," said Erjon Veliaj, director of the movement.
