23/06/2006
By Jovan Djerich for Southeast European Times in Novi Sad -- 23/06/06
Croatian coach Zlatko Kranjcar and his boys are going home after the first phase of the 2006 FIFA World Cup. 
On Thursday (22 June) in Stuttgart, the Australians managed to overcome a two-goal deficit and fight back for a draw. 
They will now face Italy on Monday, while the other Group F winner, Brazil, will take on Ghana.
The game started perfectly for Croatia, which scored after only 2 minutes of play. 
Australian striker Viduka found no other option but to bring down Kovac, and Srna's subsequent free kick successfully targeted the top left-hand corner of Kalac's net, scoring Croatia's first goal of the tournament.
The next thirty minutes saw constant pressure by the Aussies, but the Croats successfully defended their net. 
In 38th minute, Tomas broke under the pressure and used his hand inside the penalty area. 
Without hesitation, referee Graham Poll awarded a penalty kick which Moore converted into an equaliser.
The second half brought more thrills. 
Kovac made an attempt in 56th minute, Kalac reacted as if this was his first football match ever, and Croatia was into the Round of 16 for the moment. 
Croats demonstrated more power at this stage of the game, and it looked like the former Yugoslavia would have a representative in the upper half of the tournament tables.
Less than twenty minutes separated Croatia from the next stage of its World Cup campaign, but the Aussies were on the attack. 
Keeper Pletikosa made two incredible saves in the 72nd minute. 
Kewell tried to score twice, but the attempts were not good enough for the Croatian goalie. 
The second attempt ended in foul play by the Australians, when Kewell and Aloisi tumbled onto Pletikosa just in front of the goal-line. 
Five minutes later Tomas again played handball inside penalty area, but this time referee Poll remained silent.
Two minutes later, the match got its final score, when another shot by Kewell dashed Croatia's hopes of advancement. 
In the 85th minute, the Croats were left with ten men on the pitch, as Simunic received his second yellow card for the night. 
Before Australia could capitalise, however, Emerton got his second warning in 6 minutes and was out.
Although Croatia wasn't able to pull off the win it needed, one player did make history of sorts. 
Simunic may now be inscribed in the FIFA record books as the first player to receive three yellow cards. 
His second came in the 90th minute, but Poll neglected to send him off and he remained in play, only to receive another in the third minute of added time.
