18/08/2006
By Balkanblogs for Southeast European Times – 18/08/06
With declassified files revealing that many prominent figures in Romania once collaborated with Nicolae Ceausescu's Securitate, the country's political landscape has been rocked.
One blogger warns of a "witch hunt".
"Right now there is only one age category which can consider itself 'clean' and which has a right to criticise:
the people who are now 40 years old at most," writes Delice.
And even that generation should be wary of rushing to judgment, he adds.
"You think you are God to decide what such a contract meant at that time for a person.
Do you know how our parents were convinced to be members of the Communist Youth or the Communist Party?" Delice asks.
"Or how our grandparents used to report to the Party?"
Bulgarian blogger Boycho Kamenov wonders if secret police files in his country should be further examined to find out if past informants now hold senior positions in political parties or the government.
"It is quite clear that the issue of communist-era informer dossiers and dirty deals is always raised to provoke changes in the government rather than in an effort to find the truth," he writes.
"The simple fact is that this decision must be made by the people at a national referendum rather than the politicians.
All files must then be published on the internet so that they would be accessible to everyone.
This would prevent a few files from disappearing."
Facing the past is also the issue in another headline-making debate.
A new videotape has surfaced showing war crimes from the conflict in Yugoslavia, and while some see this kind of evidence as key to uncovering the truth, others find it too vulnerable to political manipulation.
Alias Damir thinks the video footage points to an uncomfortable fact -- that war criminals continue to walk freely, often in the cities where they committed the crimes.
Perhaps there are many more recordings that have yet to see the light of day, he suggests.
"This time it concerns ARBiH and a Croatian Army unit.
Although those are individual cases, the units and detachments in question certainly belonged to some specific command, and the perpetrators will be found and probably convicted in the future.
Crime is a crime and -- regardless of who committed it -- the perpetrators have to answer for such an act and be punished," he writes.
"Long live justice -- it comes slowly, but wins most of the time."
Writing from Serbia, Milic i Milic take a contrasting point of view.
"We are being showered with recent Balkan war-crime snuff production," they write.
With atrocities on all sides now viewable on tape, the bloggers argue, the documentation simply provides fodder for nationalists seeking to downplay one set of crimes and play up another.
"Beside posthumously undermining the victims and additionally hurting people close to them, as well as their compatriots, [this] makes it difficult for those who above all care for the fulfillment of justice, the punishment of crimes, and introduction of the mechanism for local, regional and international prevention," Milic i Milic suggest.
On a different note, the Albanian blog shekulli hosted a lively back-and-forth discussion concerning copyright in the digital era.
In some cases, claims Fjodor Zotaj, pirated Hollywood movies are showing up on Albanian TVs before they're released officially.
"It seems we are facing the situation of some years ago, when all television stations were broadcasting stolen programmes," he suggests.
That's true, says one commenter, but who's to complain?
Piracy, after all, means entertainment on the cheap.
Another suggests there's no need for Albanians to be overly worried about the problems of "distant Hollywood companies".
Fjodor Zotaj replies:
"If we don't obey the law in one direction or in another and so on we are going to not respect it at all.
The law is the law and should not be violated, whether just a little or more."
