22/06/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/06/06
Serbia and Montenegro leaves the 2006 World Cup in Germany without a single point won.
In front of 66,000 people at Munich's Alianz Arena, Ilija Petkovic's ten-man team lost to Ivory Coast, 3-2.
The Plavi return home with bowed heads, while the Elephants earned the first World Cup points in their history.
With goals by Nikola Zigic and Sasa Ilic, Serbia-Montenegro was up 2-0 at 35 minutes.
The team looked like it had finally regained its stride.
But all that evaporated into nothing, thanks to two handballs by Milan Dudic, a red card picked up by Albert Nadj, and the feisty play of the Ivorians.
The match started with Ivory Coast taking the initiative.
Dindane stormed up the right side at the 4th minute, but no one was in front of Jevic to get the ball.
Boka's long shot from the left went just wide.
Kone kept up a constant attack through the centre of the Serbia-Montenegro defence.
The Plavi opted for their signature defensive game, so successful during the qualification stage, and it bore fruit in the 10th minute when Stankovic's pass from the right of centre found Zigic.
The Belgrade Red Star striker moved a step to the right, passed off Blaise Kuassi's back and rounded goalkeeper Boubacar Barry.
In the 14th minute, bad luck struck the Serbia-Montenegro defence.
Mladen Krstajic was injured and Nadj came in to replace him.
Of the original defensive lineup, only Goran Gavrancic was now left on the field.
Five minutes later, Ivory Coast brought some very prosperous action to a poor finish, with the ball bouncing around, as though on a billiards table, among the African players in the keeper's box, finally ending above Jevric's post.
For this misadventure, they were punished in the next Serbia-Montenegro attack.
Sasa Ilic took advantage of Cyrille Domoraud's poor control, got the ball behind the defenders and found the net.
In 35th minute on ordinary centre shoot in a box, Dudic raised his hands well above his head on Boka's cross and referee Marko Rodriguez pointed out a penalty spot.
From 11m, Dindane fired at Jevric's left corner -- twice, because the ref ordered a retake.
Both of Dindane's shots found their mark, though only one counted.
Now back in the game, Ivory Coast had the wind in their sails.
Then came another blunder by a Serbia-Montenegro player.
After only 30 minutes on the pitch as a substitute, Nadj received his second booking of the half for a challenge on Kader Keita.
With his departure, the Ivorian midfield duo Didier Zokora and Yaya Toure gained more space.
The reduced Serbia-Montenegro team had no power to burst on the flanks and feed Zigic, who found himself cut off.
Ivorian dominance of the midfield enabled them to play with three strikers, keeping goalie Jevric very busy.
The equaliser for Ivory Coast came in the 67th minute, when Dindane put his head on Keita's free kick into the area.
Serbia-Montenegro wasted a good chance at the 77th minute, when Dejan Stankovic had a point-blank header on a Djordjevic free-kick, but struck wide.
Not content with one costly error, Dudic blocked a volley with his hand again and the Ivorians had another penalty.
With the match in their pocket, Ivory Coast calmly played possession football, although they lost Doromaud to a second yellow card.
The Ivorians were able to win some pride and honour from their first World Cup, while for Serbia-Montenegro it was one nightmare after another.
A fresh start will now begin for the separate teams of Serbia and newly independent Montenegro.
Serbia's first official match, against the Czech Republic, is on 16 August.
