23/06/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/06/06
The foreign ministers of Serbia and Montenegro, Vuk Draskovic and Miodrag Vlahovic, signed a protocol on Thursday (22 June) that established full diplomatic relations between the two countries, and said that they would continue working on the improvement of ties.
"Political parties, the authorities, the opposition, elections, victory, defeat, even life, are all ephemeral.
Excellent relations between Serbia and Montenegro must be unephemeral.
Nothing should cast even the smallest shadow on what the Serbs and Montenegrins, Serbia and Montenegro, have always been for one another," Draskovic said after signing the protocol.
Vlahovic, who was paying his first official visit to Serbia since Montenegro's independence, said he was "honoured to be signing the document that has indisputable historic importance".
The Serbian cabinet agreed to recognise Montenegro on 15 June, ten days after parliament confirmed Serbia's own independence.
Montenegro became an independent state following a referendum on 21 May.
Draskovic said Serbia and Montenegro would exchange ambassadors as soon as possible, adding that he and Vlahovic agreed for the principle of reciprocity to be respected.
"Montenegro and Serbia are once again together in the capacity and in the way that allows them to be equal and at service to one another, like it has always been in history," Vlahovic said.
On Thursday, the flag of Serbia-Montenegro was officially taken down at OSCE Headquarters in Vienna and was replaced by the Serbian flag.
At the same time, the flag of Montenegro, which has become the organisation's 56th member, was also hoisted.
Montenegro's membership was confirmed at a meeting of the OSCE Permanent Council, chaired by Belgian Ambassador Bertrand de Krombrouguet, who called on Montenegro's representative to take his place among the representatives of the other countries.
The UN Security Council recommended that Montenegro become the 192nd member of the world organisation.
The General Assembly is expected to vote on this next week, and diplomats say a routine approval is expected.
That would make Montenegro the first new UN member since 2002, when East Timor was admitted.
