22/06/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 22/06/06
Newly independent Montenegro has now been recognised by many nations around the world, including -- as of 13 June -- the United States.
In a letter addressed to her Montenegrin counterpart, Miodrag Vlahovic, US Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice congratulated the people of Montenegro for the peaceful and democratic manner in which the 21 May referendum was conducted and said Washington formally recognises Montenegro as an independent state.
"The honor of being counted among the free and independent states of the world brings with it the challenge of protecting and advancing the freedom, rights and prosperity of all the people of Montenegro, and the responsibility to make a positive contribution to the community of nations," Rice wrote, adding that the United States would soon consider launching the process of establishing diplomatic ties.
Montenegro declared its independence on 3 June after international election monitors validated the results of its referendum.
A total of 230,661 Montenegrins -- 55.5 per cent – backed independence in the referendum, surpassing the threshold set by the EU.
Montenegro's opposition lodged over 240 complaints, claiming election irregularities, but these were all rejected by the referendum commission.
US-Montenegro bilateral relations have an almost 100-year long history.
In October 1905, John Jackson was named the US diplomatic chief of mission to Montenegro, marking the start of official ties.
Jackson resided in Athens and would come to Cetinje as needed until 1907.
In 1918, Montenegro opened its embassy in Washington, DC.
A number of US ambassadors followed, but in 1921 the United States severed relations and said it did not acknowledge Montenegro’s diplomatic and consular representatives.
In 1997, Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic broke with the regime of Slobodan Milosevic.
During NATO's air strikes against Yugoslavia, Djukanovic said Montenegro was not a party to the conflict -- a stance which brought the republic financial support from the EU and the United States.
After Milosevic was ousted in 2000, Djukanovic attempted to pursue independence, but this was halted by the international community, which saw it as a possible destabilising factor.
Under pressure from Brussels, Montenegro formed a loose union with Serbia.
During its three-year trial period, however, the union never succeeded in becoming functional, and it finally ended with the 21 May vote.
