13/03/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 13/03/06
EU member states want Macedonian authorities to include clear and precise provisions on funding election campaigns in a new code, according to a report by the London-based Institute for War and Peace Reporting.
The report says that although the EU awarded Macedonia candidate status in December, the date for the actual start of negotiations depends largely on compliance with the EU election rules.
Under those rules, election and party funding must be completely transparent.
Candidates and political parties must reveal the sources of money being used for election activities, and the identities of contributors.
"Campaign funding is an important issue and therefore clear rules are necessary.
We should be sure that elections will be really conducted under the European standards," says EU Special Representative in Macedonia Erwan Fouere.
Macedonia is currently in the process of drafting a new election code.
Among other things, it prohibits campaign funding from the government budget or from public enterprises, and sets specific limits on contributions that can be provided by individuals (500 euros) or organisations (5,000 euros).
The law also increases the amount parties can spend per vote, on the grounds that the current limits are too low and are thus regularly exceeded.
Parties will be required to release their financial statements to the State Audit Institute and State Election Commission, which in turn will be obliged to release the information to the public.
Law professor Renata Deskovska says it would be a good idea to establish a new panel to monitor election expenditures.
In addition, Deskovska says, the election law should include a provision stipulating "the parties' obligation to release the names of their sponsors and the origin of the money", as requested by Brussels.
Slagjana Taseva, a member of the State Anti-Corruption Commission, says the new code should offer concrete improvements in the way election campaigns are funded in Macedonia.
"The Commission has not had real input in party funding so far," Taseva says.
"This should change and we want to prevent financial manipulations in the future."
