13/03/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/03/06
Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic caused a stir recently by calling for the replacement of all Serbia's judges, saying he is fed up with corruption and biased decisions. 
His call triggered an outcry among judges and prosecutors, as well as among Dinkic's political opponents. 
Even the minister's coalition partners were critical. 
Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic said the idea was reminiscent of the Milosevic era.
Even if Dinkic's statement was extreme, however, the problems with Serbia's judiciary are real. 
The public largely shares the view that the system is unjust, slow, inefficient, and to a large extent, corrupt.
After the furor cooled, the government decided to offer a proposal for judicial reform. 
Once the new constitution is adopted, all judges would be appointed to five-year terms; afterwards, the best judges would get permanent tenure. 
Judge candidates would be nominated by the High Judiciary Council -- half of whose members would be judges -- for parliamentary consideration.
Prosecutors would get greater independence than current investigating judges, and out of court settlements would be allowed between opposing sides in a case. 
The Public Prosecutor of Serbia, the War Crimes Prosecutor and the Organised Crime Prosecutor would be appointed by parliament. 
The network of courts would be reduced, but a new Supreme Court of Cassation would be introduced, while courts of appeal would largely take on the current function of the Supreme Court of Serbia.
With this strategy, the government says, independent policymaking in the judiciary would be achieved by 2011.
The Judges' Association of Serbia, which accused Dinkic of attempting to "dismantle the judiciary", has been critical of the government's strategy. 
It notes that the High Judiciary Council is not defined as an independent body, while the Constitutional Court is being put forth as a legislative body. 
Prosecutors, meanwhile, would still continue to be linked to the executive authority.
According to Vesna Rakic-Vodinelic, director of the Comparative Law Institute in Belgrade, the government would do better to enforce the already existing, but mostly forgotten, law on lustration. 
If enforced, it could have led to the sacking of hundreds of judges implicated in election riggings and show trials carried out by the Milosevic regime, as well as some who were simply incompetent. 
But the political will simply did not exist. 
The Lustration Commission established as a result of the law has ceased to function, as lawmakers failed to elect new members. 
Not a single case has been followed through.
Perhaps it is no surprise that authorities are reluctant to dismantle mechanisms that can be used to their advantage. 
According to research by the Centre for Democracy and Reconciliation in Southeastern Europe, only one other country in the Western Balkans -- Albania -- has adopted a law on lustration. 
In Croatia, parliament tabled draft legislation but never passed it. 
Neither Bosnia and Herzegovina nor Macedonia have gotten that far.
Moreover, even when legislation has been drafted, NGOs and representatives of those victimised by former regimes have been cut out of the process, and there has been little public debate.
