18/08/2006
(Turkish Daily News, Jewish Telegraphic Agency - 18/08/06;
Reuters, AFP, AP, Fox News, NTV MSNBC - 17/08/06)
Israel is urging Turkey to make sure that its territory is not used for the transfer of weapons from Iran to Syria and then to Hezbollah, a senior Israeli security official was quoted as saying on Thursday (17 August).
Speaking to Reuters, the anonymous source said Israel wants the Turkish military to impose an air and ground embargo to prevent that from happening, and that talks with Ankara have been initiated.
Israel believes that most of the long-range missiles and other heavy weapons Hezbollah has received from Iran have passed through Turkish territory or airspace and then through Syria before reaching the Lebanese militant group by land, sea or air.
Other shipment routes -- through Iraq or Jordan -- already have been blocked.
Resolution 1701, adopted by the UN Security Council on 11 August, called for the "disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon".
"Successful implementation of the international arms embargo is the litmus test of the success of the UN effort in Lebanon," Israeli Foreign Ministry spokesman Mark Regev told Reuters.
However, he would not comment on the specific role Turkey is expected to play in the process.
An unnamed senior Israeli security official said "The very future of the embargo rests on their [Turkey's] shoulders."
The only Muslim NATO member, Turkey is on friendly terms with both Israel and Lebanon and is seeking to improve its ties with Syria and Iran.
The Turkish daily Hurriyet reported on Wednesday that Turkey had forced two Syria-bound Iranian airplanes to land at an airport in the southeastern city of Diyarbakir on 27 July and 8 August for an arms' search.
The moves reportedly were prompted by an Israeli tip-off that there were rockets destined for Hezbollah on board the aircraft.
Confirming the paper's report on Thursday, Turkish Foreign Ministry spokesman Namik Tan described the operations as "a routing procedure," which was "in line with international rules".
No military equipment was found on board either of the aircraft, according to Hurriyet.
