19/05/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 19/05/06
Up until the last minute, Bulgaria and Romania had hoped they would receive a clear answer on Tuesday (May 16) regarding the date of their EU accession. 
Instead, the European Commission (EC) postponed the final say until October.
"The Commission will report on Bulgaria and Romania's progress in addressing the outstanding issues not later than early October. 
On this basis the Commission will consider whether the date of their accession to the EU on 1 January 2007 can be maintained," it said.
In its latest monitoring report, the EC gave Romania four red flags -- that is, areas of "serious concern" -- while Bulgaria received six. 
Sofia was criticised for insufficient efforts in fighting corruption, organised crime and money laundering. 
Romania's red flags were mostly in technical areas, such as the need for an appropriate computer system for reporting VAT collection. 
However, the country also received "yellow flags" on corruption and border security.
EC President Jose Manuel Barroso and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn visited both countries the day after they reported to the European Parliament in Strasbourg. 
Barroso emphasised that judicial reform is the "priority of all priorities". 
Officials of both countries were told they will have "to shorten their summer holidays" in order to join the EU on January 1st 2007 and to avoid a one year postponement.
However, Barroso's tone was different in the two capitals. 
In Bucharest, he brought "a message of congratulations for the progress achieved so far" and said he was "completely confident you will make it".
In Sofia, he voiced optimism, but insisted, "It is time to achieve results in concrete areas."
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, the Romanian press, and even some EU officials hinted that Romania did not receive a clear answer Tuesday because of Bulgaria's shortcomings on organised crime and corruption, and the EC's desire to keep the countries together. 
However, Barroso refused to speculate as to whether the two countries' bids might be separated. 
-
"It depends on the countries themselves. 
Regarding Romania, you should do your work and not be worried about others. 
Bulgaria should do its work," he said.
Barroso stressed the positive contribution the two countries would make to the EU. 
"Romania and Bulgaria will bring very active hard working people, dynamic societies, societies that share today our basic values … And first of all, this is the reunification of Europe that was artificially divided by a line that should never have been dividing the Europeans. 
This is, I would say, a duty."
