27/09/2004
By Georgi Mitev-Santek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 27/09/04
Following a period of disarray, the National Bank of Serbia (NBS) is reasserting its role in monetary policy, taking three significant -- and by no means popular -- steps to halt the increased demand for foreign currency. 
Legal reserves of commercial banks have been raised from 3 per cent to 21 per cent, lowering the dinar liquidity of banks. 
Interest rates for bonds have been raised, making them more appealing to investors than foreign currency purchases. 
Finally, the money supply has been curtailed through accelerated withdrawals of NBS bank deposits. 
Through these measures, the central bank is signaling its commitment to macroeconomic stability and maintaining the planned rate of inflation. 
NBS Governor Radovan Jelasic spoke recently with Southeast European Times correspondent Georgi Mitev-Santek and spelled out the ramifications.
Southeast European Times: The new steps taken by the central bank came less than a month after the presidential elections, which were generally seen as a referendum on the ruling coalition. 
How much political pressure is being exerted on the central bank?
Jelasic: There were no significant political pressures, and I hope that there won’t be any. 
I think that everyone realises that the most important thing is macroeconomic stability. 
The government also has to adopt unpopular measures, and a reduction in budget expenditures has been announced. 
We did not act "politically", even leading into the presidential elections -- nor do we plan to act that way in the future. 
I was criticised when the NBS stood alone in its opposition to the current budget, primarily because of the high levels of subsidies and public sector salaries. 
Now everything is falling into place.
SE Times: It has been said that you will do everything in your power to maintain the planned rate of inflation and the exchange rate of the dinar. 
Does this mean that you will not review the 8.5 per cent projected inflation rate?
Jelasic: We have no intention of increasing the planned rate, but it is clear now that we will end the year with a level that is above the projected one. 
External shocks such as the dramatic increase in the price of oil and metals also left their impression here. 
A third of the 6.6 per cent rate of inflation -- which is the level reached during the first seven months of the year -- can be attributed to those increases.
SE Times: According to analysts, the world price of oil could reach $80 a barrel by the end of this year. 
Would this mean more than 10 per cent inflation in Serbia?
Jelasic: Not necessarily. 
It is true that a 10 per cent increase in the retail price of gasoline could increase inflation by, roughly speaking, 0.8 per cent, but this will not necessarily happen. 
The greatest portion of the retail price is based on customs, excise and tax duties. 
Things could be ironed out, so to speak, between the euro we are "exporting" and the dollar we are "importing" through the oil. 
But the problem with the price of oil and the dollar-euro difference is something that everyone around us is facing, including all European central bankers.
SE Times: Besides the daily battle for stability, you are also waging a long-term battle to revive the Serbian banking and insurance sectors. 
Is there a hitch in this area?
Jelasic: Things are moving. 
We are presently in a tender procedure for the sale of the first large bank -- Jubanka -- out of the 15 banks in which the state owns shares. 
Other large banks should undergo a similar procedure, for owning of shares does not only mean ownership per se, but also management and accountability. 
The government must do its job in this area and finally adopt a general strategy on what to do with its shares. 
We have only just begun the task of regulating the insurance sector, and we are getting ready for a thorough cleanup.
SE Times: The state debt has been significantly reduced by the write-off from foreign creditors in the Paris and London clubs. 
Does this mean that Serbia is approaching its first international financial rating?
Jelasic: Our restructured London debt is already being traded in the secondary market, with an unofficial rating of B+. 
By the end of the year, we should discuss this with the London Club and with rating institutions, and we should get an official rating. 
Since, under our current arrangement with the IMF, we are unable to raise credits under commercial conditions, a rating will, above all, mean encouragement of investors -- for this is proof of a reduction in investment risk. 
It will also have implications for our companies which are seeking credits abroad, and effects should also be felt with international guarantee funds, such as Germany's Hermes, which currently places us in category 7, the lowest in Europe.
