17/07/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 17/07/06
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and the UN's envoy for status negotiations, Martti Ahtisaari, all briefed the UN Security Council last week, offering varied accounts of the situation in the province.
On Thursday (13 July), Sejdiu spoke to Council members.
Though the session was closed to the media, he told reporters afterwards that he had called for Kosovo independence, calling it "non-negotiable".
"Kosovo's people have a right to self-determination, and Kosovo should be independent and sovereign "in order to be a sustainable factor in the Balkans and a good neighbour to all other states," he said.
Although Sejdiu's presentation came during an offsite meeting rather than a formal session, it was nevertheless highly significant, said UNMIK deputy chief Steven Schook.
"I want to make sure that everyone understands how important this visit is.
Although it is an offsite meeting he meets every member, and every principal representative of the Security Council.
He is speaking to them without UNMIK's presence.
So, for anyone to minimise the importance of what he is doing there means no understanding of what is going on," Schook said.
Kostunica's address, meanwhile, laid out the Serbian government's position -- opposing full independence for Kosovo and offering "essential autonomy" instead.
Sovereignty for the province would set a dangerous global precedent, the Serbian prime minister suggested.
"The solution to the Kosovo problem that we all work to achieve must be universal precisely in order to avoid a precedent related to the change of borders, that could then be referred to by any ethnic minority with territorial claims," Kostunica was quoted as telling the Council.
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari briefed the Council on the progress of direct talks in Vienna, between the delegations representing Belgrade and Pristina.
He said he would soon invite leaders of each side to a high-level meeting.
"It will be first time the political leaders on both sides have a chance to present their case, how they see the status issue.
Then we will continue discussions on the technical issues so long as we can see we are making progress and narrowing the gaps."
"The talks will focus primarily on protective zones around Serbian Orthodox and cultural sites, and on mechanisms to monitor and implement the settlement agreement in the field of cultural and religious heritage," Ahtisaari said.
