16/08/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 16/08/06
German diplomat Joachim Ruecker, currently in charge of economic reconstruction in Kosovo, was appointed as head of UNMIK on Monday (14 August) by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.
He is the sixth chief in seven years, and his appointment comes at a crucial time for Kosovo, with the international community expecting a long-term settlement by the end of this year.
At a press conference Monday, Ruecker said he expects to be the last to hold the post.
Speaking in both Albanian and Serbian, he said his focus would be on building stable institutions, increasing the participation of minorities in political life, boosting security and promoting economic development.
"I promise that I will co-operate with all of the institutions in Kosovo, with the Contact Group members, the civil society, KFOR and especially with Kosovo's citizens," Ruecker said.
He added that his main task would be to support UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari's efforts to close the status negotiations by the end of 2006.
Ruecker, who met with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu on Tuesday, also said he will protect the Contact Group principles.
He emphasised that the idea of partitioning the province and annexing the northern, Serb-majority part to Serbia is out of the question.
"UNMIK and KFOR have increased their presence in the north and I think that was the most important development in recent months," Ruecker said.
"We cannot and do not accept partition as an option." He also appealed to the Serbs to participate in Kosovo's security institutions.
The situation in northern Kosovo is a challenge, Ruecker acknowledged.
"We will make sure the Contact Group principles are realistic," he added.
The mission will focus now in part on preparing to leave the province, and on transferring competencies to other missions that will be installed in Kosovo after the status settlement.
Ruecker faces the task of steering the province through the remainder of the status negotiations -- six rounds of which have failed to yield agreement on any major issue -- while deterring interethnic violence.
Ruecker will officially take up the post on 1 September.
He succeeds Danish diplomat Soren Jessen-Petersen, who has served as the UN special representative since 2004.
