20/10/2006
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia - 20/10/06
The 46th Mala Eksperimentalna Scena Sarajevo (MESS) international theatre festival opened in Sarajevo on October 15th. 
It is considered one of the most important theatrical events in Southeast Europe.
First launched in 1960, the festival was reborn after a break during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), gaining international status in 1997. 
According to organisers, it is known for its "tradition of diversity, unconventionality and dedication to the spirit of theatre".
This year, theatrical ensembles from 13 European countries are participating. 
Twenty plays, including three premieres, are being staged. 
In addition to BiH, Balkan countries represented at the event are Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia and Turkey. 
Other participating countries are Germany, Hungary, Italy, Lithuania, Poland and Spain.
The plays are being performed on the stages of several theatres in Sarajevo and at the Bosnian National Theatre in BiH's fourth-largest city, Zenica, some 70km north of Sarajevo. 
The event runs until October 30th.
The festival was opened by director and playwright Dusko Jovanovic at an official ceremony at the Sarajevo National Theatre. 
This was followed by a performance of "Faust" -- based on the drama by 16th century British playwright Christopher Marlowe.
In Bosnian director Haris Pasovic's interpretation of the play, the action is set in the 21st century. 
The production, which had its national premiere in the city of Tuzla in mid-August, has drawn great interest from local viewers.
"Faust" has reportedly been seen by more than 2,000 MESS spectators, achieving a record not only for the festival, but also for Bosnian theatre in general.
Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night," directed by Silviu Purcarete of Romania, was presented by the Marin Sorescu National Theatre in Craiova at the Bosnian National Theatre in Zenica on the second day of the event. 
The comedy had two performances.
Next on the schedule was "Bread and Play," produced by the Vojvodina Slovakian Theatre -- the youngest theatre in Serbia -- and directed by Miroslav Benka.
"Without a word uttered and in the absence of a steady dramatic storyline, the play succeeded in engaging the interest of audiences in Sarajevo -- what is more, it completely enchanted them and drew them into its own world," a review of the play said.
Montenegro marked its debut in the MESS festival as an independent state on Wednesday with a performance by the country's National Theatre of British playwright Edward Bond's drama, "Have I None". 
The production, led by renowned director Egon Savin, won a standing ovation from the audience.
With an overall score of 8.49, "Have I None" tops the MESS audience's ratings of the plays performed within the festival thus far.
Other plays being presented by Balkan countries include "Eurydice"s Cry" by Turkey's Studio Oyunculari on Thursday, "On the Other Side," to be presented by the Zagreb Youth Theatre on October 23rd and "Don Juan" by the Skopje Drama Theatre on October 26th.
A five-member jury, including two representatives each from BiH and Serbia and one from Hungary will present the Golden Laurel Wreath award at the end of the festival. 
In addition, a Viewers’ Choice Award and three other awards sponsored by local media organisations will be presented.
