20/06/2006
(International Herald Tribune, Helsinging Sanomat, Official Finnish EU Presidency Web Site - 19/06/06)
With less than two weeks until it takes over the rotating EU presidency from Austria on 1 July, Finland indicated on Monday (19 June) that enlargement would be one area of focus during its six-month term at the helm of the bloc.
Along with the EU constitutional treaty, the bloc's finances for 2007-2013, improving regulation and boosting transparency, enlargement is a "cross-cutting issue" to be taken on during the second half of this year, according to a preliminary agenda released by the Government Secretariat for EU Affairs.
The agenda notes that Bulgaria and Romania's progress towards meeting accession criteria will continue to be monitored, with the European Council to assess the situation in early October. 
Monitoring reports published in May said the two countries could join the bloc at the start of 2007, provided they fulfil their commitments.
The agenda also mentions the upcoming screening reports on Croatian and Turkish legislation as being "of crucial importance".
"Depending on how much progress is made in processing the reports, benchmarks may need to be set for the closing and opening of certain negotiating chapters, and indeed the time may come to close or open certain chapters," it said.
After a major diplomatic crisis between the EU and Turkey over Cyprus was averted at the last minute last week, Turkey's membership bid is expected to come under the spotlight again in the fall, when the Union is due to review the country's progress in meeting its obligations.
At the end of a two-day summit in Brussels last week, the leaders of the 25-nation bloc told Ankara to speed up the reform process and act on its commitments. 
Turkey was specifically urged to normalise relations with Nicosia and implement by the end of this year a protocol it signed in 2005, extending its customs union to the EU's ten new members, including Cyprus.
"If Turkey is unable, or unwilling to adhere to its obligations, it would have a negative impact on the membership process," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has said.
Ankara does not recognise Cyprus and is refusing to provide Greek Cypriot vessels and aircraft access to its ports and airports.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has repeatedly stressed that the ban will only be lifted after the end of the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community in Cyprus's north, whose administration is recognised by Ankara alone. 
Turkey will keep its ports closed to Greek Cypriot ships and planes even if this means a suspension of its EU accession talks, he said Friday.
