20/06/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 20/06/06
Municipal elections in Kosovo, scheduled for later this year, were postponed for up to 12 months on Saturday (17 June) by UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen.
The Determination on the Postponement of the Municipal Elections in Kosovo, signed by Jessen-Petersen, calls for the vote to be held between three and six months after the future UN Security Council decision on Kosovo's status.
"I have arrived at this decision after careful consideration and taking into account consultations over the last months with political parties, the Status Envoy and international stakeholders," Jessen-Petersen said.
"I am convinced that the decision to postpone the elections serves the best interests of all communities in Kosovo."
The move will help keep the political focus on the status talks, he added.
Kosovo's political parties reacted differently to the news.
The Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) welcomed the postponement.
"We think that the electoral campaign should not overshadow the final status process of Kosovo," AAK spokesperson Ernest Luma said.
Luma expressed confidence that the elections will get under way immediately after the status issue is resolved.
"We need to prepare for the third elections, keeping in mind the decentralisation process in Kosovo, which is ongoing," Luma said.
However, the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) and Reformist Party (ORA) have come out against Jessen-Petersen's decision.
Kosovo needs the elections now more than ever, they say.
"Keeping in mind the reports of the General Audit in Kosovo, which identified abuse and bad management in the Kosovo government, we think that we need to have elections in Kosovo as soon as possible," said PDK spokesperson Vlora Citaku.
The decision on postponement was taken without a consensus among the political parties, she noted.
According to the calendar of elections, the third municipal elections should have taken place this summer.
Opposition parties have also expressed concern that uncertainties over the timeframe of the status talks could lead to an open-ended postponement of the elections.
According to UNMIK, though, such concerns have been addressed by setting a concrete timetable for holding the vote.
