17/05/2006
(AP, Reuters, International Herald Tribune, VOA, RFE/RL, Transitions Online, Journal of Turkish Weekly, SEE Security Monitor - 16/05/06)
Days before Montenegro's independence referendum on Sunday (21 May), polls show voters in the Adriatic republic to be almost evenly divided in their views as to whether it should split with Serbia. 
Meanwhile, both the pro- and anti-independence camps appear confident that their cause will win.
Under referendum rules, at least 50 per cent of eligible voters must participate in Sunday's poll and 55 per cent of them must vote in favour of independence for Montenegro to be able to pull out of its loose union with Serbia, established three years ago.
Citing a new poll conducted by the International Institute for Middle East and Balkan Studies (IFIMES) in Ljubljana, Belgrade-based Radio B92 said on Tuesday that 87 per cent of registered voters -- numbering between 440,000 and 480,000, according to different reports -- were planning to take part in the referendum. 
Of the 1,000 respondents in the survey conducted over the phone, 51.7 per cent indicated that they would vote for independence, while 44 per cent said they would vote against Montenegro's secession from Serbia.
Also citing polls, Srdjan Darmanovic, director of Montenegro's Centre for Democracy and Human Rights, appeared confident that Montenegro is heading towards independence.
"I think we will have a pretty clear result where independence will go beyond 55 per cent," the VOA quoted Darmanovic as saying. 
"All polls that are conducted here indicate that the Bloc for Independent Montenegro might win about 55 per cent of the votes."
Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic, a senior member of Montenegro's pro-independence Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS), appeared even more confident Tuesday that the vote will lead to a split with Serbia. 
"I'd say the result will be between 58 to 60 per cent for 'yes'", he was quoted as predicting in a television debate with opponents of independence.
The majority of ethnic Montenegrins, accounting for around 43 per cent of the republic's population of about 650,000 people, are said to favour independence from Serbia, while the 32 per cent of ethnic Serbs want the union preserved. 
Given the referendum requirements, ethnic Albanians and Bosnian Muslims -- said to account for nine and 14 per cent of the population, respectively -- are seen as playing a potentially decisive role in the vote.
Lisa McClain, the Montenegro country director of the US-based National Democratic Institute, believes Montenegrins living outside the republic could also be key.
"You have to understand there are a lot of unknowns out there, especially the issue of the diaspora coming home," she told the VOA. 
"How many diaspora are coming home and … who are they voting for? 
That's not included in the poll samples."
