17/05/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 17/05/06
Even as politicians in Kosovo and Serbia-Montenegro continue to disagree over the status issue, religious figures took the initiative earlier this month and sent a strong message of reconciliation, tolerance and mutual respect.
Ahead of the fourth round of status negotiations, key figures from the Serbian Orthodox Church, the Catholic Church and the Islamic, Jewish and Evangelical communities held a two-day conference in Pec to discuss strengthening peaceful relations, respecting all communities' right to worship, and fostering unity in the province.
"We need to establish justice, co-existence and peace with the will of the God and the call of our humanity for peace between people in Kosovo and in the entire world," said Metropolitan Amfilohije of the Serb Orthodox Church.
He was joined in this call by Don Shan Zefi and Mufti Naim Ternava, representing the Catholic Church and the Islamic community respectively, as well as by Belgrade-based Rabbi Yitshaak Asiel and Evangelical Pastor Artur Krasniqi.
In his remarks, Amfilohije called for a solution to the status issue that protects the traditions, rights and cultural and religious heritage of all of the province's citizens.
"A sustainable and long-term solution is a premise for Kosovo's future.
We expect the international community and all those who take part in the process will accept this solution," Amfilohije said.
Ternava, meanwhile, appealed to the religious leaders to work for a more positive relationship among all Kosovo citizens.
He also urged the province's institutions to repair the religious buildings that were destroyed during and after the war.
"The Serb minority should understand that Kosovo is a new reality," Ternava said.
"The Serb Orthodox Church should demonstrate that it is a spiritual representative of the Serb people, and not become involved in political issues." Don Zefi said there has been little religious co-operation in the province since the 1998-1999 conflict.
He said he hopes this will change after the status question is resolved.
"Today we can remember the violent displacement during and after the war, the massacres, and the destruction of cultural buildings, which wasn't in our tradition," Don Zefi said.
He said that the past should act as a spark for all Catholics, Muslims and Orthodox Christians to live together in peace and tolerance.
The conference was organised by Norwegian Church Aid and hosted by the Serbian Orthodox Church.
It was part of the ongoing activities of the Interreligious Council of Kosovo, established in 2001 by Bishop Artemije of Raska and Prizren, Mufti Rexhep Boja and the late Roman Catholic Bishop Marko Sopi.
