21/06/2010
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 21/06/10
In April, NATO offered Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) a Membership Action Plan (MAP) for joining the Alliance.
The MAP is expected to boost reforms and contribute to increased stability and security in the country.
However, the Alliance said, BiH's first Annual National Programme will be accepted only when all defence facilities -- anything immovable -- are officially registered as the state property of BiH for use by the defence ministry.
Defence Minister Selmo Cikotic sat down with SETimes correspondent Antonio Prlenda to discuss the progress that has been made, and what NATO membership could do for the country.
SETimes:
Do you believe that the political climate in BiH is good enough to achieve an agreement on immovable property and to start the first annual MAP plan in September?
Minister Selmo Cikotic:
All the ruling political parties in BiH support the road to Euro-Atlantic integration.
To resolve the status of the immovable military property, there must be political consent that the property is owned by the state of BiH and that the state defence ministry has the right to use it.
Resolving this issue is a test of credibility for the [country's] aspirations to join NATO.
The BiH ministry of defense will take all measures and activities under their jurisdiction, and it is expected that the competent institutions will take the necessary measures in order to meet the conditions for the MAP.
SETimes:
What will the MAP programme actually entail?
Cikotic:
The Annual National Programme will contain five chapters:
political and economic affairs, defence and military issues, resource issues, safety and legal issues.
The Ministry of Defence and Armed Forces of BiH (OSBiH) will concentrate on defence and military issues and resources issues, and will participate in drafting the others.
In preparing the draft of Chapter II (Defence and Military Issues), the focus will be on policy planning, defence reform, the armed forces in general, organisation of the OSBiH, management of personal and resource management.
Special emphasis will be on defence review, the modernisation of the state's armed forces and the implementation of partnership goals.
SETimes:
What do you see as the largest obstacles to the country's NATO accession?
Cikotic:
It is essential to improve the overall political situation.
BiH faces a large barrier in the processes of reaching a political agreement on specific measures that are needed for progress.
Also, the state institutions are not sufficiently constructed, which complicates development of the economy and other areas.
SETimes:
When do you expect the first OSBiH unit to be deployed in the ISAF Danish contingent in Afghanistan?
Cikotic:
The date of the deployment will depend on the deployment schedule of the Danish continent.
We expect that our infantry unit could be deployed in Afghanistan in the second half of 2010, probably in November.
Our infantry unit will be in charge of the facility security and will have 45 members.
SETimes:
Why doesn't BiH hold more bilateral military exercises with other countries?
Cikotic:
OSBiH has high-quality bilateral co-operation, particularly with our neighbours, the countries of the region and NATO members.
Co-operation among countries in the region will be improved with the progress of each country toward membership in NATO and the EU.
In accordance with the programs of bilateral and regional co-operation, members of OSBiH have participated in several international exercises.
The Armed Forces of BiH were actively engaged in, and are planning to participate in, the following international exercises on the basis of bilateral or regional co-operation:
Combined Endeavour, that we hosted in 2009;
MEDCEUR (Medical Central and Eastern Europe), that we will host in 2012;
SEESIM (Southeastern Europe Simulation);
Viking;
Balkan Star;
and LOGEX (Logistics Exercise), that we will possibly host in 2012
In addition to these exercises, OSBiH participates in international exercises organised by relevant institutions of NATO.
SETimes:
Why should the citizens of Republika Srpska welcome NATO membership for BiH?
Cikotic:
NATO membership provides collective security for all member states, ensuring the safety of all citizens in BiH.
When we talk about economic reasons, membership in NATO creates the preconditions for serious foreign investment in BiH.
NATO member countries represent a certain guarantee of a secure investment of foreign capital.
Also, it creates better conditions for access to international incentive funds.
Membership ensures more favourable business conditions for private and state companies.
Large companies inherited from the previous system will have a better chance for successful privatization, to attract foreign investments and create conditions for actively promoting tourism and similar activities.
Finally, the experience of the latest NATO member-states shows that Alliance membership creates positive conditions for acquiring full status in the EU.
This is not a prerequisite for admission to the EU, but it greatly facilitates the fulfilment of conditions for accession to the European community.
