18/10/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 18/10/06
Research published by a Serbian NGO sheds light on attitudes towards EU accession among educated young people in Serbia.
The group, Youth Takes Action, interviewed 750 people between ages 17 and 23 earlier this year, with the assistance of University of Belgrade professor Dragan Popadic.
All of those interviewed were either school or university students.
By a large margin (85%) they favoured joining the EU.
However, only 36.1% gave their unconditional support, while another 48.6% said certain conditions should be met.
A small minority (8.1%) were staunchly opposed to joining the bloc.
More than 50% said they support prevention of corruption, stabilisation of the economy, and harmonisation of Serbian laws with European standards, while 46.9% said relations with neighbouring countries should be improved.
"The youth believe that the force which most supports joining the EU is the government, followed by the youth and the NGOs," says Aleksandar Gubas of Youth Takes Action.
"In their opinion, the forces most opposed to it are the Church, senior citizens and leftist political parties." The five top European values cited by interviewees were democracy, open markets, rule of law, stability and tolerance.
The polling was conducted before Stabilisation and Association Talks were suspended because of the government's failure to extradite fugitive Ratko Mladic.
The survey found mixed attitudes about co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal.
"While 80% of youth see this issue as a condition, only 43% are ready to meet that condition," Grubas said.
A substantial bloc also said there was no need to improve attitudes towards national minorities.
"The research showed that 30% of youth rejected compliance with that condition," said Martina Petrovic of Youth Takes Action.
"To me it is one of the results that is disturbing."
Some 33% of those surveyed predicted that Serbia would join the EU between 2011 and 2015, while 18% said it would happen by 2020.
Only 9% thought it would occur before 2010.
