18/10/2006
(Standart, Novinar - 18/10/06;
AP, AFP, DPA, UPI, EFE, BBC, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool - 17/10/06)
Bulgarian and Spanish police have broken up a human trafficking ring that was active in the Canary Islands, the Bulgarian Interior Ministry announced on Tuesday (October 17th).
Officials say the gang included 15 Bulgarians, seven Spaniards, three Russians, two Serbs, as well as one national each of from Albania, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Romania, Slovakia and Ukraine.
A joint operation launched in July 2004 and code-named "Sofia" culminated in the arrests.
Bulgarian national Kiril Dzhalev, alias Kiko, allegedly led the criminal network from the Balkan country's small southern town of Simitly.
His brother Velin was also a member, said to have smuggled some 500 Eastern European women, most of them from small Bulgarian towns, into Spain.
The victims were recruited through advertisements on the internet or through direct contact by people promising them "decent work" as waitresses or aides on the Canary Islands of Fuerteventura or Lanzarote, Bulgarian police chief Valentin Petrov said.
"Young and beautiful girls in difficult financial circumstances were lured with promises of honest, legal and well-paid jobs on the Canary Islands," the BBC quoted the Bulgarian interior ministry as saying Tuesday.
"Some of the women had an idea about what the job could entail, but not to its full extent -- an absolute limitation of freedom and sexual slavery to enrich their bosses."
Once brought to the islands of Fuerteventura and Lanzarote, the women had their identity documents taken away, so that they could not run away.
They were often beaten up orand sexually abused, Petrov explained.
The prostitution services, delivered at various spots, including Dzhalev's own 1.2m-euro villa and a luxury yacht, were advertised as "an unforgettable tourist trip", Bulgaria's English-language newspaper Sofia Echo reported.
According to the Spanish news agency EFE, Dzhalev's goal was to monopolise prostitution in the Canary Islands.
During last week's raids, Spanish police seized 16,000 euros in cash, three laptops, a large number of passports, five credit-card terminals and a digital camera.
Bankbooks and diaries, detailing the services rendered by each of the women and the fees collected for them, were also confiscated.
Petrov could not say Tuesday if the Bulgarian members of the gang would be tried in Spain or at home.
According to the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office's Human Rights annual report, released last week, Bulgaria remains a country of transit and origin for human trafficking, "although joint action by the Bulgarian police and their EU colleagues has helped dismantle a number of networks".
