20/04/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 20/04/06
The Macedonian Constitutional Court on 12 April annulled a law that granted MPs special status and privileges, ruling that parliamentarians should not be treated differently from other citizens when it comes to pensions, salaries and other benefits.
The law had given MPs in office for at least two years the right to gain a pension after 25 years of work experience -- in effect, establishing a retirement age of 55 for male MPs and 53 for their female counterparts.
Ordinary Macedonians, by contrast, have seen their retirement age go up. 
Under current legislation, men can retire after 40 years of work experience and women after 35 years. 
In most cases, that means a retirement age of 64 for men and 62 for women.
"Early old-age pension can be nothing else but acquiring a right under privileged conditions only related to MPs," the Constitutional Court said. 
"The legislation puts the citizens in an unequal position and the provisions of the law are in direct contravention with Article 9 of the Constitution of Macedonia."
MPs also had voted themselves a daily stipend for participating in plenary sessions and commissions, even though they are professionals who already receive salaries. 
In the Court's opinion, "there is no case that could justify this type of benefit."
"Any MP's duty is to take part in the parliamentary sessions and working bodies, and this is what they receive a salary for," it ruled.
The legislation was hotly criticised at the time it was drafted and approved. 
The cabinet opposed it, and President Branko Crvenkovski initially refused to sign it.
The MPs were therefore obliged to put the bill to a second vote. 
In both cases it passed with a sweeping majority -- with only 14 members voting against it. 
The president was then legally required to sign the measure.
The public has greeted the Constitutional Court ruling with enthusiasm, and analysts say it contributes to an improved climate for judicial independence.
