16/05/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 16/05/06
According to the country's central bank, Croatia's debt increased by 720m euros, or 13 per cent, since last year, and now totals almost 26 billion euros. 
If the current trend continues, the debt could reach 86 per cent of GDP.
Croatian National Bank (CNB) Governor Zeljko Rohatinski recently presented a new report on the debt situation to Prime Minister Ivo Sanader and President Stipe Mesic. 
While the findings are not cause for alarmism, he said, it is time for economic policy to start tackling the issue.
In late 2005, Croatia's external debt totalled 24.5 billion euros, or 82.4 per cent of GDP. 
The country's debt continued to rise in the first two months of this year, hitting a high of 26.2 billion euros in late February. 
Analysts say bank privatisation has contributed to the spiraling figures, due to the attractive loan packages being offered to citizens.
According to the daily Vjesnik, the World Bank ranks Croatia among highly-indebted countries, and the EU has warned that the problem must be brought under control. 
The Bank classifies a country as "highly in debt" when the level exceeds 80 per cent of Brutto Domestic Product.
The increasing debt could seriously affect living standards and produce solvency problems in Croatia, Vjesnik said. 
Living standards could fall sharply if the situation worsens, making the country vulnerable to external shocks. 
If the debt level grows to more than 30 per cent of domestic imports, Croatia could become categorised as a high-risk state, causing credit lines to decrease and interest rates to rise. 
That, in turn, could ultimately lead to a financial crisis.
The government and CNB cannot use capital control to stem the flow of debt, because the EU accession process prohibits this kind of measure. 
Furthermore, domestic savings are not enough to repay what is owed. 
As a result, the government has had to try to refinance the debt.
Rohatinski believes that the level can be brought down through co-ordinated action. 
He has warned the banks that they can expect more restrictive monetary policies. 
The CNB has already begun to implement new savings prgrammes meant to put the brakes on proliferating credits, and higher interest rates are in store.
