20/04/2006
(B92 -- 14/04/06;
DTT-NE -- 27/03/06)
In an effort to strengthen public trust and to meet European standards, the Serbian government last week adopted a strategy to reform the judiciary sector.
"After 60 years of wandering around in the judicial system, a reform strategy has been adopted that is supported by both the EU and the Council of Europe," Serbian Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic said on 14 April after the government ruling.
Stojkovic presented a plan earlier this month that focused on shortening the length of court procedures and setting standards for the election of court officials.
The new plan envisions placing the Supreme Judicial Council at the centre of the reformed system.
The council will be comprised of judges from all over the country and will not be limited to court presidents.
Once a judge is elected, parliament will vote on a proposal from the Supreme Council within five years of the election -- thus giving the judge a life-long term.
According to Stojkovic, court procedures that used to take more than three years have been expedited to now take less than two years, "with the ability to further decrease".
The biggest step was taken in commercial courts, where procedures have been speeded up by 50 per cent", the minister said.
Ministry of Justice State Secretary Branislav Bjelica says that the idea is for prosecutors to become more independent.
"The role of prosecutors will be completely changed.
In 2000, [the prosecutors] were an intermediary between the police and the court -- now they will have to conduct investigations and engage in the procedure prior to the hearing.
For the first time, they will be in a position to measure the results of their work."
According to the planned changes, prosecutors working on cases involving organised crime or war crimes will be elected directly by the lower house of parliament, which will grant them independence.
Those with executive power will be able to give written orders to the prosecution regarding criminal offences, as stipulated by conventions ratified by the state.
The changes are also focused on bringing the sector into line with European standards.
To facilitate this process, Stojkovic signed a co-operation agreement with Austrian Justice Minister Karin Gastinger last month.
Under the deal, Austria will help train judges, prosecutors and other officials, particularly in the fight against organised crime.
