15/09/2006
(Dnevnik, Europe.bg, Nine o'Clock - 15/09/06; AP, AFP, EUpolitix, BNN, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Europe.bg, Dnevnik, Rompres - 14/09/06)
Bulgaria and Romania, which expect to join the EU on 1 January, are likely to face some restrictions that will exclude them from certain policy areas for some time, a senior member of the European Parliament (MEP) indicated on Thursday (14 September).
"We're of the view we'll need a number of safeguard clauses," the AP quoted Graham Watson, chairman of the Liberal Democrats in the EU assembly, as saying. 
"The extent and nature of these clauses will now be a subject of debate."
Policy areas where restrictions could be applied include justice and home affairs, agriculture and public health, he said.
Watson's statement came ten days before the European Commission (EC) is due to publish its final progress reports on Bulgaria and Romania's preparedness for EU membership. 
The papers will recommend whether the two countries should join the Union on 1 January 2007, as envisioned in their accession treaty with the 25-nation bloc.
The treaty includes safeguard clauses allowing the EU to delay the two Balkan nations' admission by one year, if they are deemed not ready.
Recent media reports have indicated that the EC most likely will recommend that Bulgaria and Romania be allowed to join the EU on schedule, but with certain restrictions.
These could include a three-year delay on the two countries' entry into the EU internal market, and close scrutiny of efforts in fighting corruption, EUpolitix.com reported.
Indirectly confirming such reports Thursday, Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin said he expects his country to join the EU on 1 January but with tough measures imposed on sensitive areas.
His remarks followed a meeting in Brussels with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, which was attended also by Bulgaria's EU Affairs Minister Meglena Kuneva.
While the EC now appears unlikely to recommend delaying Bulgaria and Romania's membership by one year, their accession treaty with the Union needs to be ratified by all 25-member states. 
Four countries -- Belgium, Denmark, France and Germany -- have not yet completed the process.
The French Senate is expected to discuss the agreement on 3 October, Romanian European Integration Minister Anca Boagiu told reporters on Thursday. 
The German Bundestag has scheduled a first reading of the treaty for 28 September, with a second reading to follow in late October, before the final vote by the Bundesrat on 24 November, Romanian news agency Rompres quoted the minister as saying.
