10/05/2010
By Sasa Ilic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 10/05/10
Thousands gathered in Belgrade's Kosutnjak Park to participate in the Supernatural Festival on April 25th. 
Founded four years ago, the event seeks to educate people about the need to protect the ecosystems we inhabit.
"The whole idea of the festival is to raise awareness of the necessity for greater environmental protection through entertaining forms of art," festival organiser Srdjan Stankovic told SETimes.
The festival area was constructed using recycled materials. 
All the stands were "card houses" made of timber pallets used for transport, a game offered a bicycle made of recycled aluminum as a prize, and visitors enjoyed sandwiches and pies prepared with organically grown food.
Sponsors and organisers found one more way to encourage visitors to choose a "green" way of life.
"We gave 5,000 free tickets [to the event] to visitors who brought three plastic bottles, three cans and three pieces of newspapers for recycling," Stankovic.
For those who did not bring recyclables, the ticket price was 3 euros.
The festival had two main parts -- musical and educational. 
The musical programme took place on two stages, named Biodiesel and Dance Meadow. 
Educational activities were held throughout the festival area.
The first few hours of the programme were designed for the youngest audience members. 
While having fun, children could learn about environmental protection at age-appropriate workshops.
"I found out that we should throw garbage in the can and we should not break flowers," 4-year-old Rastko Stajic from Belgrade told SETimes.
Young visitors had a chance to meet with actor Milorad Mandic Manda, TV host Minja Subota, poet Dobrica Eric, pop-singer Tijana Dapcevic and other celebrities who took to the stage to entertain the children.
"I'm taking part in Supernatural for a third time in a row and I fear we are not using the time in-between the two festivals to the fullest," Eric said. 
"I propose we dedicate at least one day a month, in one way or another, to environmental protection.”
Musical events for adults kicked off in the late afternoon. 
About 10,000 visitors enjoyed the music of a dub-dance band Zion Train, New York guitar player Adam Rafferty, Japanese drum-n-bass duo DJ AKi & MC YUUKi and a national band headed by Darkwood Dub and Svi na pod (Everybody on the Floor).
"I've enjoyed the music and nature," Jovan Zivkovic of Belgrade told SETimes. 
"I've thrown some frisbee, had a few beers and now I still have time to go back home and get some sleep before an early start for work tomorrow."
The festival was sponsored by the environment ministry, USAID, the Dutch Embassy and the City Secretariat for Environmental Protection.
"The concept of this festival aims at having all three family generations in one place," Secretary for Environmental Protection of the city of Belgrade Goran Trivan told SETimes. 
"Environmental protection is definitely one of the top priorities in the world, and this feeling is being transferred to Serbia as well."
