14/08/2006
(Sofia Echo - 14/08/06; AFP, The Sunday Telegraph, The Daily Mail, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik - 13/08/06; Sofia News Agency, Makfax - 11/08/06; Focus News Agency - 10/08/06)
Thousands of people from non-EU countries, the majority of them from Macedonia and Moldova, have been able to get Bulgarian citizenship in recent years after claiming to be of ethnic Bulgarian descent.
"Since 2001, Bulgaria has been attractive for its Euro-Atlantic prospects, its stability and the travel opportunities that Bulgarian passports offer," an AFP report Sunday (13 August) quoted Stefan Nikolov of the Agency for Bulgarians Abroad as saying. 
"Applications have increased exponentially."
More than 20,000 people have received Bulgarian passports since 2001, when the number of those applying for Bulgarian citizenship was almost 5,500. 
That number rose to nearly 29,500 in 2004. 
In 2005 alone, when 23,200 applications were submitted, more than 2,400 Macedonians and slightly more Moldavians were granted Bulgarian citizenship, according to the AFP report. 
Russians, Israelis, Ukrainians and Serbs totalling fewer than 700 people also received Bulgarian passports last year.
Less than five months before the country is due to join the EU, the number of those whose applications are waiting to be processed exceeds 50,000.
Under Bulgarian law, there is a "facilitated naturalisation procedure" for members of Bulgarian minorities in neighbouring countries applying for Bulgarian citizenship. 
Once it is granted to them, they enjoy all the rights Bulgarians are entitled to, without being obliged to give up their other nationality.
Many of those waiting for their applications to be processed might have submitted "documents with dubious validity" Nikolov said. 
He said officials are conducting "severe checks" to prevent unlawful claims and abuses.
Meanwhile, reports in British dailies on Sunday criticised Bulgaria for its lax procedures for issuing citizenship. 
According to the papers, corrupt officials have been exploiting the situation and agreeing to fast-track passports for less than 300 euros.
Citing the findings of its own investigation, The Telegraph suggested that many applicants were not actually of ethnic Bulgarian origin, did not speak Bulgarian and knew next to nothing about the country. 
Rather, their main motive was access to the EU job market.
The reports come amid fears in Britain that Bulgaria and Romania's entry into the EU, scheduled to take place on 1 January 2007, could trigger a large new influx of migrants. 
Some, including members of Prime Minister Tony Blair's cabinet, have insisted that Britain abandon its open door immigration policy for people from the two Balkan countries.
"Entry control to Britain is now only as good as the integrity of the passport systems in other EU countries," said Sir Andrew Green, the head of the British think tank Migrationwatch. 
"This is a further argument against opening our labour market to Romania and Bulgaria unless all EU countries do the same simultaneously."
