16/05/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/05/06
The Republican Broadcasting Agency's (RBA) recent allocations of television frequencies were not universally welcomed. 
At the end of April, the RBA awarded frequencies to TV B92, TV Pink, TV Avala and TV Fox, and Kosava TV and Hepi TV. 
However, a number of other broadcasters -- RTL Television, BK TV and TV 5 from Nis -- were left out.
Although the RBA insists the decisions were made fairly and complied with existing broadcasting legislation, some are charging foul play. 
Critics say stations with established infrastructures and reputations were passed over for the sake of lower quality broadcasters and even some that do not yet exist.
The stakes were high, since research shows that the media market in Serbia is growing. 
Last year, the revenue from TV advertising alone was worth 60m euros and the sum is expected to be 15 per cent higher this year.
The agency says it followed a set of strict criteria, taking into account not only the current degree of business success but also prospects for the future. 
The largest investments were announced by Pink (100m euros), TV Fox (38.5m euros), Kosova-Hepi (32.5m euros) and Avala (21.8m euros). 
By contrast, one of the stations that lost out, RTL, had planned to invest 21.3m euros.
BK TV, established by controversial businessman Bogoljub Karic, was turned down for a number of reasons, says RBA Governing Council Deputy President Aleksandar Vasic. 
These include lack of transparency in the initial capital funding, as well as the excessive prominence the station gave to Karic's political party.
"BK TV's response shows they lack knowledge of the Radio Broadcasting Law," Vasic told Balkan Insight.
The RBA also says the bank accounts of BK TV had been blocked for several weeks at the time of negotiations, and that the records of the registry of the National Bank of Serbia showed that the account of BK Telekom continued to be blocked.
Another criterion was the behaviour of applicants during the application procedure. 
The RBA claims statements by the representatives of BK TV and RTL had attempted to prejudice the outcome and exert public pressure on the agency.
RTL was also refused a license because of its majority foreign ownership, the broadcast agency said.
"We do not accept such an explanation, because nothing of what has been said about RTL is true," counters Nenad Savic, a member of RTL's management board.
The rejected TV stations have filed appeals with the RBA, which has 30 days to respond. 
After that, the stations still have the option of taking the agency to court.
Serbian Culture Minister Dragan Kojadinovic has weighed in on the issue, saying the allocations were "scandalous" and should be declared null and void.
