14/07/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 14/07/06
Golf is a sport that has been played throughout the world for over 500 years.
However, its history in Croatia is much shorter.
Out of about 18,000 golf courses in the world, and 6,105 in Europe, only seven are located in Croatia.
These seven include "Island Brijuni", the oldest and most beautiful course in the country, "Novi Dvori", where golfers can play at night, and "Cardinal Valley", one of the oldest courses in the country and for a long time, the only one.
Despite Croatia's lacklustre history in the sport, it has 42 golf clubs and 168 registered players.
Due to the enthusiasm of such groups, development of the sport is on the rise.
According to a strategic programme for golf development in Croatia, more than 35 locations have been selected for the construction of new courses.
Many of these projects have received funding from investors, and some already are being built.
One, near Zadar, is to be built over an old landfill.
This project in particular has been widely lauded, as residents look forward to seeing beautiful green fields near their city.
Meanwhile, American developer Jeff Blackard is planning to build a huge, exclusive golf course in the Dalmatian city of Sukosan, near Zadar.
It is to be built on the coast, as opposed to inland, because exceptional climate conditions will permit year-round play.
The complex will be the biggest golf course in Europe, capable of hosting world golf tournaments.
The first tournament is scheduled to be held in 2008.
When completed, the complex will include a course of 27 holes, an Olympic complex, marinas, five-star hotels, a conference centre, business offices and private residence villas.
Blackard will also employ about 10,000 people.
Completion is expected in ten to 12 years.
In the past, Croatia has been virtually the only tourism-oriented country without any real golf programme.
However, the long-standing problems -- such as inadequate planning and lack of facilities -- are gradually being resolved.
And although golf is still not a priority in Croatia's sport and tourism focus, progress is being made.
