19/04/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 19/04/06
With a just over a month to go before the 21 May referendum on Montenegrin independence, those who support preserving the Serbia-Montenegro state union launched their campaign Monday (17 April) with an event at Mojkovac.
Predrag Bulatovic, one of the anti-independence bloc's leaders, vowed that his side would achieve a decisive victory at the polls.
"For the future of Montenegro, we will win -- not in the 'grey zone', but with many more supporters than they will have," Bulatovic said.
Last week, the leaders of the two blocs -- Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic and Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic representing the pro-independence forces, and Bulatovic and Predrag Popovic representing the supporters of the federal union -- held their first televised debate.
For nearly two hours, the two sides defended their positions while trading allegations and, at times, insults.
Seeking to defuse arguments that the pro-independence campaign serves his own political interests, Djukanovic offered to resign if Bulatovic throws his support behind the independence bid.
"Ask your voters to support independence and you will have my resignation a month after the referendum and I will not participate in the next elections," Djukanovic said.
"Here is your chance to win and accomplish your 15-year long dream [of gaining power]."
Bulatovic, leader of the Socialist People's Party, charged that Djukanovic was using the "grey zone" to avoid a commitment to resign if the independence bid fails.
Under the referendum rules, the "yes" vote must pass a 55 per cent threshold to succeed.
As a result, the bid could fail even if it garners a majority.
That isn't an issue, according to Bulatovic.
"The grey zone does not exist.
Either 55 per cent will be reached or it won't -- that is, Montenegro will or will not be independent.
Should the independence forces reach 55 per cent, I will withdraw from politics congratulating those who won," he said.
Predrag Popovic, leader of the People's Party, said the vote is about whether or not Montenegro and Serbia should build a "Great Wall of China" with barbed wire.
He also took aim at Djukanovic's political past, saying the prime minister had once been a solid supporter of Milosevic-era Yugoslavia, only to switch sides in order to advance his personal interests.
According to Montenegrin national TV, 84.5 per cent of potential viewers -- a total of 525,000 -- tuned in to watch the debate.
About 77 per cent of them stayed with it until the end.
