14/07/2006
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 14/07/06
The international community has decided to close the Office of the High Representative (OHR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on 30 June 2007.
For the past 11 years, the OHR has been the top agency for implementing the civilian aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Headed by a top international envoy -- currently German diplomat Christian Schwarz-Schilling -- the office has the authority to dismiss any local politician or official who does not comply with the Dayton provisions.
The OHR itself believes that the country has made enough progress to continue on its own.
However, BiH Presidency Chairman SulejmanTihic has requested a postponement of the final decision on closure.
"The decision should at least wait until after October elections and the formation of the new government," said Tihic, who worries that shutting down the OHR could give a new impetus to hardliners in BiH's Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS).
On the other hand, Mladen Ivanic -- of RS's Party of Democratic Progress -- thinks the decision is a positive one, allowing local politicians to take greater responsibility for the country's future.
"It is absurd that negative reactions are coming from the same Sarajevo politicians who are always ready to proclaim the strong BiH state with a centralised government.
Obviously they want further existence of the OHR because they believe that the OHR will fulfil the principles and vision of their political groups," Ivanic argues.
Deeper concerns about closing the international envoy's office are voiced by small parties in BiH, such as the Croatian Party of Law.
Its head, Zvonko Jurisic, says the country's future is questionable without the OHR.
"We ask the OHR to take responsibility for the internal structure of BiH and impose, when necessary, a solution that would guarantee unity both within BiH and in terms of Euro-Atlantic integration," Jurisic said.
The long-term prospects for BiH also are hotly debated by academics.
However, few see a future that includes a continuation of the OHR.
"I would not link the destiny of BiH with the OHR.
The question is what do we, citizens of BiH, want from the state that we live in.
I sincerely believe that, right now, we are not able to make a good thing alone for ourselves," said Zdravko Grebo, a university professor in Sarajevo.
According to Grebo, the decision to close the OHR sends a particular message to the citizens -- you have elections in October, so think carefully consider your choice to lead the country in the future.
