19/04/2006
(International Herald Tribune, Turkish Daily News - 19/04/06;
FT, AP, Reuters, AFX, Zaman - 18/04/06)
Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer approved on Tuesday (18 April) the new governor of the country's Central Bank, ending weeks of uncertainty following his rejection of the government's first nominee for the key post.
Durmus Yilmaz succeeds Sureyya Serdengecti, who retired on 14 March at the end of his five-year term, during which he helped Turkey recover from a deep financial crisis that began in 2001.
The government's first choice for Serdengecti's successor was Adnan Buyukdeniz, chief executive of Albaraka Turk, a finance group -- established with Arab capital -- that operates according to Islamic rules and does not charge interest.
The nomination sparked concerns about the future of the Central Bank's interest policy and was eventually rejected by the country's secularist president.
A veteran British-educated economist, Yilmaz, 59, joined the Central Bank of Turkey (CBT) in 1980.
He was appointed director in 1995 and deputy executive director in 1996.
Yilmaz has been a member of the financial institution's executive board since 2003 and part of the committee monitoring monetary policy since 2004.
Assuming his new post Tuesday, Yilmaz pledged to adhere to a tight monetary policy, in line with the country's commitments spelled out under a $10 billion IMF-sponsored economic programme.
The new CBT governor cited meeting inflation targets -- set at 5 per cent for 2006 and 4 per cent for both 2007 and 2008 -- and achieving price stability as top priorities.
"Attaining these targets is our basic goal," Yilmaz said at his first press conference, vowing to support the government's growth and employment policies, provided they would not jeopardise the inflation targets.
He also promised that the floating exchange rate regime would remain in place.
"Turkey has seized a golden opportunity to be saved from the destruction of inflation in more than 30 years," Yilmaz added.
"The disinflation process has almost been completed successfully.
Our next goal is to reach price stability and make it permanent."
His appointment was welcomed by the World Bank, which has provided loans worth more than $15 billion to Turkey since it joined it in 1947.
"Financial markets have reacted positively to his appointment," World Bank country director Andrew Vorkink said in a statement.
"The World Bank feels he will be an excellent governor for the important period ahead."
"In general it is a pretty sound choice, he just needs to prove to the market he will be independent," Reuters quoted Michael Buchanan, co-director of global macro and markets research at Goldman Sachs & Co in London, as saying.
"I think it is just a matter of showing monetary policy will be made very much in relation to the data and continuing a relatively risk-averse type strategy the bank was following under Serdengecti and not being seen to cut rates in response to political pressure, and also not to overly weaken the currency, again, in response to political pressure."
Yilmaz's first challenge, according to the Financial Times, will be chairing the monetary policy committee's meeting next week.
Other important tasks on the new governor's agenda include rebuilding the bank's management, following a series of resignations and retirements in recent weeks.
