13/07/2006
Analysis by Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/07/06
At their most recent summit, held in mid-June, the presidents and prime ministers of EU member states instructed the European Commission (EC) to make an assessment of the EU's "absorbing power" concerning new members by December 2006.
At the same time, they postponed debate on an amended European Constitution, which many analysts see as necessary for further enlargement.
Germany, Spain and Italy advocate smaller amendments to the existing text, while France, the Netherlands and Great Britain call for an all new Constitution.
Britain is against the overt transfer of authority from the member states to the institutions in Brussels.
Failure to adopt the constitution would have serious implications for the hopes of aspiring members.
Among the first to be affected would be Croatia, which is hoping to join the bloc by 2010.
It is not inconceivable that Croatia could meet all the conditions for membership and still face an obstacle -- if the members still have not reconstructed the institutions and policies governing the admission of new states.
While the European future of the Western Balkans has never been disputed, it is clear that the countries from the region will have to wait for the EU to solve its internal problems.
"We need, more than ever, to change some rules of decision-making inside the EU," said EC President Jose Manuel Barroso.
The conclusions from the session stress that the EC's analysis of the EU's "absorbing power" must include an explanation of the process to European citizens.
This is considered a key requirement in light of the rejection, by Dutch and French citizens, of the draft constitution -- in part, out of concerns that enlargement poses a threat to the jobs and living standards of "old Europe".
The summit participants did, at least in general, reaffirm their commitment to the enlargement process.
"The entry of new members has been confirmed as a historic opportunity to contribute to peace, security, stability, democracy, the rule of law, and the growth and well-being of the EU as a whole," they declared.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn also struck an optimistic note, saying the summit had paved the way for a "new consensus".
This consensus should "strengthen our interest in forming a zone of peace, democracy and prosperity in Europe, while on the other hand ensure that we function efficiently and accept new members," he said.
The Western Balkan countries were promised membership at the summit in Thessaloniki in 2003, a move confirmed in several documents since then.
Last fall, Croatia and Turkey launched membership talks, while Macedonia has candidate status.
Albania recently signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU, whereas Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia andHerzegovina have yet to do so.
