15/05/2006
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 15/05/06
A two-day conference in Sarajevo of the Balkan Political Club ended with a call for full liberalisation of trade in the Western Balkans.
Participants also urged the strengthening of BiH institutions, describing this as key to the country's Euro-Atlantic integration.
The Balkan Political Club is a regional NGO whose members include former political leaders and prominent intellectuals.
The 7 May conference was the organisation's ninth.
The event presented an opportunity for attendees to express their views on the future Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA).
Official talks on the agreement are expected to start in several weeks, with some details of the agreement to be made public at the beginning of September.
BiH Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic and Zlatko Hurtic, adviser to the prime minister, suggested that the revamped CEFTA should not be based on previously signed free trade agreements among individual states, but should take into account economic rather than political issues.
A special annex of the agreement, Hurtic said, should be dedicated to agriculture.
"The current situation in our country does not allow the BiH government to sufficiently subsidise agricultural production.
I expect the issue will be among the key challenges in the future CEFTA talks." Statistics show that around 35 per cent of BiH's population is directly dependent on agriculture.
Beriz Belkic, a member of the BiH Parliament, said the CEFTA would have to standardise procedures and harmonise laws.
This, he said, would create "new small European market".
"BiH does not have a choice.
In our experience, the existing bilateral agreements are interpreted differently as a result of our specific internal organisation of the state," Belkic said.
Economist Anto Domazet said the CEFTA deal would set up administrative bodies to monitor implementation of the agreement.
"This would be much more effective than the current solutions, where there are discriminations in foreign trade on a daily basis," Domazet said.
Dusko Lopandic, deputy foreign minister of Serbia-Montenegro, also attended the forum.
He called for transforming the current web of free trade deals into a simplified agreement that would allow a higher degree of openness in trade.
The Balkan Political Club was founded in 2001 in Sofia.
It has 55 members, including current and former presidents, ministers and intellectuals.
