14/09/2006
(Blic - 14/09/06; AP, UPI, B92, Beta, Serbianna, US embassy in Belgrade, Serbian government - 13/09/06)
US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Clint Williamson urged Belgrade on Wednesday (13 September) to move quickly to complete its co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal and thus improve the country's prospects for a better future.
Williamson, who arrived on a two-day visit to Serbia on Tuesday, held talks with a number of top officials, including President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, national council for ICTY co-operation head Rasim Ljajic, and war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic.
"The discussions were useful, and Serbian authorities expressed their understanding … of the need to urgently address and resolve outstanding issues, particularly the cases of Ratko Mladic and the remaining ICTY fugitives," the US embassy in Belgrade said in a statement. 
"This is crucial for Serbia's future."
Along with former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic, Mladic tops the UN tribunal's list of most wanted indictees. 
He is charged with a host of war crimes, including genocide for his alleged involvement in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo.
Earlier this year, the EU suspended talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Belgrade after Kostunica's government failed to keep its promise to hand over Mladic by the end of April. 
Several weeks later, the government adopted an action plan for full co-operation with The Hague-based court.
That plan must be implemented fully, Williamson and Tadic agreed on Wednesday.
After his meeting with Williamson, Ljajic said that while no deadlines for Mladic's arrest had been discussed, the international community was growing clearly impatient.
Meanwhile, Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic suggested that the search for Mladic had expanded to include not only individuals suspected of helping him evade justice, but companies as well.
"The co-ordination is better," the minister said in a talk show on Belgrade-based Radio B92. 
"Also, finally information is coming in through our taxation police and then the companies which are suspected of financing the hiding of Mladic and other Hague indictees at one time are under our control. 
However, results must be shown and that depends completely on the security services.
"It seems paradoxical, but it seems that the future of Serbia depends on our security services," Dinkic added.
