15/05/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 15/05/06
NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and members of the North Atlantic Council were in Kosovo last week for talks with local and UNMIK authorities, as well as Serb community representatives.
The Council is the Alliance's senior decision-making body, comprising the 26 NATO permanent representatives and chaired by de Hoop Scheffer.
The visit aimed to demonstrate that NATO remains committed to Kosovo and stands ready to deter anyone seeking to derail the process of resolving the province's final status.
"KFOR is here and those who intend to spoil the process should not forget that KFOR is here," de Hoop Scheffer said on Thursday (11 May) at a press conference in Pristina.
He urged all parties in the province to prepare for a compromise in the status talks.
"Everyone should agree that compromise is the only solution, while the international community will support this process," de Hoop Scheffer said.
He did not elaborate on what kind of solution might be achieved, saying only that decentralisation and fulfilment of the standards are necessary.
While in Kosovo, he met with President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Agim Ceku.
He also visited the 14th century Decani monastery, where he held talks with Serb representatives.
"NATO is here to protect every single Kosovar, [be they] majority or minority," the NATO chief stressed.
He also appealed to authorities in Belgrade to encourage Serbs to participate in the status process and institutional life of Kosovo.
"Only in this way, the Kosovo Serbs can represent their interests in the province's institutional life.
At the end of this process, everyone would have a hope for a better future," he said.
The NATO Council's visit followed a fourth round of direct talks in Vienna between negotiating teams from Belgrade and Pristina.
As in the previous rounds, the sides were unable to reconcile their fundamentally different positions on the future of the province.
Belgrade is insisting on a strong degree of autonomy for Serb enclaves in Kosovo, while the Albanian side -- which is pushing for full independence for Kosovo -- rejects ethnic partitioning.
A fifth round is scheduled for 23 May.
Meanwhile, de Hoop Scheffer says, NATO's peacekeeping forces will prevent tensions over Kosovo's future from erupting into violence.
"KFOR is here to stay during the important periods Kosovo is going through with the status talks under way," he said, adding that NATO will also be engaged in the province after the status issue is resolved, although its precise role has not yet been defined.
