13/09/2006
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 13/09/06
The Croatian football federation is facing disciplinary action after a mid-August match against Italy, during which Croatian fans allegedly displayed racist behaviour.
The investigation into the incident, which is being conducted by football's governing body FIFA, could affect Croatia's bid to host the European Championship in 2012.
The Croats won the friendly match, 2-0.
However, things turned unfriendly when 250 Croatian fans formed a human swastika and made a Nazi salute.
"This prompted the FIFA Disciplinary Committee to further examine the case, which could be a violation of the FIFA Disciplinary Code regarding racism," a FIFA statement said.
FIFA has announced that a detailed investigation is under way.
The organisation is collecting evidence and written reports from Croatian and Italian football authorities about the incident, which occurred in the 30th minute of the match.
Television cameras caught it, including it in the live broadcast of the game.
In response to the investigation, Croatian fans published an open letter insisting they were provoked by the Italians.
According to the anonymous letter, published on an internet site for Croatian football fans, the Italians were waving the old flag of Yugoslavia and shouting during the Croatian national anthem.
Fans of the Croatian football club Armada claimed they were behind the incident.
"The Nazi cross was our response to provocations [by Italian fans] who waved the Yugoslav flag and communist symbols," one Armada fan told Jutarnji List.
Croatian National Federation (HNS) Secretary-General Zorislav Srebric said the HNS has sent a written report of the incident to FIFA.
At a press conference after the match, Srebric said that the Federation did not understand the fans' motives for this kind of outrageous behavior.
The federation now awaits the outcome of the FIFA investigation.
Some fear the results may influence the joint bid of Croatia and Hungary to host the 2012 European Championship games.
At the least, if the FIFA rules against Croatia, the football federation can be fined 10,000 euros and be made to replay the match behind closed doors.
"This incident deserves to be treated severely.
There is no doubt that both FIFA and the (European soccer body) UEFA will condemn it.
We call on the fans to help us find the perpetrators so that police can ban them from the stadiums," chief HNS security official Zoran Cvrk told the Vecernji List daily.
UEFA recently announced there are eight candidates for Euro 2012.
There are six individual candidates -- Azerbaijan, Greece, Italy, Romania, Russia and Turkey;
and two joint bids -- Croatia and Hungary, and Poland and Ukraine.
UEFA will announce the three finalists in November, while the final decision will be made at the beginning of December.
