15/05/2006
(Financial Mirror - 15/05/06;
ANA-MPA, Cyprus Mail - 14/05/06;
Cyprus News Agency - 12/05/06)
There has been "new momentum on the Cyprus problem" following the February meeting between UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos, according to Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis.
In an interview published in the Greek daily Ethnos on Sunday (14 May), she noted that progress has been made towards the establishment of technical committees.
The Greek Cypriot administration wants them to deal with "issues of substance," in order to prepare the grounds for a new peace initiative, she said.
"A solution that is imposed, against the view of the people, cannot be a solution," Bakoyannis said.
"For there to be a solution, it must be well-prepared and acceptable for both the leadership and the people."
Annan and Papadopoulos met on 28 February in Paris to discuss ways for moving forward the Cyprus peace process, and again last week on the sidelines of the EU-Latin America-Caribbean summit in Vienna.
They agreed that progress in a number of areas would improve the atmosphere for the revival of talks on reuniting the island.
After the Paris meeting, Annan hailed the agreement reached between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders to initiate bicommunal technical talks on a range of issues.
The deal will benefit all Cypriots, he said.
On Sunday, the Cyprus Mail reported that Annan plans to send envoys to Nicosia, Athens and Ankara to kick-start the operation of the technical committees.
But it offered no other details.
"Annan asked me about the progress made for the discussions on a technical level, I briefed him and we exchanged ideas as to what can be done," the Greek Cypriot president said on Friday.
At the same time, however, Nicosia is accusing the Turkish Cypriots of refusing "to discuss the committee terms put forward by the UN secretary general".
According to Greek Cypriot media reports, the Turkish Cypriots, whose administration is recognised by Turkey alone, disagree with the idea that the technical committees should discuss issues of substance.
