16/10/2006
(DPA, Euronews, ANA-MPA- 16/10/06; AP, DPA, AFP, ANA-MPA - 15/10/06)
While early results from Greece's local government elections on Sunday (October 15th) indicate a slight decline in the support for the ruling New Democracy (ND) party, the conservatives appear set to take the leading posts in half of the country's prefectures.
In Greece, where voting is compulsory, more than nine million eligible voters -- including nearly 9,000 citizens of other EU states -- cast their ballots at 24,710 polling stations. 
They elected representatives in the three super-prefectures, 54 prefectures, provinces, and approximately 1,033 communities and municipalities.
To win an outright victory, a candidate must garner at least 42% voter support. 
In places where the first round has ended without a clear winner for the respective post, a second round will be held on October 22nd.
Early results suggest that the ND won 27 of all prefectures, compared to the 30 it won in the October 2002 local elections. 
Among the prefectures to be governed by an ND representative is Thessaloniki, Greece's second largest city. 
Incumbent Prefect Panayiotis Psomiadis reportedly pulled off an outright victory against Voula Patoulidou, a gold medalist in the Barcelona 1992 Olympics.
The ND also will retain its more than two decade-long hold on the post of Athens mayor. 
Former Health Minister Nikitas Kaklamanis won an outright victory against the opposition PASOK's mayoral candidate, Costas Skandalidis.
"I want to thank Athenians for their trust," Kaklamanis said on Sunday, suggesting he would not waste time for celebrations. 
"Tomorrow morning, the battle against our city's problems begins."
Taking place in the wake of weeks of a teacher's strike and high-profile corruption scandals, Sunday's elections were considered a key test for the ruling conservatives, who returned to power in March 2004 after more than a decade in opposition. 
Less than two years later, polls suggest the conservatives have a 1%-lead over George Papandreou's PASOK.
Following Sunday's vote, Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis made it clear that, despite labour unions' opposition to some of the measures intended to reduce the country's budget deficit, his government would stay the course. 
Greece must bring its deficit below 3% of GDP or face EU sanctions.
"Today's elections dictate to the government that it continue to pursue its strategy, and this is the course we will follow until the 2008 (national) elections," the prime minister said. 
"Our strategy is leading the country out of the crisis inherited from the past. 
I will not mortgage the country's future for passing gratification … The vicious circle of pre-election handouts followed by post-election sacrifices will be broken definitively, at whatever cost to the party."
The ND, however, lost to PASOK in the race for the top post in the Athens-Piraeus super prefecture, where almost half of Greece's population lives. 
Incumbent Prefect Fofi Gennimata is said to have won re-election with a victory over main challenger Argyris Dinopoulos, a former journalist.
In the race for Piraeus mayor, former basketball star Panagiotis Fasoulas is said to have won an outright victory with 44% of the vote, defeating two-term conservative incumbent Christos Agrapidis.
"PASOK is renewing the political life of the country," PASOK leader Papandreaou said on Sunday. 
"We will continue to battle for a just society. 
This is what Greece is asking and what Greece deserves," he added, calling for early elections. 
Karamanlis, however, ruled this out as a possibility.
