15/06/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 15/06/06
An IMF mission, headed by Peter Doyle, is on a two-week visit to Belgrade. 
The goal is to see how far the Serbian government has progressed in completing its existing deal with the Fund, under which it committed to trimming inflation -- currently at around 15.5 per cent, the highest level in Europe -- pursuing stricter monetary and fiscal policies, and accelerating structural reforms.
All that was set forth in the monitoring programme after the three-year arrangement was concluded. 
In return for a 700m debt write-off from the Paris Club of creditors, Belgrade agreed to embark on major reforms -- namely, restructuring of public enterprises and privatising (or closing down) what remains of the inefficient socially-owned sector. 
Such changes, according to the Fund, are a precondition for creating a more favourable investment climate.
However, a new arrangement with the Fund is not on the agenda for this visit, as Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic agree, "the time is not right."
Such statements worry economists. 
They are concerned that the current government -- which is about halfway through its mandate -- is seeking to gain manoeuvering space when it comes to implementation of reforms. 
Financial experts at the IMF are unlikely to view such an effort favourably.
A few months ago, Dinkic suggested that a new arrangement should not be proposed until after Montenegro's status was decided. 
The referendum was held in May and Montenegro is now independent, but there is no letter from Belgrade.
"It's still not clear to me why a letter has not been sent," said Central Bank Governor Radovan Jelasic.
Bozidar Delic, a former finance minister, believes that the uncompromising IMF is very much needed.
"What we need more than money now are responsible policies and monitoring. 
In the foreseeable future Serbia will have fragile coalition governments, labouring under daily pressures, that will not be able to prepare the country for the 21st century," Delic said. 
In such an environment, pressure from the international financial institutions may be crucial to getting anything done.
