12/07/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 12/07/06
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica met with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in Washington on Tuesday (11 July). 
According to Belgrade media reports, he told her that Serbia opposes independence for the province of Kosovo and any imposed solution to the status question.
"Kosovo's independence would lead the region to serious instability ... 
To take 15 per cent of a state's territory away -- is possible only if democracy is trampled on," the prime minister told Serbian reporters in Washington after meeting with Rice.
He also said he had briefed Rice in detail concerning Serbia's proposal for Kosovo, which sets out "essential autonomy" as an alternative to independence. 
The authorities in Belgrade also oppose setting a limit on the Kosovo status talks, while both the United States and UN special envoy Marrti Ahtisaari have said a decision should be made by the end of this year.
Kostunica also met with US Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns and National Security adviser Stephen Hadley.
Officials in Washington made no statement after the talks. 
US Ambassador Michael Polt, however, has criticised the Serbian government for terming Kosovo independence "unacceptable".
"The stance is not a good one," he said during a panel discussion in Belgrade, titled "The Priorities of US Foreign Policy in the Balkans". 
While Washington is not necessarily backing Kosovo independence, it has acknowledged it as one of the possibilities, he said.
The Serbian government must approach politics in a more realistic manner, not just regarding Kosovo but in general, Polt said. 
For the United States, the status of Kosovo is not nearly as important as the quality of life for the province's inhabitants, he added.
Meanwhile, an AP report said the state department called on Serb authorities Tuesday to transfer war crimes suspects to the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. 
Spokesman Sean McCormack issued the appeal ahead of Kostunica's talks with Rice.
"We, as well as our European friends and allies, have urged the Serbian government to do everything that they can to make sure those people are delivered to justice in The Hague," McCormack said.
Kostunica's itinerary includes a meeting Wednesday with US Vice President Dick Cheney. 
The following day, the prime minister will participate in a UN Security Council session on Kosovo.
