27/09/2010
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 27/09/10
Donning the bright blue shirt of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Chris Nkwonta takes to the football pitch to display the skills he hopes will one day make him famous.
He is one of many young Africans living in Istanbul who get together for a few weeks every year to play in the city's very own replica of the African Cup of Nations. 
The players come from a range of countries, and are united by the elusive dream of becoming professionals in the Turkish leagues.
Nkwonta, 20, from Nigeria, is playing for Congo because there are not enough Congolese players to make up the team.
He says he played professionally in his homeland, but like most of his teammates, he had little idea of the barriers and difficulties that would face him in Turkey.
"It's so tough," he told SETimes. 
"We can't play for a club. 
Foreigners can't play on any Turkish team because you must have a residence permit."
Few players arrive with enough money to purchase the permit, and without this, they are unable to work legally as a footballer or anything else.
"I want to raise enough money to become a footballer, but it's hard to get the money here because there are no jobs to do," said Nkwonta, who trains three times a week.
Even those with both the proper documents and talent on the football pitch face steep odds.
Can Vanli, a football manager who was part of the Turkish national coaching team, spent three months last year training around 40 African players.
"They had enough talent and motivation," he said, "but it was very difficult to get a pitch. 
The time was limited, we had 40 players and it was too much. 
I was very sad that I couldn't work with them longer."
Vanli said he started training with the players because he was in contention to be the coach for Liberia and wanted experience training Africans, but working with them soon became a passion.
Now coaching in the Maldives, he believes around 35 of the players, none of whom were signed, had the talent to play in Turkey's top amateur league, the Super Amatör, which would earn them a salary of 1,000 Turkish lira a month, roughly 500 euros. 
Three or four, he said, had the skills to play in the Bank Asia league, the second tier of Turkish football.
"No one in the Super Amatör is serious about these players. 
They say, 'we have enough Turkish players, and if we took African players it's too much money.'"
A major hurdle is that residence permit required for hiring, the cost of which must usually be covered by the club.
Donald Aberuade, who founded the tournament and still runs it, knows all too well the disappointment that inevitably awaits some of the players.
"My dream was shattered," he said, describing how he had passed a try-out with one club and trained for an entire pre-season before being told they would not pay for his residency permit.
"I gave everything I had and got nothing from it. 
It's not an easy thing to train all the time, make the level, go to the camp and play friendly matches, and then the league starts and you can't play, after all the time and effort."
Now in its tenth year, the tournament in Istanbul is starting to attract more attention. 
Western Union and Finanzbank, a Turkish company, have provided sponsorship for team uniforms, and African and Turkish businessmen have helped raise money to pay for the venue.
More importantly, it is starting to attract more attention to the footballers, and Turkish clubs now send scouts to the games.
Following their latest victory over Congo in the semi-finals, four of Cameroon's players were approached by Turkish scouts. 
For Jean-Pierre Mbelek, Cameroon's captain, it was a proud moment.
"I'm very happy," said Mbelek, who is himself a striker for Gebze, a club in the fourth tier of Turkey's professional league. 
"I hope at the final they have some propositions. 
If by the end we have six or seven players with clubs that would be fine."
Now 24, he left home at the age of 18 to play in Egypt, and came to Turkey two years later. 
A year ago, his girlfriend joined him from Cameroon, and they married. 
Last year, he scored 15 goals for his amateur team, and now earns 1,500 Turkish lira a week, around 750 euros.
"The life is very nice in Istanbul," he said. 
"When you have your papers, you have something to do, but when you don't have an occupation it's very, very, very hard."
Many of those watching the games, and some of those playing are registered refugees, but they face the same problems as the migrants.
Turkey is one of only three countries that put a geographical restriction on asylum seekers, only granting permanent refugee status to those fleeing from Europe.
Like the mass of Iranians, Iraqis and Afghans who come to Turkey every year, African refugees rely solely on UNHCR, charities and NGOs for support. 
They have no right to education, and it is difficult for them to get work permits.
Many complain of racism, and NGOs have accused police of unfairly targeting them.
In 2007, one Nigerian refugee and aspiring footballer, Festus Okey, was shot dead in an Istanbul police cell. 
Three years on, the prosecution of an officer accused of the killing is stalled in the courts.
As the players take to the pitch for the latest game, their figures cast long shadows across the Astroturf, and in the stands a crowd of a couple of hundred African spectators shield their eyes from the sun.
Played over the course of a month, the competition includes four other teams: Nigeria, Cameroon, South Africa, and Ethiopia.
Most of the spectators and players agree that the Istanbul tournament is about more than just football -- it's about bringing this fragile community together.
"You meet many Africans you didn't know before," said Nkwonta. 
"We make new friends. 
The Congo players -- I didn't know them before -- but I know them now as if I'm Congolese. 
It's united us together.
