16/06/2006
(AKI, The Guardian, EUobserver - 16/06/06; UN, Cyprus News Agency - 15/06/06)
The UN Security Council on Thursday (15 June) adopted a resolution extending the mandate of the Union's peace keeping mission in Cyprus (UNFICYP) by another six months, calling on both communities on the divided island to take steps towards the renewal of peace talks.
The 15-nation body also voiced regret that "the gap between words and deeds remains too great for the Secretary General [Kofi Annan] to resume fully his good offices mission" and called for "progress for the renewal of talks for a comprehensive settlement".
Some three months after tension between the Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots resulted in an outbreak of violence in December 1963, the Security Council endorsed a resolution on the establishment of UNFICYP with a mandate "to prevent a recurrence of fighting and, as necessary, to contribute to the maintenance and restoration of law and order". 
It has periodically been extended.
An Athens-backed Greek Cypriot coup in July 1974, aimed at uniting Cyprus with Greece, was followed by a military invasion by Turkey, which took control over the northern part of the island. 
A de facto ceasefire came into effect on 16 August 1974 and ceasefire lines and a buffer zone were established. 
But there has been no formal ceasefire agreement.
The latest effort to end Cyprus's more than 30-year division collapsed in April 2004, when Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected a reunification plan proposed by Annan.
Although the majority of the Turkish Cypriots supported the blueprint, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the island eventually joined the EU on 1 May 2004, representing the whole island. 
The Turkish Cypriot administration is recognised by Ankara alone.
Speaking to reporters Thursday, Annan acknowledged that the situation was not an easy one to resolve. 
"The situation has been complicated further by the fact that Cyprus is now a member of the EU and Turkey is seeking to join the EU," a UN report quoted Annan as saying. 
"So, when you are negotiating and you have one country sitting in the club and the other seeking to join the club, it does not make it easier."
On Monday, a last-minute agreement helped defuse a major crisis between the EU and Turkey over the Cyprus issue. 
Nicosia had threatened to block Ankara's membership talks unless it normalises relations with Nicosia and implements a customs union protocol it signed last year.
Under the protocol, Turkey agreed to extend its customs union with the EU to all its new members, including Cyprus. 
But, in a separate declaration attached to the protocol, Ankara made it clear that this did not imply recognition of the Greek Cypriot administration. 
It has since refused to provide access to its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels and aircraft.
The Turkish authorities say they will only lift the ban once the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community has ended.
