15/06/2006
(Blic - 15/06/06;
UNMIK, UN News Centre, AP, AKI, Beta -14/06/06;
AP, UN News Centre - 06/06/06)
UNMIK deputy chief Steven Schook voiced optimism Wednesday (14 June) following what he described as "sincere" talks with Serbian officials on a number of important Kosovo-related issues.
"The purpose of these meetings was to start an honest and direct dialogue with the leaders in Belgrade with respect to returns, returnees and property," Schook told reporters.
"I am very optimistic.
We agreed to have follow-up meetings at the technical level.
We began a sincere dialogue in the best interest of all the displaced persons and truly in the best interest of the economic development of Kosovo."
The return of people displaced by the 1998-1999 ethnic conflict in Kosovo, particularly of Serb refugees, is a critical factor for determining the future status of the province.
Over 200,000 members of the Kosovo Serb and other minority groups have fled since 1999, fearing revenge attacks by ethnic Albanians, following the Milosevic regime's bloody crackdown and its subsequent withdrawal from the province after a NATO air campaign.
Some 100,000 ethnic Serbs remain.
Belgrade claims that only some 10,000 Serb refugees have returned to their homes over the past seven years, accusing UNMIK of failing to ensure the protection of that community.
Schook's visit came days after Serbian and Kosovo officials and UNMIK's outgoing head, Soren Jessen-Petersen, signed a protocol on 6 June, pledging to speed up the return of people displaced by the 1998-1999 conflict.
The sides agreed that ensuring the safety of returnees, returning property to the displaced and rebuilding their houses, and creating an environment that sustains returns are critical factors for the success of the process.
Schook's visit also coincided with the release of UN Secretary general Kofi Annan's latest report on Kosovo, which concludes that the Serbs and the Kosovo Albanians remain far apart in their positions.
Annan stressed that "flexibility, generosity and a spirit of compromise" on both sides are essential to progress in the negotiations.
Among the officials Schook talked to in Belgrade were the president of Serbia's Co-ordination Centre for Kosovo, Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, Serbian presidential adviser Dusan Batakovic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's political and foreign policy advisers.
Schook briefed them about the privatisation process in Kosovo and how private property issues are handled.
Raskovic-Ivic described her meeting with Schook as "very good and useful," adding that besides the privatisation and property issues, the two had discussed "the public transportation problem" in Kosovo.
Draskovic told Schook that Serbian authorities were ready to show "maximum flexibility" in the Kosovo status talks, Belgrade-based daily Blic reported on Thursday.
