17/04/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 17/04/2006
The solution to the Kosovo status issue must be one that contributes to regional stability and prosperity, the US envoy for Kosovo status talks, Frank Wisner, said during a weekend visit to the province.
He also reiterated Washington's view regarding timing.
"The US stance on Kosovo's status remains the same, a solution should be reached by the end of this year," Wisner said on Friday (14 April) after arriving in Pristina, where he met with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Agim Ceku and the Kosovo negotiating team.
Wisner praised the efforts made by the ethnic Albanian majority in reaching out to the Serb minority.
"I am very pleased to see this devotion towards a safer future for these communities, but also for the good understanding between majority and minorities, including also Serbs," he said.
On Saturday, the US diplomat visited the city of Prizren, where he urged all ethnic communities to look beyond the past in order to build a new Kosovo.
He called on Kosovo's people to undertake important steps in restoring interethnic confidence and reconciliation and make it clear that all citizens will have a peaceful and prosperous future.
During a stop in Mitrovica, Wisner called for collaboration between the northern and southern parts of the ethnically divided city.
He also urged Kosovo Serbs to take part in provisional institutions, and said he disagreed with Belgrade's recent demand that Serbs employed in those institutions give up their UN-paid salaries or lose funding provided by Serbia.
Wisner, who is on a diplomatic tour of the region, arrived in Kosovo after a stop in Skopje, where he met with Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski and discussed the issue of demarcating Macedonia's border with Kosovo.
On Monday, Wisner was due in Belgrade for meetings with Serbian President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
Meanwhile, a new incident at the weekend marred the already troubled interethnic relations in Mitrovica.
According to local media reports, two bombs were thrown at the house of a local Serb resident, Zorica Mitrovic.
One of the devices exploded, causing damage.
Kosovo police have launched a probe, while local Serb leader Nebojsa Jovic repeated a call on UNMIK to tighten sanctions against extremist attacks targeting the Serb minority.
