17/04/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 17/04/06
The software giant Microsoft appears interested in expanding its presence in Albania. 
An Albanian-language version of its Office XP system is being released for the first time, and the company is mulling over a plan to computerise the country's schools.
"We will need three up to five years to get profitable results from the Albanian market," the head of Microsoft's operations in Southeast Europe, Goran Radman, told reporters during a visit to Tirana last month. 
"This is a process that will start with the technical expertise and training. 
In the meantime we will work for reaching an agreement ... 
I am happy to announce that we have made the first steps," he said.
Radman urged Albanian authorities to safeguard Microsoft's copyrights and ensure fair play in the market, and said the country stood to benefit greatly from the introduction of new technology.
"Every service can be facilitated starting from the distribution of car licenses, birth certificates and tax payments," Radman said. 
"By applying our technology the authorities and the public will reduce the time for services."
At the beginning of this year, Albanian Minister of Education and Science Genc Pollo met in Lisbon with Microsoft chief Bill Gates. 
Among other things, they discussed a possible deal on computerising the country's education system and the creation of an "e-government" system meant to increase transparency of public administration and facilitate communication between citizens and the government.
"The Internet should be accessible in the schools. 
From the information we have, Albanian schools do not even have computers," Radman said, suggesting that the authorities boost public awareness and provide incentives such as tax breaks for computer purchases.
Currently, the number of computers bought per year in Albania varies from 12,000 to 17,000. 
In neighbouring Macedonia, the number is five times higher. 
"We would like to establish a centre of new technologies in Albania, a kind of a 'technological park'. 
Another idea of ours is building up a network among the Albanian diaspora and local companies in Albania for passing the information to the public," Radman said.
Microsoft is a US-based software corporation headquartered in Redmond, Washington, with 2005 global annual sales of close to $40 billion and about 64,000 employees in 85 countries and regions.
