11/08/2006
(Reuters, BBC, CNN, UPI, Independent, The Guardian, EUobserver, Sofia News Agency - 11/08/06;
AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, International Herald Tribune, VOA, RFE/RL, Ireland Online, Sofia News Agency - 10/08/06)
Praising the British authorities for thwarting a major attack on US-bound airplanes, European Commission Vice-President Franco Frattini called on Thursday (10 August) for stronger efforts in the fight against terrorism.
"Today's events show once more that terrorism is a continuous and global threat in Europe and in other parts of the world, which calls for a constant, concerted response from all European countries, institutions and peoples," Frattini, who is also the EU's justice, freedom and security commissioner, said in a statement.
He issued the statement hours after British police announced that they had foiled a terrorist plot that included multiple, simultaneous bombing attacks on airplanes flying between Britain and the United States.
"We are confident we have disrupted a plan by terrorists to cause untold death and destruction," said London's Metropolitan Police Deputy Commissioner Paul Stephenson.
"Put simply, this was intended to be mass murder on an unimaginable scale."
Leaked information indicated that the plotters were planning to use liquid explosives taken on board in hand luggage to bring down as many as ten airplanes in nearly simultaneous attacks.
United Airlines, American Airlines, Continental Airlines and possibly some non-US carriers were said to be among the targeted airlines, whose trans-Atlantic flights usually carry more than 300 passengers.
Twenty-four British-born Muslim men, some of Pakistani origin, were arrested in overnight raids, officials said on Thursday.
The Bank of England has already frozen the assets of 19 of the suspects, aged 17 to 35.
In addition, Pakistani security forces have arrested two British men of Pakistani origin in connection with the alleged plot.
US intelligence services reportedly have provided British authorities with intercepts of the group's communications.
British Home Secretary John Reid voiced confidence Thursday that all of the key figures involved in the plot have been arrested.
According to some reports, however, five suspects may be on the loose.
Britain raised its alert level to "critical," while the United States raised the terror threat level to "severe," or red, for all incoming flights from Britain.
London's Heathrow airport, one of the busiest in the world, effectively was closed to incoming flights.
Flight security measures were tightened immediately.
Passengers travelling from Britain were not allowed to take hand luggage on board, except for tickets, passports and a few other essentials.
Hundreds of flights across Europe were cancelled or delayed, disrupting air travel across the continent.
Several Southeast European countries were also affected.
All flights from Athens to airports in the London area -- including four British Airways flights, three Olympic Airlines flights and two by easyJet -- were canceled on Thursday.
Cyprus and Bulgaria have stepped up the security measures at their airports.
Flight delays were expected to continue through the weekend.
