11/07/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 11/07/06
The World Bank signed a $15m loan deal with the Albanian government last week to help fund a key education project in the country. 
The 20-year loan, which will be disbursed by the World Bank's soft-loan wing IDA, will co-finance the implementation of the Education Excellence and Equity Project (EEE-P), which is worth $75m.
The other donors to the project are the European Investment Bank and the Council of Europe Development Bank, which are providing $15m each, and the Albanian government, which is contributing $30m.
Part of Albania's 2004-2015 National Education Strategy, the EEE-P will serve as a road map to help strengthen the sector, the World Bank office in Albania said. 
"Given Albania's aspirations to maintain its growth, narrow regional disparities and join the EU, the main challenge in the education sector is to develop a system and institutions which prepare school graduates to function effectively in labour markets, become active citizens and contribute to strengthening Albania's competitiveness," the Bank said.
The EEE-P has four priority areas. 
Some $10m have been earmarked for strengthening leadership, management and governance of the education system. 
Another $26m will go towards better conditions for learning and teaching, while improving educational infrastructure has been allotted $32m. 
The fourth area -- paving the way for higher education reform -- will receive $7m.
Efforts to reorganise Albania's education were first launched in 1990, with a proposal to extend compulsory schooling from eight to ten years. 
The following year, however, a major economic and political crisis in Albania, and the ensuing breakdown of public order, plunged the school system into chaos. 
Extreme shortages of textbooks and supplies had a devastating effect on school operations, prompting Italy and other countries to provide material assistance.
Through the years, many teachers relocated from rural to urban areas, leaving village schools understaffed and swelling the ranks of the unemployed in the cities and towns -- in all, about 2,000 teachers fled the country. 
In the late 1990s, many schools were rebuilt to improve learning conditions. 
Most of the improvements occurred in the larger cities, such as Tirana, which suffers from overcrowded classrooms.
Public and private schools have now begun introducing computers, but many schools still lack basic supplies for laboratory classes. 
To improve the system, UNICEF is supporting new teaching-learning strategies, such as interactive and child-centred methodologies. 
A total of 200 teachers have been trained in these strategies, leading to improved performance in math and reading among 1,500 children with learning difficulties.
