14/06/2006
(World Bank -- 13/06/06 - 14/06/06)
The World Bank approved on Tuesday (13 June) a $58.5m loan to Romania, intended to help the country address the needs of some of its most vulnerable citizens and facilitate its smooth EU accession.
The loan will finance actions envisioned under a Social Inclusion Project (SIP), developed under the Bank's new Country Partnership Strategy for Romania.
Its implementation will improve the living conditions and social inclusion of some of the Balkan nation's most disadvantaged groups:
the Roma community, children at high risk, youth over 18 leaving the state child protection system and people with disabilities.
These groups were identified as socially vulnerable under a document Bucharest signed with the European Commission a year ago.
The project also envisions measures to mitigate the risks for victims of domestic violence, seen as also needing assistance.
The Roma, accounting for 2.5 per cent of Romania's population of 22 million people, are one of the poorest groups in the country and particularly at risk.
The infant mortality rate for the group is 4 times higher than the national average, the Bank said in a statement Tuesday, announcing the loan approval.
With only 13 per cent of the members of this community officially employed, nearly three-quarters of them live in poverty.
Among the general population, some 30 per cent of children under the age of 15 are poor.
World Bank figures also show that 5,000 of Romania's institutionalised children leave the facilities each year as they turn 18, though lacking a place to live, a job or social experience.
The protection system for the over 400,000 registered people with disabilities is sub-standard, the Bank said.
Three ministries and two agencies will implement the actions planned under the four-component SIP until 2010.
Nearly a quarter of the SIP money will be used for grants to underpin small infrastructure projects and to fund the creation of community-based services in about 100 Roma settlements.
In addition, poor Roma communities will be assisted in preparing projects for accessing EU structural funds.
The project also envisions actions to increase access to pre-school education for children aged 3-6, including children from disadvantaged groups such as the Roma.
Measures to be supported under this component include the rehabilitation of early childhood education units, the construction and furnishing of new facilities in communities with a high percentage of Roma, and staff training.
More than half of the funding will underpin different social assistance programmes for people with disabilities, youth at risk and victims of domestic violence.
Finally, $1m of the project funding will be provided to one of the project's implementing agencies, the National Agency for the Roma, and its eight regional branches.
