12/05/2006
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 12/05/06
Established in 1956, the Eurovision Song Contest (ESC) is an annual televised contest with participants from numerous countries whose national television broadcasters are members of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU).
The contest is broadcast on television and radio throughout Europe, in selected countries around the world, and on the Internet.
The 51st ESC will take place in Athens, thanks to Helena Paparizou and her song "My Number One", which placed first in last year's contest in Kiev.
The Greek broadcaster ERT is hosting the contest for the first time.
The contest theme for this year, "Feel the Rhythm", is tied into Greek tourism's "Feel the Myth" slogan.
This theme will be the basis for the show's souvenirs, which will emphasise Greece's historical significance, as well as highlight the country's modern appeal to tourists.
Although the show is expensive to put on, the host country also stands to reap impressive profits.
This year's contestants are from 37 countries, and will perform their songs in the semifinal and final nights.
As major financial contributors to the contest, France, Germany, Spain and the UK are granted direct entry into the final, bypassing the semifinal stage.
The winner and the nine highest-scoring countries from the previous year's contest also head straight for the final.
This year they are Greece, Croatia, Denmark, Israel, Latvia, Malta, Moldova, Norway, Romania and Switzerland.
Balkan countries have had an important place in the event in the recent years.
Despite their clouded past, when it comes to music the countries vote for each other.
The winner of the ESC is chosen by members of the public who phone in their votes.
Albania, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Bulgaria and Romania are among the participants from the Southeast European region this year.
Serbia-Montenegro withdrew from the ESC this year following a row over the country's national entry.
A Montenegrin panel of judges was accused of tactical voting earlier this month during a competition to decide the official song for the contest.
The vote saw Montenegro's "No Name" chosen as the winner, but Serbia called for the vote to be done over.
When Montenegro refused to agree to a new contest, no solution could be found and the country withdrew.
Contestants have been promoting their songs for months.
They visit different countries and perform the songs on national TV, making the public familiar with the material that will be presented in Athens.
Maria Menounos and Sakis Rouvas will host the semifinals and final.
Rouvas is well-known as the man who brought Greece a third place win at the contest with "Shake it", and Menounos is an actress who starred with Sean Connery in " James Bond 007:
From Russia with Love".
ESC winners have included a number of well-known artists who went on to achieve success around Europe.
The best known were Sweden's ABBA, who won the contest in 1974 with their song "Waterloo".
