12/09/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 12/09/06
The trial of those charged with the assassination of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic has restarted at the Special Court in Belgrade, following the appointment of a new presiding judge, Nata Mesarevic. 
She replaces Marko Kljajevic, who asked to be relieved of duty on 1 September, just months before the proceedings were to end. 
He did not give a reason for his request.
With a new judge taking over, the trial -- which originally got under way in December 2003 -- had to begin anew. 
This does not mean that all the witnesses and forensic experts will have to testify again. 
Their previous statements will be used as evidence. 
However, Kljajevic's withdrawal has meant further delays in what has already been a drawn-out process.
Djindjic, 50, was gunned down by sniper fire as he stepped out of his car in front of his office in Belgrade. 
The pro-Western reformist played a key role in the campaign that led to the ousting of Slobodan Milosevic in October 2000. 
As prime minister, he was instrumental in Milosevic's extradition to The Hague. 
This, and the crackdown on organised crime he initiated, enraged nationalists loyal to the former regime.
So far, some 100 witnesses and experts have testified in the case. 
A turning point seemed to have come in May 2004, when prime suspect Milorad "Legija" Ulemek turned himself in to police. 
However, Ulemek's testimony shed little light on the plot to murder Djindjic. 
He claimed he knew nothing about the murder and had been hiding in a house in Belgrade for nearly 14 months.
A second important development was the arrest of a highly ranked member of the "Zemun Clan" criminal gang, Dejan "Bagzi" Milenkovic, in Thessaloniki. 
He was extradited to Serbia in February 2005, but initially refused to defend himself at the trial, claiming to be afraid of "powerful people".
Milenkovic later changed his mind, provided a detailed statement to the prosecutor, and was granted witness associate status. 
His testimony could be a major breakthrough.
In June 2006, justice suffered a blow with the torture and murder of another witness, former Zemun Clan member Vuk Vukojevic. 
He had refused to enter the state's witness protection programme and therefore had no police protection.
A cigarette butt with the DNA of one of the escaped clan members was found next to his body, and police suspect that Vukojevic was killed because he agreed to co-operate with the court. 
The testimony he provided prior to his murder will be used in the ongoing process.
