11/07/2006
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Novi Sad – 11/07/06
During a visit on Thursday (6 July) to the EXIT festival in Novi Sad, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn got into the groove by quoting The Clash's song "Should I stay or should I go?"
Speaking at a roundtable on the visa issue -- "Myths and legends about White Schengen List -- When are we going to travel like normal people?" -- Rehn used the lyrics to describe the current EU integration situation in Serbia.
The forum, hosted by former Serbian Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic, included current Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic, British journalist Tim Judah and Serbian EU accession adviser Milica Djilas.
Joining the relaxed atmosphere of the Petrovaradin fortress, with loud music coming from a nearby cafe, Rehn was kind but firm when he explained the conditions that the Balkan countries must meet to get on the White Schengen List.
Rehn said that he is aware that 70 per cent of Serbian youth have never travelled abroad, and that "getting a single visa can be an expensive bureaucratic nightmare".
Rehn assured the participants that Finland -- which currently holds the rotating EU presidency -- is committed to concluding a visa facilitation agreement this year.
If that happens, some groups, such as students, professors and researchers, will have lighter requirements for visas.
Rehn also said that he would see that visa costs stay at 35 euros.
"My goal will be to convince the EU that young people from the Balkans have to travel and get an education in the EU, that it is very good both for them and the EU, and a key for Balkans democratisation," Rehn said.
Draskovic and Ivanic, however, said the EU is making it too hard for Balkan states to meet the terms for entry onto the White Schengen List.
The EU has "double standards" on the issue, Draskovic said.
The BiH foreign minister listed the requirements his country has fulfilled.
"The EU asked [BiH] for a unique passport for Bosnian citizens, we did that.
Then they asked for readmission deals to be signed with each EU country, we did that.
Afterwards, they wanted a single deal to be signed with EU as a whole.
Then, we had to issue new personal documents, on which we spent 40m euros.
Now, it is all about biometric data, which will cost us another 100m euros and two years of work," Ivanic said.
He asked EU officials to "open [up] towards the Balkans and they will see that we're not such bad guys and that we have something to be proud of".
Svilanovic said the EU's main concern, in his opinion, is that Balkan countries will export crime if the visa restrictions are eased.
But does the visa regime pose a real obstacle for criminals seeking to enter EU member countries?
Not really, he said, citing, as an example, the suspects currently on trial for the assassination of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
"They all had Schengen visas in their passports.
And they got them legally.
Visas will not stop the criminals, but they are causing problems for nice people who just want to take their ladies to Paris," Svilanovic said.
