12/05/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 12/05/06
Kosovo is several years away from meeting the requirements for integration into the EU, according to the bloc's special envoy for the status talks, Stefan Lehne.
During a two-day visit to the province that started on Tuesday (9 May), Lehne met with government officials and political leaders to discuss economic issues and Kosovo's long-term prospects.
"It is evident that Kosovo is several years away from accomplishing its integration objectives.
[The province's] perspective is its integration into EU, but at the current pace Kosovo will have to wait," Lehne said.
The envoy's remarks followed a speech the day before by Prime Minister Agim Ceku, who said Kosovo would turn its focus to EU accession after its final status is resolved.
While acknowledging the road to EU integration would not be easy, Ceku expressed confidence that it would not be long.
"We will accelerate this road, and I believe that very soon Kosovo will be a member of the European family," Ceku said.
"Kosovo's people are a European people who see themselves in the European family."
Regardless of whether Kosovo's EU accession comes sooner or later, Lehne urged local leaders in Pristina, including Democratic Party of Kosovo head Hashim Thaci, to "work harder on issues related to the status".
"I strongly encouraged [Thaci], as well as the entire negotiations team, to continue to be constructive in this process and to provide recommendations for the next meeting's agenda in order to make sure that minorities' interests will be taken into account in the future," he said.
Thaci said he spoke with Lehne about the further presence of the international community in Kosovo after the status is defined.
"It was a common evaluation that Kosovo needs international supervision and civic support," Thaci said.
On Wednesday, NATO announced that it would be streamlining the KFOR troops in the province to respond faster to threats of interethnic violence as the status decision nears.
A NATO spokesman said that in the next five days, KFOR would complete the switch from a system of four brigades to the five task forces that were established last year.
In addition, UNMIK has restructured the judiciary sector's role in the province, turning over responsibilities to the province's newly created ministries of justice and internal affairs, said Neeraj Singh, the UN spokesman in Kosovo.
The mission also plans to relinquish some duties to a possible EU-led mission once the decision is made on the province's status.
