13/06/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 13/06/06
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen announced on Monday (12 June) that he would be leaving his post at the end of this month. 
"After almost two years on the job, it is time for me to rejoin my family in Washington, DC," he said.
With direct talks between Belgrade and Pristina under way and the question of Kosovo's status to be addressed this summer, Jessen-Petersen is leaving at a crucial time for the province. 
He expressed confidence, however, that the process is on track.
"When I arrived in Kosovo, I stated my belief that there will be no normalisation, no stabilisation in the Western Balkans unless the issue of Kosovo is resolved -- the last piece in the puzzle taking the region from the conflicts of the 1990s to a peaceful and prosperous future," the former Danish foreign minister said. 
"My experience here only strengthened that belief."
The course towards a democratic and multiethnic society is in the good hands of the people and the elected political leaders of Kosovo, he said. 
"The international community, led by UNMIK and KFOR, will be there to continue its support," he added. 
Jessen-Petersen arrived in Kosovo on 15 August 2004, and served longer than any of his predecessors. 
During his tenure, Kosovo's political institutions successfully navigated a series of challenges, including the resignation of former Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj and his voluntary travel to The Hague tribunal, the illness and death of President Ibrahim Rugova, and a political reshuffle that brought Prime Minister Agim Ceku into office earlier this year.
Elections in October 2004 were judged to be free and fair. 
The security situation, tense in the months preceding Jessen-Petersen's appointment, has improved markedly over the past two years.
"It has been a privilege and an honour for me to work with and for the people of Kosovo," said Jessen-Petersen. 
"I am very grateful for the support of my partners, including the institutional leaders, party and religious leaders from all communities, local leaders, women leaders, and many, many others."
"My frequent trips throughout Kosovo brought me into contact with many ordinary men, women, and young people of all ethnicities, and they have given me a great deal of hope for the future of Kosovo," he said.
Those people showed him that reconciliation is possible, that they share the wish to build a prosperous and tolerant society, and that they are courageous and prepared to look towards the future and away from the past, he said.
"I have often been asked whether I would be the last [UNMIK chief] to serve in Kosovo. 
I can say that, whereas I opened the last chapter of UNMIK's mission in Kosovo, I am confident that my successor will close it," he said.
