19/04/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Bjelovar -- 19/04/10 Photos by Roberto Aquillotto for Southeast European Times
It is a quiet morning in Veliko Korenovo, a typical rural Croatian village in the northeast. 
This area, centered around the city of Bjelovar, is the country's breadbasket, the heart of its fertile farmlands.
Behind the houses, tractors begin plowing fields from dawn. 
A barking dog announces visitors, but the cows are lazing around. 
It is a beautiful sunny spring day with cottony clouds above. 
The village seems serene. 
Not so. 
The local farmers are ill at ease, discontented with their daily routines.
In early March, many of them participated in demonstrations against government plans to cut state funds allocated for agriculture. 
The government has been trying to adapt to EU standards as Croatia prepares for accession.
There are more than 36,000 farmers and agriculture workers in Croatia with a yearly production average of 1.7 billion euros and annual subsidies worth 650m euros. 
Expenditures are often higher than income. 
Farmers fear that free market competition will be the end of small, family owned farms as has been the trend in other countries.
"I have never applied for state subsidies, I did everything on my own. 
I never wanted anything from others ... 
I always paid everything in cash. 
But not anymore. 
I don't know how long can I hold on," farmer Tomo Zgela told Southeast European Times.
"What they [the government] promised, they should deliver to the people. 
Only once I tried to get subsidies, but when they asked me to fill out all the forms, I got into an argument with them and decided to stay away," he added.
Zgela uses three tractors on his field of wheat. 
But he cannot afford to work only in agriculture. 
The costs are too high and the money offered for his crop isn't enough to pay for fuel to keep the tractors running.
"After this year, I'm done," Zela said, trying to sound calm while petting his dog.
"Last year the price of corn was 0.2 euro initially and then it dropped to 0.05 euro. 
I lost the money before I even started working. 
I don't know what to expect for the coming year," he said.
Josip Petin, a veteran Bjelovar farmer, has watched the traditional way of life go sour. 
"What you produce, you cannot sell. 
The work is not a problem for the farmers; the problem is to get the money for the work. 
I don't think it is something new. 
We had the same problems in agriculture before, in this country and the former [Yugoslavia]," he said.
Petin and his son work the farm together and the older man supports the protests. 
"Protests are the only way to achieve something and force the state to do its part. 
Still for farmers as small as we are, I am afraid there is nothing left."
His son, Karlo Petin, helps his father grow barley and wheat, but does not see his future on the farm. 
Not because he would not like to follow in his father's steps, but because he cannot afford it.
"Small farmers will be destroyed. 
Only the big ones will survive. 
We can't get back the money we invested in planting and harvesting the fields. 
I have to maintain a company job in order to survive and pay for expenses," Karlo said.
Their neighbour, Ljubomir Sabic, has 300 pigs, a vineyard and vegetable fields. 
He is hopeful that the farmers' action has made a difference.
"The protests had to happen," he said. 
"We needed to let the government know that we exist and that we are the backbone of the economy. 
Nobody can ignore the farmers and our villages because we are not that small."
A pioneer in horse breeding from Croatia's northeast, Miljenko Obranovic, has five horses in a business that employs his entire family. 
Because horse breeding does not bring in much income, all of the Obranovics have day jobs. 
Miljenko laughed about state subsidies for horse breeding, as they are minimal and paid in so many installments that it is like receiving nothing at all.
"We have a difficult time here in small villages. 
Liberal capitalism can't work here as we are a small country. 
More powerful countries could not make the free market work and it is even more difficult for the villages." Obranovic said.
Because he loves horses, breeding them is not just a job.
During the protests, farmers tried to block roads with their tractors and gathered in front of the agriculture ministry in Zagreb. 
The agreement with the government was reached before most of the 2,000 in the tractor brigade reached the capital.
An accord with Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Rural Development Petar Cobankovic was reached on March 8th.
At the press conference after the deal, Cobankovic said it was not an easy decision to make as the EU refuses to increase agricultural state subsidies and the financial crisis in Croatia does not allow any expansion of the state budget.
"We need to work together, respecting each other. 
As a responsible government, we could not promise something we were ultimately unable to deliver," Cobankovic said. 
"The agreement is not a promise, but a real thing."
Under the agreement, farmers won 86% of payment incentives promised for spring sowing in 2009 and 2010 -- 60% will be paid in cash in equal installments. 
The first installment was received by March 31st and the second on April 15th.
The remaining 26% refers to 83 euros per hectare that will be paid in intermediary products. 
The remaining 28m euros from the 2008 and 2009 spring sowing will be paid in full by June 2011.
