13/10/2006
(Reuters, Bloomberg, FT, The Guardian, Independent - 13/10/06;
AP, AFP, BBC, The New York Times, BBC, AKI, RFE/RL, Swedish Academy, Nobel Foundation - 12/10/06)
One of Turkey's most famous living authors, who narrowly escaped prosecution earlier this year, was awarded the most prestigious literary prize in the world Thursday (October 12th).
Announcing the Nobel Prize in Literature for 2006, the Swedish Academy cited Pamuk's "quest for the melancholic soul of his native city" and said he had "discovered new symbols for the clash and interlacing of cultures".
Born in Istanbul in 1952 to a family of industrialists, Pamuk first wanted to become a painter.
After studying architecture at the Istanbul Technical University for three years, he switched to journalism, receiving a degree from Istanbul University.
However, he never practiced journalism, choosing instead to become a writer and give up everything else.
In 1982 -- seven years after he retreated into a flat to write -- his first novel, "Cevdet Bey and Sons", marked the start of his literary career.
It was a family saga describing the transition from the traditional Ottoman to a more Western lifestyle.
A year later, "The House of Silence" was published, followed by "The White Castle" in 1985.
Five years later, it became Pamuk's first novel to be translated into English.
Pamuk's fourth novel, "The Black Book," appeared in Turkish in 1990 and in English in 1994, when his next book, "The New Life," was published.
"My Name is Red," which was published in 1998 and translated into English three years later, marked the writer's breakthrough onto the international literary scene.
The British daily Independent described it as a "pivotal book, which … could conclusively establish Pamuk as one of the world's finest living writers".
The Swedish Academy's announcement on Thursday found Pamuk in New York, where he is currently a visiting researcher at Columbia University.
The author, who is Turkey's first Nobel Prize winner, said he accepted the award with joy.
For him the prize was both "a celebration of the Turkish language, of Turkish culture, which I'm a part of," as well as "recognition of my 32 years of humble devotion to the great art of the novel," he told the British daily The Guardian.
In his home country, reactions were mixed.
Some expressed pride that Pamuk, who was the first Muslim writer to publicly condemn the 1989 fatwa against Salman Rushdie, had been awarded the Nobel.
"It is great happiness for us all that a Turkish writer has won such a prestigious award," said Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul.
Prominent Turkish author Yasar Kemal sent a congratulatory note to his fellow writer.
"I'm so happy that you got the award that you had deserved.
I believe that you will write new novels with the same passion," he said.
"I have no doubt that you will stick to your beliefs."
But Kemal Kerincsiz, who headed a group of nationalist lawyers that sought to prosecute Pamuk on charges of "insulting Turkishness" said he was ashamed of the Swedish Academy's decision.
The prize was awarded to Pamuk because he "belittled" Turkish values and for his "recognition of the (Armenian) genocide", Kerincsiz said.
The lawyers were angry over remarks made by the writer in an interview with a Swiss newspaper.
Pamuk told the paper that nobody else in Turkey dared talk about the 30,000 Kurds and 1 million Armenians killed in his country.
The charges were eventually dropped.
