12/05/2006
(AP, HINA, AFP, Official Web Site of the European People's Party-European Democrats - 11/05/06)
Voicing hope that the European Commission (EC) will be able to open talks on justice, freedom and security with Croatia in early 2007, a top Brussels official said on Thursday (11 May) that the EU would assist the country with preparations in this area.
Croatia hopes to join by 2009.
It opened membership talks with the Union on 3 October 2005;
the first stage of the negotiations process, known as the screening, began 17 days later.
During this phase, the country's legislation is evaluated for compatibility with the Union's acquis communitaire.
Screening for the negotiating chapter on justice, freedom and security was completed in late February and the EC is expected to soon complete the relevant reports.
This will allow officials in Brussels to open detailed talks with Zagreb on this chapter in early 2007, EC Vice President Franco Frattini said on Thursday, following talks with Croatian Interior Minister Ivica Kirin.
"We intend to speed up the process paving the way to start concrete negotiations," the AP quoted Frattini, who is also EU Commissioner for Freedom, Justice and Security, as telling reporters in Brussels.
The chapter on justice, freedom and security covers a wide range of issues, including asylum applications, visa regimes and migrations.
Border protection, the fight against terrorism, judicial co-operation and co-operation among countries' customs officials and police are also included in this chapter.
The EU will help Croatia in its fight against organised crime, corruption and drug trafficking, as well as in border protection, Croatian news agency HINA quoted Frattini as saying.
Concrete measures the Union would assist in include the recruitment and training of border guards and the development of a "comprehensive strategy" for fighting organised crime.
Frattini said he would also push for an agreement between Croatia and the EU's anti-narcotics agency to improve co-operation in the fight against drug trafficking.
Kirin noted that Croatia is implementing measures to establish the Schengen border regime and had asked the EU for assistance in providing equipment for border police and protecting seaports against criminal gangs and terrorists, HINA reported.
Also on Thursday, Europe's conservatives expressed their strong support for Croatia's bid to join the EU by 2009.
"We are supporting strongly the government of Prime Minister Ivo Sanader and although we know that the timetable is certainly ambitious, we support this," Hans-Gert Poettering, the leader of the European People's Party (EPP) said in Croatia's southern coastal town of Split.
He was speaking at the opening of a two-day meeting of the EPP and the European Democrats, which together form the largest political grouping in the European Parliament.
Croatia is viewed as a model case by other countries in the Balkans who are watching developments closely, said former EU Agriculture Commissioner Franz Fischler, who currently serves as adviser to Sanader on the accession talks.
"If everyone in Europe has the same attitude about Croatia and our [EU] perspective like the EPP-ED and Poettering, then we have nothing to be afraid of," the AFP quoted Sanader as saying.
