11/09/2006
(AFP, BBC, EuroNews, The Guardian, The New York Times, Bloomberg, FT - 11/09/06;
AP, Reuters, DPA, AFP, BBC, VOA, RFE/RL, B92 - 10/09/06)
Hours after the polls closed, Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic said on Monday (11 September) that his centre-left coalition won an absolute majority in the country's first parliamentary elections since it voted to end its state union with Serbia in May.
"I can say with certainty that we have 42 and that we are fighting for the 43rd mandate," the AFP quoted him as telling supporters in Podgorica.
With 97 per cent of votes counted in Sunday's poll, observers from the Centre for Monitoring said the ruling coalition, including Djukanovic's Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) and the Social Democratic Party (SDP), had won 41 of the seats in the country's 81-seat parliament.
According to another group, the Centre for Democratic Transition (CDT), also said the DPS-SDP coalition was set to take 41 seats.
The CDT observers said a three-party opposition coalition led by Predrag Bulatovic's Socialist People's Party had won 11 seats, just behind the Serbian List, which appears to have won 12 seats.
The Movement for Change, a former NGO that recently registered as a political party, won 11 seats.
Five smaller parties will share the remaining six seats and coalitions, the CDT estimates suggest.
Sunday's elections took place less than four months after Montenegro's independence referendum.
On 21 May, more than 85 per cent of the country's approximately 485,000 eligible voters went to the polls.
This time around, the voter turnout did not exceed an estimated 66.5 per cent.
Djukanovic, 44, who has served alternately as Montenegro's prime minister and president over the past 15 years and who led a strong pro-independence campaign ahead of the May referendum, described his latest victory as "a triumph for pro-European policy in Montenegro".
He also pledged to step up the reforms needed for the country's Euro-Atlantic integration and to remain focused on attracting much needed foreign investments.
"Montenegro is firm in its European path and has the authorities that … can make crucial steps towards European integration," Djukanovic said on Sunday.
"Tomorrow we will turn our attention with renewed energy to new successes, to make Montenegro even more democratic, more economically developed, with more jobs and higher wages."
On Monday, the OSCE said in a press release that the vote was held largely in line with democratic standaards, but cautioned that several reappearing challenges remain to be addressed.
Problems that surfaced included allegations of vote buying, complaints of pressure on voters, unbalanced media coverage and changes made to the election law after the vote was called, the OSCE said.
On the whole, however, "the people of the world's newest country can be proud that their first elections since gaining independence meet international electoral standards," said OSCE parliamentary delegation head Joao Soares.
Official results were expected later on Monday.
