11/05/2006
(Reuters, NATO, UNMIK, KFOR - 10/05/06; UPI - 08/05/06; UPI - 28/04/06)
NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and members of the North Atlantic Council (NAC) arrived on a one-day visit to Kosovo on Thursday (11 May). 
The NAC is the Alliance's senior decision-making body, comprising the 26 NATO permanent representatives and chaired by de Hoop Scheffer.
During their visit to Pristina, the NATO officials are scheduled to meet with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Agim Ceku, local officials and UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen, the Alliance said in a statement Wednesday.
With UN-led talks on Kosovo's final status currently under way, de Hoop Scheffer said on Monday that KFOR would protect UN-supported decisions on the province's future and would deal with any attempts to stir up violence or resist them.
Technically still part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict. 
The majority of the Kosovo Albanians, accounting for 90 per cent of the province's population of 2 million, favour independence from Serbia.
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's special envoy for the Kosovo talks, Martti Ahtisaari, voiced hope this week that a solution to the province's future could be reached by the end of this year, though negotiations between the Serbs and the Kosovo Albanians have not made much progress.
Meeting in Sofia in late April, NATO foreign ministers agreed that the number of KFOR troops in Kosovo would remain unchanged until the province's future is decided. 
The NATO-led peacekeeping force currently numbers some 17,000 troops from 37 countries, including 12 nations that are not members of the Alliance.
While in Kosovo, the NAC members also are scheduled to visit KFOR's Task Forces and remaining Multinational Brigade, according to the NATO statement.
On the eve of the visit, KFOR said on Wednesday it had streamlined its command and control structure in a bid to improve the force's capacity to respond faster to possible ethnic violence ahead of the eventual status solution. 
Peacekeepers came under strong criticism over their response to ethnic riots in mid-March 2004, which left 19 people dead and scores wounded. 
The outbreak of violence was the worst since June 1999.
During a regular UNMIK press briefing in Pristina on Wednesday, KFOR chief spokesman Colonel Pio Sabetta said that the latest reform steps, initiated in December 2005, would be completed within the next five days. 
As a result of the restructuring, the current KFOR system of four brigades will be replaced by five "task forces".
This will allow the KFOR commander to "quickly move forces from one place to another in response to any threat, while NATO and contributing nations are able to reinforce their troops quickly," Reuters quoted Sabetta as saying.
