11/05/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb- 11/05/06
Croatian drivers are feeling the pinch of higher gas prices.
Although Prime Minister Ivo Sanader convinced the national oil monopoly INA not to raise the price of the most popular gas derivate, Super 95 -- used by about 70 per cent of drivers -- prices of the rest of the fuel grades are up by as much as 2.6 per cent.
While the trend reflects world market conditions, many Croatians also feel INA may be taking advantage of its monopoly status.
Croatia differs from the rest of the region, where the industry is less centralised and prices are more in sync with market dynamics.
Gas currently costs more in Croatia than in any other part of the Balkans except Bosnia and Herzegovina.
While in most countries, it is not unusual to find different prices at different pump stations, in Croatia all stations offer the price set by INA.
Sanader's government has criticised the monopoly for having "unreasonably raised prices without consulting the government or the economy ministry".
According to Sanader, INA simply forwarded its new prices to the ministry without any prior discussion -- a break, he says, from the established practice.
Last month, the prime minister cut off a state trip to Poland to address the burgeoning crisis over the issue.
For its part, INA insists that it is behaving in accordance with regulations and that the prices have hit their maximum.
The company refuses to accept blame for the price hikes, arguing that it cannot sell gas for less than it costs to import it.
If gas prices continue to rise, inflation in Croatia -- currently 3.6 per cent -- could hit 4 per cent.
Sanader has vowed that his government will do more to control the the situation, through flexible government spending and by finding a good sale price for INA, which is in an early stage of the privatisation process.
He also says his administration will continue to monitor international trends and make sure domestic prices stay in compliance.
