13/06/2006
(AP, AFP, DPA, UPI, AKI, HINA, Makfax, Sofia News Agency, CTK, MTI, SEE Security Monitor, Austrian EU Presidency Web Site - 12/06/06)
The EU on Monday (12 June) became the first international organisation to formally recognise Montenegro as an independent state, giving the green light to the bloc's 25 member nations to establish bilateral diplomatic relations with Podgorica.
"The EU and its member states have therefore decided that they will develop further their relations with the Republic of Montenegro as a sovereign, independent state," the foreign ministers said in a statement following their meeting in Luxembourg. 
They urged Serbia and Montenegro "to pursue a direct and constructive dialogue on their future relations". 
Noting Brussels' readiness to support the dialogue between the two countries, the top diplomats also reaffirmed the "European perspective of the Western Balkans".
In the Montenegrin independence referendum on 21 May, 55.5 per cent of eligible voters backed the end of the Adriatic republic's loose union with Serbia. 
On 3 June, the Montenegrin Parliament followed up with a declaration proclaiming independence.
Serbia has yet to formally recognise Montenegro as a sovereign state, although its parliament has adopted a decision defining the Republic of Serbia as the state union's successor.
The EU foreign ministers' decision came hours after Croatia became the first former Yugoslav republic to recognise independent Montenegro. 
Worldwide, the first nation to offer recognition was Iceland, which did so on 8 June. 
Switzerland followed suit the next day and Russia's recognition came on Sunday.
Bulgaria, Latvia, Malta, Macedonia and Turkey recognised Montenegro's sovereignty on Monday. 
They were joined by three EU member states: Austria, the Czech Republic and Hungary.
"The Czech Republic believes that Montenegro will become an active member of the international community and will defend the principles of peace, stability and democracy in the world," the Czech Foreign Ministry said in a statement.
All countries that have already announced their recognition of independent Montenegro have said they will now move to establish bilateral diplomatic ties with Podgorica. 
Bulgaria and Macedonia have already announced plans to open embassies in the Montenegrin capital.
The United States also reportedly took steps Monday to officially recognise Montenegro as an independent state. 
According to the Montenegrin news agency Mina, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has written a letter to Montenegrin Foreign Minister Miodrag Vlahovic.
"I am pleased to inform you that the US government recognises the Republic of Montenegro as a sovereign and independent state," Mina quoted the letter as saying. 
It also reportedly urges Podgorica to "rise to the challenges" of protecting liberty and making a positive contribution to the community of nations.
