13/06/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 13/06/06
Albania's ruling coalition and members of the opposition left their political differences at home and travelled to Luxembourg for Monday's (12 June) signing of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU.
The agreement, considered a milestone on Albania's path to EU membership, outlines a set of political and economic criteria that authorities in Tirana are expected to meet.
"We welcome Albania's continued progress in the reforms, including on fighting corruption and organised crime," said Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. 
"Nonetheless Albania still faces difficult reform challenges. 
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement indeed provides a solid framework for Albania to address these challenges and for the EU to support it doing so."
Sustained implementation of the agreement will be essential for further formal steps towards EU entry to be considered, Rehn added.
Prime Minister Sali Berisha, meanwhile, described the SAA signing as a "great obligation for all Albanians" and said it marked the end of the country's 15-year transition from communism.
"This is a contract that we sign with the EU. 
It is the most serious contract we have ever signed in our history, with the nations of this continent. 
Our obligation is to refer to the document punctually. 
I guarantee all the Albanian citizens that the government remains open for co-operation with all the political parties, groups of interests and with citizens. 
We will carry out the reforms and implement the SAA," Berisha said.
Besides Berisha, Foreign Minister Besnik Mustafaj and other cabinet members, the Albanian delegation included Socialist Party Parliamentary Group chairman Pandeli Majko , former Integration Minister Ermelinda Meksi and other representatives of the opposition. 
The display of unity was rare for Albanian politics, media reports said.
The Albanian Assembly held a special session to welcome the agreement, while the signing was broadcast live on a large screen at the parliament building. 
Pupils from different schools around Tirana joined the ceremonies.
The SAA with Albania comes five years after Brussels signed similar agreements with Croatia and Macedonia. 
Both those countries have now become formal candidates for EU membership.
Albania is expected to profit economically from the deal. 
However, what citizens look most forward to is the chance for a liberalised visa regime and free movement.
The Albanian Parliament and the European Commission (EC) likely would ratify the agreement in July. 
It also must be ratified by all 25-member states of the EU. 
The process is expected to take at least two years.
