10/07/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 10/07/06
The winners of last week's parliamentary elections in Macedonia -- VMRO-DPMNE and its partners in the For a Better Macedonia coalition -- have begun the process of assembling a coalition.
The party scored a decisive victory over the incumbent Social Democrat-led coalition, which garnered only 32 seats to the opposition's 44. 
According to a spokesman, VMRO-DPMNE already has reached a preliminary deal that would give it 61 votes in the 120-member parliament. 
Talks are continuing.
So far, the proposed coalition consists of VMRO-DPMNE, the Democratic Renewal of Macedonia, the New Social Democratic Party, the Democratic Development of Albania party and possibly the Party for a European Future, according to the spokesman, Aleksander Bicikliski. 
He said his party is still considering the possibility of co-operation with the Democratic Union for Integration, which was a member of the outgoing government led by Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski.
The election, Macedonia's fifth since independence, has been judged as fair and democratic by international representatives, who reported only isolated irregularities.
"The day of the elections was peaceful. 
However, there were a few isolated serious incidents," said Audrey Glover, head of the ODIHR monitoring mission.
The United States and the EU also praised the conduct of the vote. 
"These elections are a major step forward in Macedonia accomplishing its goal for integration in the Euro-Atlantic structures. 
As such, this was a real victory for Macedonia and its citizens," a press release from the US Embassy said.
The embassy also urged relevant state bodies to examine serious election irregularities without any delay.
EU Special Representative for Macedonia Erwan Fouere congratulated the country. 
"Well done! 
You have conducted peaceful elections, and it is a major accomplishment for the country in relation to violent conflicts that occurred in the election campaign," he said. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn also congratulated the fair elections and said the new government is expected to continue with the European agenda.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski sent a letter to NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso. 
"The way the parliamentary elections were organised and conducted has confirmed once again the Macedonian citizens' strong commitment to continue their efforts for democratic reform and the Euro-Atlantic integration of the country," the letter says.
Constitution of the new parliament is scheduled for 26 July. 
After that, the president has ten days to give the mandate to the majority party or parties, who must then submit a draft list of ministers and a working programme within 20 days.
Meanwhile, the State Election Commission announced on Sunday that it has rejected all 47 appeals submitted by parties in relation to the 5 July vote, due to lack of sufficient evidence. 
By law, SEC decisions can be contested within 48 hours before the Supreme Court, whose ruling is final.
