12/06/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 12/06/06
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari has once again appealed to Kosovo's Serbs to take part in the provisional institutions.
He urged them to give serious consideration to a Kosovo government proposal meant to ensure their active participation.
"I appeal to the minorities, and especially to the Serbs, to participate in the institutions, to accept the government's offer, and to join its structures as well as the parliament," Ahtisaari said on Saturday (10 June) after meetings with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Agim Ceku, Serb leader Goran Bogdanovic and the Kosovo negotiating team.
Serb participation would strengthen prospects for building a multiethnic society in Kosovo, said Ahtisaari, who was on a three-day visit to the province.
"This is the aim of our commitment here," he added.
Bogdanovic told reporters that his side had informed Ahtisaari about the Serb viewpoint regarding the future of Kosovo.
"We made clear our concerns about Kosovo's future status and the position of Serbs here.
And we emphasised that the international community is not working enough to improve the minorities' position in Kosovo," Bogdanovic said.
Another Serb leader, Oliver Ivanovic, said on Saturday that the boycott of institutions would likely continue, at least for the coming months.
During his visit, Ahtisaari paid a visit to the divided city of Mitrovica, the future of which has been a thorny issue during the direct negotiations in Vienna between representatives of Belgrade and Pristina.
Ahtisaari said the Mitrovica issue would be addressed as part of the decentralisation package, which is being discussed at experts' level.
"The essence of the decentralisation is the guarantees for a quiet life for the majority and better conditions for minorities.
If the majority does not live better, then the minorities will not have a good life.
The aim of this process is that everyone to live in favourable conditions," he said after meeting with ethnic Albanian and Serb families.
The Serbs, however, threatened the possibility of partition if the final status is unacceptable to them, saying they would organise a referendum.
