14/04/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/04/06
A law adopted by the Serbia-Montenegro Parliament on 7 April clears the way for freezing the assets of fugitives wanted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Indictees who refuse to surrender to the tribunal could find themselves unable to transfer, use, or access their money or property.
Serbia-Montenegro sees the law, which passed 65-21, as one way it is fulfiling its obligations to the EU Council, which has called for the adoption of such a measure.
The ICTY wants Serbia-Montenegro to deliver indictees Ratko Mladic, Goran Hadzic, Zdravko Tolimir and Stojan Zupljanin.
Serbia-Montenegro authorities say Vlastimir Djordjevic, also wanted by the tribunal, is in Russia.
Another top indictee, Radovan Karadzic, is thought to be in Bosnia and Herzegovina, or possibly in border areas of Montenegro.
The arrest and extradition of Mladic, who commanded Bosnian Serb forces during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzgovina, is a condition for the signing of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU.
Brussels has warned it could break off SAA talks if Mladic is not handed over by the end of this month -- an extended deadline granted by the EU after Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica pledged the matter was close to being resolved.
The head of the National Council for Co-operation with the ICTY, Rasim Ljajic, says the law on confiscating fugitives' assets is a sign of Belgrade's readiness to meet its obligation to the ICTY.
"We will invest most serious efforts by the end of this month to meet this obligation," Ljajic said.
At the same time, authorities have been putting pressure on Mladic associates, including members of his family.
On 5 April, police brought in two brothers and cousins of Mladic's wife, releasing them after several hours of questioning.
Tax police have been scrutinising a company owned by Mladic's son Darko, amid reported irregularities.
Two former members of the Bosnian Serb armed forces, Jovo Djogo and Sasa Badnjar, suspected of aiding Mladic, have been in custody for two months now.
Several international reports, including one published on Wednesday (12 April) by the Institute of War and Peace Reporting (IWPR), have drawn parallels with the lead-up to the December arrest of Croatian fugitive Ante Gotovina.
In that case, the IWPR said, Croatia was under pressure to reach a solution or see its membership talks with Brussels further delayed, whereas Belgrade now faces suspension of its SAA talks.
In late March, UN tribunal chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte's unexpectedly positive report on Belgrade's level of co-operation echoed one she made about Croatia just prior to Gotovina's capture, the report noted.
