14/04/2006
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 14/04/06
Turkish Atomic Energy Agency (TAEK) President Oktay Cakiroglu confirmed on Wednesday (12 April) that the country's first nuclear plant will be built in the Black Sea province of Sinop.
The facility is expected to help meet the country's energy demand over the next 15 years.
TAEK carefully studied the details about proposed locations, focusing on criteria such as sea temperature, climate, wind and general weather, Cakiroglu told a parliamentary commission.
After eight possible locations were chosen, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan decided on Sinop, he said.
A100 MW pilot reactor will be constructed by 2009, followed by three power plants with a total capacity of 5,000 MW, expected to be in service by 2012.
Turkey has uranium reserves totaling around 10,000 tonnes, according to the authorities -- enough to last 50 years.
Turks have been debating the pros and cons of building a nuclear power plant for almost 30 years.
Previous governments tried to get such a project going three different times, but ended up shelving their plans in the face of opposition from environmental groups.
Environmentalists, as well as the opposition Republican Peoples' Party, have also objected to the Sinop project, citing its high price tag and security concerns.
But Energy and Natural Resources Minister Hilmi Guler says authorities are determined to press ahead.
"The reactions concerning nuclear energy originate from the non-detailed examination of the issue.
When the issue is explained in detail, the people will see that their reactions are baseless," Guler said.
The current commitment to build the plant stems from rising fuel prices and the desire for energy independence.
According to Guler, Turkey must invest approximately $128 billion in energy infrastructure by 2020 to keep pace with rising demand and to move from dependence on foreign oil and natural gas.
He says Turkey's current energy needs amount to 88m tonnes of petrol, with 72 per cent of that amount currently being met by foreign suppliers.
