11/10/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 11/10/06
George Maior was installed as the new director of domestic intelligence on Friday (October 6th), following a vote by parliament.
Previously, he had headed the Senate's Defence Committee as a representative of the opposition Social Democratic Party (PSD).
During the ceremony, Maior -- who studied at George Washington University and, as former state secretary, was involved in fruitful negotiations with NATO and the United States -- pledged that he would be guided by "the idea of total political neutrality".
At the same time, Claudiu Saftoiu, a former journalist and close ally of President Traian Basescu, was sworn in as head of Romanian foreign intelligence.
Basescu's decision to look to the opposition benches for the new Intelligence Services chief has jostled the political landscape.
Although few deny his qualifications, Maior's appointment was strongly resisted.
It tests the limits of the ruling Liberal-Democratic Alliance.
Prime Minister Colin Papescu Tariceanu's Liberals see the president's move as an act of betrayal.
The party joined forces with the ultra nationalist Greater Romania Party in opposing Maior.
Civic groups were also taken aback.
"In principle, we may agree with the decision to entrust one of the secret services to the opposition.
But the PSD is the party which, through its top leaders, already had the control of these services during most of the transition period, and did not show the political will for reform," said the Coalition of Reformist NGOs.
Moreover, the PSD itself is divided over the appointment.
The reformist "Cluj faction" to which Maior belongs has been buoyed by the decision.
But old guard Socialist leaders complain that Basescu is exploiting a PSD faction in his political battle with Tariceanu.
Basescu's aides say the choice of Maior is proof that the president does not want to make use of the secret services for political purposes.
The current decision will someday be considered a turning point in Romanian politics, they predict, saying it could establish a custom of giving the leadership of one of the secret service branches to the opposition.
Basescu also says the decision is in line with a larger goal of promoting young people with no connection to the Communist system, regardless of their political affiliation.
Maior is 39, while Saftoiu is 38.
Laura Codruta Kovesi, installed on October 5th as the new General Prosecutor, is 33.
In a column for the daily Romania libera, Balkan analyst Tom Gallagher suggests the president "probably views Maior as a safe pair of hands in a delicate post.
He has pro-Western credentials and is sure to inspire more confidence in Washington than the currently suspended defence minister [Teodor Atanasiu], who is a public relations disaster for Romania."
Basescu also is seeking to gain leverage in the face of continued efforts by the Liberals to neutralise him, Gallagher adds.
