12/06/2006
(Various sources -- 11/06/06 - 12/06/06)
EU foreign ministers meeting in Luxembourg have cleared the way for Turkey to begin the first chapter in its membership talks, according to international media reports Monday (12 June). 
The ministers had been trying to defuse a major crisis over Turkey's bid, with EU member Cyprus threatening to block Ankara's accession talks before they kick off.
"We have agreed on a common position," Reuters quoted a spokesman for the Austrian EU presidency as saying. 
The deal will enable Ankara to open the science and research chapter in its talks – viewed as the least contentious of the 35 chapters. 
With no real EU legislation on this policy issue, the talks were likely to be completed the same day.
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, who was set to travel to Luxembourg for the negotiations, delayed his trip because of the row. 
He was now expected to go ahead.
The last-minute objections raised by Cyprus concern Ankara's refusal to extend it recognition. 
The island had been divided into a Greek Cypriot south and a Turkish Cypriot north since the 1974 Turkish invasion, and a reunification agreement remains elusive. 
On 1 May 2004, the Greek Cypriot part of the island -- representing Cyprus as a whole -- joined the EU. 
Under the initial agreement to launch membership talks with Turkey, the EU obliged Turkey to normalise relations with Nicosia and implement a customs union protocol it signed last year.
At their meeting Monday, the EU foreign ministers went some way towards accepting Cyprus' demands, reminding Turkey that "failure to implement its obligations in full will affect the overall progress in the negotiations."
Turkey, which still keeps some 35,000 troops in northern Cyprus, insists that any concessions on its part, including the opening of its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels and aircraft, hinge on moves by the EU to end the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community.
The opening and conclusion of talks on any of the 35 legislative chapters requires the unanimous approval of all EU member states.
Apart from the Turkish talks, EU foreign ministers were scheduled to deal with other enlargement-related issues as well.
Croatia, whose entry talks were formally launched along with Turkey's on 3 October, was expected to open and close negotiations on the science and research chapter Monday without any problems.
Monday will also mark Albania's first step towards eventual EU membership, as the country was due to sign its Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the Union during the Luxembourg meeting.
The ministers also were to give the green light to the bloc's formal recognition of Montenegro following its 21 May independence referendum, in which the majority of voters said "yes" to a split from Serbia. 
The move will allow Podgorica to establish bilateral diplomatic ties with each of the countries in the 25-nation bloc.
