08/09/2006
(AP, AFP - 07/09/06; Turkish Daily News - 04/09/06; Reuters - 01/09/06; FENA - 21/07/06; Yahoo - 02/05/06; Hollywood.com; Wikipedia)
A luxurious villa just outside Zagreb will serve as Richard Gere's home for the next few months. 
The US actor arrived in the Croatian capital on Thursday (7 September), days before the kickoff of a Hollywood film project about the hunt for Bosnian Serb war crimes fugitive Radovan Karadzic.
The shooting of director Richard Shepard's "Spring Break in Bosnia" is due to begin Tuesday. 
Most of the scenes will be shot in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and only a few in Croatia.
The movie, described by the Hollywood Reporter last year as a "dark comic thriller," is based on an article by Scott Anderson, who covered the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH for Esquire.
The 57-year-old Gere plays the part of a reporter, who along with an experienced cameraman (Terrence Howard) and a young fellow journalist (Jesse Eisenberg), set out on an unauthorised mission to capture Karadzic. 
The local population takes them for a CIA hit squad and problems ensue for the three.
It is not yet clear who will play Karadzic's part.
The wartime Bosnian Serb political leader was initially indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in late 1995, along with his military commander, Ratko Mladic. 
Charged with genocide for their alleged role in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo, they top the UN tribunal's list of most wanted indictees.
While Mladic is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia, Karadzic's whereabouts remain unknown. 
Media reports suggest he is constantly on the move between BiH and his native Montenegro.
"Spring Break in Bosnia" is expected to be released next year.
Gere is due to join some 160 film crew members in Sarajevo on Saturday.
Edo Sarkic of the Sarajevo-based Scout Film production company told Reuters earlier this month that all technical preparations, including the selection of shooting locations, had been completed, so that the crew could start filming on 12 September. 
The first ten days of shooting would take place in BiH and the remainder in Croatia, he said.
Actors from BiH and Croatia will appear in the film, Shepard told Bosnian news agency FENA back in July.
A Buddhist and an active supporter of the Dalai Lama, Gere won the Golden Globe award as best actor for his role as Billy Flynn in "Chicago" in 2002. 
He is also the winner of the 1997 National Board of Review Freedom of Expression Award for "Red Corner" and the 1980 Theatre World Award for "Bent".
Successful box office movies he starred in include "American Gigolo," "An Officer and a Gentleman," "Internal Affairs," "Pretty Woman," "Primal Fear," "Runaway Bride," "Unfaithful," and "Shall We Dance?".
