09/03/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 09/03/06
The United States European Command (USEUCOM), through the US Embassy's Office of Defence Co-operation, delivered $50,000 worth of medical equipment and supplies to the Mother Teresa Pediatric Hospital in Tirana at the start of this month.
US Ambassador to Albania Marcie Ries, Albanian Health Minister Maksim Cikuli and hospital centre director Paskal Cullufi participated in the 1 March ceremony.
"I sincerely express my gratitude for this humanitarian action, which will help to improve the quality of the hospital service for the children. 
The pediatric hospital was chosen as this is one of the centres that receives children from all over Albania," Ries said.
The 240-bed hospital serves the entire country as a referral centre.
"We are not only going to be receivers of aid, but also serious partners in all the projects that the Albanian authorities have with the United States," Cikuli said at the ceremony.
The Office of Defence Co-operation manages the US Defence Department's Humanitarian Assistance programme, under which direct assistance is provided to countries around the world. 
The programme has been active in Albania since 1996, providing supplies, rebuilding schools, aiding medical facilities, developing water projects and helping to finance other humanitarian activities.
Army Major James McKinney is chief of the Office of Defence Co-operation at the US Embassy in Tirana.
One recent project involved repairing the water facility in Gjader. 
Completed on 16 February, the repairs restored drinkable water to more than 2,500 Albanians.
USEUCOM contributed more than $99,000 to the project, which rebuilt an existing water distribution system. 
The existing line was unusable due to inadequate piping originally installed in 1989. 
The project rebuilt the pump station and main water lines improving the sanitation and hygiene of the water supply for villagers.
Several other projects have been conducted within the framework of USAID, the US international aid organisation.
