09/03/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 09/03/06
As of this year, every firm in Macedonia with more than 25 employees has been required to install an electronic metre to record working hours. 
This obligation results from a new employment law meant to address two common problems: worker tardiness, and employers who abuse their staff by forcing them into hours of unpaid overtime.
According to Labour Inspectorate Director Izet Rizahau, most employers are complying with the law and implementing the system.
"Controls are being carried out on a daily basis," Rizahau says. 
"In case of violations, a temporary 30-day suspension of operations is imposed."
However, EU representative for Macedonia Erwan Fouere is not convinced that the law is being enforced fully. 
Failure to do so represents a problem area that must be overcome as Macedonia moves ahead on the path to EU membership, he says.
"The final deadline for installation of electronic metres was 1 January 2006," Fouere told members of the Macedonian-Slovenian Business Club. 
"Practice has shown that compliance is insufficient."
Under the new legislation, a work week should consist of 40 hours, with up to ten hours of paid overtime allowed. 
If a worker's annual overtime exceeds 150 hours, his or her employer is obliged to pay an extra month's salary.
These provisions were included because of the increasing number of cases in which workers were being kept on the job for 12 or 13 hours, instead of the regular eight. 
Such cases were most prevalent in the textile industry.
Industry representatives, however, say they are under competitive pressure in the global marketplace, especially because of cheap labour in China and elsewhere. 
The metre requirements, they say, will only add to the industry's woes.
"If we start paying workers an extra month's salary we will find ourselves in an even more difficult economic situation," says Ruska Trpevska, director of the textile company Dekon. 
"The volume of jobs will decrease since we will have to assume small orders because of limited working hours."
Textile companies are arguing that the April-May and September-October periods should be regarded as seasonal working periods, as so-called "swift orders" reach their peak during these times. 
In such conditions, extended work hours are necessary and the law should be amended to take this into account, they say.
