10/10/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 10/10/06
Deputy State Attorney Milorad Cvijovic was arrested in Belgrade on Saturday (October 7th) for allegedly aiding the so-called "bankruptcy mafia".
At its session Monday, parliament stripped Cvijovic of his representative immunity, at the request of the special prosecutor for organised crime.
The same day, the suspect was placed in 30-day custody.
Members of the bankruptcy mafia are suspected of carrying out illegal sales of Serbian firms going through bankruptcy proceedings, causing millions of euros in losses to the state as well as to the companies involved.
According to a police news release, Cvijovic is thought to have directly aided one of the bankruptcy mafia leaders, Slobodan Radulovic.
The deputy state attorney is also suspected of using his position to take over a case illegally in 2005 and resolving it without the authorised prosecutor's knowledge.
Belgrade media reported that Cvijovic enabled Radulovic to throw Slovenian hypermarket provider Mercator out of the race for purchasing the shares of C Market, one of the biggest supermarket chains in Serbia.
Radulovic himself has been on the run since April, and police say he is probably out of the country.
In April, police arrested nine people suspected of belonging to the bankruptcy mafia.
Among them are former Belgrade Commercial Court president Goran Kljajevic and a judge from that court, Delinka Djurdjevic.
Goran Kljajevic's brother, Marko, was the head of the trial chamber in the Zoran Djindjic murder trial.
Marko Kljajevic withdrew from the trial in late August, objecting to the police and judiciary's treatment of his brother.
Serbian Interior Minister Dragan Jocic told the Belgrade media Saturday that Cvijovic's arrest proved the government's readiness to deal with crime and corruption.
"No one will be untouchable," he said.
Cvijovic and the two Belgrade Commercial Court judges are not the only judiciary officials arrested in Serbia during the term of Vojislav Kostunica's cabinet.
Late last year, police arrested Serbian Supreme Court judge Ljubomir Vuckovic, who was charged with helping to reduce sentences given to the members of a criminal group.
He was sentenced to eight years in prison.
