08/08/2006
(B92, Blic, OHR Morning Media Brief - 08/08/06; BBC, VOA, HINA, B92, Makfax - 07/08/06)
An amateur video allegedly showing the killing of an ethnic Serb during Operation Storm in Croatia in 1995 has prompted investigations in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia.
The Croatian State Prosecutor's Office issued a statement Monday (7 August) saying it had received the footage and had asked the interior ministry to launch a criminal investigation.
The video of the alleged war crimes is said to have been recorded in early August 1995 in Dvor na Uni, during a Croatian attack to regain control over the self-declared republic of Serb Krajina. 
Reports said it showed members of the BiH Army's "Hamze" unit and of the Croatian Army's "Black Mambas" unit as they killed a Serb who had surrendered -- his hands in the air -- as well as the burning of houses belonging to refugees.
Hundreds of ethnic Serbs were killed during Operation Storm, which also forced about 200,000 others to flee Croatia, mostly into BiH and Serbia.
Two days after the footage was broadcast simultaneously by Belgrade-based Radio Television B92 and TVBN from Bijeljina in BiH, Serbian Interior Minister Dragan Jocic urged the BiH and Croat authorities Sunday to identify and arrest those responsible for the crimes.
A similar call came from Serbian President Boris Tadic, who urged the Croatian government to make punishing war crimes a priority. 
Doing so "is a precondition for establishing normal and good-neighbourly relations," the BBC quoted Tadic as saying.
On Monday, a Croatian government spokesman denied that Croatian Army members were involved in the recorded incidents, or that they occurred on Croatian soil. 
"The footage without doubt confirms that there are no members of the Croatian military in it," said Ratko Macek. 
"It shows clearly that this footage was taken somewhere in Bosnia."
Boris Grubesic, spokesman for BiH prosecutors, confirmed on Monday that the Court of BiH had received the videotape and was in the process of collecting additional data.
Meanwhile, Serbian Deputy Prosecutor for War Crimes Dragoljub Stankovic, who left for The Hague on Monday, was expected to give a copy of the tape to UN prosecutors.
However, UN prosecution spokesman Anton Nikiforov told reporters Monday that the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) no longer has the mandate to launch new investigations. 
Any investigation "should be carried out by both Croatia and BiH, with possible assistance from the ICTY".
Meanwhile, Radio Television Serbia reportedly aired a second video Monday evening showing Atif Dudakovic, commander of the BiH Army's Fifth Corps, ordering his troops to burn Serbian villages in the Bosnian Krajina region during the continuation of Operation Storm in mid-September 1995.
Quoting Savo Strbac, the director of the Documentary-Informative Centre Veritas, a B92 report on Tuesday suggested there was a third video tape showing the actual killings of more ethnic Serbs.
