09/05/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 09/05/06
Direct talks between delegations from Belgrade and Pristina on the issue of decentralisation ended on Friday (5 May) without any concrete result. 
The two sides failed to come to an agreement on the number of non-Albanian communities that would be given a degree of autonomy under a roadmap for Kosovo.
The Serbian delegation wants to build 15 to16 Serbian municipalities in the province, while the Kosovo delegation wants just three. 
"Reaching a consensus on this issue is still impossible," UN deputy special envoy Albert Rohan said.
Moreover, the two sides remain far apart it comes to the divided city of Mitrovica, the main focus of the last round of talks in Vienna. 
The Serbs have called for an independent municipality in the city's north, with links to other Serb municipalities and to Belgrade. 
By contrast, the Kosovo Albanians say Mitrovica should remain one municipality with two subunits, both answerable to a single governing structure.
"The other side has asked for ethnic division and segregation, a proposal that has been opposed by us. 
Such principles are unacceptable," said the head of the Albanian negotiating team, Lutfi Haziri.
Discussions on decentralisation are over for the time being, but Rohan is scheduled to visit Belgrade on 16 May and Pristina on 18 May to reassess the differences between two sides.
One of the major issues in dealing with decentralisation is how to include the possible return of Serbs who fled the province during the conflict. 
"On the one hand nobody wants to create 'ghost municipalities' in the hope that somebody may come," Rohan said. 
"On the other hand, there is a very real possibility -- and it is the hope of the international community -- that the maximum of people will indeed return."
The stalemate over Mitrovica and decentralisation reflect the larger disagreements regarding Kosovo's final status, which has yet to be broached during the UN-mediated talks. 
The Kosovo Albanians strongly favour outright independence from Serbia. 
Belgrade, by contrast, wants to retain some form of sovereignty, while granting Kosovo broad autonomy. 
Meanwhile, Serbs have been boycotting the province's provisional institutions.
"There are many open questions and we are going to resume the work directly with each side separately and try to get compromise solutions," Rohan said.
EU envoy Stefan Lehne, meanwhile, will lead a delegation of experts to Belgrade and Pristina on Tuesday and on 17 May to discuss the division of assets, debts and liabilities between Kosovo and Serbia.
The next round of talks in Vienna, scheduled for 23 May, will focus on the protection of cultural and religious sites.
