07/07/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 07/07/06
Full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, including the arrest and extradition of Ratko Mladic, remains a condition for resuming Stabilisation and Association (SAA) negotiations between the EU and Serbia, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said in Belgrade Thursday (6 July).
The SAA talks were suspended on 3 May, after Serbian authorities failed to arrest Mladic.
The former Bosnian Serb general faces war crimes charges over his role in the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At a news conference with Serbian President Boris Tadic, Rehn welcomed Serbia's proposed action plan for co-operation with The Hague-based tribunal, expressing hope that it would be successful.
He said the EU should receive the plan by 16 July, and that Serbia's highest officials are invited to present it at the meeting of the European Commission (EC).
Rehn also said the EC is working on ways to liberalise the visa regime for countries in the Western Balkans.
"Visible results" in this field could be expected in the autumn, he said.
After the meeting with Rehn, Tadic said full membership in the EU is the only alternative for Serbia and that this is his primary goal as head of state.
He said Serbia faces a number of challenges this year, citing the Kosovo status negotiations.
Rehn also met with Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
In comments afterwards, he stressed that "action is important" and that negotiations could not continue until Mladic is in The Hague.
Meanwhile, the EC approved two new mandates for SAA talks with Serbia and newly independent Montenegro.
According to an official statement from Brussels, changes have been made to Serbia's mandate, while a new one was approved in the case of Montenegro.
For Serbia, talks will not resume until the country fully meets its obligation of complete co-operation with the UN tribunal.
Montenegro will be able to start negotiating with the EU as soon as its mandate is approved by the bloc's 25 member states.
