08/03/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 08/03/06
The South Eastern Europe Network (SEE-Network) has kicked off a major public relations campaign in Montenegro, starting with the inauguration of a Business Service Centre (BSC) in Podgorica. 
The centre aims to provide businesspeople with crucial information about regional markets, investment opportunities, export/import terms, consulting and training services, and other issues.
It is based at the Centre for Entrepreneurship and Economic Development, which over the past ten years has become one of the main supporters of Small and Medium Enterprise development in Montenegro, providing an array of consulting services to help new and established businesses.
BSCs have also been set up in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia.
The SEE-Network brings together economic organisations, enterprises and experts from South East Europe (SEE) and Germany. 
It encompasses chambers of commerce, business associations, NGOs and private companies in the region. 
Participants co-operate with other organisations, donors, investors, and governments in order to attain valuable information and data.
Its aim is to promote regional economic co-operation among SEE countries, as well as between the region and Germany.
Network partners include Albania's Agency for Regional Co-operation, the Republika Srpska Chamber of Commerce, the Croatian Association of Business Consultants, the Regional Chamber of Commerce of Uzice, and Macedonia's BASME Consulting and Training.
Creating an efficient market in the Balkans represents an important and attainable goal, German Consul Bernhard Zobel said at the launch of the Montenegrin BSC. 
Increasing the flow of trade and business depends on the ability of business community members to obtain information about countries in the region and establish ties with market-oriented organisations, he added.
The SEE-Network was initiated by the German Federal Foreign Office and InWEnt gGmbH -- Capacity Building International. 
It is being promoted through the Stability Pact for South East Europe, via the Regional Development through Competence and Co-operation programme. 
The network maintains a Web site offering free information about market trends, investment conditions and examples of successful enterprises, as well as pertinent contact information.
