07/09/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 07/09/06
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha announced on Monday (4 September) that he has hired former US Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge as an adviser to the government on issues including NATO membership, fighting corruption and tackling organised crime.
Ridge will begin work this month, said Berisha's spokesman, Neritan Sejamini.
Under the agreement, Ridge will make occasional visits to Albania, but will work primarily from the United States.
Albania applied for NATO membership in 1992 -- when Berisha, the country's first non-communist president, strengthened ties with Washington.
The momentum stalled, however, when Berisha refused US advice concerning a 1997 pyramid scheme crisis that led to his government's ouster.
Since becoming prime minister in July 2005, he has sought to rebuild the relationship.
Ridge's main priority will be to help Albania meet its goal of joining NATO in 2008, Berisha said.
"Ridge will assist and advise the Albanian government on the issues which are the top priority for every government in the world:
the country's security," he explained.
Tirana signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU in June, but obstacles remain in areas such as the economy, infrastructure and the fight against crime.
Ridge, who was in Tirana Monday, said it would be a privilege to work for the Albanian government.
"I am ready to support the needed changes that Albania has to do in order to become a NATO member and a global partner in the international economy.
I believe these goals may be achieved and I am looking forward to starting to work together with you on their realisation," Ridge said.
In March, he held talks with Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu, Interior Minister Sokol Olldashi and Minister of Public Affairs, Transport and Telecommunications Lulzim Basha.
One of the issues discussed was the management and control of borders.
Ridge, 61, cut short his second term as Pennsylvania governor when US President George W. Bush appointed him to co-ordinate homeland security after the 11 September 2001 attacks on the United States.
Named head of the department a year later, he stepped down in February 2005.
