08/05/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb- 8/5/06
US Vice President Dick Cheney was in Dubrovnik at the weekend to meet with Croatian leaders and to attend a meeting of the US-Adriatic Charter.
He is the highest-level US figure to visit Croatia since former President Bill Clinton's trip a decade ago.
"We understand the desire to join NATO and the European community," Cheney said Sunday (7 May) at the Charter meeting, hosted by Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader and attended by his counterparts from Albania and Macedonia, Sali Berisha and Vlado Buckovski.
"It's very important -- both for NATO and the EU -- to take in new members, people who aspire to join the organisation, help rejuvenate it, and to help us rededicate ourselves to those basic fundamental values of freedom and democracy that are a very important part of our collective security arrangements," Cheney.
He also thanked the three Western Balkan countries for their engagement in international operations such as those in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Berisha, Buckovski and Sanader, meanwhile, took the opportunity to reiterate their countries' aspirations to join Euro-Atlantic structures, saying they expected NATO's November summit to make their prospects clearer.
"It is our hope that in addition to receiving a strong signal for our future membership in the Alliance at the next NATO summit in Riga, this November, a clear timeframe for those talks will be set," said Sanader.
Berisha noted the "loyal partnership to NATO" which Albania has demonstrated over 15 years, vowing that his government would "take any decision, pay any price" to implement the NATO membership action plan.
Buckovski stressed the role Euro-Atlantic integration prospects have played in fostering stability and democratic progress in the region.
"Accepting the region's candidates that are prepared to enter in the Euro-Atlantic alliance as the international community works hard to close the last outstanding issue in the south and east Europe will be a historic opportunity to fulfil NATO's decade-long commitment and contribute decisively to long-term stability and prosperity of the region," Buckovski said.
On Saturday, Cheney held talks with Sanader and Croatian President Stipe Mesic.
They discussed bilateral ties, Croatia's contribution to the global war against terrorism and reforms the country is undertaking on its path towards NATO.
Americans are "tremendously impressed with Croatia's progress over the past few years," Cheney said.
"We are strongly supportive of Croatia becoming a full member of the trans-Atlantic community, in terms of working with NATO and the EU," he added.
