07/09/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 07/09/06
A recent anticounterfeiting operation in Montenegro resulted in the largest confiscation of forged money ever in Southeast Europe, according to police. 
Launched in January and concluded in August, Operation Trezor led to the seizure of 714,000 euros and $150,000 in forged banknotes, as well as several arrests.
Police began their investigation after obtaining information that an international criminal group was preparing to transfer a large quantity of forged money onto the Montenegrin market. 
The notes were to be distributed through various channels to Albania, Kosovo and Italy, as well as to Western European countries via Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia.
On 12 August, a Lithuanian woman was arrested in Ulcinj while trying to use 200 forged euros. 
Soon after that, seven other people were apprehended, and three more are being sought. 
A police officer was among those detained.
Forged banknotes totalling150,000 euros and $100,000 were found in a car travelling from Podgorica to Bar. 
After searching various apartments and other premises used by alleged members of the criminal group, another 564,000 euros and $500 were found. 
The smugglers reportedly managed to put only a small amount of the counterfeit money into circulation.
Police said the notes were among the best forgeries they had seen, but were printed on thicker paper than genuine currency. 
According to Central Bank Council President Ljubisa Krgovic, however, it would have been hard for criminals to successfully place millions of forged euros into circulation in Montenegro.
Employees at the Central Bank's regional centres and banks are trained to recognise forged banknotes, he said, citing the conversion to euros that took place in 2002. 
At the time, only one irregular banknote was discovered -- and that wasn't a forgery, but two pieces of a banknote that had been taped together.
Operation Trezor was carried out in co-operation with Interpol as well as Bulgarian and Serbian police. 
Its success is bound to have positive reverberations among other countries of the region and their police organisations, says police expert Marko Nicovic.
He says Montenegro attracts criminal groups due to its large inflow of tourists and foreigners. 
As a result, it is especially important that the newly independent state work more closely with other police in the region as well as international police organisations such as the FBI and Scotland Yard, he added.
Police Administration Director Veselin Veljovic praised the operation. 
Its successful conclusion shows that Montenegro is on the path to a modern police organisation, he said.
