08/05/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 08/05/06
Under a two-year agreement signed in April, the US Millenium Challenge Corporation (MCC) will provide $13.8m in assistance to help Albania implement a "Threshold programme" aimed at tackling corruption and improving the business environment.
The funding is expected to start this summer, after USAID declares the winners of a tender for monitoring the project's implementation.
The Albanian government has requested MCC assistance with fighting corruption in three areas:
tax administration, public procurement and the business registration process.
Corruption has threatened Albania's democracy and stifled its growth, said MCC's chief executive officer, Ambassador John Danilovich, at the signing ceremony.
"Corruption also weakens foreign and private investment and undercuts the efforts of those laboring to promote a transparent, level playing field for their own development," Danilovich said.
The government's plan is "a manifestation of Albania's dedication to moving forward and embracing genuine development, growth, and poverty reduction," he added.
Prime Minister Sali Berisha describes corruption as "a cancer, a national emergency to be tackled".
"The Albanians have been suffering from this phenomenon in the last years, while corruption has been causing a lot of damage to the country.
The Albanian government is working seriously to make the fastest and the right response," he said.
Albania slipped 18 places in October 2005 to 126th of the 159 nations in Transparency International's 2005 Corruption Perception Index -- an annual ranking that is closely watched in Eastern Europe.
The international community has said that Albania must fight corruption, curb human trafficking and improve the judiciary in order to achieve its goals of joining the EU and NATO.
The Threshold programme in Albania is expected to produce a number of results.
Tax collection should increase from 30.4 per cent to 50 per cent;
the cost of government procurements is to be trimmed by 20 per cent;
and the number of new businesses registered monthly is to increase from 625 to 1,000.
It currently takes 47 days to register a new business;
under the programme, this should be cut to one day.
The programme also seeks to meet benchmarks in reducing bribery in tax collection, business registration and procurement of government contracts.
The MCC was established by the US Congress in 2004 to administer the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA), set up to provide development assistance to countries that "rule justly, invest in their people, and encourage economic freedom".
If it successfully completes the Threshold project, Albania could qualify for further assistance under the MCA, which has given aid of up to $1.6 billion to a dozen countries.
