07/08/2006
(Turkish Press - 06/08/06; AFP, AP, Reuters, BBC, DPA, Zaman - 05/08/06; Wikipedia)
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan led a groundbreaking ceremony outside the southeastern town of Dargecit on Saturday (5 August), marking the beginning of work on the country's second-largest dam.
The Ilisu Dam on the Tigris River is part of a $1.55 billion project that includes the construction of a 1,200-megawatt hydroelectric power plant -- the fourth largest in Turkey. 
It is expected to be completed in 2013, several decades after its initial inception in the late 1970s.
"We have lost enough time; we don't have any more time to wait," Erdogan said at the ceremony, promising that the reservoir would turn the brown landscape green and attract tourists to the poor, Kurdish-dominated region.
"The step that we are taking today demonstrates that the southeast is no longer neglected ... 
This dam will bring big gains to the local people," the prime minister said.
Launched in a region that was devastated by years of fighting between government forces and Kurdistan Workers' Party militants, the project is expected to create up to 10,000 jobs and provide much-needed power and irrigation.
Companies from Germany and Austria will be involved in the construction of the 1,820-metre-long, 135-metre-high dam and the power plant, designed to generate 3.8 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity annually.
However, the initiative has been criticised by many since its inception.
Opponents say the dam will bury part of the ancient town of Hasankeyf and destroy its unique historic heritage. 
The small, impoverished town on the banks of the Tigris is thought to date back some 10,000 years. 
Declared a natural conservation area by Turkey in 1981, it still bears evidence of Assyrian, Byzantine, Roman, Seljuk Turk and Ottoman cultures.
According to critics of the project, its implementation will lead to the destruction of key items, including a 12th century palace, mosques and cave dwellings. 
In addition, they argue, it could displace about 10,000 Kurds, who would have to seek new lives in the country's bigger cities.
Friday night, on the eve of the groundbreaking ceremony, about 4,000 protesters gathered at Hasankeyf to voice their opposition to the dam project.
Officials insist that 80 per cent of Hasankeyf's archaeological sites, many of which are said to be in poor shape already, will not be buried under the water. 
Speaking at Saturday's ceremony, Erdogan said that the ruins would be moved to a nearby site and that $85m had been set aside for the architectural projects.
The authorities also have pledged to compensate people who will lose their homes as a result of the project.
"On one side there is a need for energy and a brighter future for Turkey and on the other side there is history and culture," Reuters quoted Erdogan as saying Saturday. 
"We have to reconcile this somehow and find a common solution."
