08/05/2006
(Blic, The Guardian, ISN Security Watch - 08/05/06; Reuters, BBC, VOA, Beta - 07/05/06; CNN, AP - 06/05/06; Reuters, AFP, AP, Radio B92 - 05/05/06)
Serb special police forces conducted a number of weekend raids as part of efforts to capture war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic.
Backed by helicopters, police units carried out searches in Serbia's west on Sunday (7 May), including in and around the town of Valjevo, 80km southeast of Belgrade, where the former Bosnian Serb military commander reportedly owned an estate after he moved to Serbia in the late 1990s.
The authorities have not announced the results of Sunday's raids.
Mladic is wanted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for his role in war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
He has been charged with genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, as well as the 43-month siege of Sarajevo, in which some 10,000 people were killed.
In March, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica promised chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte that Mladic would be arrested and handed over to the ICTY by 30 April. 
But Belgrade failed to deliver on its pledge, prompting the European Commission (EC) to suspend its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia. 
The next round had been scheduled for 11 May.
Serbian President Boris Tadic voiced hope Saturday that Mladic would be arrested by 10 May so that the SAA negotiations, a first key step towards EU membership, could proceed according to schedule.
"The government must finish the job," Tadic said.
His remarks came a day after police sealed off the Banovo Brdo neighbourhood in Belgrade and searched the area around Mladic's house there, as well as other locations in the country believed to have been used, or still used, by the fugitive. 
As the hunt continued on Saturday, police blocked streets and searched cars in the Belgrade suburb of Zemun, according to Reuters.
Two suspected Mladic aides were arrested Friday, bringing to more than ten the total number of people detained in recent months for allegedly helping the fugitive evade capture.
Retired Republika Srpska Army General Marko Lugonja and a woman, identified as Ljiljana Vaskovic have been taken into 30-day custody, along with three other civilians arrested Thursday, Belgrade-based news agency Beta reported.
Meanwhile, Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic called on Saturday for the dismissal of top security officials over their failure to arrest Mladic.
"Mladic must be arrested, and not any time, but in the next ten days," the BBC quoted Draskovic as saying. 
"After that, it will be too late."
