09/10/2006
(Focus News Agency, Standart - 09/10/06; Sofia News Agency, Vseki Den, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 08/10/06; Balkan Investigative Reporting network - 05/10/06; Angus Reid - 04/10/06)
Seven candidates are hoping to win Bulgaria's presidential election on October 22nd. 
Due to an expected low turnout, however, the race is likely to be decided in a runoff a week later.
By law, at least half of the country's eligible voters of some 6.4 million must participate in the first round of the presidential poll for the person who has garnered more than 50% of voter support to win outright victory. 
That is unlikely to happen, Tsvetozar Tomov, a sociologist at the Skala polling agency, said on Monday (October 9th).
A survey conducted by AFIS polling agency indicated that the number of people who intend to vote has declined by 9% since the campaign began, while the number of those saying they will definitely stay home has increased.
Two weeks before the vote, incumbent Georgi Parvanov remains the clear frontrunner in the race and -- whether they plan to vote or not -- 88% of the eligible voters believe he will win a second five-year term this month, AFIS reported.
While polls show Parvanov's support ebbing slightly in recent days, he is still well ahead of his challengers. 
Between 35% and 37% of Bulgarians are expected to vote for him -- a figure that could translate into nearly 70% of voter support. 
Three of the other six contenders, however, may stand a chance to finish second and proceed to the runoff on October 29th.
Volen Siderov, the leader of the ultranationalist Attack party, has the support of around 9% of all eligible voters, or about 19% of those likely to go to the polls on the 22nd.
Constitutional Court head Nedelcho Beronov, 78, is third in the opinion polls, about 1% to 2% behind the Attack leader. 
Beronov was nominated for the post by the opposition Democrats for Strong Bulgaria, the Union of Democratic Forces and other smaller right-wing parties.
A similar distance separates Beronov from the other rightist candidate, Georgi Markov.
Sofia Mayor Boyko Borissov, one of the country's most popular politicians, recently announced his support for Beronov, describing him as the "least evil". 
His move, he said in an interview last week, sought to prevent the risk of Siderov winning the presidency. 
That, he said, would be devastating for the country.
Only 5% of the mayor's followers, however, are expected to cast a ballot for Beronov, while 46% have said they will vote for Parvanov, 12% for Siderov and 8% for Markov.
While they do not rule out a possible turn of tide among those competing for the second place, pollsters widely expect a runoff between Parvanov and Siderov.
