09/06/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 09/06/06
Serbia-Montenegro is competing in the 2006 World Cup tor the last time as one team. 
The Plavi ("Blues") are in the so-called Group of Death, along with Argentina, Ivory Coast and the Netherlands. 
Coach Ilja Petkovic and his team are hoping to settle some old scores -- namely, the Dutch triumph at the Round of 16 at France 1998, and Argentina's victory, arguably because of penalties, at the quarterfinals at Italy 1990.
The first tournament match is always the toughest, and Serbia-Montenegro versus the Netherlands on 11 June promises hard play and few goals. 
Serbia-Montenegro's granite defence, headed by Mladen Krstajic in front of goalie Dragoslav Jevric, will clash with a furious Dutch offence led by Ruud Van Nistelrooij, whose representative average is a goal every two games.
Ahead of the match, the coaches have been facing a different set of problems. 
In the Dutch camp, coach Marco van Basten has five injured players. 
The Serbian media, meanwhile, accused Petkovic of nepotism because his son Dusan joined the team as a replacement for an injured player. 
Dusan finally opted to return to Belgrade, leaving the team a man short.
From a Balkan perspective, Serbia-Montenegro plays a strange style of football. 
It is aimed not at wowing the spectators, or "dying for beauty" as Serbs like to put it, but at achieving results. 
Defence is the strongest element. 
Together with Petkovic's tactics, it has made Serbia-Montenegro one of eight European teams to remain undefeated in the qualifying campaign, with six wins, four draws and only one goal given up -- to Spain in Madrid. 
Petkovic, who came aboard after a humiliating loss to Azerbaijan during EURO 2004 qualifications, has succeeded in building a cohesive, mentally tough team that includes top players from European clubs and domestic youngsters with no experience in big matches.
Goalie Jevric (Ankaraspor) holds a world record in the 2006 World Cup qualifications, with seven shutouts in a row. 
He has good reflexes, a commanding overview of the penalty area and authority over the defenders. 
The "fantastic quartet" girding Europe's top defence are Mladen Krstajic (Shalke), Nemanja Vidic (Manchester United), Goran Gavrancic (Dinamo Kyev) and Ivica Dragutinovic (Sevilla). 
Vidic will miss the match against the Netherlands due to a red card.
SCG midfielders have had less media coverage, but there are illustrious names here too. 
Predrag Djordjevic is one of the most experienced players in the Serbian squad. 
The central midfielder is a legend in Greece, having won eight championship titles with Olympiakos. 
Bosnian Serb Ognjen Koroman (Portsmouth) is a right-winger with great speed, while Dejan Stankovic (Inter) is truly a world-class player, with fierce shots and good timing in the air. 
Provided he manages to control his temperament, he could be a force to be reckoned with.
Defence aside, the strikers still anticipate their share of glory. 
Mateja Kezman (Atletico Madrid) is always ready to punish the slightest mistake by the opposition defence. 
The 27-year-old veteran scored five times in his last seven representative appearances. 
Then there is the young striking lion, Nikola Zigic (Crvena Zvezda). 
For this 2.02m-tall defender's nightmare, speed is never a problem. 
Last but not least, there is Savo Milosevic (Osasuna), who shared top-scorer honours with Patrick Kluivert at UEFA Euro 2000.
German football legend Lothar Matteus, former coach of Belgrade's Partizan, says he has a lot of respect for both Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro and that each could potentially make it to the quarterfinals -- or even pull off a big surprise akin to Croatia's 1998 journey to the semifinals. 
Petkovic, however, is thinking one step at a time. 
"Against the Netherlands we must play with a cold head and a hot heart," he says.
