09/06/2006
(Reuters, BBC, FT - 09/06/06;
Magharebia, AFP, AP, The New York Times, FT - 08/06/06)
Heads of international organisations and country leaders hailed on Thursday (8 June) the death of one of the most wanted terrorists in the world.
Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of the al-Qaeda terrorist network in Iraq and the mastermind of a bloody campaign of terror in that country and the Middle East, was killed Wednesday after US forces dropped two 227kg bombs on a safe house in a rural area near Baquba, 65km north of Baghdad.
Some of Zarqawi's associates, including one of his key lieutenants, spiritual adviser Sheikh Abdel Rahman, were also killed in the joint US-Iraqi operation, helped by tips from local and Jordanian intelligence.
General George W. Casey Jr, head of the US-led Coalition in Iraq, said the body of the Jordanian-born terrorist, for whom Washington had offered a $25m bounty, had been identified "by fingerprint verification, facial recognition and known scars".
World leaders said the development was a victory for the global war on terror.
"This is a man with rivers of blood on his hands so I do not think I exaggerate when I say he will not be missed," the BBC quoted NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer as saying Thursday.
US President George W. Bush described Zarqawi's death as "a severe blow to al-Qaeda" and voiced hope that it would help turn the tide in the campaign against the insurgency in Iraq.
But he warned it would not necessarily halt sectarian violence in Iraq.
A similar note was sounded by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.
"Of course, we cannot pretend that [his death] will mean the end of the violence," he said.
"But it is a relief that such a heinous and dangerous man, who has caused so much harm to the Iraqis, is no longer around to continue his work."
Zarqawi, who had been operating in Iraq since 2003, is believed to have masterminded a series of attacks and assassinations over the past three years, and to have personally beheaded two Americans.
His organisation was responsible for the beheadings of two Bulgarian truck drivers in Iraq in 2004.
"It's obviously a big defeat for al-Qaeda," said European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso.
Noting that the terrorist's influence had extended beyond Iraq's borders, EC Vice President Franco Frattini said Europe and other parts of the world had been affected by Zarqawi and his army's "dreadful activities".
British Prime Minister Tony Blair described the development as "a very important moment in Iraq",describing it as "a strike against al-Qaeda in Iraq and therefore a strike against al-Qaeda everywhere".
But, he added, no one should have illusions, as the terrorists would continue to kill and many obstacles remain in the fight against terror.
