09/10/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 09/10/06
A 20-member NATO delegation arrived in Pristina last week for talks with Kosovo leaders on the Alliance's role after the final status settlement, and to observe the security situation in the province.
"We are interested in having NATO troops after the decision on Kosovo's status," President Fatmir Sejdiu said after meeting with the delegation. 
NATO currently has more than 10,000 peacekeeping troops in Kosovo, representing 24 nations.
Meeting with Parliament Speaker Kole Berisha, delegation representative General Karl Lamers urged Kosovo's leaders to "work for creating a multiethnic society".
"A democratic and peaceful Kosovo is a stabilising factor for the whole region," he said. 
Lamers also stressed the need to reach a "positive solution" on the status question. 
"We need to support and co-operate with special envoy Martti Ahtisaari in order to reach an agreement this year -- this is our aim," he said.
For his part, Sejdiu reiterated the Kosovo Albanian demand for independence and sovereignty. 
"We believe that 2006 will be the year of independence for Kosovo," he said.
He also urged that there be no delay to the status solution. 
"Keeping in mind the Contact Group principles, the Kosovo's final status should be solved within 2006," the president said.
In comments last week, Ahtisaari suggested the decision could be postponed.
If Serbia sets an election date for the end of this year, the six-member Contact Group -- consisting of the United States, United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy and Russia -- might reconsider the timetable for the status decision, Ahtisaari told Finnish TV.
"Maybe it will mean that my proposal -- which is under preparation -- would be presented only after the elections," he said.
But representatives of the Contact Group have since appeared to rule out a delay."The Contact Group has not changed the agenda for Kosovo and we are still committed to realising our principles that Kosovo's status should be settled within 2006," said the US chief of mission in Pristina, Tina Kaidanow, after a meeting with Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku.
Ahtisaari himself now insists a postponement is not in the works. 
"No such directions have been given," Reuters quoted him as saying Monday (October 9th).
"[The] starting point for the schedule we have with the Contact Group is that this issue will be solved by the end of the year," he said.
