18/10/2010
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia - 18/10/10 Photos by Nikolay Dimitrov
Situated on the boundary between Europe and Asia, the Black Sea is one of the world's most isolated inland seas. 
It is distinctive for another reason also: its depths are largely without oxygen.
Accounting for about 13% of the total volume of the sea, its upper layer is oxygen-rich and home to a wealth of marine flora and fauna. 
But the bottom layer is devoid of marine life. 
Instead, there is a permanent presence of hydrogen sulphide, a colourless, extremely toxic gas that smells like rotten eggs.
The sea's peculiar characteristics make existence inherently fragile for its flora and fauna. 
Scientists warn it is "very vulnerable to disturbances of its environment and ecosystems". 
With unsustainable human activities throwing a new factor into the mix, sharp declines are being reported.
The push for securing high crop yields and cheaper sources of meat heading to market has led to an extensive use of large amounts of fertilisers and pesticides and the creation of larger-scale animal farms, experts say.
Waste from the six littoral countries, and from nations in the drainage basin, enters the sea primarily through rivers, and sometimes through outright dumping.
Fishermen say high pollution levels have led to dwindling catches. 
"Instead of dumping the slime 25km-30km inside the sea, the barges dumped it here close to the shore," Angel Kishev, an 80-year-old fisherman from the town of Chernomorets, told SETimes in late September.
"They simply opened the cargo hatchways and dropped it. 
And this has had an impact."
Meanwhile, Turkish fishermen quoted by the daily Hurriyet cite inadequate wastewater treatment. 
"Could anyone tell me the name of any island that uses a water purifying facility?" the paper quoted Sekip Yalcin, a 48-year-old fisherman, as asking.
Of all 19 coastal agglomerations with a population over 10,000 people, Chernomorets and two others have no urban waste water treatment (UWWT) facility at all, the Bulgarian environment ministry said in e-mailed response to a question from SETimes.
"Projects for the construction of a new, or the upgrading of an existing UWWT facility are currently being implemented in three other agglomerations," it noted. 
"The existing facilities in another nine need to be upgraded to improve the level of purification and the projects have been approved, but their implementation has not begun yet."
The UWWT facilities in the remaining four do not need any upgrading, the ministry said.
During its EU membership negotiations back in 2001, Bulgaria promised to have all facilities up and running in line with the required standards by the end of this year, Deputy Minister of Environment Evdokiya Maneva said in an interview last month. 
The previous two governments took no steps whatever to fulfil that commitment, however.
Instead, hundreds of millions were squandered on village sewage projects that are not part of any EU obligation. 
Stressing that the current government has the political will to meet its commitments as quickly as possible, Maneva insists that Bulgaria will be able to resolve the problem within the next three years.
Over-fertilisation of a water body by waste nutrients causes a dense growth of plant life, including phytoplankton and algae. 
The decomposition of those organisms depletes the supply of oxygen, leading to the death of animal life.
Eutrophication, as the process is called, is considered to have contributed most significantly to the degradation of the Black Sea and the change in the structure of its ecosystem. 
Chemical pollution, due to the entry of oil, pesticides or heavy metals into the marine environment, the discharge of insufficiently treated sewage, the introduction of non-native species and the dumping of solid waste into the sea have been identified as other problem areas.
A UNDP report in 1999 estimated that the six littoral countries contributed about 70% of the total amount of nitrogen and phosphorus compounds flowing into the Black Sea as waste from human activities. 
"Some of this amount and almost all of the remaining 30% enter the sea via the Danube River," it added.
The report was published seven years after the 1992 signing in Bucharest of the Convention on the Protection of the Black Sea against Pollution, in which the six coastal countries affirmed their commitment to environmental protection and sustainable management of the sea.
Implementation of the Bucharest Convention, including three specific protocols on control of land-based sources of pollution, dumping of waste, and joint action in case of accidents (such as oil spills) is co-ordinated by the Black Sea Commission, whose secretariat is based in Istanbul.
According to the 2007 Black Sea Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis (TDA), conducted with the support of several organisations, including the UNDP and the UN Office for Project Services, river-borne nutrient loads dropped about 30% over the previous decade or so.
But they remained much higher than the pollution loads from municipal and industrial sources, the authors said, singling out the Danube as the largest source.
"Environmental improvements have primarily been brought about by a collapse in agricultural productivity and a decline in manufacturing industry, rather than direct government interventions," was one of the conclusions in the TDA. 
"It will be many years before the reduced river loads are likely to be reflected in the sea itself."
The analysts also found extremely high values of some chemical pollutants, which appeared to be present at certain areas only and voiced concern over the levels of some pesticides. 
They also warned that there is an increased risk of pollution from shipping and offshore oil and gas installations.
"A single large-scale accident could have devastating consequences for the whole region," they conclude.
