06/09/2006
(The Times, EUpolitix, Nine o'Clock - 06/09/06;
AP, Reuters, AFP, EUobserver, EUexpands, EurActiv, Rompres, Sofia News Agency, BNN - 05/09/06)
Three weeks before the European Commission (EC) is due to issue its final reports on Bulgaria and Romania's preparedness for EU membership, Brussels officials indicated on Tuesday (5 September) that both countries are set to join the bloc in January, as scheduled.
However, it might not be the smoothest entry, as Bulgaria in particular will likely face the strictest conditions ever applied to an acceding country.
Under the accession treaty signed in April 2005, Bulgaria and Romania are to join the Union on 1 January 2007.
Safeguard clauses included in the document, however, allow the EU to postpone their entry by one year if they are deemed unprepared for assuming the obligations of membership.
The union could also impose certain restrictions that would exclude them from full involvement in some areas.
The EC is to publish its final monitoring reports on the two countries on 26 September, when it is expected to recommend whether Bulgaria and Romania should join the Union on time, or if accession should be delayed until January 2008.
Taking into account the commission's recommendations, EU leaders make the final decision, likely during a meeting in Finland on 20 October.
With the EC now in the closing stages of work on the key papers, media reports suggested this week that Brussels has decided against a postponement, so that the Union can keep pressing the governments to meet their reform commitments.
However, concerned about insufficient progress in some areas, particularly in the fight against organised crime and corruption in Bulgaria, the EC is expected to recommend strong membership restrictions, at least on Sofia.
"We think the best way to achieve our aim is to work with them with the threat of these measures," a report in Monday's Financial Times quoted a senior EC official as saying.
"It's a better way to achieve results than by postponing until 2008."
For Bulgaria, the EC appears to be mulling restrictions in the economic and justice fields for three years after its entry into the Union due to its failure to deal with organised crime and corruption.
Speaking after a meeting Monday with top European Parliament (EP) officials in Strasbourg, Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev voiced hope that the EC's report will be fair, insisting that Sofia's stepped up efforts in the fight against organised crime and corruption are producing results.
"It is very important for us as a country to join in a dignified way," the AP quoted Stanishev as telling reporters.
"We count on the fact that the Commission will judge objectively the progress of my country."
In talks with EP chairman Josep Borell, he also pledged Tuesday that his country would continue implementing necessary reforms even after it joins the EU.
