07/03/2006
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 07/03/06
Only about half of Romanians have access to running water or waste collection systems.
About 45 per cent of public roads are unpaved, and most paved roads are in bad condition, as are hundreds of road and rail bridges.
For many of the country's half million unemployed, working abroad appears to be the only solution.
As for those wishing to to open or expand a small business, bank loans are often very difficult to obtain.
These are some of the problems that EU pre-accession funds are meant to address.
Brussels has granted some 3.8 billion euros for development projects in Romania.
Infrastructure, environmental protection, business environment, and social services are among the areas Brussels is willing to finance.
But despite the enormous need, Romanian institutions, companies, NGOs, and individuals haven't managed to put together enough eligible projects.
In some cases, the three main EU-financed programmes -- ISPA, PHARE and SAPARD -- spent as little as 10 per cent to 20 per cent of the available money for Romania.
Bucharest officials have repeatedly had to ask for the terms to be extended while they seek to boost absorption capacity.
"The biggest problem is the lack of the ability to elaborate projects," the daily Evenimentul Zilei quoted Deputy Finance Minister Nicolae Ivan as saying.
He added that many ideas are found ineligible because their promoters can't prove they own the funds needed for co-financing (usually 25 per cent of the total).
The government has been taking steps to address the problem.
Earlier this year, Prime Minister Calin Popescu-Tariceanu's centre-right cabinet held an extraordinary meeting on improving absorption levels.
"Before accession, we have to deal with up to 800m euros per year.
After becoming an EU member, Romania will receive 2.5 billion to 4 billion euros per year.
If we have big problems now, imagine what could happen then," Deputy European Accession Minister Leonard Orban told journalists.
To prevent the situation from becoming catastrophic, the government is hiring about 8,500 new personnel for the public institutions that deal with EU grants.
"It's a necessary decision in order to decentralise management of the cohesion funds," Tariceanu said.
The new jobs are in various ministries, including agriculture, environment, transportation, commerce and internal affairs, as well as their local branches.
