11/04/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 11/04/06
Kosovo's status should be settled this year, and the solution must be acceptable to its citizens, representatives of the Contact Group reiterated on Friday (7 April) during a visit to the province.
"The Contact Group reaffirmed its wish that all possible efforts be made to achieve a settlement in 2006 and noted that the final settlement needs, inter alia, to be acceptable to the people of Kosovo," said a press release issued after talks among representatives of Contact Group member states, Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Agim Ceku, the Kosovo negotiating team, and representative of Serbs and other minorities.
At the same time, the Contact Group restated its commitment to preserving a viable Serb presence in Kosovo, and said arrangements must be negotiated in the status process to guarantee the rights and security of all of Kosovo's people.
"Kosovo's leaders should deliver tangible results on the [UN-set] standards, particularly those affecting minority communities, in order to improve the situation of minorities and all citizens," the representatives said.
The Group urged the province's leaders to be flexible and generous in the status negotiations, particularly when it comes to decentralisation and the protection of Serbian Orthodox heritage in Kosovo.
They also encouraged Kosovo Serbs and non-Serb minorities to participate actively in the status process and in Kosovo's governing institutions.
A fourth meeting between Pristina and Belgrade delegations will take place in Vienna, on 4 May, amid sharp differences between the two sides.
"The last meeting only showed how far the positions are from each other," said Deputy Prime Minister Lutfi Haziri.
While in Kosovo, the Contact Group representatives visited the ethnically divided city of Mitrovica and met with regional mayors.
Mitrovica suffers from a host of problems -- including economic stagnation, unresolved property claims and restricted freedom of movement -- that cannot be addressed without engagement and co-operation between residents on both sides of the River Ibra, the representatives said.
The Group pledged sustained attention to Mitrovica both now and after Kosovo's status is resolved.
It reaffirmed previous statements that there will be no partition of any kind of Kosovo, either de facto or otherwise.
The international representatives arrived in Pristina after a two-day stay in Belgrade, where they met with Serbian President Boris Tadic, Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic and the Serbian negotiating team for the Kosovo status talks.
They urged Belgrade to play a constructive role in the process and help arrive at realistic solutions, especially in the areas of decentralisation and the protection of minority rights.
