11/04/2006
(AP, UNDP - 10/04/06)
UNDP chief Kemal Dervis praised Albania on Monday (10 April) for its co-operation with his organisation and development efforts, and pledged continued assistance to the country.
"Albania has been a role model for other countries in its pursuit of human development and in its strong commitment to the Millennium Development Goals," said Dervis, the third highest-ranking UN official, during a visit to Tirana. 
"Albania recognised that good governance is a crucial component of development by making it a priority in all of their work. 
I applaud Albania for that."
Dervis arrived on a two-day visit to the country on Monday -- his second visit since 1991, and the first since he became UNDP head in May 2005.
Dervis met with Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli. 
"The priority you have given economic development -- since the time you were president -- it is obviously having a result," a UNDP statement quoted Dervis as saying after his meeting with the prime minister.
During the talks, Berisha briefed him about Albania's efforts in the fight against organised crime, trafficking and corruption, and about concrete legal initiatives, including the law to counter conflict of interest and nepotism.
The two also discussed the UNDP programme in Albania, particularly in four new areas of co-operation: Combating extra-legality and undertaking tax reform; information and communication technologies for schools; the Brain Gain initiative; and environment and tourism.
The e-schools project focuses on the modernisation of school computer labs, the establishment of broadband Internet connectivity and the training of teachers. 
Around 1,749 primary schools and 384 high schools will be the primary beneficiaries of this project, which will help Albanian students acquire skills and take advantage of modern information and communication technologies. 
The UNDP has set aside $1.3m for the first year of implementation of the 36-month programme.
The projects on combating extralegality and supporting ecological initiatives and cultural tourism were also expected to be inaugurated during Dervis's visit.
The Brain Gain initiative would assist the government in its effort to utilise expatriate Albanian expertise for the country's socio-economic development.
On Monday, Dervis visited a police station commissariat in Tirana, which has been renovated under an ongoing project in support of security sector reform, financed by various international and bilateral donors, including the UNDP.
Addressing deputies in parliament later, Dervis urged politicians to stay united on issues of national importance, stressing that stability is key to sustainable economic development and growth. 
Income per capita in Albania could double in 20 years if it promotes "private entrepreneurship and markets, as well as a good government that makes sure that markets are competitive, that they are well regulated, that the law applies equally to all," the AP quoted him as saying.
"So Albania needs both: effective government and competitive markets ... 
What is crucial is to enforce the rule of law and not allow criminal elements to distort the economy to their advantage. 
Political instability is the biggest enemy of rapid and sustained growth," Dervis said.
