11/04/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 11/04/06
In late March, Macedonia became the first country in the Western Balkans to hold talks with the European Commission on easing the requirements for visas. 
Two days of negotiations were held on 28-29 March, setting the stage for what Brussels says would ultimately be a region-wide initiative.
Visa relief was one of the steps proposed in the EC's January communique, "The Western Balkans on the road to the EU: Consolidating stability and raising prosperity". 
It sets out a number of measures intended to help membership candidates and potential candidate countries move further along the road to entry into the bloc.
Other measures outlined in the document include providing more scholarships for students and providing continued assistance to small enterprises via the recently established European Fund for Southeast Europe, to which 60m euros have been allocated for 2006.
In addition, a Regional Higher Education and Public Administration School will start activities this year. 
Planning meetings about the school have already been initiated in each beneficiary country in the region, and the first regional-level meeting is set to take place in May.
Of all the EC's proposals, however, the one that has provoked the most discussion is its call for a regional free trade agreement. 
Media in the Balkans, echoed by various politicians, greeted the idea with suspicion, characterising it as an attempt to restore Yugoslavia, minus Slovenia but with the addition of Albania. 
Those concerns have now subsided, with EC representatives insisting that they had no such aim in mind and stressing the benefits of trade liberalisation.
On 6 April, prime ministers of eight countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Moldova, Romania and Serbia-Montenegro -- met in Bucharest and endorsed the creation of a single free trade zone through the expansion of the existing Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA).
CEFTA currently includes Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia and Romania. 
However, Bulgaria and Romania will be leaving the organisation once they enter the EU.
The EC also has suggested the establishment of a local border traffic regime at the external borders of the EU member states. 
Under this regime, residents of border regions -- including along EU borders with Western Balkan countries -- could be authorised to cross the border with a local border traffic permit, and without a visa.
