10/04/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times -- 10/4/06
In January, former Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi pledged to establish Serb-language classrooms in Pristina schools, a move that would enable children from the local Serb community to study in their own language.
However, the idea appears to have foundered for the time being.
"Kosovo's government formed a task force, which is working in order to create the possible conditions for Serb children to study in Pristina, but at the last moment, pupils have been withdrawn from this initiative," Kosovo government spokesperson Upliana Lama told Southeast European Times.
The Serbs "have expressed their interest to continue their studies in the town of Gracanica, due to the friendship circle they have created," Lama explained.
The schooling situation is one more example of the many challenges involved in bringing together Kosovo's ethnic communities, divided by the legacy of war and by disagreements over the province's future.
The ethnic Albanian majority, accounting for 90 per cent of the population, favours full independence from Serbia.
Belgrade, however, is pushing for some form of continued sovereignty and is discouraging local Serbs from participating in Kosovo institutions.
Reconciliation can be achieved, but it will take time, analysts say.
In the meantime, progress is likely to be incremental, with steps forward followed by steps back.
The schooling initiative, for instance, was launched in an atmosphere of optimism during a visit by Kosovo officials to a Serb community in the capital.
According to the head of the Pristina municipality, Ismet Beqiri, the visit was a signal that "Pristina can be home to people from different communities."
At the time, members of Serb families asked the authorities to expand their visits to the Serb communities, not only in Pristina but all over Kosovo.
This, they said, would help strengthen Serb confidence in the Kosovo institutions.
Since then, the momentum has again stalled.
Nevertheless, there are still glimmers of progress.
At the end of March, for instance, representatives of the province's different communities assembled in Durres, Albania for a "constructive dialogue" about minority rights.
