09/08/2010
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 09/08/10
Zarko Rakcevic, a former leader of the ruling Social Democrats, helped spearhead the movement for independence of Montenegro. 
The fight, he told SETimes, was not only for sovereignty, but also for democracy, prosperity and respect.
"We have to be satisfied with the achievement of our dream, the restoration of independence of Montenegro and Euro-Atlantic orientation. 
However, economic stagnation, rising social tensions and poverty, organised crime and corruption are seriously threatening the foundations of our country and its reputation," Rakcevic said.
A former ally of Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, Rakcevic does not want to be a silent bystander. 
Together with a group of intellectuals, entrepreneurs and former government officials, he has formed Forum 2010 with the goal of changing Montenegro's political and social environment via public involvement.
Ex-foreign minister Branko Lukovac amd General Assembly chairman advisor Blagoje Grahovac are among the prominent figures who have signed on.
"In Montenegro, a significant number of prominent and influential people would like to point out and unmask some of the issues, and help to make sure that things go the other way," Rakcevic said. 
"The Forum has no obligation and mission to deal with daily issues politically. 
We are insisting on dialogue between all the structures; we propose solutions for the crisis."
Rakcevic said that he "does not think Montenegro has a responsible government, but Montenegro needs clear programme and a responsible opposition".
By a responsible opposition, he means one which is working to address the issues facing the country, not one which wants to turn the clock back on independence. 
"The Forum will strategically co-operate with these social forces that want a change in Montenegro, and not change the state and legal status of Montenegro," he said.
Economic crisis
Forum 2010 recently organised a roundtable discussion on how to deal with the economic crisis.
"The government, in the past decade, especially in the period of economic expansion after independence, has missed the opportunity to accelerate structural reforms in the economy," he said, citing bureaucracy, an inadequate business climate, too much financial speculation and thoughtless consumption as problems.
He proposes that future policy development be focused on measures that can bring about widespread economic improvement.
"The state should not spend money from the IMF, which is limited because there are very few credit ratings, on one or two infrastructure projects, the effects of which could be felt only after many years," he said, citing hydroelectric power as an example. 
"The public interest requires that priority in borrowing be placed on good programmes that could quickly and efficiently activate the Montenegrin economy, increase employment and exports, and improve living standards."
On Djukanovic
As a former political partner of Djukanovic, leader of Montenegro since 1991, Rakcevic worked alongside him during the country's most turbulent political era.
"In light of his policy change at the end of the 1990s -- from a proponent of union with Serbia to a promoter of independent Montenegro – and as his coalition partner and associate, I have respect for his decisive contribution to the renewal of the Montenegrin state," Rakcevic said.
Djukanovic's political skills and charisma have undoubtedly left their imprint on the past two decades, he said. 
But he believes it's time for Djukanovic to retire from politics in order to "allow the change of government and bring the necessary positive socio-political dynamics".
A referendum on NATO
Forum 2010 supports Montenegro's NATO integration. 
Rakcevic made it clear that such a decision should be made by a referendum.
"In Forum 2010 we are aware of the complexity of this issue, because we analyzed both the advantages and indisputable risks of entering NATO. 
Our geographical position and the size of Montenegro, its historical experience in the Balkans, relations with neighbors and undeniable positive orientation towards Euro-Atlantic values and achievements determine our support for Montenegro's NATO membership," Rakcevic said.
However, he thinks that Montenegro rushed to send troops to Afghanistan.
"The content, character of the relationship, the manner and condition of the Montenegrin participation in the collective security system requires much knowledge and professionalism, as well as a statesman's strategic wisdom and responsibilities. 
The urgency with which we joined the mission in Afghanistan, in our view, is not a good example of this approach," Rakcevic said.
