08/06/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 08/06/06
With Montenegrins having voted to split from the loose union wth Serbia, the economic prospects of the new state are a key topic of interest.
According to the IMF's resident representative in Serbia-Montenegro, Harald Hirschhofer, foreign investors are becoming increasingly confident in Montenegro and are willing to commit financial resources, skills and time.
Tourism, financial services and the construction sector are especially promising, despite competitive disadvantages, Hirschhofer said.
He noted that Montenegro has comparatively brief seasons for tourism and agriculture.
Privatisation is also being carried out appropriately and will pick up in the wake of the independence referendum, the IMF representative said.
For some types of assets, such as hotels, privatisation is rather straightforward and transparency and accountability are key ingredients, he said.
In others -- such as electricity, the ports, airports, and the airline industry -- some difficult regulatory issues must be resolved.
The IMF is urging such assets to be offered for sale or as long term concessions to international companies that have experience and scale economies managing them.
To date, Montenegro has had modest success in attracting Foreign Direct Investment through privatisation.
According to the Agency for Reconstruction and Foreign Investments, the amount totalled 420m euros from 1997 to 2004.
The income generated from privatisation in 2004 was 25m euros, while contracted investments reached 75m euros.
The main agency responsible for conducting privatisation in Montenegro is the Privatisation Council, established in September 1998
According to Montenegrin Economy Minister Predrag Boskovic, lack of technology -- in comparison to Western competitors -- is the largest problem faced by some companies.
This can be overcome by finding strategic partners who will invest in technology, he said.
Currently, the ministry is devoting special attention to completing the infrastructure needed for the development of the energy sector, which it sees as offering major potential for Montenegro's economic development.
Public spending objectives for 2006, according to the finance ministry, include pushing ahead with EU-related reforms, tackling the grey economy, improving competitiveness, restructuring banks and companies, and maintaining macroeconomic stability while trimming spending levels.
In February, the IMF Executive Board completed the sixth and final review of Serbia-Montenegro's economic performance under an extended arrangement.
It recommended that Montenegro continue with its tight macroeconomic policy stance in order to improve competitiveness.
Over the medium term, structural reforms will be the key to increasing productivity, bolstering growth potential and reducing external imbalances, the Board said.
