08/06/2006
(Reuters, AP, AFP, RFE/RL, UPI, Makfax - 07/06/06)
Kosovo's provisional institutions have been given up to six months to implement a set of measures aimed at improving the rights of the province's minorities, primarily those of ethnic Serbs.
The Contact Group, consisting of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, has outlined 13 steps to be completed "within four to six months", Reuters reported on Wednesday (7 June).
These include adopting legislation on languages and religious freedom, setting up additional police stations to ensure the protection of minorities' rights and security, and earmarking money for refugee returns.
"This list is not exhaustive nor is it intended to minimise the importance of implementing all the [UN-set] standards," the Contact Group said in a document.
Rather, it added, the purpose is to highlight priority items for immediate action.
Technically still part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict.
Fulfilling UN standards in eight areas had been considered a precondition for beginning negotiations on its final status.
While acknowledging that none of the benchmarks have been fully achieved, the UN decided in October to launch the process, saying it could not run the province indefinitely.
Direct, UN-led negotiations between Serb and Kosovo Albanian officials have been under way since February, with little progress so far.
The international community expects the process to be completed by the end of this year.
The Kosovo Albanian majority, accounting for 90 per cent of the province's population of 2 million, hopes the talks will lead to full independence.
Belgrade says it is only willing to grant substantial autonomy.
Meanwhile, tension in the province remains high, particularly in the north, where about half of Kosovo's 100,000 ethnic Serbs live.
A Kosovo Serb youth was killed and two other men were seriously injured in shooting incidents over the past two weeks, which the community blames on ethnic Albanian militants.
Protesting the violence, Kosovo Serbs declared a "state of emergency" in four northern municipalities, saying also they were cutting off all ties with the province's institutions.
UN police officials said there was no indication that either of the attacks was ethnically motivated, but pledged to beef up security in the volatile Serb-dominated north.
UN Police Commissioner Kai Vittrup said on Wednesday that over 500 international police officers would be moved to the region of the ethnically-divided town of Mitrovica and other northern Serb towns near the provincial border.
"And more could come to make sure the police are able, together with the municipalities, to maintain law and order," he added.
The UN police mission in Kosovo includes some 2,000 international officers, working alongside more than 7,000 Kosovo policemen.
There are 130 vacancies in the Kosovo police that could be filled by former Serbian police officers, provided their records were clean, UN sources told Reuters on Wednesday.
NATO, which decided last week to reopen a base in Kosovo's north, is expected to deploy some 500 Italian troops on Friday.
They will join the 17,500-strong KFOR for a regular month-long exercise to prepare them for any potential crisis.
Western officials are concerned that, if Kosovo gains independence, ethnic Serbs in the north could launch an attempt to partition the province -- an option the Contact Group has ruled out as a possible outcome of the status talks.
