06/03/2006
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 06/03/06
Residents of six cities in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) gathered at the end of February to publicly support Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) lawsuit against neighbouring Serbia-Montenegro for aggression and genocide in the 1992-1995 conflict.
The process at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague began on 27 February, 13 years after BiH submitted the charges in March 1993.
The rallies in Sarajevo, Mostar, Tuzla, Travnik, Cazin and Gorazde were organised by 13 Bosnian associations of war veterans and families of killed soldiers. 
Although turnout was lower than expected, organisers say they are pleased the gatherings were held with dignity and without incident.
Sakib Softic, the BiH representative in the ICJ case, said that he hopes for a favourable verdict. 
But his Serbia-Montenegro counterpart, Radoslav Stojanovic, argues that BiH will not be able to prove that Belgrade had genocidal intentions.
The hearing will be conducted through 9 May, with a verdict expected by the end of this year or early in 2007.
In the FBiH, residents and politicians alike are hoping the case will lead to war reparations. 
For victims and their families, however, the most important issue is revealing the truth about the conflict.
"We do not hate and we are not seeking for revenge," said Jasmin Jusuf Jasarevic, a young man who lost both his parents during the war. 
"We just want the truth to be finally established, so we can find peace in our hearts. 
The things have to be called with the right name. 
This was an aggression against our country."
Politicians representing the Bosnian Serbs have never supported the idea of pressing a legal suit against either the former Yugoslavia or its successor, Serbia-Montenegro. 
The majority in Republika Srpska does not view the conflict as the result of Serbian aggression, nor do they agree that genocide took place.
In Belgrade, meanwhile, attitudes have been shifting, with a growing number of intellectuals holding the Milosevic regime responsible for terrible atrocities. 
The former Yugoslavia was definitely involved in genocide, says Sonja Biserko, noting that many of the top military and political figures involved are at the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague -- including former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic.
