05/09/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 05/09/06
On Friday (1 September), the change of command ceremony of Kosovo Force Commander (COMKFOR) was held at KFOR headquarters in Pristina. 
German Lieutenant General Roland Kather took over KFOR from Lieutenant General Giuseppe Valotto.
Admiral Harry Ulrich, commander of Allied Joint Forces in Naples, stressed the success of the mission over the past year under Valotto's leadership. 
He also emphasised the evolution KFOR has undergone, upgrading its flexibility on the field, "thanks to its commander's determination".
Ulrich also praised Valotto's efforts to improve the quality of life in Kosovo and enhance public trust and confidence in international forces. 
"As a result, the people of Kosovo have accepted General Valotto into their hearts and he has taken them into his", he said.
Ulrich welcomed Kather as the new commander, saying "familiar in the region because of his tour as a brigade commander in Prizren seven years ago, Lieutenant General Kather will continue to carry the torch of democracy". 
Ulrich added that Kather's strong leadership and knowledge of the region will help him face the many demands of the coming months.
For his part, Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu told Valotto that during his stint as KFOR commander, "Kosovo has gone through critically important times and significant challenges, which, thanks to your contribution, have been met successfully."
Valotto said that the year has been one of the most demanding of his life, as a man and the soldier. 
"This assignment as COMKFOR has been the most important professional experience in my entire long military career and I am proud to have successfully accomplished it… It has been a great opportunity to work for the future of Kosovo."
This is the third time that Kather -- who commanded the 13th Mechanised Infantry Division, deployed in Leipzig from September 2003 until last month -- is in Kosovo and contributing towards peace-building efforts in the region.
"I can rely on the military contingents of 35 nations, which make up KFOR and be a guarantor for peace and stability. 
I'm absolutely convinced that a peaceful future and development of this country is only reachable and possible with a strong will and the participation of all inhabitants", Kather added.
KFOR is a NATO-led international force responsible for establishing and maintaining security in Kosovo. 
This peace-enforcement force entered Kosovo on June 12, 1999 under a UN mandate, two days after the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1244.
