06/03/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 06/03/06
After more than a decade, Croatia and Slovenia remain unable to resolve their dispute over a section of the Adriatic that connects both countries.
The maritime border in the Bay of Piran -- known as Savudria Bay by Croatians -- remains undetermined, and periodic controversies have erupted over fishing rights.
The problem is a legacy of the Yugoslav era, during which the maritime border was never clearly demarcated.
Although Croatian and Slovenian leaders signed a deal in 2001, it ran into opposition from the Croatian public and was never ratified by parliament.
Last fall, the Slovenian government set up an ecological zone off its coast, spurring Zagreb to complain that its sovereignty was being violated.
According to Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa, his country is entitled to territorial waters stretching 12 miles from its shoreline and unfettered access to international waters.
Zagreb, however, has firmly rejected that claim.
"We won't allow Slovenian fishermen to fish in the Croatian part of Piran Bay," said Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, adding that his government would "do anything to avoid incidents".
Croatia says it will either seek international arbitration or take the case to either the Court of Justice at The Hague or the Court of Sea Law in Hamburg.
"Slovenia cannot be an enemy of Croatia;
on the contrary;
Slovenia is a natural ally because both came out of Yugoslavia.
Croatia has to find conditions for establishing stable and good relations with Slovenia, and demanding an international solution is probably the only optimal way," Sanader said.
Slovenian President Janez Drnovsek says both sides should try to reach an agreement through direct talks, but seek international recourse if the process fails.
The issue should be resolved before Slovenia takes over the EU presidency in 2008, he says.
The fact that Slovenia is an EU member, and that Croatia is a candidate for membership, provides an extra dimension to the controversy.
Hinting that Zagreb needs its neighbour's support, Slovenian officials have suggested that fishing rights in Piran Bay are tied to EU rules, and have accused Croatia of dragging its feet in meeting EU requirements in that area.
"Croatian-Slovenian relations cannot hurt Croatian negotiations with the EU," insists Sanader.
In February, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said that it is up to the two countries, not Brussels, to settle the issue.
While the European Commission (EC) can help with the negotiations process, he said, it has no views on a solution and cannot provide a judgment on the matter.
"We are convinced that a properly functioning fisheries regime could significantly reduce the number of incidents.
However, the countries have to try to find a solution together," he added.
