07/06/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 07/06/06
In most of Europe, feminine professional titles are widely used, but in Serbia they are only starting to be introduced. 
Some see this as a sign that Serbia has a long way to go in terms of countering discrimination, while others argue that the issue is superficial and has little concrete relevance to womens' lives.
According to the Matica Srpska, the official linguistic authority, the Serbian language contains as many as 300 feminine noun forms denoting professions. 
Only a handful, however, have entered common usage. 
Women doctors, directors and teachers all use feminine forms of their job titles. 
Less common are the feminine forms for such titles as secretary, psychologist or human rights advocate.
The situation may be changing, thanks to a planned dictionary of non-sexist language. 
The dictionary's author, University of Novi Said professor Svenka Savic, believes promoting such language is important, given Serbia's hopes of joining the EU.
"It is questioned whether this is in accordance with the Serbian language, and the answer is, of course, yes, because the category of gender is interwoven in all levels of the language," Savic says.
According to her, the process is bound to be gradual. 
"We propose that at the first stage of the selection of forms both are offered, and see whether at later stages -- in a year, two years, five or ten years -- some sort of specialisation will occur or whether some will become redundant," she says.
Journalists, who perhaps have the greatest potential to influence the use of feminine titles, tend to be sceptical. 
"I don't think that linguistic or lexical or any such equality will improve the position of women in the society," says Politika editor Nikola Trkulja.
"It is more important that every female colleague has a better position at work, status, higher salary than the fact that she will be addressed as journalist, doctor or doctoress," Trkulja adds.
In part, the issue has gained resonance because of the overall situation for women in Serbia. 
The republic is one of the last parts of Europe not to have adopted any kind of anti-discrimination act or other legislation ensuring the equality of men and women.
