06/10/2006
(Telegraph, Turkish Daily News - 06/10/06;
Reuters, AP, AFP, BBC, DPA, RFE/RL, Hurriyet - 05/10/06;
AFP, AP, Reuters - 03/10/06)
The trial against a writer accused of insulting the founder of the modern Turkish republic opened in Istanbul on Thursday (October 5th).
The charges stem from a passage in Ipek Calislar's biography of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk's wife, Latife Usaki.
In the passage, the writer describes Ataturk as escaping an assassination attempt by fleeing the presidential palace disguised in a chador.
The book was published in June and quickly became a bestseller.
The prosecution was initiated by a reader of the Turkish mass-circulation daily Hurriyet, which published excerpts of the biography.
"To claim that ...
Ataturk, whom no one could even attempt to weigh his courage, would have done something like this ...
is the greatest insult," the AP quoted Huseyin Tugrul Pekin as saying in a letter to the prosecutor, who eventually pressed charges against Calislar and Necdet Tatlıcan, an editor at Hurriyet.
"
This was a decision Mustafa Kemal took at a critical moment and it turned out to be successful," Calislar argued in a recent newspaper interview.
"How can anyone file a lawsuit claiming that he could not have done it?"
Neither of the accused attended the opening hearing Thursday.
The court adjourned the trial to December 19th.
Citing the Dogan news agency, reports said the judge ordered that police bring Tatlican to the court and called on Calislar to attend the trial.
Both could face prison sentences of up to four and a half years if convicted.
The start of the trial came on the final day of EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn's three-day visit to Turkey.
Rehn has urged Ankara to change or abolish articles in the country's penal code that could infringe on the freedom of expression.
Article 301 of the code makes it a criminal offence to "insult" the republic, parliament or other state institutions, and stipulates a prison sentence of up to three years.
Two of the country's most famous novelists, Orhan Pamuk and Elif Shafak, are among the scores of Turkish intellectuals that have faced prosecution on charges of "insulting Turkishness".
The charges against Pamuk were dismissed earlier this year, while the trial against Shafak ended with her acquittal shortly after it began.
"You must break the vicious cycle that this article has created," Turkey's English-language Journal of Turkish Weekly quoted Rehn as telling officials in Ankara this week.
"It must be either changed or removed entirely from the penal code.
This is of the utmost importance for the freedom of expression.
Even if the cases end favourably for the defendants, it does not change the fact that they never should have been brought about in the first place."
As the trial against Calislar opened Thursday, another Istanbul court issued its opinion on the ruling in Shafak's case, suggesting that Article 301 needs to be revised to give a more precise definition of "Turkishness".
"Efforts to limit freedom of thought and expression may have grave consequences,” Reuters quoted the court saying in the opinion on the Shafak ruling.
"It is unthinkable to talk about crimes committed by fictional characters ...
It is necessary to define the boundaries of the Turkishness concept and place it on firm ground."
