05/06/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 05/06/06
From a coalition with the ultra nationalists to a resurrection of their old ex-communist leader, Romania's Social Democrats (PSD) have tried everything to halt their plunge in the polls. 
The decline started with the loss of power in December 2004, and recent revelations about greed and corruption have accelerated it. 
As of May, the PSD retained only 23 per cent of voter support, down from the 31 per cent it had in October 2005.
PSD President Mircea Geoana is a career diplomat and former foreign minister. 
He promised to modernise an organisation viewed as the heir to the largest Communist party in Eastern Europe. 
The reform started by the so-called Transylvanian "Cluj Group" is strongly backed by the Party of European Socialists, to whom PSD belongs.
However, Geoana's latest political tactics have raised doubts. 
His initiative to sign a protocol with the ultra nationalist Corneliu Vadim Tudor was halted at the last minute. 
The protocol aimed to create "a strong and united opposition", as Geoana put it, and to pave the way for toppling the reformist Tariceanu's cabinet with a motion to be introduced this month.
But the prospect of such a collaboration stunned the reformist "Cluj group" and some EU officials. 
The Eurosocialist Jan Marinus Wiersma reminded the PSD that Socialists worldwide refuse to associate with xenophobic parties.
Geoana justified the move to co-operate with a populist leader as an attempt to rally traditional PSD voters. 
Once seduced by Ion Iliescu, self-described as "poor but honest", rural Romanians felt betrayed by the unreasonable wealth of his successors. 
They were amazed to find out that former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase had inherited a fortune from "Aunt Tamara", a mysterious relative who died in a modest one-room apartment. 
"It is a story told in every pub from every corner of the country," Geoana said.
Prosecutors accused Nastase of bribe taking, and the Social Democrats eventually persuaded him to step down as PSD executive president, leaving the entire leadership to Geoana. 
But Nastase's forced resignation was not enough to restore public confidence. 
Other influential PSD figures are under investigation, including three former ministers.
At the same time, Nastase's ouster has given PSD founder Ion Iliescu room to manoeuvre. 
He has been attempting to organise a parallel structure, the "Social Pole", at the left of the party, describing it as a "forum of discussion" between left-wing parties and trade unions. 
That raises the threat of splitting the party, and the current leaders have moved to silence Iliescu. 
"From now on, the 'Social Pole' expression will never be used again", Geoana said last week.
After one year in power, however, Geoana has yet to deliver most of his promised reforms, and some in his camp are losing patience. 
For the PSD to put corruption allegations behind it requires bold political action against some of the current leaders, but Geoana so far is keeping them aboard.
"We have hashed out our internal problems in the public arena," says Vasile Puscas, an influential lawmaker with the Cluj Group. 
With Nastase's resignation, "we gave the signal for cleansing and all PSD members and organisations have to carry it out."
