07/04/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 07/04/06
Speaking on Thursday (6 April), Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Lutfi Haziri appealed to the province's Serbs to return to the provisional institutions.
The community, he said, "should not become a hostage of Belgrade politics".
"Their future is in Kosovo and within the institutions," Haziri said.
However, Kosovo Serb representatives say they are not ready to return.
"We are looking at what to do, but we don't just want to serve as decor," says Randjel Nojkic, a community leader who is also a member of Serbia's delegation for talks with Pristina.
Serbs have boycotted Kosovo politics for two years, saying their presence amounts to window-dressing.
On Wednesday, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen criticised Serbia for pushing the Kosovo Serb community to continue its boycott, and for demanding that they give up wages from the province's budget.
"Building confidence and reassuring minorities is the responsibility of all Kosovo Albanians, but in order to be fully effective it also requires a constructive engagement by Belgrade," Jessen-Petersen said.
Under a directive from Belgrade's Co-ordination Centre for Kosovo, Serbs are being asked to relinquish salaries they receive from the Kosovo provisional institutions on top of the subsidies paid to them by Serbia.
The move affects Serbs who have held positions in local self-government, health and educational institutions.
In effect, it means that all Kosovo Serbs would be equally dependent on subsidies from Belgrade.
The Co-ordination Centre says the move is meant to fend off disparities and tensions among Kosovo Serbs.
Jessen-Petersen criticised the Co-ordination Centre for working to speed the departure of Kosovo Serbs from the institutions.
That goes against the international community's wishes for a multiethnic Kosovo, he said.
"The new political leadership in Kosovo, including the new prime minister, has injected new momentum into standards implementation," Jessen-Petersen said in a press release Thursday."We all wanted to see this continue to translate into real results, including on minority issues."
