05/05/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 05/05/06
The number of citizens at, and below, the poverty level in Serbia has remained virtually unchanged for the past few years, despite significant economic growth and public spending. 
Five years after the democratic revolution, the country is still in the first phase of transition, and authorities are unable to measure whether the steps taken are having an effect.
According to the first government report on implementation of the poverty reduction strategy, money is being invested in everything that is believed to reduce poverty -- the economy, employment, healthcare and education. 
But because of the linear budgetary system, say officials, it is impossible to determine the direct connection between specific expenditures and achieved effects.
In some ways, Serbia is not different from other countries in transition, in that poverty remains a rural phenomenon. 
Given that the growth of salaries and pensions in Serbia exceeds the growth of all other income, the number of citizens at poverty level in cities has not changed, while the poverty rate overall has been increasing 0.5 per cent annually.
According to the 2005 World Bank Report, Serbia's 10.5 per cent poverty rate is equal to that in Romania, but greater than that in Bulgaria, Croatia and Poland. 
It is smaller in comparison to Albania, where the poverty rate is 25 per cent.
The belief among citizens that they are worse off than before is more pronounced than the figures indicate. 
Memories of "the golden times in the 1970s" -- when the standard of living was three times what it is today -- are fresh in people's minds. 
The expectation in turning to democracy in 2000 was for far greater improvements compared to the chaos in the 1990s, when the GDP was literally cut in half.
In fact, many statistical indicators are positive. 
The average official salary increased 7 per cent annually, or 209 euros in the last year, while the average salary increased by 2.5 per cent, or 128 euros, annually. 
The figures would be even higher if grey economy salaries were taken into account. 
According to a survey conducted by the Statistics Bureau in October 2005, the unemployment rate was 18.5 per cent. 
At the same time, the National Employment Service registered a 27.2 per cent unemployment rate, while EU estimates put the rate at 32.4 per cent.
The government's poverty reduction strategy was adopted in 2003, and the implementation team was established in 2004. 
Although the plan was heralded as the first programme that crosses sectors, the government admits that state institutions still lack mechanisms for systematic monitoring of its implementation. 
For this reason, a system for monitoring and evaluating the strategy is urgently needed. 
Authorities face a serious task if they want to achieve the goal of reducing poverty by half by 2010.
