05/10/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/10/06
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's suggestion that a decision on Kosovo's status could be postponed has drawn mixed reactions. 
Kosovo Albanian leaders called for the process to move forward as planned, Kosovo Serbs said a delay could be a feasible option, and the EU's foreign policy and security chief appeared to support Ahtisaari's position.
"If the election date is at the end of this year, it might be that in the Contact Group there is a will to reconsider the timetable, and maybe it will mean that my proposal -- which is under preparation -- would be presented only after the elections," Ahtisaari said in an interview with Finland's public broadcaster, YLE, on Tuesday (October 3rd).
His spokesperson, Hua Jiang, told Southeast European Times that any decision to delay the process would be made only after consulting the Contact Group for Kosovo.
"We should wait for the election date in Serbia and then we can see the Contact Group's reaction," Jiang said. 
The situation will be clarified after the date is fixed, she stressed.
Kosovo Albanian political leaders expressed dismay, with Prime Minister Agim Ceku warning that putting off the decision would increase risks and tensions.
"We were not informed officially about the possibility of postponing the process. 
It is clear that all of these delays would not have happened if Kosovo had a dynamic life over the past six years," said Veton Surroi, Kosovo's delegation head for community rights.
Opposition leader Hashim Thaci, meanwhile, reiterated that the Kosovo Albanian side is committed to a solution this year. 
"And I think that this is also the commitment of the Contact Group," he added.
But Kosovo Serb leaders said on Wednesday that a postponement might be a realistic option.
"The international community considers that if the democratic forces win power in the election, these forces can take on the responsibility for the Kosovo solution," said Randjel Nojkic.
EU foreign policy and security chief Javier Solana said he had discussed the matter with Ahtisaari earlier in the week. 
If a constitutional referendum takes place in Serbia this month and a parliamentary vote is held by the end of the year, a "sound decision" on postponing the status solution would probably be taken, Solana said.
During a visit Wednesday to northern Mitrovica, UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker responded to reporters' questions about a possible delay.
"As far as the timeline is concerned, we are still guided by the commitment of the Contact Group to do everything possible for an early solution of the status and I'm very sure that the Contact Group and of course Ahtisaari and all the key players are very conscious of the critical importance of having an early solution," he said.
In Belgrade, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica was sharply critical of Ahtisaari's statements, saying the UN envoy has "absolutely no authority to deal with the issue of when elections would be held in a sovereign country".
