13/12/2004
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia - 13/12/04
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has indicted more than 100 people for their alleged involvement in atrocities committed during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s. 
Most have either surrendered voluntarily, or have been arrested and handed over to The Hague-based tribunal.
However, 19 war crimes suspects remain at large. 
Among them are the world's three most wanted war criminals -- Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, his military chief, Ratko Mladic, and retired Croat General Ante Gotovina. 
Each one of them, UN prosecutors allege, was responsible -- individually, or because of his superior position of authority -- for war crimes that left hundreds of people dead.
Over 200,000 people are estimated to have been killed as a result of the conflicts in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) during the first half of the 1990s, while more than 2 million others fled their homes. 
In what has been described as the single worst atrocity in Europe since World War II, nearly 8,000 Bosnian Muslim boys and men were summarily executed by Bosnian Serb forces in Srebrenica in July 1995, weeks before the end of the Bosnian conflict. 
About 10,500 people, including 1,800 children, were killed and 50,000 people were injured during a 44-month shelling and sniping campaign by Bosnian Serb forces and Serb Army and paramilitary units, who targeted the civilian population of Sarajevo.
The ICTY first indicted Karadzic and Mladic in July 1995. 
A second joint indictment against the two was issued in November the same year. 
Separate amended indictments against Karadzic and Mladic were issued respectively in April 2000 and October 2002. 
Each of the former Bosnian Serb leaders has been charged with two counts of genocide for crimes that include, but are not limited to, the Srebrenica massacre and the Sarajevo siege.
During the war, Karadzic was the president of the Bosnian Serb republic and of its National Security Council, as well as supreme commander of the Bosnian Serb armed forces and the leader of the Serbian Democratic Party. 
Forces under his direction and control were engaged in a variety of actions intended to significantly reduce the Bosnian Muslim, Bosnian Croat and other non-Serb populations in a number of municipalities in BiH, the amended indictment alleges. 
In addition to the genocide counts, it charges Karadzic with a total of nine other counts of crimes against humanity, violations of the laws or customs of war and grave breaches of the Geneva conventions of 1949.
Karadzic announced his retirement from politics on 19 July 1996, eight days after the ICTY issued an international warrant for his arrest. 
After that, he disappeared and has since been on the run. 
He is widely believed to be hiding in the mountainous parts of BiH's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS), occasionally crossing over the border into neighbouring Montenegro.
Mladic served as commander of the Main Staff of the RS Army (VRS) throughout almost the entire war, staying in that post until December 1996. 
In addition to the two counts of genocide, the ICTY prosecutors have charged him with seven counts of crimes against humanity and six counts of violations of the laws or customs of war on the basis of his individual and superior responsibility for atrocities committed during the war.
Like Karadzic, Mladic has been hiding since 1996. 
Chief ICTY prosecutor Carla del Ponte has repeatedly insisted that he is in Serbia, but the Belgrade authorities deny it.
A report in the Sarajevo daily Dnevni Avaz on 30 November displayed leaked copies of Mladic's military personnel file, showing that he was discharged from the VRS in March 2002, almost seven years after the ICTY first charged him with war crimes. 
Meanwhile, he also remained on the Serbian Army payroll until 2001, according to the documents.
Support networks, including state structures, del Ponte says, have also been helping Gotovina evade justice. 
The key war crimes fugitive, she says, has been spotted in Croatia on a number of occasions. 
Authorities in Zagreb say Gotovina has fled the country and they are unaware of his whereabouts. 
They also deny the alleged involvement of state structures in any networks supporting the fugitive.
The former general disappeared in June 2001, after being informed by the Croatian authorities that there was a sealed indictment against him. 
Gotovina faces four counts of crimes against humanity and three counts of violations of the laws or customs of war in connection with a Croatian army offensive, codenamed Operation Storm, to retake the Krajina region from Serb rebels. 
The purpose of the operation, launched in early August 1995, was to forcibly and permanently remove the Serb population from the region. 
The ICTY alleges that Gotovina has individual and superior criminal responsibility for a host of atrocities committed by troops under his command during the several-day offensive and in follow-up actions lasting until mid-November 1995. 
At least 150 Krajina Serbs were killed and up to 200,000 others were forced to flee their homes as a result of Operation Storm. 
Gotovina was discharged from the Croatian Army in late September 2000.
Addressing the UN Security Council on 23 November, del Ponte said that the failure of the RS, Croat and Serb authorities to arrest and hand over ICTY indictees could derail the process of implementation of the court's UN-endorsed completion strategy, which sets the end of 2004 as a deadline for the conclusion of all investigations. 
The strategy also envisions that all trials be completed by the end of 2008 and all appeals during the following 24 months, so that the ICTY may end all its activities in 2010.
"All in all, the lack of co-operation of Belgrade remains the single most important obstacle faced by the tribunal in the implementation of the completion strategy," the prosecutor told the Security Council, adding that at least a dozen wanted indictees are residing -- some of them openly -- in Serbia. 
The chief ICTY prosecutor has been particularly critical of Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica over his reluctance to arrest and hand over any of those indicted by The Hague tribunal.
The revelations about the VRS and the Serb army's post-war relations with Mladic, and the surrender of Dragomir Milosevic to the Belgrade authorities on 3 December, appear to support del Ponte's allegations.
Among the 19 still sought by the ICTY are four retired Serb police and army generals -- Sreten Lukic, Vladimir Lazarevic, Nebojsa Pavkovic and Vlastimir Djordjevic -- all indicted in connection with the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo.
The RS authorities have also come under increasing international pressure to meet their commitments under the Dayton Agreement, which obliges them to co-operate fully with the ICTY. 
Unlike the BiH federation, which has delivered all its war crimes suspects to The Hague, RS has not yet arrested a single indicted war criminal.
At the end of June, BiH and Serbia-Montenegro failed to receive invitations to join NATO's Partnership for Peace programme -- a first step towards eventual full membership -- because of the lack of co-operation by Serbian and RS authorities.
Days later, the top international envoy in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, imposed a series of wide-ranging measures against those obstructing the country's full co-operation with the ICTY. 
According to analysts, the latest revelations about Mladic could prompt new measures likely to affect RS institutions, such as its defence and interior ministries.
The EU has made the three countries' accession to the Union conditional on their full co-operation with the UN tribunal. 
In October, it adopted a regulation freezing "all funds and economic resources belonging to, or owned or held by" the ICTY's three most wanted indictees, Karadzic, Mladic and Gotovina.
Croatia is hoping to get a starting date for its membership talks during the EU summit in Copenhagen on 17 December. 
Del Ponte says Gotovina's handover remains the only obstacle to the country's full co-operation with the UN tribunal.
While the United States has already frozen aid to Serbia due to its failure to meet its obligations to the ICTY, del Ponte is pushing for "even stronger pressure," involving "diplomatic, economic and financial" sanctions.
The prosecutor has warned that failure to bring Karadzic, Mladic and Gotovina to justice in the coming months could prompt a revision of the deadlines set out in the tribunal's completion strategy. 
Allowing high-profile war criminals to remain at large, according to ICTY President Theodore Meron, also puts international justice at stake. 
"With the end of the tribunal's lifecycle in sight, we must together guard against compromising the legacy of justice, the ending of impunity, and reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia," he told the Security Council in November.
If the international community could not prevent the Srebrenica genocide, said del Ponte, "it should at least not allow this and other most serious crimes to be left unpunished
