05/06/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/06/06
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen on Sunday (June 4) welcomed the Kosovo government's updated refugee return policy, but called on donors to assist the process.
"Let us not fail because of lack of financial support," he said during a visit to the municipality of Istog.
The updated policy was promulgated Friday by the Kosovo authorities, after eight months of consultations among the government, political parties, Internally Displaced Persons' associations, minority groups and civil society representatives.
According to Jessen-Petersen, it "shows the commitment and seriousness of the government of Kosovo towards ensuring the return of more and more displaced persons".
"This will go a long way in convincing members of the minority community that their future is secure in a democratic Kosovo, bound by international conventions on human rights and the protection of minorities," he added, welcoming the agreement between Belgrade and Pristina on co-operating more closely in the return of displaced persons.
At the same time, the UNMIK chief noted the lack of sufficient donor support for returns.
"What I find deeply regrettable is that we cannot find the resources so that the return becomes sustainable," he said.
"If we don't even get enough resources from donors to help 200 returnees, what will happen if after status tens of thousands start coming back?" Jessen-Petersen asked.
So far this year, 66 displaced persons have returned to Istog, where they face economic problems.
"I would return with my family to Kosovo, but what can I do here without a job?" says one returnee, Dragoljub Milorad.
He and his wife are back in Kosovo, but they have left the rest of the family in Nis.
Jessen-Petersen has pledged to become personally involved in mobilising support from donors for the returns process.
During his visit to Istog, he also noted that overall progress has been made in the municipality
"Istog ranks as one of the four best municipalities on standards implementation, but we have to continue to do better.
And, the example being set here could be and should be the example we are all working on," he said.
