05/06/2006
By Svetla Dimitrova and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times – 05/06/06
The Serbian government came under strong criticism Sunday (4 June) over the killing of a protected witness in the Zoran Djindjic assassination trial.
The handcuffed and partially burned body of Zoran "Vuk" Vukojevic, a member of the Zemun Clan mafia gang, was found Saturday in a field along the Belgrade-Zagreb Highway.
A torched automobile believed to have been used in the hit was found near the Belgrade Arena in New Belgrade, recalling the Zemum Clan's initial attempt to eliminate Djindjic in February 2003 by means of a staged traffic accident.
Earlier the same day, police found the body of another gangster, Zoran Povic, at the entrance to Belgrade's Emergency Clinic, not far from the headquarters of the interior ministry.
Pro-democracy activists, including Vladan Batic of the opposition Christian Democrats, described the murders as a sign that the Zemun criminal organisation has resurfaced.
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and his government bear responsibility for enabling this to happen, they said.
Interior Minister Dragan Jocic, however, claimed that Vukojevic's death was a "showdown within a criminal gang".
He also suggested that Vukojevic himself was to blame for his own death by refusing to be included in a witness protection programme.
Turning against his fellow gang members, Vukojevic became a key witness for the prosecution in the trial against 13 crime figures and former police officers accused of killing Djindjic in March 2003.
His testimony in April 2004 was closed to the public.
However, he reportedly told the Belgrade Special Court that former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's son, Marko, had offered the Serbian mafia 5m German Marks for the prime minister's assassination.
Serbia's opposition Democratic Party (DS) says Jocic has failed to deal with organised crime in the country, and demands his resignation.
"The cruel murders of Vukojevic and Povic are not only an attempt of obstruction of court proceedings in the assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic, but also an attempt at inciting fear among the witnesses and other participants in that court process," the party said on Sunday.
Vukojevic is not the first witness in the Djindjic murder trial to be murdered, the Serbian daily Blic noted on Monday.
Kujo Krijestorac, the only person to have actually seen the perpetrators carry out the assassination, was killed on 1 March 2004.
Another important witness, Nenad Sare, was visited by former colleagues from Serbia's now-disbanded Special Operations Unit while in detention a day before he was due to testify and was reportedly warned to change his statement.
Vukojevic's murder could discourage other potential insiders willing to testify against their bosses, said Maja Kovacevic-Tomic, a spokeswoman for the Belgrade Special Court.
"Without recruiting former criminals as witnesses, many crimes and murders would have gone undiscovered,” Kovacevic-Tomic said, adding that the latest hits could have an effect on witnesses who are yet to testify.
Thirteen crime figures and former police officers are being tried for the Djindjic assassination.
The trial started in late 2003.
