06/04/2006
By Jaime L. 
Wood for Southeast European Times in Stuttgart – 06/04/06
The fourth meeting of the Chiefs of Defence (CHODs) from Albania, Croatia, and Macedonia took place on Monday (3 April) at US European Command (EUCOM) headquarters in Stuttgart, Germany. 
Together with the United States, these countries are signatories of the "US-Adriatic Charter".
The charter was initially proposed by the presidents of the three NATO aspirants to then US Secretary of State Colin Powell at the Alliance's Prague Summit in 2002. 
Since then, the group --commonly known as the A-3 -- meets every six months. 
Attending this week's meeting were delegations from Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia-Montenegro, acting as observers in the A-3 process.
During the gathering, the CHODs and the EUCOM directorates were briefed on "Lessons Learned in Peacekeeping Operations" as well as on progress towards NATO Partnership Goals by each of the A-3 nations. 
In turn, EUCOM provided briefings on the US perspective regarding Non-Commissioned Officer (NCO) leadership and empowerment, and an update regarding the regional Joint Combined Exercise Training (JCET) planned for this summer.
Building on an initiative from the last meeting, in Macedonia, where all three countries expressed an interest in developing their capabilities, the JCET is an opportunity for EUCOM to turn a bilateral exercise into a regional event. 
This one-time exercise will not give the A-3 countries an actual combined Special Forces Company, but it will highlight the hurdles the countries must overcome in implementing such a force.
The country representatives signed a Joint Statement at the end of the conference reinforcing the countries' dedication to strengthening their individual and co-operative efforts to intensify and hasten domestic reforms that enhance the security, prosperity, and stability of the region.
"EUCOM has participated in three previous CHOD meetings. 
Hosting them here in Stuttgart has two major benefits. 
First, it shows our commitment to the region and, secondly, the subjects discussed provided the EUCOM staff a complete picture of the accomplishments and remaining requirements of these NATO aspirant countries," said Major Jordan Thomas, ECJ5 International Political Military Affairs officer.
The next meeting is planned for October in Croatia.
