05/04/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 05/04/06
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and neighbouring Serbia-Montenegro are at odds over small sections of their mutual border.
Interstate commissions have been trying to hash out an agreement for years, but without success.
Although 95 per cent of the border presents no problems, the two countries have not been able to work out differences over about 40 sq km.
The most important of the disputed sections is near the site of the Zvornik and Banja Basta hydroelectric power stations on the Drina River.
Fifty years ago, during the Yugoslav era, Serbia financed both stations, and today all the power produced there is sold to customers in Serbia.
However, half of the accumulative lakes and dams are on BiH territory.
Local BiH authorities say Serbia owes around 18m euros in compensation for flood damages over the past 13 years.
"We are not asking to put things back where they were, but we want Serbia to fulfil its obligations, and we are prepared to reprogramme the debt or to establish rates so that it could be paid," says Zvornik Mayor Budimir Acimovic.
In a second case, Serbia has argued it should get about 16 sq km of BiH territory near Strpci where the Belgrade-Bar railroad passes.
Another involves the village of Medjurjecje, which is officially in BiH although it is surrounded by Serbian territory.
Villagers find themselves in an absurd situation daily, as they have to pass through two border crossings if they want to visit the main municipality offices in Rudo.
Some have their houses in one country and their gardens in another.
Meanwhile, new problems are emerging.
For a few years, the Drina River has been changing its flow patterns in the area around Janja, near Bjeljina.
As a result, around 300 acres of BiH territory have passed to Serbia, since the river marks the boundary line.
Likewise, in the Amajlije area, several areas of Serbian territory are now in BiH.
This affects local residents such as Meho Seftic, whose house and about 3 acres of land have become part of Serbia.
He has to pass through border crossings to reach his own property.
BiH authorities have ruled out the possibility of territorial exchanges until a bilateral border agreement is signed and ratified.
The ball is in Belgrade's court, insist officials.
"We have nothing to offer.
The other side, which is suggesting the exchange, should show which territory BiH would get if we are to accept their proposition," says BiH Public Business Minister Safet Halilovic.
