03/07/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times from Bucharest -- 06/07/03
Romania's top defence body, the Supreme Defence Council, has overwhelmingly rejected Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu's demand to withdraw Romania's 890 troops from Iraq.
''When her allies are facing difficulties, Romania can't take her toys and leave.
You can't change the course of foreign policy overnight," President Traian Basescu said on Friday (30 June) following the vote.
Tariceanu's proposal garnered just two votes out of 11.
He was opposed by the chief of the army and by two of his Liberal Party subordinates, the foreign and finance ministers.
Following the meeting, Tariceanu maintained that the Romanian military presence in Iraq was "unpopular and no longer useful".
Nevertheless, the Supreme Defence Council's decision was greeted with relief by US and UK diplomats.
"Basescu made it clear that Romania remains committed to our common efforts in Iraq and in the global war on terror," said US Ambassador Nicholas Taubman after two days of uncertainty.
On Thursday morning, Tariceanu took many by surprise.
After a meeting of the Liberal Party leadership convened on short notice via SMS text messaging, Tariceanu told journalists he had ordered his defence minister and a Liberal Party colleague to table the withdrawal proposal to the Supreme Defence Council.
He cited soldiers' security, financial reasons and "an increased tendency among European states to pull out their troops", mentioning Spain, Bulgaria and Italy.
Basescu, who learned about the proposal from the TV, lashed out at his prime minister.
He said Tariceanu's statement was "a serious blast against national interests" brought up in public debate without any prior consultation with Romania's allies.
Foreign Minister Mihai-Razvan Ungureanu said Tariceanu had not consulted him either.
US and UK diplomats did not hide their amazement and sought clarification.
"These latest reports from Romania are, frankly, a surprise," said State Department spokesman Adam Ereli.
"We hadn't been informed about them.
They're certainly not consistent with what we've heard from senior Romanian leadership."
One Romanian soldier has died in Iraq and four in Afghanistan.
The military presence abroad, strongly supported by Basescu, has been judged by Liberal Party strategists to be unpopular.
Mircea Geoana, the leader of the Social Democratic opposition, reacted cautiously.
A former career diplomat, Geoana favoured a negotiated pullout timetable.
He pointed to the ongoing political battle within the ruling coalition -- specifically, between Tariceanu's Liberals and the Democrats, still devoted followers of their former leader, Basescu.
"A foreign policy issue cannot be subject of a political game," Geoana said.
"I think, at least in the short term, the image and the credibility of Romania in the United States would be affected," says Michael Radu, chairman of the Centre on Terrorism at the US-based Foreign Policy Research Institute.
"In the longer term, the problem would be to what extent an ally who takes unilateral decisions, based on party interests, or even on personal interests, is a reliable ally," he added.
