04/04/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 04/04/06
In addition to high public spending, the monopolisation of the Serbian economy is one of the major factors behind the country's high inflation rates. 
Economists warn that as long as the state fails to take action, inflation will continue to remain at 20 per cent, where it is expected to be by the end of the year, and is not likely to drop below 10 per cent -- a rate closer to the rest of the region.
The IMF is requiring state budget spending for next year to drop by 220m euros, thus attacking one of the pillars of inflation. 
Estimates are that world oil prices will not fluctuate as much as they did in 2005, and this will take care of the second inflationary pillar. 
The government is left to deal with the third pillar: domestic monopolies.
However, the monopoly lobby in Serbia is extremely powerful. 
It was only in September 2005 that a new Law on Protecting Competition was passed by parliament, after several years of being shelved. 
Many expect the new law will be poorly enforced, just like the previous 1996 law, which did not give rise to a single charge of monopolistic activity. 
The government launched an anti-monopoly department last year, but it remains to be seen whether it will have any effect.
Analysts say that benefits reaped by monopolists are too great, and the proximity of businessmen to the authorities too close, for them to give up easily.
The citizens of Serbia are burdened by expensive services provided by inefficient state monopolies, including electric utilities, fuel companies and telephone services. 
At the same time, private monopolies created during the transition -- especially in the agricultural sector -- are exerting inflationary pressures. 
Informal private cartels are setting prices illegally, according to experts at the Economics Institute in Belgrade.
"[Monopolies] directly fuel the inflation by raising the price of heating, water, garbage removal services, and indirectly by increasing the salaries of their employees. 
Our system still lacks mechanisms for controlling monopolistic prices," says Stojan Stamenkovic, who heads a team of analysts.
Another economist, Jurij Bajec, points to food producers, whose goods eat up the lion's share of an average Serbian salary. 
Five dairies -- 60 per cent of the dairy industry in Serbia -- are owned by a single company, the British Salford Investment Fund. 
In the sugar industry, there are just three large producers: Italy's Sfir, the domestic firm MK Commerce and Greece's Hellenic Sugar. 
A major portion of the meat industry is in the hands of domestic companies, the largest of which is Delta Holding, the largest company in Serbia.
The IMF's permanent representative in Belgrade, Harald Hirschhofer, also says the government needs to pay more attention to monopolies in the food industry. 
Low-income households and the unemployed are hardest hit by inflation in this sector, he notes.
Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus and Minister of Agriculture Ivana Dulic Markovic publicly attacked cartels in 2005, yet concrete steps have not been taken to stop them. 
Until authorities back up their words with action, say economists, inflation will remain uncurbed.
