03/05/2006
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 03/05/06
A fourth round of UN-mediated talks between delegations from Belgrade and Pristina is due to kick off on Thursday (4 May).
On the agenda this time is the thorny subject of Mitrovica, a northern Kosovo town divided along ethnic lines and the scene of frequent clashes over the years.
As with the other major issues on the agenda of the status talks, the two sides have sharply opposite stances when it comes to Mitrovica's future.
The delegation from Pristina will be advocating the establishment of two municipal units in Mitrovica., both answerable to an executive council that would be overseen by an international administrator in the coming years.
The Serb negotiators, by contrast, want to see two entirely separate municipalities, with northern Mitrovica forming part of a proposed grouping of Serb municipalities with close ties to Belgrade.
The Kosovo side rejects this approach, seeing it as an attempt to partition the province by creating ethnic enclaves.
Participants have described previous rounds of talks -- which have yet to touch on the status issue -- as cordial and constructive.
Yet the sides have been mostly unable to reconcile their fundamentally different visions for Kosovo.
UN envoy Martti Ahtissari's deputy, Albert Rohan -- who is chairing the talks -- has described the impasse as "disturbing".
The Serbs, he says, envision a great degree of autonomy for municipalities and a minimal role of the central government, while the Albanians are asking for a stronger role for the central government.
Decentralisation is supposed to apply to all municipalities, and to be based on the principle of ethnic neutrality, but the Serbs have been insisting that an ethnic principle be applied in all municipalities where Serbs form a majority, according to Rohan.
Slobodan Samardzic, a member of the negotiating team from Belgrade, says the main goal of the decentralisation is the return of refugees, safety and freedom of movement.
It is important to establish normal conditions for the Serbs who have lived for the last six years in discrimination, he says.
The Serbian side wants such guarantees to be incorporated in the agreement on status, and not left for a subsequent discussion in Kosovo.
Albanian negotiators say they endorse autonomy, but not in a way that leads to the creation of an entity.
They insist that their concept of municipalities is based on European principles, meaning that municipalities are functional and sustainable.
"We have made an effort to provide functional and applicable suggestions that should lead to the final status, independent and sovereign Kosovo with all guarantees for national minorities, including the Serbs.
The Serbs should have a right to make decisions on the local level," says the chairman of the Pristina delegation, Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Lutfi Haziri.
Both sides, meanwhile, have voiced objections to a proposal drafted by Rohan and a UN team of experts.
The UN has run Kosovo since mid-1999, when a NATO air war halted a Serb crackdown on ethnic Albanian separatists, forcing Belgrade to relinquish control of the province.
Kosovo officially remains part of Serbia, with its final status yet to be determined.
In April, the Contact Group said the status question should be resolved by the end of this year, and that the solution must be acceptable to all citizens.
