03/10/2006
(The New York Times, The Guardian, Irish Times - 03/10/06; AP, Reuters, BBC, Deutsche Welle, VOA, AKI, Euronews, Fena, HINA, OSCE, Finnish EU Presidency - 02/10/06)
Sunday's elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) were conducted generally in line with international standards, OSCE and Council of Europe (CoE) monitors said on Monday (October 2nd). 
The vote -- the fifth since the end of the 1992-1995 conflict in the country -- was the first to be fully administered by domestic institutions.
"Real progress towards democracy in BiH was made yesterday, and I congratulate the country and its people for conducting a fair electoral process in which representatives could be freely chosen," David Heath, head of the International Election Observation Mission (IEOM), said on Monday.
Although all observers assessed the voting positively, a fifth of them gave a negative assessment regarding the counting process.
"Despite overall well administered elections, it was a disappointment to see some problems emerge during the count," Ambassador Lubomir Kopaj, head of the long-term observation mission of the OSCE/ ODIHR, said. 
"All necessary steps, including effective training of election officials, should be undertaken so that voters' confidence can be more fully assured."
Voters went to the polls to elect members of the tripartite state presidency, including a representative of each of the country's three main ethnic communities -- Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats -- as well as members of the national parliament.
In addition, Republika Srpska (RS) held elections for the entity's president and two vice presidents, as well as for members of its parliament, while voters in the Muslim-Croat Federation of BiH (FBiH) cast ballots for that entity's parliament and ten cantonal assemblies.
Under law, the Bosniak and Croat members of the state presidency are elected by FBiH voters, while the Serb member is elected by RS citizens.
With final election results pending, the latest figures, released by the BiH Central Election Commission on Monday evening, showed that close to 55% of the nearly 2.7 million eligible voters went to the polls.
None of the current members of the BiH tripartite presidency appear to have won re-election. 
Haris Silajdzic, founder of the moderate Party for BiH and wartime foreign minister and prime minister, is expected to fill the Bosniak seat. 
Nebojsa Radmanovic, a member of RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik's Alliance of Independent Social Democrats will represent the Bosnian Serbs in the presidency.
According to the latest results, Zeljko Komsic of the multiethnic Social Democratic Party is expected to take the Croat seat after defeating the Croat Democratic Union's candidate for the post, Ivo Miro Jovic.
