03/08/2006
(Independent - 03/08/06;
Human Rights Watch, AP, Reuters, UPI, RFE/RL - 02/08/06)
A leading rights watchdog urged Romania on Wednesday (2 August) to end the discrimination against thousands of HIV-positive children and youth, which leaves many of them without access to schooling, medical care, jobs, or information about their health condition.
More than 7,200 Romanian children and youth aged 15 to 19 are living with HIV, Human Rights Watch (HRW) said in a new report.
The majority were infected with the virus between 1986 and 1991 due to government policies allowing the use of contaminated needles and "microtransfusions" in which small children were injected with untested blood in the mistaken belief that this would boost their immune systems.
The 104-page report, released on Wednesday, is based on five months of research completed in June and on individual and group interviews with dozens of HIV-positive Romanian youth.
By law, education in Romania is free and compulsory through the tenth grade, or until the age of 18.
However, more than 40 per cent of the children living with HIV remain outside the education system, according to the report.
"The discrimination against those whose status is known is so great that many face daily harassment by teachers and fellow students," Clarisa Bencomo, an HRW researcher for children's rights in Europe and Central Asia and author of the report, said on Wednesday.
"In some cases they have been expelled from school."
In addition, the children described being refused dental treatment or were unable to get needed medicines.
Despite the government's stated commitment to providing universal access to antiretroviral therapy, interruptions in supplies are common in some counties, while hospitals are not allowed to stock buffer amounts, to compensate for anticipated delivery delays or shortages, the report said.
HIV-positive youth also face employment discrimination, according to the report.
Romanian law provides for mandatory medical testing for a number of jobs, even those posing little risk of HIV transmission.
As a result, HIV-positive youth may be denied jobs arbitrarily.
"It is too much to wish to work in a shop, because everywhere I would go they would ask me to show them my medical exams," the report quoted a 17-year old girl from Bucharest as saying.
"That is hitting below the belt.
Why would I need medical exams to sell shoes?"
More than 700 of the HIV-positive children live in extended family placements, foster care placements, and institutions run by the state or NGOs.
They face an uncertain fate when they turn 18.
"The Romanian government has known about these children for more than 15 years, but it still doesn't have a plan for what will happen when they turn 18," Bencomo said.
"Unless the authorities take urgent measures now, unchecked discrimination will push far too many of these children to the margins of society."
Such measures include ensuring the access of HIV-positive children and youth to appropriate education and medical care -- including medications -- and suitable care for those with mental and physical disabilities.
HRW also called for ending mandatory HIV testing as a condition for employment and for measures to ensure that those in foster, extended family and residential care are better prepared for independent living.
