04/04/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 04/04/06
The administration reform launched by the ruling Democratic Party (DP) -- led by Prime Minister Sali Berisha -- has drawn fire from opposition parties. 
They say that the government has been implementing a campaign of political cleansing and that the number of those dismissed has reached nearly 4,000.
The administration reform phenomenon was launched in 1992, when the collapse of communism paved the way for a new pluralist democratic system, along Western lines. 
At that time, many state officials were sacked as part of the process of eliminating the old regime and its entrenched bureaucracy.
However, the same phenomenon occurred in 1997, when the DP was forced out. 
Now, with the party back in power, critics say it is conducting yet another round of "political cleansing".
Berisha has rejected such accusations, saying he is simply keeping a DP election promise to work for a streamlined public administration.
"It is not true that the dismissals have a political background. 
I have declared that I am for a small government, efficient and on a diet," Berisha said. 
"Out of 18 ministries that existed from the last socialist government, we cut them to 14. 
We reduced the administration, making it in proportion with the population. 
I am only establishing a logical proportion of the administration."
Socialist Party head Edi Rama disagrees. 
"[The dismissals] … are an expression of a weak state of democracy. 
The Albanian democracy faces a major problem today, regarding the relations between the state and the individuals. 
We are seeing every day on TV lists of companies and citizens that are being published. 
They are denounced as people who have problems with the law and the state. 
This is something extraordinary for a European democracy," Rama said.
The majority of those who have been dismissed have been civil clerks, who theoretically enjoy legal protection from political sackings. 
Many have been complaining to the Commission of Civil Service.
"In the shifting process of power, it is normal that several [people] would leave their jobs. 
But all the moves, appointments and dismissals are made now through the laws, whether for the persons who have political status or for the persons with civic official status," said the head of the Albanian Helsinki Committee, Vasilika Hysi.
According to Hysi, significant efforts have been made and considerable funds spent on ensuring workers' rights in the public administration. 
It is time to attend to the strict implementation of laws, she adds.
