04/04/2006
(The New Anatolian, Turkish Daily News, Journal of Turkish Weekly, Financial Mirror, Cyprus News Agency - 03/04/06;
European People's Party - 31/03/06)
The European People's Party (EPP) called on Friday (31 March) for a renewal of UN-led efforts to find a settlement to the Cyprus issue and for a stronger EU role in the process.
In a resolution adopted during its two-day congess in Rome, the EPP urged UN Secretary General Kofi Annan to "resume his initiative for reaching a solution acceptable by all communities in Cyprus".
The document, put forward by the leader of the Greek Cypriot opposition Democratic Rally party, Nicos Anastasiades, also urges Brussels "to get more actively involved in the international endeavours to solve the Cyprus problem".
The EPP brings together 68 Christian Democrat and conservative parties from 35 countries and, together with the European Democrats, has 264 members in the 732-seat European Parliament, forming the legislature's largest political group.
The latest international effort to end Cyprus's division ended in failure in April 2004, when Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected Annan's plan for a settlement, while the majority of Turkish Cypriots approved it.
Eventually, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the Mediterranean island joined the EU on 1 May that year.
The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is recognised by Ankara only.
Cyprus has been divided since a 1974 Turkish military invasion, which followed an Athens-backed Greek Cypriot coup seeking to unite the island with Greece.
In its resolution, the EPP urged Turkey "to affect an early withdrawal, pursuant to the relevant UN resolutions, of its forces in accordance with a specific timetable".
It further urged Ankara to fully ratify and implement the protocol extending its custom union with all 25 EU members, and to recognise the Republic of Cyprus.
Turkey has said the extension of the customs deal does not amount to recognition of the Greek Cypriot authorities.
Senior Turkish officials, including Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, repeatedly have made clear that the country's ports and airports will remain closed to Greek Cypriot vessels and aircraft as long as the Turkish Cypriot community continues to live in isolation.
