03/03/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 03/03/06
Efforts to boost transparency in state institutions are expected to receive a boost from a new law on free access to information, adopted by parliament earlier this year and scheduled to go into force this September.
The law implements constitutional principles guaranteeing free access and the right to receive and transfer information, and requires information holders to operate in a transparent manner.
It calls for a list of publicly available information to be drawn up, together with details about the authorities holding that information.
The justice ministry will announce the list in the media once a year.
Through this document, members of the public will be able to find out what information is available to them, and who to contact in order to get it.
The legislation obliges holders of public information to ensure availability of texts of regulations, information, programmes, and strategic documents related to their operations.
Any institution holding information of public interest will also have to assign one or more persons responsible for providing citizens with the information they seek.
Not all information held by the institutions will be available.
The law explicitly cites nine situations in which relevant authorities may refuse to give information.
For example, classified information, at a certain level of secrecy, and protected personal information will not be made public.
Information related to environmental protection or potentially jeopardising intellectual or industrial property rights would also be off limits.
The law stipulates establishment of a special commission to protect the right of free access to information of a public character.
This panel will be independent in operation and will serve as a kind of a mediator between the holders of information and those requesting it.
Funds for operation of the commission will be appropriated in the budget and the commission will be accountable to parliament.
It will consist of five members with a five-year term.
The government will nominate the members, who must then be approved by lawmakers.
