03/03/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 03/03/06
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu has formally nominated the head of the Kosovo Protection Forces, Agim Ceku, as the province's prime minister.
In a statement Thursday (2 March), Sejdiu said the nomination was based on a coalition agreement between the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) and other parties.
Ceku now has the mandate to propose a new cabinet, which must be approved by 61 out of the 120 members of parliament.
The new prime minister will succeed Bajram Kosumi, who announced his resignation Wednesday following a request by the ruling coalition.
"I resigned … but, I will reconfirm that during these days I have worked for establishing a state of Kosovo, an independent and sovereign Kosovo," Kosumi told reporters.
Explaining the move, he said he does not want the current governmental coalition to risk losing its parliamentary majority.
A political figure in Kosovo since 1992, Kosumi became prime minister in early 2005 aftre his predecessor, Ramush Haradinaj, was charged with war crimes by the UN tribunal at The Hague.
On Wednesday, the ruling coalition also requested the resignation of Parliament Speaker Nexhet Daci, calling for his replacement by the current LDK deputy president, Kole Berisha.
The changes are for the sake of "democratic processes that are continuing in Kosovo", a top LDK official, Eqrem Kryeziu, said.
Through an adviser, Ramush Tahiri, Daci has insisted he will not resign.
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen says such developments are a part of normal democratic life and are fully in accordance with democratic principles.
"I urge the future prime minister and parliament chairman to accelerate standards implementation and to make sure that Kosovo does its utmost to provide the highest quality of life to all of its communities.
This is of particular importance as progress on standards will have a strong impact on the outcome of the status process," Jessen-Petersen told reporters.
Opposition leaders said the changes were late in coming.
"I don't know if the bread will change, since the pastry is same," said opposition leader Veton Surroi, who has frequently clashed with Daci.
He expressed hope that the political shuffle would re-energise Kosovo institutions and lead to a stronger focus on the key political issues facing the province.
Ceku's nomination immediately came under fire from Serbia, which has accused him of war crimes.
A former commander of the Kosovo Liberation Army, Ceku also fought with the Croatian Army during the breakup of the former Yugoslavia during the 1990s.
Srdjan Djuric, a Serbian government spokesperson, said the choice of Ceku was "unacceptable" to Belgrade.
