02/06/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 02/06/06
A sixth round of talks between Pristina and Belgrade was held Wednesday (31 May) in Vienna, with the focus this time on economic issues. 
According to the EU's representative for the negotiations, Stefan Lehne, the latest meeting was useful in that it clarified the positions of both sides.
However, "we should have no illusions," said Lehne, who chairs the office of the UN special envoy's (UNOSEK) working group on the economy. 
Considerable differences remain on key issues, he stressed.
Some of the economic issues are closely related to the core status issues and are therefore difficult to handle at this stage of the process, Lehne said. 
"There are important economic interest aspects at stake both for Serbia and for Kosovo and … some of these issues are technically enormously complex," he added.
On the question of external debt, there is a certain amount of agreement on the overall approach, Lehne said. 
Specifically, Kosovo is prepared to pay a share of the international debt of Serbia and Montenegro.
On the issue of property, however, fundamental disagreement exists. 
According to Lehne, it is not within UNOSEK's mandate to renegotiate economic legislation in Kosovo from the past seven years, or to interfere with management of the process.
Rather, he said, the status process can look into the existing mechanisms aimed at guaranteeing that claims regarding private property and the privatisation process are handled correctly, even after UN Resolution 1244 is replaced by another resolution.
During Wednesday's round, the Belgrade delegation also brought up the issue of internal debt, while the Pristina side raised the issues of cadastral documentation, pension rights, foreign currency accounts and the idea of an overall compensation mechanism to deal with claims by private individuals.
"It was agreed by both sides that they would exchange relevant information and will return to this issue at a later stage," Lehne said.
In other news, UN deputy special envoy Albert Rohan announced that UNOSEK is currently establishing the working group on the creation of protective zones for religious sites. 
The group includes UNOSEK, representatives of Belgrade, Pristina and the Serbian Orthodox Church, as well as experts from the Council of Europe and UNESCO. 
"We hope to dispatch the working group in the region in the week of 12 June," Rohan added.
He also announced that the government in Pristina has approved the protocol on sustainable returns to be signed with Belgrade. 
Although the protocol does not fall under the competencies of UNOSEK, the deal was reached on the sidelines of the fifth round of Vienna talks, held on 23 May.
