02/06/2006
(Nine o'Clock, Bucharest Daily News - 02/06/06;
AP - 01/06/06)
Adrian Nastase, who served as Romania's prime minister from 2000 to 2004, was charged with bribery Thursday (1 June) in connection with the appointment of the head of the country's main anti-money laundering agency, in exchange for a personal favour.
Anti-corruption prosecutors said Nastase appointed Ioan Melinescu as head of the National Office Against Money Laundering in 2000, on condition that he would block an investigation into a money transfer involving the former prime minister's wife.
"Nastase is accused in that, based on previous agreement, he named Melinescu as head of the office, by a government decision, in exchange for the latter's blocking an investigation into a suspicious transaction of 400,000 dollars to the account of Dana Nastase," the National Anti-Corruption Department was quoted as saying in a statement Thursday.
Under Romanian law, any transaction exceeding $10,000 must checked by the anti-money laundering office, which was established in 1999.
According to the English-language daily <I>Nine o'Clock</I>, the case under which the former Romanian leader has been charged does not target him directly, but Melinescu.
She is said to have assisted a number of individuals by not reporting suspicious transactions in which they were involved.
Nastase appeared before prosecutors on Thursday to be officially informed of the new charges.
These come about four months after he was indicted on bribery charges over a 1998 deal, in which he bought real estate from a former lawmaker who was later convicted of fraud.
In addition to the probe into the 1998 deal, in January, anti-corruption prosecutors launched an investigation into the means by which Nastase acquired his wealth, following revelations that he had inherited $1m from an aunt, who died last year.
Nastase insisted that his Aunt Tamara, who had reportedly lived in poverty, made her fortune by selling family jewellery in recent years and then investing well in the real estate market.
Pending the investigation, Nastase stepped down as leader of the opposition Social Democratic Party (PSD) in January.
Two months later, he also resigned from his position as speaker of Romania's lower house of parliament after his party withdrew its support for him.
News of the new bribery charges came amid media reports suggesting that Nastase is also being investigated for abuse of office, in connection with construction of the National Museum of Contemporary Art in Bucharest.
