02/05/2006
(Bucharest Daily News, Nine o'Clock - 02/05/06; Bucharest Daily News - 30/04/06)
Romania deserves to join the EU in January 2007, but its efforts to fight corruption will need to be monitored even after that to ensure the effective eradication of this problem, an anti-corruption watchdog said on Monday (1 May).
Releasing its annual report, Transparency International Romania (TI-Romania) noted that although the country had made progress in dealing with the issue in the last year, corruption remains the main problem in the context of EU accession.
"It is necessary to maintain pressure on the government in order to continue the efforts along the line of combating corruption and to increase the level of public integrity," the Bucharest-based English-language daily Nine o'Clock quoted TI-Romania head Victor Alistar as saying.
The report, which covers the period from March 2005 to March 2006, found low levels of performance in prevention and combating corruption, although in the area of sanctions, things appeared to be moving at a faster pace.
"When we talk about preventing corruption, things have not developed," said Alistar. 
"We do not have coherent mechanisms. 
As for the sanctions, the perception is positive due to the government's attitude. 
What's more, the major corruption files have started to appear, but we cannot yet debate these cases, as they have not yet reached the court."
According to TI-Romania, the National Anti-corruption Department (DNA) is not efficient enough yet, and has been unable to finalise some major corruption cases at the desired pace. 
This demonstrates the DNA's low institutional capacity and poor co-operation with other structures, the NGO said.
In recent months, Romania launched corruption investigations against several top officials and politicians, including former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase.
In an interview with the Dutch newspaper NRC Handelsblad several days ago, incumbent Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu said the probes against Nastase and others facing similar charges would be completed. 
While acknowledging that corruption has not been eradicated, he insisted it no longer constitutes a "big problem" for Romania.
Citing the EBRD's corruption barometer, the prime minister said it showed corruption in Romania to be on a descending path, as it had declined from 2.6 per cent to 0.7 per cent.
EU officials, including Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, have in recent months praised the Balkan country's progress in meeting the Union's criteria for membership, including its efforts in the fight against corruption.
However, TI-Romania says there are four areas -- health, education, public acquisitions and local public administration -- in which no progress is apparent, leaving them still vulnerable to fraud.
The watchdog said it would send its new paper to the European Commission (EC), which is due to release key reports on Romania and Bulgaria's preparedness for EU membership on 16 May. 
Both countries are scheduled to join the Union on 1 January 2007, but if the EC decides they have failed to meet the requirements for membership, it could recommend that their entry be delayed by one year.
