02/05/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 02/05/06
After eight years of privatisation, some of the companies and banks that were sold in Republika Srpska (RS) may again become state property.
RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik has said he intends to review all decisions made during the process, due to suspicions of widespread illegal conduct.
"We want to bring back trust," Dodik said.
"Those who have been doing everything according the law have no reason to fear they will lose their companies."
Dodik's plan has won the support of parliament, including deputies from the Serbian Democratic Party and Party of Democratic Progress -- both of which were involved in the privatisation process for years, including some of the most famous cases.
A special commission established by the government will carry out the review primarily.
According to economics professor Rajko Tomas, the review will not scare off foreign investors.
Rather, it will send a signal that legal business practices are taking root in RS.
The RS Chamber of Commerce and the Industry of RS association have welcomed the authorities' intention of "righting the wrong".
However, they have also expressed concern that the review could turn into a witch-hunt and end up hurting lawful investors.
"Some political parties are already asking for legally sold and well-functioning companies to be revised.
I am afraid we might start it without analysing which companies should be controlled," said RS Chamber of Commerce and Industry President Mladen Micic.
The employers' union has also weighed in, arguing that a commission working under government control is not a good solution.
Such an institution, the union says, can press charges against someone and then decide on the verdict.
In the view of most economists, privatisation in RS has been a disaster due to the drawn-out process as well as basic conceptual misunderstandings.
All RS banks and 60 per cent of RS companies have been sold, garnering about 100m euros for the state -- at least on paper.
In actuality, only 25m euros have been paid.
The largest and most valuable firms are still state property.
Investors have shown the greatest interest in Telekom Srpske, the state telecommunication company, which may be privatised this year.
Shares of the State Power Company, meanwhile, have been constantly rising in value on the Banja Luka Stock Exchange.
