03/04/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 03/04/06
Unemployment in Croatia is higher than in EU member countries, according to statistics from the Croatian Employment Institute. 
As of February, 313,627 people were registered as unemployed -- 18.4 per cent of the total population.
The high rate of joblessness stems from the high expenses of the transition period, poor implementation of privatisation, the pervasive "grey economy" and other problems. 
Most Croatian firms were not prepared for privatisation and foreign concurrency, experts say.
Permanent mass emigration of highly educated people and professionals is a common problem. 
In the last decade, about 10,000 scientists have left Croatia, and the number is growing. 
The United States, Great Britain, Germany, France and Canada are the most favoured destinations.
Such "brain drain" impedes development in Croatia. 
But it is hard to blame those who leave, since all too often they cannot find opportunities at home. 
It is particularly difficult to find jobs in certain fields, including law, design, art, education and transportation.
Although Prime Minister Ivo Sanader's administration has pledged to tackle the issue, the statistics suggest that not enough is being done. 
According to analysts, there are a number of steps that could be taken. 
Tax policies can be changed in order to motivate employers to open up new workplaces and invest in education. 
At the same time, the country must be made more attractive to foreign investors.
An increase in production and exports should help with tackling Croatia's massive foreign debt and deficit. 
Better quality of products would result in higher concurrency of Croatian products in the world markets and decreases of state expenditure, meaning less need for international credits.
The long-term outlook will be affected by Croatia's entry into the EU. 
Most expect accession to bring improvements in terms of job openings. 
However, it is impossible to predict exactly what the impact will be, and in any case EU membership is not a panacea that will instantly solve all problems.
According to the Sanader administration, efforts to combat unemployment are founded on four pillars: stimulating the job sector, boosting the economy, motivating business and equalising conditions for employment among genders. 
Specific steps include simplifying the process of registering small and medium-sized businesses, thus creating new opportunities for Croatian job-seekers.
