01/09/2006
By Balkanblogs for Southeast European Times – 01/09/06
Georgi from Bulgaria http://georgi.unixsol.org/ starts us off this week with a healthy dose of consumer outrage. 
"I have started reading the labels on various food products lately and I am far from pleased with what I find. 
There is hardly any information about calories, fats, salt, and the producer. 
All this is very important because I want to know what I am buying, particularly if I am going to stuff it into my stomach."
For Tonev at http://evropata.blogspot.com/ its Bulgaria's banking sector that's hard to stomach. 
"As many other things here, it is far from friendly. 
I really wonder what one needs to do to be welcomed with open arms. 
Most doors are closed to those who are trying to get a modest loan to buy something."
From Romania, http://luminescent.weblog.ro/ chimes in. 
"I am honestly glad when banks go out of their way to create various payment methods which will spare their customers a trip to the bank and having to queue. 
The problem arises when they introduce such a system and bring me on the verge of a nervous breakdown when they tell me I have to pay 17,400 euros by ... 
three days ago or send me an e-mail with all sorts of account numbers, codes, addresses … things I need to know when making a payment, but forget to tell me how much I have to pay."
Other bloggers criticise blogs themselves -- particularly their content.
"Blogs are becoming like two peas in a pod ... 
every second blog I visited had the same design, and every third had the same topic," writes http://amerz.blogger.ba.
Why post details of your life in cyberspace for anyone on the net to see?
"People decide to write about even the most intimate things, and they put it out there for the whole 'blogger nation' to see, because they need unbiased and frank opinion, " says http://argentaria.bloger.hr/. 
"Some random visitor will instinctively say what he thinks."
Based on a recent article www.setimes.com ran titled "Political 'tsunami' lashes Romania", LlTako opened a discussion on peshkupauje about declassifying files of the former Albanian security service. 
Vlonjati says, "In Romania it is easy to declassify the files and really find out who has collaborated with communist secret service, but in the Albanian case, it is very complicated because all the political parties when they came to power deleted their leaders' files. 
So in Albania this thing would be worthless."
On a lighter note, consider a stroll or drive this evening. 
From Romania, Emi Gal http://emi.brainient.com/ says, "The People's Palace is for sure the most beautifully lit building in Bucharest. 
Calea Victoriei, with its combination of new and old buildings, some subtly lit, is ... 
magical."
That's it for this week. 
Join us again next Friday for more blogging magic.
