01/05/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 01/05/06
Seven heads of state from the Western Balkans gathered in the Adriatic port of Durres on Friday (28 April) at the invitation of Albanian President Alfred Moisiu.
The focus of the informal meeting was boosting co-operation and regional ties.
Bulgaria's Georgi Parvanov, Croatia's Stipe Mesic, Macedonia's Branko Crvenkovski, Montenegro's Filip Vujanovic, Romania's Trajan Basescu and Serbia's Boris Tadic all joined Moisiu in Durres.
Bosnian Presidency Chairman Sulejman Tihic was unable to attend "due to political engagements in his own country," according to official sources.
Moisiu also spoke by phone to Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, briefing him on the meeting.
During their talks, the presidents of the seven states discussed the outlook for fostering economic ties, trade and tourism.
Euro-Atlantic integration was high on the agenda, along with the latest developments in the region.
The participants agreed that investments in infrastructure, with the assistance of foreign donors, would do much to spur further co-operation among the Balkan countries.
"We are anticipating that projects such as Corridor 8, the AMBO, or the creation of a common regional power network, will have a positive impact in our countries and on the enforcing our ties," Moisiu said.
In his address at the gathering, Macedonia's Crvenkovski stressed the importance of economic co-operation in the Balkans.
"Macedonia, being the country with the least internal market potential in the region, has opted for implementation of an active foreign trade policy aimed at intensifying commercial co-operation with regional countries and beyond, through liberalisation and facilitation of conditions for export and import of goods," Crvenkovski said.
Serbia's Tadic, in his remarks, addressed the Kosovo status issue as well as the upcoming Montenegrin independence referendum.
He reiterated Belgrade's opposition to "border changes" in the region, but said Serbia was participating in the Kosovo status negotiations and would seek to establish a better foundation for ties with Montenegro.
"We have had many problems in the past, which need to be left behind," Tadic said.
He also stressed the importance of the EU integration process for all the countries in the region, saying the European aspirations of the Balkans "are being fulfilled".
Moisiu also highlighted the region's European prospects.
"The future of the Balkans is in its integration in the EU.
I hope that Albanian-Serbian relations will overcome the bitter past for the sake of a better future," he said.
In a statement, the Balkan presidents welcomed the Durres meeting as a "good sign of co-operation and understanding among the countries of the region".
It demonstrates the common will to go further ahead on the integration road towards a United Europe," the leaders said.
