03/04/2006
(DTT-NET, Athens News Agency, Turkish Press, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool - 02/04/06; AP, Athens News Agency - 01/04/06)
Trade and energy ministers representing the EU and seven Southeast European (SEE) countries agreed in Thessaloniki on Saturday (1 April) to ratify a pact that sets the stage for the extension of the single European energy market into the continent's southeast.
The Energy Community Treaty, the EU's first multilateral agreement to cover all SEE countries, was signed in Athens on 25 October 2005. 
Citing "slight differences" with the European Commission, Turkey was the only country in the region that did not sign the deal.
After Saturday's meeting, the representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and UNMIK, acting on behalf of Kosovo, issued a joint statement, pledging to uphold and ratify the treaty. 
Turkey's representatives, led by Ankara's consul general in Thessaloniki, Seckin Cetinelli, participated in the meeting, but did not sign the communique.
The SEE ministers also pledged stronger regional co-operation aimed at improving energy effectiveness and energy saving, Netherlands-based independent news agency DTT-NET, featuring news on the Balkans, reported.
"The Turkish delegation was with us here today, but withdrew after the procedural part of the meeting, despite my appeal for it to stay," the AP quoted Greek Development Minister Dimitris Sioufas as saying Saturday.
"We hope that Turkey joins us, as the treaty is already in its ratification phase," Croatian Deputy Energy Minister Zelijko Tomsic added.
The deal requires that the SEE countries adopt the EU single market regulations in energy, and complete the liberalisation of their gas and electricity markets -- for companies by 2008 and for consumers by 2015.
Signing the deal on behalf of the EU presidency back in October, British Trade and Industry Secretary Alan Johnson expected it to "provide an important catalyst for further governmental co-operation" and a stable environment for investment in infrastructure.
All of the signatories, including the EU, must ratify the treaty for it to come into force. 
So far, UNMIK and Bulgaria, which is scheduled to join the EU on 1 January 2007 together with Romania, have completed this procedure. 
Greece is the only SEE country that is already an EU member.
"We all have an interest for the Energy Community to start operating as soon as possible," Sioufas said at the meeting, urging the other countries in the region to speed up their internal procedures so that the treaty can "be ratified immediately by all".
According to Sioufas, energy investments in the SEE countries in the coming years would total more than 21 billion euros. 
"Regional projects in the transportation of oil and natural gas do not compete with each other but rather complement one another," the Greek minister noted.
Austria -- which currently holds the rotating EU presidency -- the United States, Russia and Moldova were also represented at the meeting.
Addressing the Thessaloniki meeting, US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Matthew Bryza expressed Washington's support for the development of the energy sector in the SEE countries as a whole, and particularly for the Burgas-Alexandroupolis pipeline, which will link the respective Bulgarian Black Sea port city with the Greek port in the northeastern Aegean.
The project, Greece's ANA-MPA news agency quoted the US diplomat as saying, appeared commercially viable and has generated heightened interest among companies. 
"That's why we hope that it will be successful and we'll be glad to support it," Bryza told the agency.
