01/09/2006
By Blerta Foniqi, for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 01/09/06
The USAID and the mayors of three northern Kosovo municipalities -- Zvecani, Leposavic and Zubin Potok -- signed a memorandum of understanding Thursday (31 August), outlining plans for future infrastructure projects, with a US contribution of over $1m.
The memorandum was signed in Zvecani by US chief of mission in Kosovo Tina Kaidanow, USAID director Michael Farbman and the three municipalities' mayors, Dragisa Milovic of Zvecani, Velimir Bojovic of Leposavic and Slavisa Ristic of Zubin Potok.
"The American government is planning $1m for these three municipalities. 
We believe that the chosen project will be implemented successfully and in the interest of the citizens here," Kaidanow said.
The projects will include road improvements, renovations to schools and other infrastructure projects to be selected by the municipalities' representatives. 
The projects are expected to be completed by the end of June 2007.
During the signing, Kaidanow said Washington has always wanted to co-operate with these three northern municipalities and "this once again demonstrates our co-operation."
For his part, Milovic suggested the aid is over due. 
"I can say that from the beginning of the UN mission in Kosovo, these three municipalities were not noticed by international agencies. 
Now I am satisfied that USAID would like to help us."
Zvecani resident Dragoljub Samardjic says his municipality should invest in road improvements. 
"We don't have roads, we have only the pits and some broken asphalt," he said.
"I hope that our roads will improve because, not only in the winter, but also in the spring and summer, we have many problems," said Zvecani resident Ljubisa Djurdjic. 
She also believes that the donation should be used to improve the local hospital. 
"The conditions are very bad," she said.
The mayor of Zubin Potok pledged that the portion of the funds for his municipality will be used solely for the benefit of its residents, especially in improving schools and roads.
The mayors of the three municipalities decided a month ago to boycott all co-operation with international institutions or with Kosovo's government until they received assistance.
