01/03/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 01/03/10
Anmari Repic is a Kosovo Serb who decided to stay in her homeland. 
A journalist with her own TV show on the public broadcasting network, she is convinced her community has a future in an independent Kosovo.
"The integration of the Kosovo Serbs has started with their participation in the local elections [in November and December 2009]," Repic told SETimes. 
"They voted because they hope that those local structures would improve their life in Kosovo."
Virtually all the Serbs in the country's north -- the region closest to Belgrade both geographically and politically -- did not go to the polls. 
They have also rejected an integration plan drafted by the International Civilian Office (ICO) and the Kosovo government.
But many Serbs in the south took a more pragmatic approach and voted in large numbers. 
Slobodan Petrovic, president of the Independent Liberal Party, told SETimes that nearly 70% of Serbs south of the River Ibar chose to participate.
According to Repic, "Serbs understood it was their last chance for local organisation, for more jobs, better roads, taking care of the environment."
While Belgrade-backed "parallel structures" in the north are able to handle some bureaucratic and judicial tasks, they do not provide real, day-to-day authority and are unable to handle small business administration, construction permits, supervision of trade or school construction, Repic said.
ICO spokesperson Andy McGuffie told SETimes that the wide electoral participation by Serbs in the south resulted "in no small part from the positive message sent out by Kosovo institutions ... 
supported by international organisations".
The areas that had the strongest turnout, McGuffie said, were Gracanice/Gracanica, Ranillug/Ranilug, Kllokot-Verbovc/Klokot-Vrbovac and an extended municipality in Novoberde/Novo Brdo.
"There was also a decisive turnout in Shterpce/Strpce's mayoral election," he added.
Besides turnout at the polls, another sign of integration can be found in the Kosovo Assembly, which includes members from the Kosovo Serb community and has a mandatory quota for minority representatives.
During the recent Independence Day festivities, Serb Kosovo Assembly member Branislav Grbic took part in a session that officially marked the second anniversary of the country's sovereignty.
"We are part of this institution and we have accepted the new developments in the country … my participation in the solemn session is very normal," Grbic told the Kosovo daily Koha Ditore.
Two Kosovo Serb ministers serve in the government, and discussions are under way on launching a Serbian language TV channel to cover news from across the country.
"It's fair to say that things are moving forward, but now the real work gets under way to ensure that the new institutions and new arrangements function on a day to day basis," McGuffie said.
The ICO has lauded provisions in its Comprehensive Status Proposal for inclusion of highly developed safeguards to protect the rights of minorities. 
A plan drawn up by former UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari and enshrined in the Kosovo constitution sets out guarantees of local self-government, protection of religious and cultural heritage, and democratic representation.
"I think that many members of the Kosovo Serb community have seen past the political rhetoric and assessed the provisions for what they are -- a very careful and balanced package of measures aimed at ensuring the well-being of all Kosovo’s communities in the long term," McGuffie said, while acknowledging that a truly functional multiethnic society remains a work in progress.
"The more people work together and rely on their own judgment, the more trust and a co-operative spirit is built. 
All of that helps [people] resist attempts at destabilisation," the ICO spokesman said.
As for the north, Anmari Repic says the future depends on establishing new municipalities that can handle business while stimulating growth. 
At least three new municipalities have already been formed.
"Will they have more jobs?" Repic asks. 
"Will students get discounts to travel from Gracanica to Mitrovica? 
Will there be more trade, new apartments for [returning expatriates], better health services?"
A good life is possible for Serbs in the new Kosovo, she insists, but these practical questions must be answered first.
