01/06/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 01/06/06
The political scene in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is divided once more, this time over police reform. 
The Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), recently decided to freeze its participation in the Police Reform Directorate's steering board, citing disagreements with a draft model of the BiH police forces.
Among other things, the model envisions the transfer of legislative and budgetary competences in the police sector from the entities to the state. 
RS politicians say the proposal would lead to the abolition of the entity's police.
On Wednesday (31 May), the steering board adopted a position in favour of establishing a single police structure in BiH. 
However, the decision was made without the votes of the two RS members of the ten-person body. 
One of the representatives has been asked by the RS government to act only as an observer, while the other did not attend at all.
High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling has criticised Banja Luka's stance, warning that delaying police reform will jeopardise BiH's hopes of moving closer to EU membership. 
Those hopes were already dealt a blow in late April, when MPs from Bosniak and Croatian parties scuttled a crucial package of constitutional reforms.
"The key for moving forward is in the hands of the RS government," Schwarz-Schilling said after the latest impasse emerged.
RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik denies that his government is blocking the process, saying he only wants consensus on the concept so that RS will not be left without its police force. 
"If they have some other solution for the problem, then they should finish the job," says Dodik.
All parties claim they respect the police reform agreement reached eight months ago. 
But analysts say the present quarrel is a sign that some of the fundamental differences still have not been ironed out, and thus even more serious problems with the reform process may be in store.
Bosnian Serb politicians still insist that the proposed police regions should not pass the borderline between entities -- a stance which potentially conflicts with EU guidelines for police functionality.
Local media reports, citing international community sources, say a possible compromise could be found in dividing RS into two police regions, one in the east and the other in the west of the entity. 
Only in a few cases, especially in Sarajevo, regions would pass entity borders.
