01/06/2006
(Irish Examiner, DTT-NET, Focus - 01/06/06;
AP, US State Department - 31/05/06)
The United States decided on Wednesday (31 May) to withhold its financial assistance to the government of Serbia-Montenegro for failing to meet obligations to the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague.
"Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has determined that she cannot certify that the government of Serbia-Montenegro is co-operating with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" (ICTY), State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said in a statement.
"This decision will result in the withholding of $7m in assistance to the central government of Serbia for fiscal year 2006, as required by the 2006 Foreign Operations, Export Financing and Related Programs Appropriations Act."
Washington made it clear, however, that Wednesday's move did not mean a suspension of some $62m in humanitarian aid for the Serbian people and assistance for initiatives aimed at strengthening democracy in the country.
The extradition of a number of ICTY indictees in early 2005 allowed Washington to certify in June last year that Serbia-Montenegro was co-operating with The Hague court and to continue providing financial assistance to Belgrade authorities.
On Wednesday, the US government assured Serbia that it wants to "help it become a fully successful, secure, and democratic nation that is integrated into Euro-Atlantic structures".
But Washington also noted there has been "little notable co-operation" with the UN tribunal in recent months, and that Serbia must meet its international obligations in order to build closer ties with the United States.
"We call on the authorities in Belgrade to co-operate fully with the tribunal, to include the arrest and transfer of fugitive indictees, particularly Ratko Mladic, to face justice in The Hague," the State Department said, noting that Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica himself has acknowledged that Serbian state and national interests are being harmed.
The US government's decision came less than a month after the EU broke off talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Belgrade, citing its failure to co-operate fully with the ICTY, particularly to hand over Mladic.
Kostunica had promised that the fugitive would be arrested and transferred to The Hague by the end of April.
Along with former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic, Mladic tops the ICTY's list of most wanted indictees.
Both have been charged with genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo, which claimed some 10,000 lives.
Mladic, who has been on the run for more than ten years now, is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia.
During a visit to Belgrade on Tuesday, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn assured the Serb authorities that SAA negotiations would resume once Mladic is delivered to The Hague.
Similarly, the United States indicated on Wednesday that it would be willing to review its decision to suspend financial assistance to the government of Serbia-Montenegro, if it takes steps to demonstrate co-operation with the ICTY.
