01/06/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 06/01/06
One more opportunity for fostering the EU integration process emerged recently as representatives of Western Balkan countries signed a protocol on establishing a Regional School of Public Administration (RESPA).
The first activities are expected by the end of the year, with the institution operating initially as a network.
RESPA is intended to boost regional co-operation in the field of public administration, strengthen administrative capacity and develop human resources in line with the principles of the European Administrative Space.
The idea of such an institution was originally proposed at the EU's 2003 summit in Thessaloniki.
The school will organise seminars and summer and winter schools for public administration professionals.
Annual conferences for public administration training and education institutions are to be held every autumn.
The knowledge and experience gained will be shared through the publication of a newsletter and through access to a joint electronic library.
In addition, the school will play an advisory role in improving the performance of national administrations.
The ultimate goal is to help the participating countries meet the Copenhagen criteria, a set of benchmarks used to determine whether a country is ready for EU membership.
Under these criteria, an entrant into the bloc must be a stable democracy, have a working market economy, and adopt the common rules, standards and policies that make up EU law.
By helping to improve public administration, the school will have an indirect influence on enhancing the rule of law and transparency, and in strengthening the fight against corruption, advocates say.
The European Commission (EC) has already earmarked 1m euros for RESPA, and intends to allocate a further 1m euros through the CARDS programme.
"The EU has confirmed many times that the future of the Western Balkans lies in the Union.
Extended regional co-operation in the Western Balkans is essential, regardless of the different stage of integration of the various countries, and an important criterion for the European course of the countries," the EC said in a press release.
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro all sent representatives to the 2 May signing ceremony for RESPA, as did UNMIK, on behalf of Kosovo.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn was also present.
