01/03/2006
(Kathimerini, ABHaber, Turkish Daily News - 01/03/06; UN News Centre, UPI, Cyprus News Agency, Athens News Agency, Cyprus Mail, AFP - 28/02/06; AP - 27/02/06)
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos met in Paris on Tuesday (28 February) to discuss ways to move the Cyprus reunification process forward.
The two agreed that progress on different fronts, including demilitarisation and technical talks between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities, would greatly improve the atmosphere needed to revive talks on reunifying the Mediterranean island, divided since 1974.
"They agreed that the resumption of the negotiating process, within the framework of the Secretary General's good offices, must be timely and based on careful preparation," the UN said in a statement following Tuesday's meeting.
During the hour-long session, Annan and Papadopoulos also "agreed to continue their ongoing dialogue with the expressed aim at accelerating the search for a comprehensive, fair and mutually acceptable solution to the Cyprus problem," according to the UN statement. 
Annan welcomed an agreement reached between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders to initiate bicommunal technical talks on a range of issues.
According to the statement, Turkish Cypriot President Mehmet Ali Talat had assured the UN chief that "he shared the same aspirations."
Speaking to reporters, Annan said that his efforts over the next couple of months would focus on narrowing the gap between words and actions.
Asked whether he was planning to appoint his new envoy for Cyprus soon, the UN chief indicated that he did not believe the time was "ripe" for that yet.
The former special envoy for Cyprus, Alvaro de Soto, stepped down after the April 2004 referendum on a UN-led initiative to reunite the island, when the Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected Annan's plan for a deal. 
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots voted in favour of the proposed settlement, eventually only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the island joined the EU on 1 May 2004.
Annan has since made it clear that he would not attempt to re-open negotiations if he deems the chances of a deal are slim.
According to the Turkish Daily News, UN Undersecretary General for Political Affairs Ibrahim Gambarri is Annan's likely choice as new special envoy. 
Gambarri touched upon the Cyprus issue briefly during a speech in Washington on Monday, echoing Annan's cautious attitude concerning restarting the peace process.
"We've been talking with everybody," Gambarri said, mentioning the United States, Russia, Greece, Turkey, Britain and the EU. 
"I don't want to see us [the UN] showing mediation efforts just so that we can dive into an empty pool."
