28/11/2006
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 28/11/06
The UN mission in Kosovo said on Monday (November 27th) that it has stepped up security across the province, and police have adopted special measures after receiving threats against the mission and its personnel.
"The police in Kosovo on Monday have received information of credible threats against UN personnel and or property," Kosovo police spokesperson Veton Elshani told Southeast European Times.
Authorities are taking this threat seriously, and the public will see an increase in police activity and presence. 
"We are asking for everyone's co-operation and understanding," Elshani said. 
"We are requesting that any citizen with any information immediately contact their nearest local KPS Police Station or International Police Officer."
UNMIK, meanwhile, said in a press release that any attack on its personnel or property would be destructive and counterproductive, particularly at this juncture.
"The status process is in a critical phase and the world has its eyes on Kosovo," it said. 
"Any violent act would only set the clock back."
Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku appealed for peace and democracy, especially at this crucial time. 
"Together with international community, we have worked and invested to show that Kosovo is a success story. 
And Kosovo will be such a story," he said.
Complicating the situation, however, pro-independence activists associated with the Vetevendosje League called for demonstrations Tuesday against the international community and the Kosovo negotiating team. 
The group regularly has organised similar protests in the past.
In another significant development Monday, Minister of Returns and Communities Slavisa Petkovic officially handed in his resignation, saying he was "not able to have good relations with UNDP and the UNMIK Office for the Return and Communities".
The only Serb minister in the Kosovo government, Petkovic had been accused of corruption and mismanagement by the Office of the General Auditor. 
Prime Minister Ceku's spokesman said the current secretary of the ministry, Branislav Grbic, will take over as acting minister until a permanent replacement is chosen.
Oliver Ivanovic, leader of the Serb List for Kosovo, told Southeast European Times that the Serb List would consider seriously any offer by Ceku to appoint one of its candidates to the ministry.
He didn't rule out the possibility of his own candidacy. 
"I will not speak about my position, while we don't have an official offer to be part of the government," Ivanovic said.
