29/11/2006
(Reuters, AP, Stratfor, BBC, AKI, DPA, RFE/RL, UPI, Makfax - 28/11/06;
AP - 27/11/06)
UN police and local security forces used teargas Tuesday (November 28th) to disperse thousands of Kosovo Albanian protesters after a rally held by a pro-independence group turned violent.
The demonstrators smashed the windows of the province's parliament and vandalised key buildings in Pristina, including UNMIK headquarters.
Up to 5,000 people reportedly joined the rally, organised by the pro-independence Vetevendosje (Self-determination) movement.
It maintains that, instead of participating in UN-led negotiations on Kosovo's future, the province should simply vote for its independence.
"Pristina is the centre and source of all the bad things that are happening to Kosovo," Reuters quoted former student leader Albin Kurti, who headed Tuesday's protest, as saying.
His group organised a similar demonstration when UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's envoy for the Kosovo status process, Martti Ahtisaari, arrived on a fact-finding mission to Pristina about 11 months ago, before the start of direct talks with Belgrade.
"We believe Kosovo does not lack status, but the people of Kosovo lack freedom and that is freedom to self-determination," Kurti told the AP news agency.
Tuesday's protest came a day after UNMIK, citing "credible threats", said security measures would be stepped up across the province.
Without specifying the nature of those threats, UNMIK's statement cautioned that attacks against UN personnel or property at such a crucial phase in the negotiations would be "destructive and counterproductive".
Although it had pledged to bring the status process to completion by the end of this year, the international community decided in recent weeks to postpone a decision until after Serbia's general elections, scheduled for January 21st.
Expectations are that Ahtisaari will submit his proposal for a solution on "final status" by February, after which the UN Security Council would issue a resolution on the matter.
While the former Finnish president has not revealed the contents of his proposal, diplomatic sources have indicated that Kosovo likely will be granted some form of EU-supervised independence.
"There is a real potential for renewed violence in Kosovo," an AP report on Tuesday quoted Tim Judah, a Balkan expert, as warning.
"If there is a delay or if the resolution is unclear, (Kosovo) Albanian hard-liners will start to lose patience."
Meanwhile, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer stressed on Tuesday that the Alliance stands ready to prevent the recurrence of violence in Kosovo.
"I can assure anybody who wants to spoil things there that ...
KFOR is there to prevent anything from happening," he said, ahead of the start of NATO's two-day summit in Riga.
