27/11/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 27/11/06
Serbia's next parliament could have 12 to 15 members from parties representing ethnic minorities, according to the latest survey conducted by the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy (CESID).
"It is estimated that every mandate in parliament will represent 12,000 to 16,000 votes, depending on voter response," explains CESID's Marko Blagojevic. 
"As many times this number is won by ethnic minority parties, as many mandates will they have in the parliament."
To enter parliament, Blagojevic says, parties need only pass the so-called natural threshold -- that is, the average number of votes cast for representatives in the elections.
With the vote set for January 21st, the parties have been searching for the best way to maximise their chances under Serbia's election law. 
Rasim Ljajic's Sandzak Democratic Party, for example, has been in talks with other minority parties on the formation of a "List for Tolerance", which could campaign together with one of the major parties in Serbia -- probably the Democratic Party (DP).
Some, however, are sceptical. 
Ana Tomanova-Makanova, head of the National Council of the Slovak Minority, says she would feel more comfortable with a guaranteed parliamentary quota for ethnic parties. 
That way, she says, ethnic communities would be ensured representation, independent of political affiliation.
The Chairman of the National Council of Ukrainians, Slavko Oros, also supports the idea of guaranteed mandates. 
Similar demands have come from the Croatian minority. 
While ethnic Serb representatives are guaranteed seats in the Croatian parliament, they say, Croatian MPs in Serbia most likely will not be able to run independently.
The president of the Democratic Union of Croats in Vojvodina, Petar Kuntic, said his party cannot gather the 10,000 signatures needed under the Law on Elections. 
As a result, the party will probably enter a coalition with one of the main democratic parties, possibly the DP.
Meanwhile, the president of the Democratic Union of Vojvodina Hungarians, Sandor Pal, says serious efforts are under way to bring all ethnic Hungarian parties together with a joint election list. 
But the leader of the Association of the Vojvodina Hungarians, Jozef Kasa, recently said his party would most likely run independently.
