27/06/2007
(European Parliament - 27/06/07; AFP, AP, Reuters, Euobserver, VOA, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network, Beta, B92, European Parliament - 26/06/07)
The EU should not conclude a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia before the capture of the Bosnian Serbs' wartime military commander, outgoing chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte said on Tuesday (June 26th).
"There should be no signing of the SAA before Ratko Mladic is arrested and full co-operation established," she told members of the European Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee. 
"The signing of the SAA is the next extremely important leverage opportunity regarding Serbia."
Her remarks came about two weeks after the 27-nation bloc resumed its talks on the key pre-membership accord with Serbia after a 13-month break in the process. 
Brussels froze the negotiations in May 2006, citing insufficient co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) -- in particular, Belgrade's failure to hand over Mladic.
The two sides returned to the negotiating table on June 13th, days after the capture and transfer to the UN tribunal of former Bosnian Serb General Zdravko Tolimir.
Following Vlastimir Djordjevic's arrest in Montenegro earlier this month, four key fugitives remain: Mladic, former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic, former official Stojan Zupljanin and Croatian Serb wartime leader Goran Hadzic.
Making full co-operation with the ICTY a key condition for Balkan countries' progress towards EU integration had "proved to be a successful and absolutely crucial tool" for bringing the majority of UN-indicted war criminals to justice, according to del Ponte.
"Conditionality is a unique incentive, it is both a carrot and a stick," she said.
While Mladic is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia, the whereabouts of Karadzic remain unknown. 
Both have been charged with genocide over the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo.
Karadzic appears to have "disappeared from the radar screen", although new books and poetry written by him continue to be published in Serbia, del Ponte said.
Under a UN-endorsed exit strategy, The Hague tribunal must complete all trials by the end of next year ahead of final closure in 2010.
"Serbia has the political will now to hand over the four remaining fugitives," said the prosecutor, whose mandate ends in September. 
"Co-operation has not been full or consistent, but recent signs are positive."
Addressing the EP committee later Tuesday, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic echoed her words, saying, "All fugitives must be located, arrested and extradited."
Stressing Belgrade's commitment to full co-operation, he said EU membership is a top priority for his government, which hopes the SAA can be signed by the end of this year.
