26/06/2007
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 26/06/07
Under a programme established in 1985 by the EU's Cultural Council, the Romanian city of Sibiu was chosen as a European Cultural Capital for 2007. 
The city, first mentioned in a Vatican document dating back to 1191, is hosting more than 220 cultural events throughout the year.
Along with the honour came a budget of nearly 36m euros. 
Sibiu authorities hope to use the occasion to boost Romania's image abroad and draw more foreign visitors to the medieval town and the country as a whole. 
If successful, the effort is likely to be hailed as Romania's first effective tourism strategy.
Preparations began in March 2005, with Sergiu Nistor appointed as commissioner. 
He was also put in charge of co-operation with Luxembourg, the other city chosen as Cultural Capital for this year.
In 2005 and 2006, Sibiu invested 100m euros in infrastructure renewal, while the Ministry of Culture allocated nearly 6m euros for the restoration of 40 old buildings, passages and facades, as well as 20 churches. 
Another 13m euros were allocated for the modernisation of Sibiu airport.
The Romanian government sponsored a Europe-wide promotional campaign featuring the slogan "Sibiu -- Young Since 1141". 
It was launched late last year at the European Parliament headquarters in Strasbourg, France, and has since appeared on international TV networks such as Euronews, National Geographic and Travel Channel.
This year, Sibiu is hosting performances by Milan's La Scala, the Classic Operetta Ensemble of Vienna, and the Berlin Symphony Orchestra, as well as art exhibitions, film screenings, theatre, dance and folklore festivals, caricature saloons, church choir recitals, book fairs, poetry readings, workshops on various subjects and stand-up comedy acts.
Another 26 events are being organised in partnership with Luxembourg. 
These include choreographic projects and a Romanian film festival, titled "Au-Dela de Dracula", to be held this autumn.
In September, Sibiu will host the Third Ecumenical Meeting, to which Pope Benedict XVI has been invited.
