04/10/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 04/10/10
Ethnic identity is tied closely to religion in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Recent statistics suggest Muslims constitute 45% of the population, 36% are Serb Orthodox, and 15% are Roman Catholic.
The country is home to a series of sites profoundly important to many of the world's major religions.
Ajvatovica
About 6km or 7km from the village of Prusac in central Bosnia is Ajvatovica, the oldest religious gathering site of Muslims in the Balkans.
The faithful go there -- as well as to the surrounding towns of Donji Vakuf, Gornji Vakuf, and Bugojno -- every summer.
This past June marked the 500th anniversary of the key event.
Ajvatovica was named for a devoted believer, Ajvaz-Dedo, who, according to popular legend, lived in the 15th century.
At the time, Prusac had no water, prompting constant searches for it.
It was Ajvaz-Dedo who found a good spring, and worked to bring the water to the village.
In his way was a massive rock, 74m high and 30m wide.
Legend has it Ajvaz-Dedo prayed to Allah every early morning for 40 days, and on the 40th day, the rock cracked apart and the spring water poured in, bringing much needed relief to the villagers.
The Ajvatovica event is a custom of Muslims in Bosnia, and is believed to be derived from the old Bogumil prayers for rain, fertility and protection of summer crops.
Bogumils were a religious sect prevalent in Bosnia before the occupation by the Ottoman Empire in the 15th century.
Ajvatovica always falls in June and lasts for almost the whole month.
The event was banned in 1946 by the then Communist authorities.
Restored in 1990, it has been regularly held ever since.
In late June, in addition to the main gathering at the site of the split rock, other cultural and religious events are held, including book promotions, religious concerts and theater performances.
New this year was a fashion show of religious clothing held in Bugojno.
Temple or Church of Christ the Savior
The Temple or Church of Christ the Savior, in the heart of Banja Luka, is the largest Serb Orthodox church in BiH.
It was built on the foundations of the old Church of the Holy Trinity, which was destroyed in a 1941 bombing.
Reconstruction began in 1993, and it was ceremonially opened and sanctified in May 2009, on the Orthodox holiday of Spasovdan (Salvation Day), marking the Ascension, 40 days after Orthodox Easter.
Among those attending the ceremony were leaders of other religious groups:
the rabbi of the Jewish community in BiH, Jozef Atijas;
Banja Luka Catholic Bishop Franjo Komarica;
and Banja Luka Muslim Mufti Edhem Camdzic.
The striking yellow and red building can hold more than 1,000 people and is richly decorated with mosaics by Djuro Radulovic and icon screens by Velimir Klincov.
The temple's clock tower is 47m high.
Medjugorje
On June 25th, the Medjugorje Roman Catholic pilgrimage site in BiH celebrated the 29th anniversary of the apparition of the Medjugorje Madonna with a huge mass.
The faithful came by the tens of thousands, from 25 countries and all seven continents.
The service was translated into 15 languages.
The legend of the Madonna of Medjugorje dates back to 1981, when six local children in the nearby village of Bijakovici described a vision of a woman with a child, resembling the iconic image of the Virgin Mary.
While the claims have had more than their share of skeptics and critics, many have claimed to have seen the image.
One of them, Ivanka Ivankovic Elez of Medjugorje, was only 15 when she saw the Madonna for the first time in 1981.
She says she saw the vision every day until May 7th, 1985.
Vatican officials have not recognised this supernatural phenomenon, but this site in the southern province of Herzegovina has since seen a significant increase in visits by tourists, both domestic and foreign.
Some unofficial estimates suggest 1 million tourists visit Medjugorje a year, providing business to hotels, motels, camps and souvenir stands.
