22/11/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Šantek for Southeast European Times -- 22/11/06
Two countries -- Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia -- declined to initial an agreement on a Southeast European free trade zone at a conference in Brussels on November 9th. 
They now have until December 19th to resolve the remaining areas of disagreement, or risk losing out on a market of 40 million people.
The agreement, which would expand the existing Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) to include Albania, BiH, Croatia, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro and Kosovo, is meant to replace a labyrinth of 31 bilateral deals. 
It is considered crucial to prospects for EU enlargement in the region.
"Cross-border co-operation is not optional, it is the precondition for success," Stability Pact head Erhard Busek said last week. 
"What matters is not the size of the market, but the quality of its development. 
If you wish to compete outside your region, you need to reach the European markets via regional co-operation."
BiH and Serbia have raised different objections to the treaty in its present form. 
Sarajevo wants to include a provision allowing for the temporary introduction of tariffs on products from Croatia and Serbia. 
In this way, it seeks to legalise its earlier, unilateral break with bilateral contracts signed with the two countries. 
After Croatia and Serbia mutually agreed on some level of customs protection for meat and milk manufacturers, BiH found itself unprotected. 
Under strong pressure from farmers, the authorities decided to impose restrictions.
Serbia's main point of contention relates to a dispute with Croatia over the tobacco industry. 
Both states, for all practical purposes, have closed markets. 
Croatia protects its manufacturer, the Rovinj tobacco plant, with a 38% customs tax. 
Serbia, meanwhile, has a small (15%) tax on imported cigarettes, but its factories at Nis (owned by Philip Morris) and Vranje (owned by British American Tobacco) are protected with high excise duties.
Foreign Economic Relations Minister Milan Parivodic says the ministry's state secretary, Vlatko Sekulovic, will travel to Zagreb soon to hash out a solution.
Protection of markets with customs barriers is fundamentally contrary to the principles behind CEFTA, and free-trade advocates say they are more likely to harm than help countries in the long run. 
The economies of BiH and Serbia are barely competitive in the regional market, which will be completely liberalised by 2010. 
That will expose both to the pressures of global competition.
