28/02/2007
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 28/02/07
The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC), which reviews Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) stabilisation, decided on Tuesday (February 27th) to extend the mandate of the Office of the High Representative (OHR) by one year, until the end of June 2008.
Finishing its two-day session, which all three members of the BiH presidency and the BiH prime minister attended, the PIC Steering Board decided against confirming the OHR closure, as planned, this summer.
"In line with the general consensus of PIC Steering Board members, OHR closure is projected by 30 June 2008.
The PIC Steering Board agreed to review the situation at its meetings in October 2007 and February 2008," said the Board's communiqué.
The Steering Board members are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom, the United States, the EU presidency, the European Commission, and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), which is represented by Turkey.
"The situation in the region is still potentially unstable," said High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling after the session.
"That is why the decision on further staying of OHR in BiH is the most reasonable and responsible."
According to the communiqué, transition remains the OHR's goal.
The Board reaffirmed that it is in the interest of all for BiH to take full responsibility for its own affairs, as the policy of ownership remains the guiding principle.
"The Board welcomes the fact that political parties have now engaged in talks on the basis of the Police Reform Directorate report," said the communiqué." The PIC Steering Board expects the state and entity governments to reach an agreement on the report, together with the proposed Agreement on Implementation and Timelines, before mid-March.
" Limited changes to the report are possible.
The document continues, "There is no time to negotiate a new police concept.
Missing the March deadlines could result in significant delays in the signing of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU."
The Board called on BiH authorities, especially in Republika Srpska (RS), to renew efforts to co-operate fully with the UN war crimes tribunal, including playing a proactive role in apprehending all indicted war criminals, notably Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.
It also urged the BiH government to proceed with the process of constitutional reform, especially the reform package.
"Early adoption of the package would constitute a positive first step and basis on which to establish a broader process by mid-2007 that would help BiH meet the requirements of a modern European state," said the communiqué.
According to BiH Presidency Chairman Nebojsa Radmanovic, the three-member Presidency did not reach a consensus on the future of the OHR.
"Haris Silajdzic and Zeljko Komsic supported the idea of OHR's prolonged mandate," he said.
"However, I stressed that OHR has to be terminated, and to allow that international community have only advisory role in BiH."
