28/02/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 28/02/07
Neglect, ecology and environmental protection issues place Serbia about 15 years behind the EU's regulations for ecological standards, an issue now being addressed. 
Tracking air polution accurately is the first step in the right direction.
Though climate changes are an environmental concern, many countries downplay it. 
The EU, however, is urging change since it keeps upgrading its criteria for the emission of hazardous gases. 
The ultimate goal, agreed on at November's UN convention on climate changes, is to enable nature to regain its balance, as in the pre-industrial time.
According to the Environmental Protection Agency, as regards the control of hazardous gases, Serbia is late at least a decade and a half behind, compared to air control in developed European countries. 
The EU constantly changes its standards, making them stricter. 
Although lately it has been done more in meeting the EU standards, Serbia has to speed up the pace.
Air quality in Serbia is recorded at more than 60 sites, but most of them record only a daily average of certain parameters, which does not achieve the measurement accuracy that exists in the EU.
Serbia has just begun to introduce automatic measuring units that display air quality at any time, enable intervention. 
There are three such units in Belgrade, four in Pancevo, two in Bor and one in Zrenjanin.
A turn towards ecology and environmental protection can open new economic possibilities for Serbia, which strives for EU membership.
For the time being, according to the UN convention on climate changes, Serbia has no obligation to reduce the emission of its hazardous gases, there are parties interested in investing in renewable energy resources in the country.
Drawing from foreign funds, especially the funds of the European Agency for Reconstruction, Serbia should introduce an automatic recording of air quality on a national level this year. 
Such recording will give a more accurate reading of air quality. 
For now, the available data show that the air is not significantly different from the European average.
At the same time, Serbia must pass a bill on regulating its air quality. 
The bill on Air Quality Protection, already in Parliament, is awaiting a vote.
