25/06/2007
(Bloomberg - 25/06/07;
FT, Reuters, The Observer, Stratfor - 24/06/07;
AFP, AP, DPA, BBC, RFE/RL, VOA, EU - 23/06/07)
EU leaders reached agreement on the main contents of a key new treaty after a tough, nearly 36-hour summit that ended in Brussels around dawn on Saturday (June 23rd).
The deal ended a major crisis the Union plunged into following the 2005 rejection, by voters in France and the Netherlands, of a proposed constitution for the bloc.
"What counts for me is that we have emerged from paralysis," said German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who chaired this last summit of her country's six-month term at the helm of the EU.
Portugal assumes the presidency on July 1st.
The agreement "represents a significant step forward" for the EU, said Merkel.
European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso also hailed the deal.
"The goal for the summit was to reach a mandate for an institutional settlement," he said.
"We have reached it … this shows that Europe is on the move in the right direction."
Under the deal, an Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC) will convene next month to draft a Reform Treaty that will replace the bulky constitution, rejected by the majority of French and Dutch voters.
EU foreign ministers are expected to approve the draft document during a meeting in early September, before it is submitted for approval by the member nations' leaders at a two-day summit in Lisbon, beginning on October 18th.
Unlike the constitution, the Reform Treaty will amend basic EU documents, such as the Treaty of Rome and the Maastricht Treaty, but not replace them.
Among the institutional changes envisioned is the creation of two new posts -- a permanent president, elected to a two-and-a-half-year term, and a EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, who will also serve as EC vice-president.
This will end the current system of a six-month rotating presidency.
The changes would also lead to a substantial reduction in the number of EU commissioners.
Currently there are 27, each representing one of the member states.
Their numbers would be reduced to 15 in 2014, with the posts rotating among member states.
One of the major sticking points that threatened the summit's success concerned the decision-making process within the bloc.
Poland opposed the double majority principle envisioned in the constitutional charter, under which any decision must be approved by 55% of the member nations, representing at least 65% of the EU population.
Poland gave its consent only after it was agreed that phase-in of the double majority would begin during 2014, and fully implemented in 2017.
A week before his country takes over the rotating EU presidency, Portuguese Prime Minister Jose Socrates voiced his determination to see that the reform treaty is approved by year's end.
"We want to speed up this process," he said in Brussels on Saturday.
"Our intention is that, during the informal summit in October, we manage to approve the text of the treaty."
After this step is completed, the treaty will have to be ratified.
This is expected by mid-2009.
