22/11/2006
(AFP, AP, International Herald Tribune, VOA, Zaman, Turkish Daily News - 21/11/06)
Turkey made it clear on Tuesday (November 21st) that it was not planning to move towards opening its ports and airports to traffic from Cyprus before December 6th, as the EU demanded a day earlier.
"Issues like Cyprus cannot be solved by blackmail or setting deadlines," Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul was quoted as telling reporters in Ankara after a meeting with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Ankara's chief EU negotiator, Ali Babacan.
His statement came a day after Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, warned that Turkey's membership talks with the Union could be derailed if the country fails to honour its trade commitments to Cyprus within the next two weeks.
"If they put unacceptable conditions before us, it will not be possible to make progress," the AFP quoted Erdogan as saying Tuesday.
Several months before the official launch of its membership talks with Brussels in October 2005, Ankara signed a protocol extending its 1963 customs union agreement with the EU to cover all of the bloc's new members, including Cyprus.
The internationally recognised, Greek-run part of Cyprus, whose government the EU views as representing the entire island, joined the bloc in May 2004 -- only days after Greek Cypriot voters overwhelmingly rejected a UN-proposed plan to reunite them with the Turkish Cypriots in the north.
Although the deal was approved by the majority of the Turkish Cypriots, whose breakaway state is recognised by Ankara alone, they were not admitted into the 25-nation club.
Despite its obligations under the customs protocol, Turkey has been refusing to allow Greek Cypriot vessels and planes to enter its ports and airports. 
It has insisted instead that the EU make good on a promise to ease the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community.
Seeking to end the stalemate, Finland has proposed a compromise, under which Turkey would allow Greek Cypriot ships and planes to enter its ports and airports, while the port of Famagusta in northern Cyprus would be opened for trade with the 25-nation bloc. 
At the same time, the former Greek Cypriot residents of neighbouring Varosha would be allowed to return and live there.
According to the Turkish Daily News, however, the Finnish proposal does not provide for the opening of the Ercan airport in the Turkish-run part of Cyprus to international flights. 
If the ruling Justice and Development Party were to accept the deal, it would be taking huge political risks in view of next year's general elections, the English-language daily said.
Gul, who is scheduled to go to Finland on Sunday, noted that Ankara had not rejected the Finnish plan and that it was "still under discussion".
"The Finnish presidency is making efforts (for a solution) and we support those efforts," he said on Tuesday. 
"We still have time."
