30/04/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 30/04/07
Ivica Racan, the founder and long time leader of the Social Democratic Party (SDP), died on Sunday (April 29th) at the age of 63, following a battle with cancer. 
He died in his sleep before dawn, with his wife Diana Plestina by his hospital bed. 
His last wish was that only his family and closest friends should attend his funeral. 
For this reason, the date of the ceremony will not be made public.
Racan was a key figure in recent Croatian political history. 
At the beginning of the 1990s, he led the Croatian branch of the Communist Party, and sought to launch reforms within the party and the former Yugoslavia. 
He was strongly opposed by Slobodan Milosevic and his allies, who dominated the final Communist Party congress in January 1990. 
After the Slovenian delegation left the congress and the party, Racan followed suit.
The same year, he allowed democratic, multiparty elections in Croatia and fully respected the results, which brought victory to the nationalist HDZ. 
Racan handed over power peacefully.
After the election loss, it was many years before Racan would again occupy centre stage. 
During this time, he transformed the former Croatian Communist Party into a social democratic party, looking for the right niche in the post-Yugoslav political environment.
Finally he succeeded, leading the six-party coalition that won the parliamentary elections in 2000. 
Racan became prime minister and started to lead Croatia towards EU and NATO membership. 
His government was pro Western and determined to implement the needed criteria for accession.
This was by no means easy. 
Croatia was only just starting to deal with its wartime history, and was facing the first indictments against Croatian generals issued by the UN war crimes tribunal. 
The coalition began to break apart under the strain, and factional struggles increasingly hampered Racan's effectiveness as prime minister. 
He lost the next parliamentary vote in 2003 and was succeeded by Ivo Sanader of the HDZ.
SDP and the coalition government lost the elections in 2003. 
Racan's party has since rebounded in the polls, and he was expected to mount a strong challenge to Sanader in this year's vote. 
Illness halted this ambition. 
In January, he announced his temporary retirement from politics, due to what turned out to be kidney cancer. 
His condition deteriorated, with the cancer spreading to his brain, and on April 11th he made his retirement permanent, saying he had to focus everything on his fight for life.
Little more than two weeks later, he was gone.
Racan leaves behind a strong political legacy. 
He remains one of country's most popular politicians and is viewed generally as an honest, fair person who was not involved in any major scandal. 
Although he was seen as lacking decisiveness as prime minister, and did not prove effective in tackling corruption, he also showed willingness to negotiate, listen to others' opinions, and seek a compromise.
His death is a shock to his party and its supporters, who have been queuing in front of the SDP headquarters to leave a flower or light a candle in his memory.
