27/02/2007
(Blic - 27/02/07; DPA, AFP, AP, Xinhua, B92 - 26/02/07; Reuters - 25/02/07)
The EU and NATO pledged Monday (February 26th) to work as a team in ensuring security in Kosovo after its future status is resolved.
"We will have as close co-operation as possible," German news agency DPA quoted NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer as saying in Brussels, following a meeting with EU security chief Javier Solana.
The Alliance, which currently has a 16,000-strong force deployed in Kosovo, will continue to play a "very important role" in the future of the province, the NATO chief added.
The meeting between the two top EU and NATO officials took place just a few days after a last round of talks began in Vienna, between negotiators from Belgrade and Pristina on UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's blueprint for Kosovo's final status. 
The negotiations are expected to close on March 10th with a high-level meeting of Serbian and Kosovo Albanian leaders.
NATO says it will help with the creation and training of the Kosovo Security Force (KSF), as proposed by Ahtisaari, who will finalise his plan and submit it to the UN Security Council by the end of March.
According to the blueprint, a new professional and multi-ethnic KSF will have a maximum of 2,500 active members and 800 reserve members, without heavy weapons. 
Members of the KSF will be recruited from across Kosovo through a formal selection process developed jointly by Kosovo and the international military presence led by NATO.
The KSF will initially be responsible for crisis response, explosive ordinance disposal and civil protection. 
In addition, Ahtisaari has proposed that the KSF be designed and prepared to fulfil other security functions, not appropriate for the police or other law enforcement organisations.
NATO will help with the creation and training of the KSF, Admiral Harry Ulrich, commander of NATO Allied Joint Force Command in Naples, told reporters during a visit in Pristina on Saturday.
In Vienna meanwhile, there is tough sledding in talks between Belgrade and Pristina. 
The Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90% of Kosovo's population, are demanding independence from Serbia. 
Insisting instead on Kosovo's substantial autonomy within Serbia, Belgrade has rejected Ahtisaari's blueprint, seen as paving the way for eventual statehood.
Deadlocked, the two sides are unlikely to reach a compromise in the coming days, said Solana on Monday, adding that a Security Council decision on the issue of Kosovo's final status was essential. 
"We will not see any other way out of this process than a UN Security Council resolution," he said at a joint press conference with de Hoop Scheffer.
The Council also is expected to adopt a resolution later this year that would mark the end of UNMIK and its replacement by an International Civilian Office, headed by an International Civilian Representative (ICR) who would also act as the EU Special Representative.
The ICR would be tasked to oversee and ensure the successful implementation of the Kosovo status settlement. 
Additionally, the ICR would work in conjunction with KFOR, which will continue as the International Military Presence in providing a safe and secure environment in the province until its institutions are capable of assuming responsibility for Kosovo's security.
Solana said that once the Security Council agrees on a resolution, the EU will finalise its plans for its role in Kosovo, which under Ahtisaari's proposal, would include a European Security and Defence Policy mission to assist in the development of effective, fair and representative rule of law institutions.
The current stalemate, however, has led to increased calls by separatists in Kosovo for a unilateral declaration of independence. 
Groups opposing any negotiations with Serbia recently staged a protest that left two people dead and dozens injured. 
With a new demonstration scheduled for March 3rd, the NATO chief warned on Monday against attempts to stir up violence in the province.
Southeast European Times writer Bekim Greicevci contributed to this article.
