27/02/2007
By Denis Džidić for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 27/02/07
In a historic verdict on Monday (February 26th), the International Court of Justice ruled that while Serbia failed to comply with its obligation to stop and punish those who carried out the genocide in Srebrenica in July 1995, there was insufficient evidence that Serbia committed, assisted or funded acts of genocide in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) during the 1990s conflict.
The judges voted 13-2 to clear Serbia of the charge brought by BiH. 
If it were found guilty, Belgrade could have been forced to pay some $100 billion in compensation, a sum that would have bankrupted the country.
Court President Judge Rosalyn Higgins rejected BiH's claim for monetary reparations. 
However, she demanded that Serbia handover Ratko Mladić, the general who oversaw the Bosnian Serb onslaught at Srebrenica in 1995, for trial.
Serbian legal representatives Radoslav Stojanović and Saša Obradović expressed their satisfaction with the verdict. 
"This was the most difficult accusation our nation has ever had to deal with. 
I hope that this can open the door towards peaceful coexistence of peoples in BiH," Obradović said.
Phon van den Biesen, the chief representative for BiH in the proceedings, said he was not unhappy with the verdict. 
" We received some important verdicts, and, most importantly, the material evidence of genocide was accepted, but our evidence of intent was apparently insufficient. 
However, the finding that an act of genocide occurred is most important."
As expected, the three members of the BiH presidency differed in their views on the verdict, however, all three agreed that the verdict is final and should be accepted. 
"Now is the time to carefully read the verdict and try to move forward," Serb member Nebojša Radmanovic said.
The Bosniak and Croatian members, Haris Silajdžić and Željko Komšić, both expressed disappointment with the verdict. 
Silajdžić was bewildered. 
"Now we have a situation that a crime of genocide was committed and we don't know who did it!"
Politicians from Serbia were also quick to react. 
President Boris Tadić was pleased with the final result, and congratulated the Serbian legal team, however, he called for "the Serbian National Assembly to pass a declaration to condemn the massacre in Srebrenica."
The verdict brought mixed feelings in the Republika Srpska (RS). 
"A part of RS history will be stained by the conclusion that part of its armed forces have committed genocide, and we will have to live with that," said Miroslav Mikeš, a legal expert from RS.
However, RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik called the lawsuit illegitimate and illegal, but said he was "pleased Serbia wasn't found guilty of genocide".
Ending the process was met with the approval of the international community as well, with EU security chief Javier Solana describing the verdict as an "important step forward".
The verdict, however, did not meet with the approval of several dozen members of the Association of the Victims of Genocide, who demonstrated in front of the Court. 
"This is a disgrace to all of those that took part in it," said Fadila Memišević, one of the protesters.
The Association planned to protest in Sarajevo on Tuesday to express their "unhappiness" with the ruling and to welcome home the Bosnian legal team.
Bosnian Prime Minister Nikola Špirić said that he believes the finality of the case will lead to a better future and much better relations between BiH and Serbia.
