29/03/2007
(EurActiv - 29/03/07; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, FT, Beta, B92, Makfax, EUROPA - 28/03/07)
The EU is ready to play a "leading role" in Kosovo after its status issue has been resolved, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Wednesday (March 28th), two days after UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari unveiled his final proposal for a settlement.
The document, drawn up by the former Finnish president and sent to the Security Council on Monday, envisions EU-supervised independence for Kosovo, described as the "only viable option".
"The essence of the decision on Kosovo is European unity," Rehn told a European Parliament (EP) committee on Wednesday. 
"We must continue to support President Ahtisaari and his proposal with consistent determination in the UN Security Council. 
There is no gain in delaying the decision. 
The UN has already been running Kosovo for eight years. 
The status quo is not sustainable."
The Security Council is expected to open a debate on Ahtisaari's Kosovo plan shortly after Britain takes over the chairmanship of the 15-nation body at the beginning of April, and to decide on the province's future status later this year.
Addressing the EP on Wednesday, Rehn made it clear that EU planning for "the largest civilian crisis management mission" the Union has ever undertaken was well advanced.
Under the plan, once the status issue has been resolved, the EU will send up to 2,000 international staff to Kosovo, including up to 1,500 police officers, magistrates and customs officials.
Citing an internal report, drafted by Rehn and EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, the Financial Times reported on Wednesday that the 120-day transitional period, during which UNMIK would hand over responsibilities to the EU, would likely be "highly sensitive in political and security terms".
According to the paper, the EU mission would be fully operational "for a minimum period of two years".
"The EU will play a leading role both in the running of international civilian missions and in support of Kosovo's European aspirations," Rehn told EU lawmakers Wednesday. 
"We have no exit strategy, only an entry strategy."
The estimated funding needed for the first three years, he said, would be up to 1.5 billion euros. 
This would cover Kosovo's share of the Yugoslav debt, the cost of status implementation, economic development needs and the cost of the international presence.
"Resources cannot come from the EU budget alone," said Rehn. 
"EU member states and our international partners must share the responsibility."
The EU expects the United States and international financial institutions to contribute some of the resources.
Before debate begins in the Security Council, political directors from the six nations in the Contact Group for Kosovo -- Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States -- met in London on Wednesday.
"The Contact Group remains united in its shared sense of responsibility to promote peace in Kosovo and in the region, despite any differences of perception," the British liaison office in Pristina said in a statement.
Russia, which is also one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, is the only country in the Contact Group that has voiced opposition to Ahtisaari's proposal. 
It has been calling for further negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina.
