07/03/2005
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 05/03/07
It has been more than two years since the former Yugoslav parliament adopted the Constitutional Charter and the law on its implementation.
Following its signing by then Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica, Montenegrin President Milo Djukanovic and other top officials, a constitutional committee spent several months drafting the fundamental legal acts of the new state union.
According to Serbian media reports, both the charter and the law on its implementation have been violated on at least seven occasions during the past two years.
Some violations have been unilateral, others bilateral, and in some cases mutually agreed on by Belgrade and Podgorica.
The constitutions of Serbia and Montenegro have yet to be harmonised with the Charter, even though 30 June 2003 was the deadline for doing so.
The two constituent states agreed to break the so-called "safety" clause that says the foreign and defence ministers cannot be from the same republic.
The deadline for adopting state emblems has expired, although both the Serbian and Montenegrin parliaments initiated procedures last year towards the adoption of a flag, coat-of-arms and anthem.
Half of the violations of the Charter’s provisions relate to "the general phenomenon of the violation of the law by the highest state institutions", says Dragor Hiber, a Belgrade Law School professor and Democratic Party MP who was one of the authors of the charter.
The other half reflect the absence of political will among the member states for establishing mechanisms by which living together would be institutionalised.
The signed charter provides for Serbia and Montenegro to share a common market, with a free flow of people, goods, services and capital.
In practice, this has not happened.
The 30-day deadline for constituting state union institutions was missed, with the longest waiting period involving the appointment of judges to the state union court.
Direct elections were supposed to be held this year to elect the state union parliament, but Montenegro opposes doing so and the Serbian cabinet has indicated it is willing to postpone them.
One of the most significant violations, Hiber says, has been the failure to pass a law on state union property.
Such a law was supposed to define what falls under the category of fixed property that is necessary for the functioning of Serbia-Montenegro;
the rest would be divided between the republics on the basis of territorial rights.
The most significant areas that would be impacted are army property and the former state media.
With the exception of G17 Plus, whose leader, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, is on record as saying the charter does not reflect the actual relations between the constituent republics, all the Serbian parliamentary parties firmly back the survival of the state union.
In a statement issued on the charter's second anniversary, Kostunica said the document still represents the best available solution, despite its systemic and operating shortcomings.
In Montenegro, Djukanovic and his government strongly favour outright independence, while the opposition Socialist People's Party wants to preserve the union.
Both advocates and critics of the state union invoke the goal of EU accession.
From the viewpoint of independence-minded forces in Montenegro, the affiliation with Serbia is holding back the process, not least because of the continuing obstacle presented by Belgrade's recalcitrance on the issue of war crimes.
Kostunica and others, however, say the EU invested considerable time and effort in achieving the compromise political agreement under which the charter was drafted, and that Brussels still wants to see Serbia and Montenegro move towards accession together -- despite its recent decision to take a two-track approach on economic issues.
Zoran Lutovac, a political analyst who was on the committee that drafted the charter, believes that any assessment of the document must factor in the political conditions under which it was drafted.
Despite its shortcomings, he says, an important objective was achieved.
"Passions were cooled, especially in Montenegro, the making of one-sided moves was prevented, and the danger of further destabilisation of the region was removed.
Since then political conflicts have been channeled through institutions and did not spill over from them."
In brief, the history of the charter over the past two years reflects the complications and uncertainties that have characterised the state union, and the future outlook remains unclear.
Nearly everyone agrees that obtaining a positive assessment by the EU on a Feasibility Study for the country, thus allowing the accession process to go forward, is a top priority.
But whether that in itself is enough to sustain the union has yet to be seen.
The latest initiative from Podgorica, which has proposed establishing a new commonwealth of independent states -- along the lines of that which replaced the former Soviet Union -- has added a new complication.
The Serbian government has flatly rejected the plan, restating its commitment to the status quo But Djukanovic points out that the status quo provides for a referendum on independence in 2006, and has vowed to proceed unless the two sides agree on an alternative arrangement.
