28/03/2007
(DPA, UN News Centre, Cyprus News Agency - 27/03/07; AFP, Reuters, DPA, UN News Centre - 09/03/07; AP, BBC - 08/03/07)
The UN Security Council welcomed on Tuesday (March 27th) a decision by the Greek Cypriot authorities earlier this month to dismantle a wall that has divided Nicosia into Greek and Turkish sectors for more than three decades.
The wall and National Guard post at the southern end of Ledra Street were removed on March 8th, as a step towards opening a new crossing point in Europe's last divided capital.
Praising the move, the Council voiced hope --in a statement Tuesday -- that the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot authorities would "be able to agree quickly on the practicalities for pedestrian access".
Five crossing points have been opened on the Mediterranean island's 300km buffer zone since 2003. 
However, none are in the centre of Nicosia, where barricades were first erected during interethnic clashes between the Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots in 1963.
The Greek Cypriot government's decision came about two months after the Turkish Cypriots tore down a footbridge on their side of Ledra Street, the main commercial road in Nicosia and a major symbol of the island's nearly 33-year division.
The members of the 15-nation Security Council welcomed that move also and urged the two communities to work with the UN towards the opening of the crossing.
Following the demolition of the wall by Greek Cypriots, the top UN envoy in Cyprus, Michael Moller, said that once the two sides have agreed on how to proceed, the UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) would take quick steps "to ensure the area's overall safety in order to facilitate the opening of the crossing as a matter of priority".
The measures would include clearing the area of unexploded ordnance, as well as shoring up dangerous buildings.
In its statement Tuesday, the Security Council also voiced hope that the two communities would undertake more confidence building measures as "part of a broader move to resume full fledged negotiations aimed at a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem".
It urged the leaders of the two communities to take immediate action towards implementing a UN-sponsored agreement the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot presidents, Tassos Papadopoulos and Mehmet Ali Talat, reached on July 8th, 2006.
The deal envisioned the creation of technical and working groups to focus on issues affecting daily life on the island, as well as more substantial ones, as a means of facilitating a lasting settlement.
