27/12/2006
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 27/12/06
Romania's leu surpassed all European currencies and became the world's best performer this year, according to Bloomberg market analysts. 
Prospects continue to be high because foreign investment may double after Romania joins the EU next week.
In 2006, following the purchase of 60% of the Romanian Commercial Bank by Austria's Erste Bank, the leu rose 20% against the dollar, passing a six year high.
"There are several factors that increased the leu, starting with the seven-years of continuous economic growth and seven-years of continuous disinflation. 
The growth in work productivity in the Romanian economy and a good placement of the labour force also contributed to these results," said Adrian Vasilescu, counselor to the Governor of the Romanian National Bank.
Romania expects a record 8 billion euros in foreign capital this year, a significant rise from 5.2 billion euros in 2005. 
The government projects foreign investment will rise by10 billion euros in 2007. 
One of the most important foreign investors, Renault, France's second largest carmaker, has announced it will pump in 100m euros to raise production at its assembly plant to 350,000 vehicles a year in 2008.
"The fact that we have a stable and rising currency can only attract more foreign investments," the newspaper Ziua quoted Radu Ghetea, president of the Romanian Bank Association, as saying.
GDP is up by 8.3% compared to the same period in 2005, exceeding expectations, and economic growth during the first nine months of the year rose to 7.8%. 
According to the Financial Times, Romania is undergoing the fastest economic development in Europe, surpassing Greece (3.2 %), Turkey (5.2 %) and Bulgaria (5.7 %).
Not everyone, however, welcomes the leu's appreciation. 
Exporters say it could slow the economic expansion. 
"The rise could bring an end to Romanian exports," said Mihai Ionescu, secretary general of the Romanian National Agency of Exporters and Importers. 
"Appreciation of the leu is not based on growth of the economy and the production costs, but is merely the result of financial market speculations."
Others point to the large current account deficit, which may reach 10% of GDP this year, as a potential threat.
Still, the World Bank and other strong commercial banks have begun issuing obligations in leu. 
Analysts see this as reflecting general optimism based on Romania's strong economic performance.
