21/11/2006
(AFP, AP, Reuters, Bloomberg, VOA, Ireland Online, EUobserver, EUpolitix, EurActiv, Zaman, Turkish Daily News, Finnish EU presidency - 20/11/06)
Turkey was warned Monday (November 20th) that it has until the first week of December to respect its trade commitments to Cyprus or face a possible derailment of its EU membership talks.
"Time is running out," Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, said in a speech in Helsinki. 
"If there is no agreement and Turkey does not honour its commitments, the EU will need to consider the implications for the accession process. 
This is not a good scenario and it would mean an uncertain future."
Several months before the official launch of its membership talks with Brussels in October 2005, Ankara signed a protocol extending its customs agreement with the EU to all member states, including Cyprus.
However, it has since refused to allow Greek Cypriot vessels and planes to enter its ports and airports, insisting that the EU should first make good on a 2004 promise to end the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community.
Cyprus has been split along ethnic lines since 1974, when Turkey deployed thousands of troops in the country's north following a brief, Athens-backed Greek Cypriot coup that sought to unite the island with Greece.
Earlier this month, the European Commission (EC) issued a toughly worded report on Turkey's accession progress. 
It criticised Ankara over the slow pace of reforms and its refusal to honour the customs union deal, but did not recommend whether entry talks should continue or be suspended.
The commission is now expected to present its recommendations on December 6th. 
The EU foreign ministers will consider these five days later, when they meet to prepare for the December 14th-15th EU summit in Brussels.
Finland "has no intention of raising the Turkey issue" at the EU leaders' meeting, Vanhanen said on Monday. 
"Decisions will be made before that. 
The real deadline is before the commission presents its recommendations."
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, who has been warning for months about a possible "train crash" in Turkey's talks, echoed the Finnish prime minister's words.
"We don't need another Turkey summit like in 2004 and 2005," Rehn said at a press conference Monday. 
"The last commission meeting will take place on December 6th; hence this could be a logical moment to make a recommendation on the commission's part if Turkey has not met its obligations."
Meanwhile, Turkey indicated that it is not planning to lift its embargo.
"We stand at the point we are," the AFP quoted Turkish Justice Minister and government spokesman Cemil Cicek, as saying Monday. 
"Turkey's policy is very clear and determined. 
It is the EU authorities who have failed to fulfil their promises."
