30/01/2007
(Reuters, AP, EU Observer, EurActiv, RFE/RL, Beta, B92, Makfax - 29/01/07)
Just days before UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's proposal for a solution to the Kosovo status issue is to become publicly known, NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer warned on Monday (January 29th) against any attempts to stir up violence in the province.
He made it clear that the nearly 17,000-KFOR troops stood ready to respond to unrest.
"KFOR is prepared for all eventualities," de Hoop Scheffer said, after a meeting with Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski in Brussels.
"Let nobody in Kosovo have any illusions that they should test KFOR ...
That goes for the majority and the minority."
Ahtisaari plans visits to Belgrade and Pristina on Friday, to discuss his proposal for Kosovo's future with officials, exactly a week after presenting it to representatives of the six-nation Contact Group, comprised of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, at a closed-door meeting in Vienna.
De Hoop Scheffer urged the Balkan nations to back Ahtisaari's proposal.
"We support his timelines.
And I think it is important that all nations and countries in the region do the same."
Quoting unnamed diplomats and officials, international media reports have said the blueprint envisions some form of "supervised independence" for Kosovo that will allow it to gradually acquire the symbols of statehood and seek membership in international bodies, such as the EU, UN, the World Bank and the IMF.
Some among the province's Albanian majority are likely to be disappointed by the fact that they will not be offered outright independence, while Serbia -- which says the most it can agree to is substantial autonomy -- can be expected to protest any moves towards making the province a sovereign state.
Amid concerns about potential instability as the plan is released, Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku urged the public Monday to remain calm.
"Let's keep our eyes open, preserve the calm and security in Kosovo," Ceku said in his weekly radio address.
"Any breach of these parameters would be fatal for us."
After his discussions with Belgrade and Pristina on the roadmap for Kosovo, Ahtisaari is expected to finalise his proposal and submit it to the UN Security Council, which will ultimately decide the province's future status.
Russia has said it will use its veto power to block any Security Council resolution on Kosovo that is unacceptable to Belgrade.
It has also suggested that Ahtisaari should postpone the process until a new government is formed in Serbia.
During his planned visit to Belgrade on Friday, the UN envoy will meet with President Boris Tadic.
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has refused to meet with him, saying that due to the pending political changeover in Serbia, he no longer has the authority to decide such matters.
His political adviser, Slobodan Samardzic, told Reuters on Monday that Serbia was offering the Kosovo Albanian majority "internal independence".
"Serbia does not need much," he said.
"It needs only respect for its borders.
On internal arrangements we can have maximum flexibility.
In all matters connected with their vital interests -- economic, social, cultural -- the Albanians would not be governed by Belgrade."
