22/06/2007
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 22/06/07
The 27th World Club Championship was held on the Krupa River in southern Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) from June 2nd to 10th. 
The team from Italy won the competition.
Twenty-five European countries were represented. 
The former world champions from Serbia won second place, the Hungarian team was third, while the Jelah-Tesanj Sports Fishing Club, representing BiH, came in fourth.
"We are proud that competitors could compete in a beautiful and pleasant country, where people love nature and sports in general," said BiH presidency member Zeljko Komsic.
The competition was sponsored by the International Confederation of Sport Fishing and the International Federation of Sport Fishing in Freshwaters. 
Although the teams were not technically national ones, each participating club represented its home country.
The event was held in five sections of the Krupa River, from Karaotok to Capljina. 
Each team had one competitor in each of the sectors. 
The fisherman who caught the biggest fish in his sector received one point, while the second place finisher got two points. 
Overall, the winner was the team with the least number of points. 
The Italian team won first place with just 62.5 points and 18kg of caught fish.
The BiH team from the Jelah-Tesanj Sport Fishing Club came in with low expectations, due to a lack of modern fishing equipment. 
Italian team leader Roberto Trabucco's equipment was said to be more expensive than that of the entire BiH team.
During the first seven days of the event, the teams made preparations and familiarised themselves with the river. 
The actual competition was held during the last two days. 
On the first day of competition, the BiH team was stuck in 10th place. 
On the second day, things took an unexpected turn. 
With a bit of luck and the team's familiarity with the terrain, the BiH fishermen were able to advance to fourth.
Other teams from the region enjoyed moderate success. 
Romania was 9th, Slovenia 11th, Montenegro 13th, Croatia 15th, Bulgaria 16th and Macedonia 20th.
The rivers in BiH are known to be rich in salmon, trout and carp. 
During the two days of competition, individual catches ranged between 3.5 and 26kg. 
England's Richard O’Connor used a #16 hook and a 0.12mm silk fish-line to haul in the biggest catch. 
The English team won 6th place overall.
According to Djordje Klepic, the president of the BiH Sport Fishing Association, BiH received high marks for organising the event -- considered the most important sporting event in the country since the conflict period ended.
