27/03/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb– 27/03/07
Croatia's INA and its refinery in the industrial city of Sisak are being sued by the municipal government for exceeding the permitted concentration levels of dangerous gases. 
Now the town of Sisak is seeking compensation of 1.5m euros from the Croatian state, INA's largest shareholder.
After environmental activists in Sisak proved that the concentration of hydrogen sulphide and sulphur dioxide levels exceed the refinery's regulatory standards, the government decided to take measures to protect the public from further health threats.
More than 50,000 people live in the potential pollution zone, some 50km southeast of Zagreb. 
Sisak has always been a centre of chemical industry and home of the largest oil refinery in Croatia. 
Most people living in the area work for it or in the chemical plants.
Although residents have long noticed an odor, it was not considered a health threat. 
However, initial air tests suggest otherwise.
According to the Association of Cancer Patients of Sisak, the air pollution has led to more cancer-related illnesses. 
Women in Sisak mostly suffer from breast cancer, while the male population is affected by lung cancer. 
The rates are, according to the Association, unusual and alarming.
Most of the blame is directed at the oil refinery. 
Local politicians say they are not satisfied with the amount requested in the lawsuit and are advising the community to seek much more. 
This marks the first time that a local population in Croatia has sued government authorities for endangering their health.
The Health Ministry is researching the cancer rates in Sisak, with final results expected by the end of June. 
Health Minister Neven Ljubicic said that research done for the period between 1991 and 2000 suggested Sisak had an average number of cancer-related illnesses.
The management of INA has promised to do all it can to meet health and environmental standards, while refusing to admit that the increased concentration of sulphur gases is connected with its facilities in the area.
So far, the Environment Ministry has sent 12 different inspection teams to the refinery to monitor the situation.
