20/11/2006
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 20/11/06
October's elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) brought new members to the country's tripartite presidency. 
They have an opportunity to demonstrate BiH's readiness to move forward with reforms and bring the country closer to the EU. 
To do so, however, they will have to rise above their differences and work as a team.
The first to hold the rotating chairmanship of the presidency will be its Serb member, Nebojsa Radmanovic. 
Born in Gracanica in 1949, he graduated from the Philosophical Faculty in Belgrade and is a former member of the Republika Srpska parliament.
At his inauguration as president, Radmanovic said BiH must move towards European integration and that Europe must help. 
"I see the mandate that I have received as an obligation," he said. 
"I have a great obligation to the numerous citizens of Republika Srpska who voted for me, but also to those who didn't. 
I have an obligation to every citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
I will fulfil it."
The youngest member of the presidency ever to be elected is Croat member Zeljko Komsic, a member of the Social Democrat Party. 
He was born in Sarajevo in 1964 and later graduated from the Sarajevo Faculty of Law and the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University in Washington. 
He formerly served as BiH's first ambassador to Serbia-Montenegro.
Komsic's candidacy was the most controversial of the election. 
Several parties complained that he would draw most of his votes not from the Croat population, but from Bosniaks who also support him. 
The former Croat member of the presidency, Ivo Miro Jovic, refused to relinquish his post to him. 
"Komsic will not take up this post -- he did not get a single vote from a true Croat. 
I am the Croat member of the Bosnian presidency, according to the will of Bosnian Croats."
So far, HDZ 1990 and the Croatian Party of Rights, which are in a coalition, have said they will accept Komsic as the legally elected Croat member of the presidency if he serves Croatian interests.
Haris Silajdzic is the most prominent of the three elected to the presidency. 
Born in Sarajevo in 1945, he graduated from the Faculty of Arabic and Islamic studies in Libya. 
He served as foreign affairs minister and prime minister of BiH from 1993 to 1996. 
He is the founder and president of the Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina (SBiH).
Silajdzic noted the importance of the role of the presidency in building a fair society, with special emphasis on the young and those who are often overlooked. 
"Finally, we are here today because of the will of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
We, members of the BiH Presidency, are obligated to respect that will, and I am sure that our friends outside of Bosnia and Herzegovina would also be guided by the same, democratically expressed will and help us in achieving the common goals."
