29/01/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 29/01/07
Contact Group representatives told Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku on Friday (January 26th) that all talk about the Kosovo status proposal remains speculative until UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari presents it to Belgrade and Pristina on February 2nd.
"We should be patient until we get the package in our hands and then we will be sure about the package's contents," Ceku said after talks with the representatives.
At the same time, he said Kosovo's institutions and citizens believe the proposal will be a welcome one. 
"There are no doubts that package might have some negative elements -- maybe it will not be fully what we want. 
But it will be acceptable," he said.
Ahtisaari's plan has already been presented to the Contact Group at a closed-door session. 
International media reports, citing diplomats and officials, have said it proposes some form of "supervised independence" for Kosovo, though with significant autonomy for its Serbian population.
Russia wants to delay presentation of the plan, which was already postponed because of the January 21st elections in Serbia. 
Moscow says the process should be put off until the new Serbian government is formed.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's office has said he will not meet with Ahtisaari, due to the political changeover in Serbia. 
Outgoing Minister of State Administration and Local Governance Zoran Loncar urged the envoy Sunday to wait until the new government is in place.
"It has never happened that a European state is requested to have its key issues discussed at a time when its government has not been set up," Loncar said.
According to Ceku, however, there is no reason for further delays.
"The process is on a good track and we are expecting that Ahtisaari very soon will finalise it," he said, adding that he has received international assurances to that effect.
Meanwhile, the head of Germany's office in Pristina, Eugen Wolfarth, urged Kosovo's people to "be calm and await the proposal".
This is "very important not only for you, but also for the international community, because the world is interested in seeing a stable situation," he said.
