20/12/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 20/12/10
When it first appeared on Kanal D in Turkey in 2006, "Binbir Gece" both scandalised and enthralled audiences with its main plotline in which an architect, Sehrazat Evliyaoglu, reluctantly agrees to sleep with her boss, Onur Aksal, in exchange for the money she needs to afford a bone marrow transplant for her young, desperately ill son. 
Over time, romance blooms between the pair.
"We'd never seen this kind of serial before. 
It was a big question for every girl: would you accept this kind of offer?" said Banu Kilic, 32, a businesswoman from Istanbul who is a devoted fan of the show.
What makes it so exciting and realistic is the fact that it avoids unbelievable plot twists, in which "the main character learns that he is his own mother", notes one contributor to a "Binbir Gece" fan forum.
Although the series ended last year, the drama continued off-screen after a real-life romance blossomed between the leading couple, Halit Ergenc and Berguzar Korel. 
Shortly after Ergenc divorced in 2009, the couple married and had a son.
Reruns remain a ratings hit, and the show has sparked significant interest in visiting Turkey, especially locations where "Binbir Gece" was shot. 
Visitors specifically request guides who can provide inside scoop on the show and cast.
The protagonist, Onur (Ergenc), has attracted the most attention. 
Despite his indecent proposal, legions of women view him as the ideal man.
"This guy has all these good qualities which are admired and demanded by every woman: being rich, romantic and in love so much with a woman. 
This was a good series for women," Nursel Onar, 34, an employment manager, says.
Onur's blue eyes hold a sort of fascination for Croatian women, too. 
RTL broadcasts the soap opera every night. 
When the actor visited Zagreb last month, fans greeted him like a superstar.
He's all over the tabloids, and even the more serious mainstream media are covering Onur-mania. 
The show's lead actors filmed a TV commercial in Zagreb for the supermarket chain Konzum and were guests of the company for a few days, attracting crowds everywhere.
How pervasive is this popularity? 
A Zagreb real estate ad last month gushed that an apartment for sale "looks almost exactly like Onur's".
In Serbia, soap operas have had a faithful audience since the 1990s. 
Until just recently, 1,001 Nights, aired on weekdays in primetime on Prva Srpska TV and reigned supreme.
Its run ended on December 10th. 
After broadcasting the final episode, Korel and Ergenc were guests in the TV studio, where audience members waved banners and had a chance to meet them.
When the Turkish stars took a stroll in downtown Belgrade, fans were surprised and delighted.
Certain travel agencies, determined to cash in on the show's popularity, are offering trips to Turkey dubbed Down Shahrazad's paths.
On Prva Srpska's website, viewers seem to have a real connection with the programme. 
"Beautiful Onur. 
The show is great! 
I hope Onur will finally find happiness," writes a woman named Ivana.
Author Zoran Kesic hosts of one of the most popular talk shows in Serbia, "The Closing Time Republic", which airs on the same channel as 1,001 Nights did. 
"People get into soaps because they deal with simple, everyday topics and problems that everyone can understand. 
People are attracted to tales of heartache, deception and betrayal," Kesic tells SETimes.
He doesn't watch soaps, since, as he puts it, they do not meet his criteria for quality TV programming. 
He has no problem, however, with those who do spend their time with Onur and the others.
There are plenty of people who fit that bill in Greece. 
The centuries-old animosity between the Greeks and the Turks takes a backseat when it comes to soaps: "Binbir Gece" and a second Turkish show, "Kismet", both air in primetime on the private TV channel ANT1.
It is most popular among the 40-65 demographic. 
Athens housewife Eva says she watches "Binbir Gece" because the show portrays customs -- such as respect shown by children towards elders and between husband and wife -- that once existed in Greece.
Dimitris, a 64-year-old retired Greek-American, watches Kismet because it reminds him of Greece in the early '70s ... 
"and there's plenty of action".
When asked why they don't watch US soaps, his wife Joanne said it's primarily because the show portrays a reality that's closer to "our culture". 
"It means something to us," she explains.
Georgia, a 50-year-old civil servant, never misses an episode. 
"It's so great to be able to see places I visited when I went to Turkey. 
It's so nostalgic to think that I too once walked through those very streets," she says. 
"It's like being there."
But there are those who see the other side of the coin. 
"It's total propaganda," says 43-year-old Marios, the CFO of a major shipping company.
"The comprehensive scenario of the series breaks the decades long stereotypes about Turkey as a country of Islamic orientation, and the position of a woman as uneducated, conservative and completely dependant from the male partner/companion/master, whether it was her husband or father or brother. 
That was not done accidentally," Sejn Husejnefendic, who works in the communications department at the Faculty of Philosophy in Sarajevo says.
"The beautifully 'packaged', perfumed, designer clothed and gender/age/culture adjusted elements promoted Turkey in the region more than the official diplomacy."
In neighbouring Montenegro, since TV Vijesti ago began broadcasting "Binbir Gece" a few months ago, the streets are virtually deserted for 45 minutes each evening. 
It appeals to a broad spectrum there as well, women and men alike.
Journalist Igor Pejovic says he loves the show mainly because it is set in Istanbul. 
"That is a city that I always wanted to visit," he said. 
He also suggests the series dispels some preconceived notions about Turkey.
The series -- at least briefly -- meant booming business for translators. 
In early September, Turkish textbooks were delayed because the industry was busy cashing in on the demand for Onur in all languages.
"You could not find any Turkish translators; they were all engaged in translations of the Turkish series," said journalist Vesna Kukanova.
(Alexander Christie-Miller in Istanbul, Bojana Milovanovic in Belgrade, Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo, Maria Paravantes in Greece, Ksenija Jurkovic in Sibenik, Klaudia Lutovska in Skopje and Nedjeljko Rudovic in Podgorica contributed to this report.)
