26/12/2006
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 26/12/06
By a vote of 87 to 18, Croatia's parliament decided last week to put off activating an Ecological and Fishery Protection Zone (EFPZ) in the Adriatic until January 2008, in response to EU pressure. 
The proposed zone has raised concerns in neighbouring Slovenia and Italy.
According to Rome and Ljubljana, activating the EFPZ would allow free fishing access to Croatian fishermen, while excluding their Italian and Slovenian counterparts. 
The latter would need to request special permission, effectively limiting the number of their fishing boats in the protected zone area.
Italy and Slovenia have both filed official complaints at the European Commission in Brussels, arguing that Croatia is taking unilateral steps in the Adriatic and risking strained relations with its neighbours.
After considering possible issues and consequences, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader's Croatian Democratic Union and its parliamentary allies decided to support a delay. 
January 1st, 2008 has been set as the final date for activating the EFPZ, though parliament could decide to do so earlier. 
President Stipe Mesic also endorsed the postponement.
Supporters of the move say it is necessary to avoid a snag in Croatia's relations with the EU, at a time when the country is seeking to speed up entry into the bloc.
The Social Democrats and other opposition parties, however, oppose the delay. 
They argue that Croatia should expand its fishing authority sooner rather than later, and help its fishermen preserve their fish stock. 
The opposition also criticised Sanader for transferring the problem to the next government, instead of taking action now.
The new start date of January 2008 is several months after scheduled parliamentary elections in Croatia. 
The newly elected government would then have to deal with the issue and its repercussions, both domestic and international.
The EFPZ would cover about 30,000 sq km of the Adriatic outside Croatian territorial waters.
