23/02/2007
(AFP, FENA, Office of the High Representative - 22/02/07;
AP - 21/02/07;
Office of the High Representative - 20/02/07;
AFP - 16/02/07;
Stratfor - 13/02/07;
Office of the High Representative - 22/12/06)
Political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) must reach an agreement on police reform if the country is to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU this year, the Office of the High Representative (OHR) warned on Thursday (February 22nd).
"BiH could be in a position to progress towards its SAA as soon as mid-March," said a spokesperson for the OHR's Banja Luka office, Ljiljana Radetic.
"This is a golden opportunity for all in BiH."
The OHR has set March 2nd as the deadline for a police reform agreement.
The European Commission (EC) has made it clear that the SAA will not be signed if BiH does not restructure its police forces in line with EU standards.
Specifically, all legislative and budgetary competencies for all police matters must be vested at the state level;
there can be no political interference in the operational work of police;
and functional local police areas must be determined by technical policing criteria.
The leaders of the main political parties in BiH began police reform talks on February 16th, based on a report by the Directorate for Police Restructuring, completed at the end of last year.
Despite warnings from the OHR that a delay in reaching an agreement could delay the SAA until 2008, this and ensuing rounds of negotiations on Tuesday and Thursday failed to bring the politicians closer to a deal.
While the leaders of the Bosniak and Croat parties generally support the unification of the country's divided police forces, the Bosnian Serb politicians insist they can only agree to partial unification.
They oppose moves to allow police to cross the inter-entity borders.
Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minster Milorad Dodik, leader of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), has repeatedly indicated that he would rather see BiH lose the opportunity to join the EU than agree to abolish the entity police force, which he says should be a part of the BiH police structure.
"(RS) Police has to survive and everything else is something that does not have our support," he told reporters in Banja Luka on Thursday, ahead of the third round of police reform talks in Sarajevo.
According to BiH news agency FENA, the meeting began without the representatives of the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) and the Party for BiH (SBiH), while Social Democratic Party of BIH leader Zlatko Lagumdzija left shortly after the session started.
An AFP report Thursday suggested that the leaders of the SDA and SBiH, Sulejman Tihic and Haris Silajdzic, are concerned that the OHR seems open to the possibility of police organised at the entity level.
"This would mean the politicisation of police, and keeping regions within the boundaries of entities," the AFP quoted Tihic as saying.
"There are no reforms in that."
Meanwhile, BiH Prime Minister Nikola Spiric stressed on Thursday that dialogue is the only path to compromise.
"If the parties show good will I am prepared to continue as a moderator and to convene meetings until an agreement is reached," he said after the latest unproductive round of talks.
