21/06/2007
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 21/06/07
The Peace Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board expressed concern about the political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), during its meeting earlier this week in Sarajevo.
The board, which began a two-day meeting on Monday (June 18th), said the country's political leaders are responsible for the chaos because of their aggressive rhetoric and opposition to progress.
"Since April 2006, there has been a near total deadlock in peace implementation and the delivery of reforms required for a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA)," the board said, referring to the first formal step towards EU membership.
The group praised High Representative Christian Schwartz-Schilling for his contributions during his mandate, but criticised him for allowing the political situation to deteriorate.
The international community will not tolerate the endangerment of the Dayton Peace Accord, and will not have a passive attitude towards provocative statements and actions, the board said in a declaration issued during the meeting.
The declaration outlines a strategy for incoming High Representative Miroslav Lajcak, who takes office on July 2nd.
The political deadlock in the country, as well as fears that possible independence for Kosovo may prompt a Serb secession movement, led the West to postpone the closure of the OHR office for a year and appoint Lajcak to take over the position.
The lack of progress -- especially in constitutional and police reforms -- threatens BiH's economic prospects.
The PIC is particularly disappointed with the blockade of constitutional reform.
The last effort to restart that process failed at the weekend when representatives of leading parties disagreed on a solution.
The PIC declaration said that signing the SAA with the EU must be the country's first priority.
For that to happen, there must be concrete progress in police reform and co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
PIC members also rejected recent rhetoric suggesting competencies should be returned from the state level to the entities.
Republika Srpska, under the leadership of Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, recently reiterated a threat to call a secession referendum if the autonomy of the region is weakened without its consent.
The Federation of BiH -- with the support of BiH presidency member Haris Silajdzic, has backed the dissolution of the country's ethnic-based lines.
Consolidation of state institutions must continue, the PIC said, with an obligation to transform jurisdictions from the entities to the state, so that all necessary reforms can be completed.
Members of the PIC steering board are the United States, Russia, Great Britain, Japan, Canada, Germany, France, Italy, Turkey, which represents the organisation of Islamic countries, Holland and Spain, which have observer status, Portugal, which is taking over presidency of the EU, and a representative of the European Commission.
