21/06/2007
(World Bank, AP, DPA, RFE/RL, Sofia News Agency - 20/06/07)
Economic growth in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union could come to a halt unless governments take quick steps to address the challenge of rapidly aging populations in the region, the World Bank warned on Wednesday (June 20th).
By 2025, many of the 28 countries in the region will have populations that are among the oldest in the world, the Bank said in a new report, "From Red to Gray:
The Third Transition of Aging Populations in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union".
Over the next two decades, the region's overall population is projected to shrink by almost 24 million people, according to the almost 300-page paper.
At the same time, the proportion of people over the age of 65 will be higher than in 2000.
In nine of the countries -- including Slovenia, Croatia, Bulgaria and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) -- between one fifth and one quarter of the population will be over 65 by 2025.
Unprecedented declines in fertility and rising life expectancies are two reasons for the populations to be rapidly aging and shrinking at the same time.
Bulgaria's population is expected to shrink by 18% over the next two decades, making it one of the countries facing the most significant decrease after Ukraine, which is expected to lose 24% of its current population.
By 2025, Romania's population is likely to shrink by 10% and Croatia's by 5%.
Only eight of the countries in the region -- including Albania, Macedonia and Turkey -- will see populations grow over the next 20 years.
The proportion of those over 65 will grow at the fastest pace in BiH, where the elderly dependency ratio is expected to almost double by 2025.
By then, more than one in five Bulgarians will be over 65, and the average Slovene will be 47-years-old -- among the oldest in the world, said the report.
To accommodate the growing number of elderly, governments in many of the countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union will have to increase their pension expenditures.
Another expected consequence is that health care spending will have to grow to meet the higher demands of people in this group for ambulatory, in-patient and chronic care.
Besides the problem of rapid aging, the region also faces the challenges of relatively poor populations and an incomplete transition to mature market economies, the report said.
"Wealthier and more developed countries, such as France, Italy and Japan, are in much better shape to meet the challenges of aging than the countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union," World Bank Human Development Economics Manager Arup Banerji, and co-author of the report, said.
The best way to offset pension cost pressures, according to Bank experts, is to increase the retirement ages, which tend to be very low in the region, particularly in Albania, Romania, Serbia and Turkey.
Another suggestion is to change the formulas for how benefit rates are calculated.
"Though some increase in public expenditures is inevitable, it is possible to reduce the blow.
For that, the countries in the region need to put in policies to make pension systems financially sustainable even with more retirees, and to take proactive measures for financing long term care," another of the report's authors, World Bank Lead Economist Mukesh Chawla, said.
Strong productivity will be essential if the countries in the region are to continue to grow rapidly and achieve EU incomes and living standards, the report says.
These goals could be obtained by expanding financial markets, implementing reforms to make labour markets more flexible, by providing better education and promoting lifelong learning and innovation.
