21/06/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 21/06/07
In a move that aims to improve the workload capacity of Macedonia's administration, the government will employ 2,800 people by 2010. 
The plan, part of the National Programme for Adoption of Acquis (NPAA), a key document in the country's relations with the EU, was sparked by the Union's criticism of the administration, and its lack of alignment with Euro-Atlantic standards.
The NPAA serves as a guide on how to harmonise a country with the European legislation, deadlines, institutions, how much money will be spent and how many people are employed. 
Implementing the NPAA will cost the government about 210m euros.
The plan provides for employment of around 2,780 people, who will work to elevate crucial areas in the administration to EU recommendations. 
In the next three years, the judiciary and fundamental rights sector, justice, freedoms and security sector, the environmental sector and the agriculture and rural development sector will all gain workers under the plan. 
The Information Technology, food safety and regional policy sectors will also gain employees.
The public, however, is concerned that the move will further enlarge the state administration, which has already been criticised as being too robust and inefficient. 
But Finance Minister Trajko Slavevski says there will be no new increases in absolute figures due to the retirement of 900-1,000 workers annually.
Rigorous criteria for employment in the state administration have been established, especially for the sector working on EU integration issues. 
Experts will be employed to work on each chapter of the EU legislation.
The hiring plan will also reduce jobless rates. 
Unemployment, which is around 37% in the country, according to official statistics, is a problem -- especially among highly educated professionals with university degrees. 
Experts believe the NPAA will improve prospects, since young and educated people will be hired.
