21/02/2007
By Bekim Greicevci and Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 21/02/07
Three UNMIK vehicles and one civilian's were damaged on Monday evening as a result of an explosion in Pristina, police confirmed on Tuesday (February 19th).
In a brief report emailed to local media, a group calling itself the Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK) says it has "reactivated its structures" and carried out the attack against UN property in retaliation for the deaths of two Albanians, killed during clashes with police on February 10th.
The blast was meant to damage UNMIK property, not cause fatalities, the group said.
During the 1998-99 conflict, the UCK fought the Serbian army and police.
However, it was subsequently transformed into a civilian structure called the Kosovo Protection Force, supervised by UNMIK and KFOR.
Still unclear is whether there is any relationship between the perpetrators of Monday's bombing and the earlier UCK.
A Kosovo Police Service (KPS) spokesperson, Veton Elshani, told SETimes that the authenticity of the report is yet to be determined.
No one has been arrested.
"I just heard a very loud detonation, because I live near the scene," said Albert Kamberi, a local resident.
He said police and KFOR personnel were on the scene within minutes.
The blast came ten days after a pro-independence protest -- organised by the Vetevendosje (Self-determination) movement -- that turned violent.
Kosovo and UN police responded with rubber bullets and tear gas.
Two demonstrators were killed.
Vetevendosje has announced plans for another demonstration on March 3rd
Immediately after the blast, Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Çeku visited the scene and condemned the bombing.
"These acts are against Kosovo independence," Ceku said.
"But these acts should not obstruct the process of independence for Kosovo," he added.
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu urged the police to quickly find the perpetrators and bring them to justice.
"These criminal acts are absolutely not acceptable for the people of Kosovo and its institutions.
They damage the image of Kosovo and do not represent the people of Kosovo," he said.
