21/02/2007
(Sofia Echo, Standart News, Monitor, Focus News Agency - 21/02/07;
Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik, Mediapool, bTV, Kuwait News Agency, Bulgarian Interior Ministry - 20/02/07)
A former mufti and three others were arrested for propagating radical Islam and inciting religious hatred and intolerance, the Bulgarian Interior Ministry said on Tuesday (February 20th).
The group used two websites to promote their ideas and called for the replacement of the constitutionally established political order by a Muslim Sheria state.
After two weeks of surveillance, the arrests were made in Sofia and near the town of Blagoevgrad in southwestern Bulgaria, as part of a joint operation by the National Security Service (NSS), the special unit for fighting organised crime, and the Sofia Investigation Service (SIS).
Those arrested were linked to the Union of Bulgarian Muslims, founded in 2006 and used by the group to disguise its activities.
The leader of the group was identified as a 51-year-old Ali Kheiriddine, a former Sofia mufti.
He had contacts with a Jordanian, Ahmad Mohammad Moussa, who was expelled from Bulgaria in 2000 for establishing a local branch of the Muslim Brothers, a radical Islam organisation.
Moussa headed an Islamic relief agency involved in extremist Islamic actions, said Yavor Kolev, the head of the unit for fighting organised crime, at a press conference Tuesday in Sofia.
One of the other three detainees, identified only by the initials A.D., was described by the authorities as Kheiriddine's spiritual wife.
Investigators say her task was to download material from Chechen websites, translate it into Bulgarian, and then publish it on one of the two websites.
The two others arrested also were identified by their initials.
The first was the administrator of one of the websites.
The other woman, who recently converted to Islam, created the second website, promoting Wahhabism -- an ideology of modern terrorism and the ideological foundations of the al-Qaeda network.
According to the interior ministry, the group used the internet to propagate a radical form of jihad and urged Muslims across the globe to support the holy war by providing money, arms and manpower.
The group reportedly maintained contacts with fundamentalist organisations in Western Europe and the Arab world, receiving financing for its websites from a group in another country, Sofia's Standart newspaper quoted SIS deputy head Svetoslav Vassilev as saying on Tuesday.
The SIS has launched an investigation into the case, which could lead to further arrests.
One of the detainees was released on bail Tuesday, while the other three remain in custody for 72 hours.
All four could face a prison sentence up to three years or a fine of about 150 euros.
The Interior Ministry says the NSS and the special unit fighting organised crimes are keeping a tight watch on the Bulgarian internet, to ensure it is free from material promoting terrorist ideas, inciting religious hatred or other activities aimed at disturbing ethnic peace and religious tolerance.
