22/02/2007
(Cyprus Mail, CNA, The New Anatolian, Zaman, Council of Europe - 22/02/07; AP, Xinhua, Cyprus Mail, Zaman, Council of Europe - 21/02/07; CNA, Xinhua - 20/02/07; Council of Europe - 16/02/07)
Greek Cypriot Archbishop Chrysostomos II and Turkish Cypriot religious leader Ahmet Yonluer met for the first time since 1974 on Wednesday (February 21st), six weeks after a planned meeting was cancelled.
The event in Nicosia was hosted by Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) President Rene van der Linden, who arrived on Monday in a bid to promote dialogue between the two communities.
Welcoming this "historic" first meeting, van der Linden described it as an excellent example of intercultural and inter-religious dialogue, a priority of his presidency.
During their two-hour talks, Chrysostomos II and Yonluer discussed how to build a climate of trust and tolerance between their communities and agreed to promote respect for places of worship across Cyprus. 
Both agreed to work towards enabling worship at the Hala Sultan Tekke Mosque in Larnaca and the Apostolos Andreas Monastery in the Karpas Peninsula, according to a joint statement issued after the meeting.
Voicing hope that the talks would help boost mutual confidence and contribute to a solution to the Cyprus problem, the two leaders agreed to meet again soon.
"I am happy to be here today ... 
so that we can both work for the good of our country and the good of our people," the AP quoted Chrysostomos II as telling reporters before the meeting. 
"In Cyprus we never had a religious problem and we will not have any in the future."
Van der Linden met also with political leaders -- Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot presidents, Tassos Papadopoulos and Mehmet Ali Talat, and their senior officials -- about fostering dialogue between the two communities.
"There will be no lasting resolution of the situation in Cyprus without serious and sustained dialogue between the two communities, at every possible level," van der Linden said in a statement before his visit.
He also voiced concern over the slow pace of implementation of an agreement Papadopoulos and Talat reached in July 2006 and urged all those involved not to waste more time. 
The UN-sponsored deal envisioned the creation of technical and working groups to focus on issues affecting daily life on the island, as well as more substantial ones, as a means of facilitating a lasting settlement to Cyprus's 32-year division.
"We are losing time," van der Linden said Wednesday after his meeting with Talat. 
"The agreement of July 8th is more than half a year ago and up till now the working groups are not working properly."
He also called for the speedy opening of the crossing point on Ledra Street, a key thoroughfare in central Nicosia, and for more crossings on the Green Line dividing the island's Turkish-controlled north and Greek-run south.
"If you want to solve the problems, both parts have to make concessions," van der Linden said on Wednesday after a joint meeting with Eleni Mavrou and Cemil Bulutogullari, the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot mayors of the divided capital.
