27/04/2007
(AP, AFP, Nasdaq, BBC, The Guardian, Ireland Online, The New Anatolian, Zaman, Turkish Daily News - 27/04/07;
AFP, FT, AKI - 26/04/07)
The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has been working to secure the required two-thirds majority for its presidential candidate, Abdullah Gul, ahead of the first round of voting by Parliament on Friday (April 27th).
The only other contender for incumbent Ahmet Necdet Sezer's post is dissident AKP lawmaker Ersonmez Yarbay, but he is said to have no chance of beating Gul, now the foreign minister.
Under the constitution, a candidate must be supported by at least 367 of all 550 members of parliament to win in the first round.
If it produces no winner, a second round will be held on Wednesday, when a two-thirds majority is again required.
If none of the contenders has mustered that level of support, a third round of voting will take place on May 9th, when a simple majority, or 276 votes, will suffice.
If this does not occur, a fourth and final round of voting under the same simple-majority rule will be held on May 15th, a day before Sezer's seven-year term expires.
The AKP, which holds 353 seats in parliament, including the speaker's, appeared confident Thursday that Gul could win a first-round victory Friday, despite the main opposition Republican People's Party's (CHP) planned boycott of the vote.
"In my view, everything is very clear," Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc told reporters.
"This parliament will elect the 11th president of Turkey comfortably."
The CHP, which has 152 deputies in parliament and wants the next president to be chosen after early parliamentary elections, has warned that it will challenge the results before the Constitutional Court in the event fewer than 367 deputies attend parliament's session Friday.
Arinc insisted, however, that the usual one-third quorum, or 184 lawmakers, would suffice for him to open the session.
Legal experts support that view, saying the CHP's argument for annulling the election result lacks merit.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the leader of the AKP, has called on all lawmakers to attend Friday's session.
"I urge all elected deputies ...
to come and do their democratic political duty.
We are facing one of the most important days of our democratic life," Reuters quoted him as saying.
The opposition's push reflects concerns among secular Turks that the ruling AKP, which has its roots in political Islam, will take all key state positions.
Although the AKP has consistently denied it, the secularists fear that the party has a hidden religious agenda.
Seeking to allay those fears, Gul has been pledging since his nomination Tuesday that he will abide by the principles of secularism and be the president of all citizens, if elected.
"I am loyal to the republic, to secularism, to the principles of a democratic, social state ruled by law, as stated in the constitution in essence," he said in an interview published in the <I>Milliyet</I> newspaper Thursday.
Secularists also fear that following his ascent to the presidency -- a largely ceremonial post, except for key veto power -- the AKP will renew its efforts to lift the existing Muslim headscarf ban.
It bars Turkish women from wearing headscarves in campuses and public office.
Gul's wife, Hayrunisa, wears the headscarf, as do the wives of Erdogan and Arinc.
Gul this week described his wife's choice as a personal preference and said it should be respected.
