20/06/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 20/06/07
More than 23,000 people across Croatia donated blood during May, as part of a collection and funding drive by the Rukavina Foundation, established to promote stem cell research.
In only ten days, the drive brought in more than 300,000 euros.
The Zagreb-based foundation honours the journalist Ana Rukavina, who died of leukemia in December 2006.
It runs the country's first umbilical cord blood bank, thus enabling families who wish to donate to do so.
The blood is taken following an infant's birth in a simple, safe procedure that harms neither the baby nor mother.
The foundation has also set up a registry of bone marrow donors.
Bone marrow and umbilical cord blood are used in treatment of cancer, leukemia and genetic diseases.
Both are rich in stem cells – primary cells that have the ability to renew themselves through cell division and produce other cell types.
Rukavina, who worked for the daily Vjesnik died at the age of 30.
In the course of her illness, she managed to raise public awareness of the importance of stem cell and bone marrow research.
She was diagnosed with leukemia in 2005 and underwent aggressive medical treatments.
Although her prognosis was poor from the start, she was determined to fight the disease until the end.
After an initial round of chemotherapy treatments, the cancer remained.
Exhausted by her illness but determined to fight until the very end, Rukavina decided to write an open letter and ask her friends, colleagues and compatriots for financial help in order to undergo an expensive and risky surgery in the United States.
It was too late.
She died before the surgery was scheduled, but the public response to her letter was tremendous.
People across Croatia have their donations to help Rukavina pay for the surgery.
When she realised that the battle was lost, the journalist asked her family to establish a foundation that would promote bone marrow donations and stem cell research.
"I want life!" was the first line of Rukavina's letter.
These words are now the motto of the foundation, which officially opened the blood bank on March 28th, her birthday.
Those involved in the field of stem cell research credit the journalist for helping to promote a cause that can save lives.
Many ordinary people, meanwhile, admire her for exemplifying human solidarity and optimism.
She is the only citizen to have received a posthumous Person of the Year award in Croatia.
