23/03/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 23/03/07
A recent survey by B92 television suggests that, out of 250 new members of Parliament, 80% are university graduates.
In addition to lawyers and doctors, MPs include artists, students and professional politicians.
Most of the new deputies have a university degree.
Twenty-four hold master's degrees, 178 hold bachelor's degrees and, interestingly enough, there are eight students.
When categorised by occupation, the survey shows that Parliament mostly consists of lawyers, legal advisers and members of the medical profession.
"Our campaign was based on the motto:' expertise before politics'," says Verica Kalanovic from G17 Plus.
"All our candidates are people with a prior professional career who have proven themselves as experts in their field before entering politics."
Milos Aligrudic of the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) says political involvement is also an important factor in selecting candidates.
"Besides education, it is definitely readiness to get engaged in one of parliamentary activities, depending on the subject or the occupation.
Gender is also taken into account, as well as knowledge of languages."
Many members of the Serbian Radical Party (SRS) come from non-professional backgrounds or have not completed advanced degrees.
They include performing artists, such as accordion player Branimir Djokic and actress Lidija Vukicevic.
Another representative, Stefan Zankov, lists his occupation simply as Member of Parliament.
Though all parties ensure that at least 30% of their candidates are women, only G17 Plus has maintained that ratio among its MPs.
Dusan Petrovic from the Democratic Party (DS) and Toma Nikolic from SRS say that it is not easy to find women who want to enter politics.
Nikolic says in Serbia, "Women still think that there are other more appealing jobs then politics, as this one requires long absences from home."
As for age, most MPs are between 40 and 49 years old.
Thirteen MPs, mostly from the DS, are younger than 29.
Eighteen are 59 or older.
The oldest MP is Borka Vucic, 81, a deputy from the Socialist Party.
All other party members are over 40 years of age.
