26/01/2007
(Office of the High Representative - 26/01/07;
The Economist, AKI - 25/01/07;
The Guardian, FENA, Wall Street Journal - 24/01/07;
AP, DPA, AKI, HINA, Office of the High Representative - 23/01/07)
Less than a year after assuming his post, the high representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) said this week that he plans to step down, but would recommend that his office continue operating.
"Following my talks with (German) Chancellor Merkel on January 11th, I wrote to inform her that I would not seek an extension of my mandate beyond June 30th this year," Christian Schwarz-Schilling said on Tuesday (January 23rd).
In his weekly column, published on Friday, he defended his decision to avoid using the Bonn Powers "to resolve issues that are the responsibility of Bosnia and Herzegovina's elected leaders".
Had he used the Powers more systematically, Schwarz-Schilling wrote, "I might have been able to give an impression of progress, but it would have been a false impression.
Moreover, there would be no way of establishing the reality of the situation in BiH or knowing whether or not the country has the capacity to move forward without a High Representative."
A former German postal service minister, Schwarz-Schilling succeeded Britain's Paddy Ashdown as High Representative on January 31st, 2006.
Like his predecessor, he was appointed to serve also as EU special representative (EUSR).
The international community had hoped to close down the OHR at the end of June 2007, replacing it with the less powerful EUSR.
But complications within BiH and the region have forced some reconsideration.
With Montenegro having declared independence and Kosovo’s final status pending, Bosnian Serb leaders -- particularly Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik -- have suggested that their entity should also be given the right to self-determination.
Meanwhile, some Bosniak politicians have been calling for the abolition of the country's two entities, created by the Dayton Peace Accords.
"This country is still able to take a clear step forward, but that the transition process will take more time," Schwarz-Schilling wrote in his Friday column.
"The learning curve has been steep and the international community has to show patience."
A report in the Bosnian daily Dnevni avaz said the veteran German diplomat had asked that his mandate be extended until the end of this year, but that his request had been turned down.
The Peace Implementation Council -- a panel comprising 55 countries and agencies that support the peace process in BiH -- is due to decide on the OHR's future at a meeting in the end of February.
