26/04/2007
(EurActiv - 26/04/07; AP, HINA, European Parliament - 25/04/07)
Praising Croatia for the progress it has made so far in its EU accession talks, the European Parliament (EP) urged the country on Wednesday (April 25th) to step up efforts towards the successful completion of the process.
Croatia began its membership negotiations with the Union in October 2005 and hopes it will be able to join the 27-nation bloc in 2009. 
It has thus far opened talks on six of the 35 negotiating chapters and is likely to see more opened before Portugal takes over the rotating EU presidency from Germany on July 1st.
"Croatia should do its utmost to carry out the necessary reforms so that the negotiations can be concluded in time for the European Parliament to give its assent before the next EU parliamentary election in June 2009," the EP said on Wednesday, in a resolution concerning a report on the Balkan country's accession progress in 2006.
The report, drafted by the EP rapporteur for Croatia, Hannes Swoboda, noted that while key pieces of legislation in crucial areas such as public administration, the administration of courts and anti-corruption policy have been adopted, more efforts in these and other fields are needed.
"More needs to be done," the AP quoted German Deputy Foreign Minister Guenther Gloser as telling the EU lawmakers. 
"Corruption is still a serious problem. 
Reform efforts should be accelerated. 
There's a lot on Croatia's plate."
Stressing that "an open, competitive market economy is a fundamental requirement for EU membership," the EP urged Croatia to meet the agreed targets concerning the sale of state-owned enterprises and the reduction of state subsidies, particularly to shipbuilding and steel companies. 
Lawmakers also urged Zagreb to implement measures that would allow EU nationals to buy real estate. 
Croatia should also take steps to bring its environmental policies in line with EU standards.
Stressing the need for Croatia's full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, EU lawmakers criticised Zagreb for offering to help pay for attorneys representing Croatian army generals indicted for war crimes.
Emphasising the need for a thorough reform of the judicial system, the EP voiced criticism over the "persisting bias amongst some judicial staff against non-Croatian nationals," shortcomings in the area of witness protection and the appointment of judicial staff.
The EU lawmakers also urged Croatia and Slovenia to exhaust every effort to settle remaining border disputes bilaterally, proposing that they only resort to "the good offices of a third party" if solutions cannot be found.
Commenting on Wednesday's resolution, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said the key issue for Croatia was to receive confirmation of its accession treaty before the EP's term expires in June 2009.
"If that happened, it would be a big success for Croatia," he said.
