22/12/2006
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 22/12/06
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) State Court on Thursday (December 21st) granted bail to a former member of the tripartite presidency and leader of the Croat Democratic Union (HDZ). 
Dragan Covic was sentenced to five years in prison for abuse of office and fraud while serving as finance minister in 1998-2000. 
Covic was freed after a group of friends posted bail amounting to 1,584,182 euros.
He is obliged to hand in all travel documents issued to him by BiH and Croatia, preventing him from leaving the Federation of BiH.
The indictment against Covic charged him with offering gifts and bribes to Mato Tadic, the president of the BiH Constitutional Court, in order to gain favourable court rulings. 
Five other men -- the brothers Jozo, Mladen, Jerko and Slavo Ivankovic-Lijanovic, as well as Zdravko Lucic -- were also indicted.
As it delivered the verdict, the court panel said Covic had failed to withdraw an unlawfully issued document that defined certain products as subject to special import tax. 
This omission secured a profit of 948,914 euros for companies owned by the Ivankovic-Lijanovic brothers, thus causing financial losses for the Federation. 
Covic was the only one convicted. 
He was cleared, however, of the criminal offence of organised crime.
Though most of the defendants were acquitted, Chief Prosecutor Jonathan Rattel said he was satisfied with the trial outcome. 
"This is a major case of corruption in public office," stated Rattel. 
"It is important that the former head of state faces justice."
Covic's defence attorney, Josip Muselimovic, said his client had accepted the verdict with dignity and will file an appeal. 
Media covering the Covic trial reported that after the verdict, Covic sent two letters, one to his family and another to the members of the HDZ. 
He reportedly urged party members to "keep their heads high up" and continue the party programme while he is away on "leave of absence". 
The appeal is expected to begin early next year.
