20/02/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 20/02/07
Two years after the discovery of a 4.5m-euro financial embezzlement scheme, the Macedonian prosecutor's office filed criminal charges against Ljube Trpevski, former governor of the National Bank, and Metodija Smilenski, a businessman and banker at the National Bank.
Both have been arrested and are awaiting trial.
Smilenski is charged with acquiring 30.4m euros via illegal activities in his dealings with different Macedonian companies.
In the case of the dissolved Export-Import Bank, the National Bank recorded a loss of 16.7m euros.
Trpevski is suspected of having approved a guarantee to Smilenski for 8.8m euros in credit at a German bank and a 7.6m-euro guarantee of credit at an Austrian Bank in 2001 and 2002, respectively.
As the Export-Import Bank collapsed, the state did not collect its guarantees through the possible sale of Bank assets.
Publicly, Trpevski defended himself by claiming that he had given the Bank guarantees with the prime minister's approval, because the government approved guarantees for other banks as well.
In 2005, a parliamentary commission investigated the Export-Import scandal and determined that the state incurred losses to the tune of 26m euros.
Smilenski also faces an international arrest warrant issued for the destruction of business books in Sveti Nikola.
In yet another case, he has been charged with illegally transferring ownership of property.
In collaboration with Vanco Pelovski, a former director of the Goods Supply Bureau, in a separate proceeding, the Court of Skopje charged Smilenski in connection with illegal deals involving wheat and pork halves.
The Bureau is thought to have incurred 6m euros in losses.
Smilenski allegedly encouraged Pelovski to pay for 850 tonnes of pork, while only half the meat was delivered.
Pelovski took out a credit from the Export-Import Bank for wheat import, after which he conducted the procurement without a public bid or government approval.
Allegedly, Pelovski paid 5m euros to a nonresidential account at the Export-Import Bank in Cyprus.
In Belgrade, where he was arrested, the Supreme Court of Serbia approved Smilenski's extradition to Macedonia.
A month ago, he requested a trial in Austria since he is an Austrian citizen.
Ljube Trpevski is now under house arrest due to health problems and the need for home care.
