22/12/2006
(AP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, UPI, RFE/RL, B92 - 21/12/06)
Three Kosovo Albanians have been arrested in connection with a huge cache of illegal weapons seized by KFOR troops and the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) during a search in the Drenica area of central Kosovo, officials said on Thursday (December 21st).
Local media described the weapons' find, made late Wednesday, as the largest since the NATO-led peacekeeping force was deployed in the province in June 1999. 
A tip late Tuesday tip prompted the operation, according to KPS spokesman Veton Elshani.
The weapons, confiscated by KFOR, were found in a house and other locations at a village near the town of Glogovac, about 40km west of Pristina. 
The find reportedly included a 12.7 mm anti-aircraft gun, more than 100 rocket-propelled grenades, several anti-tank mines, a 75mm recoilless rifle and 2,500 rounds of ammunition of different calibre. 
Military uniforms and gas masks also were discovered during the search.
KFOR officials told German news agency DPA that an investigation was under way and that police had confiscated two vans.
One of the three suspects arrested has been identified as Naim Bazaj, a senior adviser to the Kosovo labour minister. 
He and another detainee are members of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), a junior member of the governing coalition led by the Democratic League of Kosovo. 
Citing a Radio Kosovo report, Belgrade-based Radio B92 identified that second person as Skenderbej Habibi. 
The identity of the third suspect has not been revealed.
The labour ministry said on Thursday that Bazaj had been fired, while the Kosovo government issued a statement condemning his involvement in illegal activities.
"The prime minister and the government condemn any illegal action regardless of who perpetrates it in the strongest terms and remains convinced that such people have no place in Kosovo's government," the statement said.
"Such acts are directed against fundamental interests of Kosovo and its future," the AP quoted President Fatmir Sejdiu as saying.
An AAK spokesman said the party was "surprised" that two of its members were involved.
The weapons' seizure was announced a day after the International Crisis Group (ICG) issued a report warning that further delays in the process of determining Kosovo's final status could foment a major crisis in the region.
"It is a fact of life that the risk of implosion does become greater the deeper Kosovo goes into 2007 without its status settled," the ICG said, while also urging the Kosovo Albanians to avoid making threats and focus instead on efforts towards sustainable self-governance.
UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari has said he will submit his proposals for a solution -- originally expected this year -- after Serbia holds parliamentary elections on January 21st.
UNMIK announced this week a strengthening of security measures in the province, with particular emphasis on the prevention of ethnically or politically motivated violence.
