23/03/2007
(Turkish Press, Zaman - 22/03/07;
MTI, Reporter.gr - 21/03/07;
AFP, Sofia News Agency - 20/03/07;
Turkish Daily News, Zaman - 16/03/07;
EUpolitix, Turkish Press, Turkish Daily News, European Parliament - 15/03/07;
AP, Turkish Pres - 14/03/07)
Although it is still unclear when the EU will be ready to accept Turkey as a member, Ankara is determined to implement the required reforms by 2013, Ali Babacan, Turkey's chief negotiator with the Union, said in Budapest on Wednesday (March 21st).
"Our definite aim is EU membership," the official, who also serves as Turkey's economy minister, stressed during his visit to the Hungarian capital.
"We are following that path."
In Budapest, Babacan met with a number of parliamentary and senior government officials, including Foreign Minister Kinga Goncz, who welcomed Turkey's efforts towards EU membership.
Voicing her country's support for the predominantly Muslim nation's accession talks, she noted, however, the need for Ankara to meet the entry requirements.
Ankara began its accession negotiations in October 2005, but has so far completed talks on only one chapter, science and research.
In December, the EU endorsed a decision freezing membership talks with Turkey on eight of the 35 negotiating chapters.
The move was prompted by Turkey's refusal to open its ports and airports to traffic from Cyprus, whose Greek-run part joined the EU in 2004, but whose administration is not recognised by Ankara.
Budapest was the latest stop on Babacan's European tour, which also included visits to Sofia, Bucharest and the seat of the European Parliament (EP).
Despite the freeze on the eight negotiating chapters, Turkey hopes to open talks on four new areas -- industrial policy, economic and monetary policy, statistics, and financial control -- before June of this year, although they cannot be formally closed because of the EU's decision in December.
"It is hard to predict when we will start talks on the four new negotiation chapters we were recently invited to open," the AFP quoted Babacan as saying in Sofia, noting that the opening of new chapters must be approved by all 27 members of the bloc.
"The decisions for opening and closing chapters are political ...
There may always be unexpected developments but Turkey will pursue reforms on these chapters, regardless."
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin expressed his country's support for Turkey's accession, saying Sofia wants "to see Turkey in the EU".
Turkey has now prepared a detailed reform programme for the period 2007-2013, to be unveiled in April.
The reform tasks, set out in the plan on the basis of Turkey's priorities, have been broken down into the 35 negotiating chapters with the EU, the Hungarian news agency MTI reported.
Most of these measures would be completed by 2011.
Ankara's plans are to devote the last two years of the programme to discussions on getting a date for Turkey's entry into the Union, Babacan says.
Implementation of EU required reforms would outpace the country's progress in the accession talks, he notes.
Despite the difficulties that have arisen, the process is "on track, it is continuing," Babacan said in Strasbourg last week.
He noted the "strong support and positive comments" from members of the EP.
"It's clear that Turkey is an important country and we welcome their reform process," EP President Hans Gert Poettering said after his meeting with Babacan.
In remarks referring to Article 301 in Turkey's penal code, which makes it a crime to "insult Turkishness", Babacan said Ankara was considering ways to prevent possible problems arising from the enforcement of the article's provisions, rather than rewriting it.
"You can change the rules of the game but it might take time for the new players to adapt to new rules," he was quoted as saying, referring to Turkey's security forces and judicial personnel.
As for the thorny issue of Cyprus, Babacan reiterated Ankara's commitment to finding a solution.
At the same time, he blamed the Greek Cypriot administration for the lack of progress in ending the Mediterranean island's decades-long division.
"Turkey has started to lose confidence as to whether the Greek Cypriots really want to solve the problem," he said.
"In any kind of comprehensive solution there would be political equality -- we don't know if they would be willing to share power with Turkish Cypriots."
