16/11/2006
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 16/11/06
Contact Group representatives met with the mayors of ten Kosovo municipalities in Pristina on Tuesday (November 14th) to discuss the decentralisation process. 
The chief of the US mission in Kosovo, Tina Kaidanow, said that decentralisation will be an important part of the eventual agreement on Kosovo's status, and that Contact Group members will support efforts to implement it.
"For better functionality of the local administration, we should have strong mayors of municipalities," Kaidanow said. 
"The local authorities should deal with that which has more importance for the local level of the people, and the mayors of the municipalities should deal more with the issues that have to do with citizens of that locality."
Although the international community views decentralisation as essential to ethnic reconciliation and the building of a civil society in Kosovo, the issue remains politically charged. 
The riots that erupted in March 2004 left Kosovo Serbs doubly convinced that their future depends on self-rule.
Kosovo Albanians, however, are wary of a process they fear would establish Serb enclaves within Kosovo, and even open the door to some form of partition. 
Pristina Mayor Ismet Beqiri reiterated such concerns at Tuesday's meeting.
"We never have said that we don't support decentralisation. 
But we have been reserved and we still are, especially regarding the creation of mono-ethnic municipalities … We want to integrate the communities, and the creation of mono-ethnic municipalities is in opposition to this," he said.
According to the mayor, Kosovo's institutions are ready to build democracy, but not at the cost of undermining an independent and sovereign Kosovo.
"The process might have its difficulties. 
I don't know how it is functional for a village located 1km from the centre to be part of another municipality that is, for example, 20km away," Beqiri said.
But according to Gerard Gallucci, the UN administrator in the divided city of Mitrovica, decentralisation "simply means strong local rule in areas in which local people want to control their own lives, whether they're Serb or Albanian".
"I don't think anyone is explaining that to anybody, unfortunately, here in Kosovo," Voice of America quoted him as saying.
