19/06/2007
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 19/06/07
Albania recently joined the ranks of countries -- 122 in all -- that have implemented laws restricting smoking in public places. 
Lawmakers approved the limits last year, but they did not go into effect until May 26th. 
Selling cigarettes to minors and advertising tobacco products are also now illegal. 
Producers of tobacco products must now print messages on the packaging, warning consumers of potentially harmful effects on their health.
Hotels, bars, restaurants and nightclubs are all subject to the new rules. 
They are allowed to use only 35% of their business area to accommodate smokers, who must be placed outside. 
Owners that do not comply face fines of up to 360 euros and penalties that include loss of their business license.
The State Sanitary Inspectorate, in collaboration with the custom and tax administrations, will be responsible for enforcing the law. 
During the first week of implementation, authorities conducted widespread checks, especially in the capital.
"I don't think this is unenforceable, and we're working hard," Ministry of Health Primary Services Director Agim Shehu said.
Many Albanians, however, are sceptical. 
"I don't think it will work in Albania … everywhere people smoke," said one user of an internet chat board where the issue was discussed.
The poster, using the name Sweet Vaize, spoke of having seen police officers smoking on duty, suggesting they would be reluctant to enforce the measure.
"I'd ban smoking all together," said another chatter, going by the name Xhevrija. 
"The risk of second-hand smoke is enough for me to call it illegal. 
If you want to fill your lungs up and die of cancer, why should I, an innocent bystander, be exposed to that very same high risk as well? 
It clearly violates other people's rights."
According to the Albanian Institute of Public Health, smoking is a massive phenomenon in the country, especially among young people. 
Within a population of 3.1million, there are more than 850,000 smokers -- about one in every four people. 
The institute says 20% of young people smoke before the age of 15. 
Albania has one the heaviest rates of smokers in Europe, and the public spends about 300m euros annually on tobacco products.
