25/01/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 25/01/07
At the weekend, the two main political camps in Albania officially kicked off their campaigns for the February 18th local elections. 
During a rally Saturday (January 20th) at the Palace of Congresses, the left-wing coalition Together for the Future, led by Tirana Mayor Edi Rama, played Queen's "We will rock you" -- a response to the right-wing Big Coalition's theme song, "The final countdown".
Over 3,000 members and supporters attended the Big Coalition event. 
Addressing the crowd, Prime Minister Sali Berisha told candidates that, once elected, they would receive strong government backing for their projects.
Decentralisation of local government remains a top priority, Berisha said. 
He also pledged a solution to the legalisation and property issues.
Berisha formally accepted the resignation of Interior Minister Sokol Olldashi, who is mounting a challenge to Rama in the Tirana mayoral race.
Speaking at the Together for the Future rally, meanwhile, Rama said a left-wing confederation finally had been forged -- with the SP and the Social-Democratic Party at its core.
Such a coalition was not easy to achieve, said Rama, who is running for a third term as mayor. 
But after many hurdles, a real union now exists, he said.
The start of campaigning was marred by an incident in the mainly Greek-populated city of Himara on Sunday. 
According to local media, police arrested three people for attempting to obstruct a speech by incumbent mayor Vasil Bollano of the Greek minority Union for Human Rights party. 
Bollano is running for a second term.
Albanian President Alfred Moisiu has sent a draft Code of Conduct regarding the campaign to the political parties. 
He called on politicians to do their part in ensuring a civilised campaign and free and fair elections.
Meanwhile, the OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission has issued its second interim report, covering January 1st to the 14th. 
The report says that one of the amendments to the Electoral Code "… opens the possibility for changing the order of the candidates on the candidates' lists after the lists have been registered by the relevant election commissions, and after voting."
"Even though the rules for such re-ordering might be made public at the time of registration, this raises a concern with regard to the compatibility of such legal provisions with democratic principles, as it lessens transparency for voters," the OSCE/ODIHR said.
