25/04/2007
By Jonilda Koçi for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 25/04/07
Two months after six cabinet members were replaced in a reshuffle, the sudden resignation of Foreign Minister Besnik Mustafaj has again shaken the Albanian government.
Mustafaj announced his move at a press conference Tuesday (April 24th). 
"I'm tired, and this is a sufficient reason to quit," he said.
Terming his stint at the foreign ministry "the richest and most extraordinary experience of my life", he expressed gratitude to Prime Minister Sali Berisha.
In a press release, Berisha said he had accepted the minister's resignation and expressed his thanks for their collaboration.
Mustafaj had a normal working day before making his afternoon announcement. 
He visited Ohrid, accompanied by Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu, and held an informal meeting with Macedonian officials.
His decision to step down caught many by surprise. 
Despite the cordial tone on both sides, media reports speculated that the move reflected disagreements between Berisha and his top diplomat.
Former Foreign Minister Paskal Milo told the press that the two may have argued over the qualifications of Albanian representatives to diplomatic missions, as well as insufficient progress in the effort to secure ratification by all 27 EU members of the bloc's Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Albania.
Press reports said the resignation came after a long telephone conversation between the two men the previous day. 
They said Berisha had complained that the foreign ministry wasn't creating the right conditions for lobbying foreign governments and had not ensured important meetings between the prime minister and his international counterparts.
Some reports also connected the move to a disagreement between Berisha and Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli.
However, the full reasons behind Mustafaj's decision remain unclear. 
He has been a close friend and colleague of Berisha's since the Democratic Party's establishment in the early 1990s. 
He is a member of parliament, and previously served as Albania's ambassador to France.
Mustafaj steps down at a crucial time for Albania, given the current efforts to resolve the status of neighbouring Kosovo. 
He had been planning an official trip to the United States, where he was to meet with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to discuss Kosovo, Albania's Euro-Atlantic integration, and other issues.
