25/04/2007
(The Guardian, Independent - 25/04/07;
AP, AFP, Reuters, AKI, BBC, FT, RFE/RL, International Herald Tribune, Turkish Press - 24/04/07)
Roughly four years after taking the reins of Turkish diplomacy, Abdullah Gul was nominated on Tuesday (April 24th) as the ruling Justice and Development Party's (AKP) presidential candidate.
"After all our research and discussions for the 11th president, our dear Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul has been chosen as candidate for the presidency," Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who is also the leader of the AKP, told a party meeting.
The announcement came three days before the launch Friday of the presidential election process, including several rounds of voting in Parliament.
To win the post, a candidate needs to be supported by a two-thirds majority in the first two voting rounds and a simple majority in the third.
The AKP, which came to power following its landslide victory in the November 2002 elections, has 367 representatives in the 550-seat parliament.
Given the party's comfortable majority, Gul, 56, is widely expected to win, succeeding Ahmet Necdet Sezer, whose seven-year term expires on May 16th.
Born in 1950 in the central city of Kayseri, Gul has a doctorate in economics from the University of Istanbul and has also studied in Britain.
His professional career includes more then seven-year service at the Islamic Development Bank in Jiddah, Saudi Arabia.
He was elected a member of parliament from the pro-Islamic Welfare Party in 1991 and in 1995.
Three years later, the party was banned and its lawmakers formed the Virtue Party, with Gul eventually heading its so-called "modernist" group.
After Virtue was also outlawed in 2001, the modernists, including Gul and Erdogan, founded the AKP, adopting a centre-right, pro-Western agenda and declaring full respect for Turkey's secularist establishment.
Gul was appointed foreign minister in March 2003, following a five-month tenure as prime minister, as Erdogan was constitutionally barred from running for public office when the AKP won the November 2002 parliamentary elections.
Amendments to the basic law initiated by the party eventually cleared his path to the prime minister post.
But the AKP's Islamist roots have fuelled suspicion among the country's powerful military, which considers itself the guarantor of secular order in Turkey, although Erdogan and other party leaders have repeatedly insisted they have no hidden religious agenda.
Amid speculation that the prime minister was planning to run for president, hundreds of thousands of protestors took to the streets about ten days ago.
In contrast, Gul's nomination is expected to ease tension with the military and further boost the AKP's chances in parliamentary elections later this year.
The main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) remains suspicious, however, threatening to boycott Friday's vote.
"His [Gul's] mindset is no different than Erdogan," CHP deputy chairman Mustafa Ozyurek said on Tuesday.
"There is no evidence that he is sincerely loyal at heart to the secular republic and principles of Ataturk."
Gul, who spearheaded the start of Turkey's EU membership talks, is considered a moderate, pro-reform politician.
Following his nomination, he vowed to abide by the principles of secularism, if elected.
"The president must be loyal to the main principles of the republic as stated in the constitution.
He must be loyal to secular principles," the AP quoted Gul as saying at a news conference Tuesday.
"If the parliament elects me president, no one should doubt I will certainly act within these principles and rules of the constitution."
A fact that may spark some opposition to his candidacy, however, is the Muslim headscarf worn by his wife, Hayrunisa.
Women in secular Turkey are not allowed to wear headscarves in campuses and public office.
Gul, however, says his wife's personal preferences should be respected.
Observers say the issue could create protocol problems, but is unlikely to present a serious political hurdle.
