25/01/2007
(Blic - 25/01/07; AFP, AP, VOA, UPI, AKI, Beta, B92, Makfax, Council of Europe - 24/01/07)
Describing his proposal for a solution to the Kosovo status issue as "fair and balanced", UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari said on Wednesday (January 24th) that its main goal was to ensure that all of the province's communities would live together in peace.
Addressing the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) in Strasbourg, France, Ahtisaari said his recommendations reflected the outcome of last year's direct talks between Belgrade and Pristina, which yielded little in the way of agreement. 
His blueprint provides answers to unresolved issues, he said.
"My settlement proposal focuses strongly on the protection of minority rights," he told the 46-nation body. 
"It provides the foundation for a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo in which the rights and interests of all communities are firmly guaranteed and protected by institutions based on the rule of law. 
It also foresees a strong international civilian and military presence within a broader future international engagement in Kosovo."
Legally still part of Serbia, Kosovo has been run by UNMIK since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict in the province. 
Kosovo Albanians, who account for 90% of the province's population of about 2 million people, are seeking full independence from Serbia.
Describing Kosovo as an integral part of their country's territory, the Serbian authorities insist that all they can agree to is substantial autonomy. 
Ahtisaari's plan is widely expected to recommend a form of EU-supervised independence for the province.
"One of our key challenges in our proposal has been to define the scope and scale of the international community's future engagement in Kosovo," he told the PACE members. 
"A future International Civilian Representative… is envisaged, whose mandate will be to supervise implementation of the settlement, and who would also be the EU special representative."
While future international engagement will play a critical role in implementing the settlement, the main responsibility for this will lie with the Kosovo authorities, Ahtisaari noted. 
"It will be very important that Pristina fully and formally commits itself to implementing all elements of an eventual settlement," he stressed. 
"But it will not only be an issue of political will. 
Pristina also has to have the necessary means and institutional capacity to implement the provisions."
The UN envoy will present his proposal for a solution to the Kosovo status issue to senior representatives of the six-nation Contact Group, consisting of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, on Friday. 
A week later, he will deliver the plan to Belgrade and Pristina, whose negotiators are expected to meet for new talks later that month.
"My idea is to engage both parties in a consultative process, to see if they have any new ideas," the AP quoted Ahtisaari as saying Wednesday. 
"I'm not going to go around and renegotiate things (that are) done. 
After this period of engagement I intend to finalise my report and get it to the UN Security Council, where the real end game of this process actually starts."
