24/01/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 24/01/11
Croatian President Ivo Josipovic has reason to be satisfied with the amount of work he did in his first year in office. 
Winning in January 2010, Josipovic promised to help Croatia move forward politically, economically and regionally. 
A strong advocate of EU membership and regional policy, Josipovic passed his first year "exams" with flying colours.
"I think that Croatia is a country where the rule of law and justice are respected more today than a year ago. 
I try to do my job as best as I can," Josipovic said, marking his first year in office earlier this month.
Josipovic wants to continue with the strategy of regional co-operation, EU membership goals and fighting corruption. 
During his first year he tried to be a balance between the government and parliament and in the election year he will continue to do so, as promised at the press conference.
A calming influence, Josipovic calls for dialogue and has had good relations with both with the government and the opposition in Croatia. 
He has stressed national policy over party policy, resigning from the Social Democrat party as soon as he was elected.
"Sometimes I think we have a president who is more a Scandinavian type of leader. 
Very calm, moderate, comforting, someone you can trust ... 
He is a real intellectual," says Jadranka Matic, 39, a saleswoman from Zagreb.
Josipovic is by far the most popular politician in Croatia, according to polls conducted at the end of his first year. 
The Ipsos Puls agency concluded that on average, people gave him a grade of 3.9 out of a possible 5. 
More than 87% of people support his work and ideas.
"I did not expect any less of him. 
But he has to be careful regarding his relations with Republika Srpska and Milorad Dodik," said former President Stipe Mesic, commenting on his successor's work.
From Serbia's viewpoint, the year was marked by strengthened co-operation with neighbouring Croatia. 
Relations had been deeply affected by the wars of the 1990s. 
Mutual visits between the Croatian president and Serbian counterpart Boris Tadic seem to a step towards reconciliation, after 20 years.
Jelena Trivan, spokeswoman for Tadic's Democratic Party, believes the two presidents have provided a service extending well beyond their borders.
"Even the EU has confirmed that the presidents Tadic and Josipovic have introduced a new climate in relations not only between the two states, but in the entire region as well," Trivan told SETimes.
She expects bilateral relations to progress further over the next year.
"I expect the matter of refugees' return to be resolved, as well as the issue of war crimes indictees on both sides. 
All problems, including the war crimes lawsuit before the International Court of Justice, will be solved in the peaceful spirit of good neighbourly relations," Trivan predicts.
Representatives of the opposition Serbian Progressive Party agree there is more to be done. 
"
The return of refugees from Serbia to Croatia needs to be resolved, the return of property, as well as the matter of equal participation of Serbian firms in the Croatian market. 
The slightly more calm rhetoric of the past year is positive, but a number of concrete steps are necessary to create conditions for achieving the right level of regional co-operation," a member of the Progressive Party's legal team, Marko Djuric, told SETimes.
Members of the Serbian public generally appreciate Josipovic's efforts.
"He seems like a decent and moderate gentleman. 
Quite the opposite of his predecessor, Mesic," economist Mirjana Krasic, 52, told SETimes.
Mladen Ivanic, who has served as both BiH foreign minister and Republika Srpska prime minister in the past, gives Josipovic a lot of credit.
"Very important is the fact that he entered the phase of fair and good relations with Serbia, because it is extremely important for the general situation in the Balkans," Ivanic tells SETimes.
Banja Luka analyst Tanja Topich says Josipovic, unlike Mesic, brought a refreshing change to Croatian politics, becoming the first Croatian official to visit the RS capital and fanned virtually nonexistent ties with the Bosnian Serb entity.
"Croatia, through Josipivic, is trying to establish itself in the regional triangle --BiH, Serbia and Croatia -- as a leader, but there is some kind of competition [as to] who could truly be a regional leader, Boris Tadic or Ivo Josipovich," Topich told SETimes.
Student Milos Jakovljevic, 24, thinks that only a modern politician can change the relationships between the countries of the former Yugoslavia, burdened as they are by the past, and move the entire region towards eventual EU membership.
"The biggest problem continues to be Bosnia, the ethnic divided and the ongoing tensions. 
It would be nice to have a Serbian and Bosnian Ivo Jospipovic as well," says Jakovljevic.
In December, Josipovic was in in Banja Luka, accepting the "Man of the Year", awarded by the city's daily newspaper Nezavisne Novine.
He was selected because "he is a statesman without a war history, has a positive engagement in relations with the countries of former Yugoslavia and has a policy of reconciliation and tolerance", says Zeljko Kopanja, the newspaper's founder and director.
(Bojana Milovanovic in Belgrade and Liljana Kovacevic in Banja Luka contributed to this report.)
