22/03/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -22/03/07
In a bid to overcome one of the most serious obstacles on its road to the EU, the Croatian government is taking steps to fight financial crime and corruption. 
A special panel of experts has been commissioned to study the problem of money laundering, and will present their initial results in late March.
President Stipe Mesic was among those initiating the formation of the anti-corruption team and has publicly given the money-laundering experts his full and unconditional support.
The head of the team, Lazo Pajic, is an experienced former prosecutor and a prominent figure in judicial circles. 
His former associates speak highly of his professional experience and determination to bring every investigation to a successful closure.
Pajic and his team have been asked by Prime Minister Ivo Sanader to collect information and evidence that will shed light on domestic money laundering. 
Pajic has appointed ten other experts to help him.
Public pressure is strong. 
The political parties also expect results, and it is an election year in Croatia. 
There is popular support for the country to undergo this process in order to take a clear step forward in implementing European values.
Money laundering and foreign bank accounts are a serious problem in Croatia. 
It is widely believed that many individuals profited significantly -- and illegally -- during the war years. 
These suddenly affluent individuals have been the subject of much scorn but so far remain untouched by the legal system. 
Their assets were never investigated thoroughly.
In a recent interview with the weekly Globus, Pajic announced that those who gained assets by way of criminal means, will face an immediate confiscation of property. 
He did not name names, saying that the first report will be handed to the president and the prime minister this month.
With the investigations conducted in secret, Pajic could not reveal details, but he stressed that his office is closely co-operating with other state agencies to trace the root of the money, to determine its legality.
"All institutions and agencies are co-operating closely and efficiently," said Pajic, who is aware of high public expectations surrounding his team's first official findings.
