16/11/2006
(EUobserver, Turkish Daily News - 16/11/06; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC - 15/11/06)
A top Turkish army official said on Wednesday (November 15th) that his country has decided to end its military co-operation with NATO ally France over a controversial piece of proposed legislation.
"Relations with France in the military field have been suspended," Turkey's semiofficial Anatolia news agency quoted General Ilker Basbug, the commander of the country's land forces, as saying. 
Speaking to reporters at a reception in Ankara late Wednesday, the general, who is one of the most senior officials in the Turkish armed forces, did not offer any details, except that there were "no high-level visits between the two countries".
The move follows the October approval by the lower house of the French parliament of a bill stipulating a one-year jail sentence for anyone denying that the mass killings of Armenians in the waning years of the Ottoman empire constituted genocide. 
To become law, the Senate and President Jacques Chirac still must approve the bill. 
According to some reports, the chances of this happening are slim.
Armenians maintain that some 1.5 million of them were killed in a genocidal campaign by the Ottoman Turks between 1915 and 1917. 
Turkey acknowledges that thousands of Armenians died, but insists the number of victims is exaggerated.
Ascribing the deaths to interethnic fighting, it denies strongly that the killings constituted genocide.
Following the adoption of the French bill last month, many officials in Ankara warned that the move could jeopardise bilateral relations. 
It already has prompted calls for a boycott of French goods, films and other media products.
France and Turkey are both longtime NATO members, participating side-by-side in military exercises and in international military operations. 
Turkey also buys French-made weaponry. 
However, the Turkish military has blacklisted a number of French companies in the past due to similar rows over charges of genocide.
The Armenian genocide bill has been criticised openly by both the EU and European media. 
Some French officials also have voiced opposition to the measure. 
Just last week, the French ambassador to Ankara, Jean Paul Poudade, described the lower house's move as an "unnecessary and polemical decision".
At the same time, however, Ankara may be eyeing a change in policy concerning the Armenian issue. 
A report in the English-language Turkish Daily News on Thursday quoted Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul as saying his country is considering international arbitration as a way of finding a long-term solution. 
Foreign ministry officials have declined to elaborate.
