21/12/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 21/12/06
Albania's political scene is in turmoil because of an ongoing dispute over local elections planned for January 20th, 2007.
The left-wing opposition is calling for a postponement, arguing that a delay is needed to implement amendments to the election code and meet the required standards.
It has threatened to boycott the vote if its demands are not met.
"There is still time for Prime Minister Sali Berisha to reopen talks so that we can save the electoral process and offer Albanians, as well as our international partners, the compromise, the understanding and everything that relates to free and fair elections," said the opposition Socialist Party's Secretary for Foreign Relations, Arta Dade.
Berisha, however, insists there is no chance that the date -- decreed by President Alfred Moisiu after the parties were unable to agree on one -- will be changed.
"The DP is ready to start the electoral campaign and it is not going to negotiate on the date when the local elections will be held," he said.
Bamir Topi, leader of the Democratic Party (DP) parliamentary group, says the majority is willing to negotiate on all electoral issues, except for the date.
The election debate has brought a familiar figure back to the political stage, after a protracted absence.
Fatos Nano, the former prime minister and former SP leader, addressed parliament Monday (December 18th), declaring there is not enough time to hold the elections as scheduled.
"Unless the authorities will hand out the voter's list tomorrow, which is not possible, the elections can not be held," Nano said.
But Deputy Interior Minister Ferdinand Poni disagrees.
He says civil registry offices across Albania are working on updating the voter lists in time for the poll.
The chairman of the Central Election Commission (CEC), Clirim Gjata, says all materials have been prepared except for the ballots, which depend on the registration of parties and candidates.
About 2,000 ballot boxes arrived last week from Canada.
The international community has expressed concern over the situation.
“The political parties should make one last effort to reach a compromise.
This is their responsibility," said the president of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly, Goran Lennmarker.
"It is very important for Albania to have free and fair elections.
The coming elections should have the same standards as those of all the OSCE participating states," he added.
The European Commission delegation in Tirana is urging the political parties to work constructively.
"Local politicians should not expect the international community or the EU to arbitrate disputes," it cautioned.
