24/05/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 24/05/07
The trial for the murder of former Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic -- which began in December 2003 -- ended on Wednesday (May 23rd) at the Belgrade Special Court for Organised Crime. 
The process wrapped up with 12 convictions and stiff sentences.
Milorad "Legija" Ulemek, the mastermind behind the assassination, was sentenced to 40 years in prison. 
Ulemek, a former commander of the Serbian secret police special unit, the Red Berets, already is serving another 40-year sentence for his part in the May 2000 killing of former Serbian President Ivan Stambolic. 
He received a 15-year sentence for organising the 1999 attack on Vuk Draskovic, an opposition leader at the time, and until recently, Serbia's foreign minister.
Ulemek's deputy in the Red Berets, Zvezdan Jovanovic, was convicted on Wednesday of shooting Djindjic, and also received a 40-year sentence. 
Members of a criminal group called the Zemun clan -- Aleksandar Simovic, Vladimir Milisavljevic, Ninoslav Konstantinovic, and Sretko Kalinic -- received sentences of 35 years each. 
Clan members Dusan Krsmanovic, Milos Simovic, and Milan Jurisic received 30-year sentences.
Milisavljevic, Kalinic, Jurisic, Konstantinovic, and Simovic were sentenced in absentia, as they are on the run. 
Red Beret member Zeljko Tojaga and former Security Information Agency officer Branislav Bezarevic were also sentenced to 30 years in prison, while former unit member Sasa Pejakovic received an eight-year sentence. 
The defendants all pleaded not guilty, claiming to be "the victims of political persecution and a staged process".
Djindjic, Serbia's first democratically elected leader after the toppling of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's regime in October 2000, was shot dead outside the Serbian government building on March 12th, 2003. 
Several members of the Red Berets and the Zemun clan were charged with his murder.
The Red Berets were used during Milosevic's rule for special operations in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, as well as for the elimination of Milosevic's political opponents.
Presiding Judge Nata Mesarovic characterised the assassination as "a political murder, a criminal act aimed against the state". 
She went on to explain that police officers and the Mafia had joined hands to kill Djindjic and to gain political power.
The verdicts sparked heated reactions. 
Members of the Democratic Party, of which Djindjic was president, staged a small protest outside the courthouse. 
The demonstrators shouted at the defendants' families as they left the building, but police prevented any incidents.
President Boris Tadic, who was in the courtroom for the verdicts, described them as "a great contribution to the reform of our justice system, but proceeding from this, we must urgently begin further substantial reforms of the police, the army, and security services".
Vladan Batic, Djindjic's justice minister, said he was satisfied with the verdicts, but urged prosecutors to look for the politicians behind the assassination.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said that the verdict "is of special importance for the state, our whole society, and for the functioning of the country's justice system".
The Djindjic murder trial was the first against organised crime in Serbia. 
It has been marked by threats to the trial chamber, witness intimidation and the murder of a witness. 
The first trial chamber president, Marko Kljajevic, left the process in August 2005. 
One of the most controversial moments of the process was Ulemek's surrender in May 2004, claiming he had been hiding in his house for nearly 14 months.
Ulemek and Jovanovic's lawyers said they plan to appeal the verdicts. 
Prosecutors say they plan appeals of their own, seeking maximum sentences for the whole group.
