21/12/2006
(EUobserver - 21/12/06; International Crisis Group, AFP - 20/12/06)
EU unity over Kosovo is essential if the status process is to remain on track, a key advocacy group said on Wednesday (December 20th). 
A further delay of the long-awaited solution beyond the first half of 2007 could jeopardise stability in the region, the International Crisis Group (ICG) warned in a new report.
UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari has said he will submit his proposals for a solution -- originally expected this year -- after Serbia holds parliamentary elections on January 21st. 
According to the ICG, Kosovo Albanian leaders may not be able to contain pro-independence pressures beyond March.
"The international community will need to give Ahtisaari strong and unambiguous support to get this process wrapped up in the first half of next year," said Nicholas Whyte, director of the ICG's Europe programme.
"His proposals need to hit the ground running in January because rising Albanian frustration means time is running out for Kosovo."
However, divisions within the international community could potentially delay the process further. 
Some members of the Contact Group for Kosovo -- including Britain and France -- want to see Ahtisaari's plan put on the table right after the election in Serbia, according to the ICG. 
Germany and Italy, however, would rather wait until a new Serbian government is in place, a process that could take months.
Given Serbia's persistent opposition to Kosovo independence, some EU nations have signaled reluctance to change the province's status, the group said. 
Cyprus, Greece and Spain have indicated support for Serbia's position, as has Romania, which will join the bloc on January 1st, it said.
"If Brussels fails to coalesce quickly around a strong internal consensus, it risks inheriting a major new crisis," the ICG stressed in a statement Wednesday.
EU unity is especially important because of Moscow's stance on the issue, it said. 
Russia, one of the five permanent members of the Security Council that has veto power, has been making it increasingly clear in recent months that it will block a settlement imposed without Belgrade's agreement.
Germany, which is due to take over the rotating EU presidency from Finland on January 1st, should make uniting member states behind Ahtisaari's proposals a top priority of its six-month chairmanship, the ICG said.
"The Contact Group should not permit further delay in Ahtisaari's proposals after Serbia's January elections and should not dilute them," the Brussels-based group said. 
"It should refer them quickly to the UN for Security Council consideration."
According to the ICG, the consequences of failing to act promptly and effectively could be serious.
"A botched status process that fails to consolidate the prospect of a Kosovo state within its present borders and limits the support the EU and other multilateral bodies can provide would seed new destructive processes," the group said. 
"A sense of grievance would become ingrained among Albanians throughout the region, strengthening a pan-Albanian ideology corrosive of existing borders and possibly even enriching the soil for radical Islam."
The report also called on the Kosovo institutions to strengthen good governance and on Serbia to engage with the province's independence project, if it wants to "extract the maximum benefit for its own long-term interests and those of the Kosovo Serb" community.
