24/04/2007
(AP, Fena - 23/04/07; Javno.hr - 22/04/07; Balkan Investigative Reporting Network - 19/04/07; Fena -- 13/04/07 - 17/04/07)
The Republika Srpska National Assembly (RSNA) supported on Monday (April 23rd) a veto decision by the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) presidency chairman, blocking plans to urge Serbia to arrest war crimes suspects charged with genocide.
Sixty-nine lawmakers in the 81-seat assembly voted in favour of the veto cast by Nebojsa Radmanovic, the Serb representative in the BiH tripartite presidency and its current chairman. 
The bill he rejected was initiated by the Bosniak and Croat members of the presidency, Haris Siladjic and Zeljko Komsic, and was prompted by a recent International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruling on the 1995 Srebrenica genocide.
It would have called on Belgrade to meet its obligations and co-operate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Radmanovic, however, criticised the proposal by his fellow presidency members as "destructive" and contrary to the interests of the Bosnian Serb entity.
"The BiH presidency cannot behave in this way and issue decisions that are damaging to BiH and her entities," he told lawmakers Monday. 
The document has an ultimatum-like tone that is "inappropriate for diplomatic communication between the two sovereign and friendly countries", he added.
"It is also contrary to the Agreement on Special and Parallel Relations between RS and Serbia and it must not be allowed to destroy this agreement," he said.
Furthermore, Radmanovic argued, the BiH presidency was not empowered to make such moves. 
Nor, he said, does it have the authority to interpret the ICJ's ruling on Srebrenica.
While clearing Serbia of direct responsibility, the court ruled that Serbia had violated the UN convention on genocide by failing to prevent it. 
The ICJ also instructed Serbia to meet its obligations and immediately arrest and hand over all those wanted by the ICTY on charges of genocide, including former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic.
Radmanovic's move to veto the decision "turns Republika Srpska into an agent of Serbia," the AP quoted the Bosniak member of the presidency, Silajdzic, as saying.
According to Tanja Topic of the Friedrich Ebert Foundation, such developments highlight the split among BiH's main ethnic communities.
"Our institutions include people who represent the interests of Serbia and Croatia more than they do Bosnia and Herzegovina's," the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network quoted her as saying.
