24/01/2007
(FT, The Guardian, Los Angeles Times, Turkish Daily News - 24/01/07;
AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, FT, International Herald Tribune, BBC, VOA - 23/01/07)
Some 100,000 people attended Tuesday (January 23rd) the funeral of Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink, whose murder has stirred a debate about freedom of expression, excessive nationalism and ethnic tolerance in Turkey.
Dink, 52, was the founder and editor of the bilingual Turkish-Armenian newspaper Agos, and devoted his life to the reconciliation between his community and majority Muslim Turks.
He was gunned down in broad daylight on Friday, metres away from his paper's offices.
Ogun Samast, a 17-year-old from the eastern city of Trabzon, has confessed to killing the journalist for his statements regarding the 1915-1917 killings of 1.5 million Armenians, which Dink described as genocide -- an account sharply disputed by Turkey.
Police are questioning at least six other people.
Among them is Yasin Hayal, a militant nationalist who spent nearly a year in prison for a 2004 bomb attack outside a McDonald's restaurant.
Police said he has confessed to inciting the killing and providing a gun and money to Samast.
Dink's assassination shocked many in Turkey and sparked a wave of condemnation from EU and other foreign officials.
"The bullets aimed at Hrant Dink were shot into all of us," Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said, condemning the murder.
On Tuesday, mourners gathered at the square outside the Agos offices as the black hearse carrying the journalist's body set off on its 8km journey to the Armenian Church of the Virgin Mary.
Before the ceremony got under way, Dink's widow, Rakel, delivered a brief emotional speech, again asking that those attending the ceremony refrain from turning it into a political event.
"We are seeing off our brother with a silent walk, without slogans and without asking how a baby became a murderer," she said, surrounded by the couple's three children.
The mourners were mostly silent as they marched through the streets of Turkey's most vibrant city of 12 million people, where additional police forces were deployed and some roads were cordoned off.
Some of the people were holding identical black-and-white placards reading "We are all Hrant Dink" and "We are all Armenians".
There were also signs reading "Murder 301," in reference to a controversial article in Turkey's penal code.
Scores of Turkish journalists, writers and intellectuals, including Dink and Orhan Pamuk, the winner of the 2006 Nobel Prize for literature, have been prosecuted under the clause, which makes it a crime to "insult Turkishness".
"We still hope that (Turks) ...
will accept that the Armenians are Turkish citizens who have been living on this land for thousands of years and are not foreigners or potential enemies," the Armenian patriarch of Istanbul, Mesrob II, told mourners during the service.
Among those attending the ceremony were Deputy Prime Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin and Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu.
Besides representatives of Turkey's Armenian diaspora, Armenian religious leaders and government officials, including Deputy Foreign Minister Arman Kirakossian, also attended the funeral following an official invitation by Ankara, which has no diplomatic relations with Yerevan.
"Hrant Dink was a man who supported dialogue and co-operation," Khajag Barsamyan, the archbishop of the Armenian Church of America, said in an interview with the International Herald Tribune.
"His soul will be in peace when he sees that his assassination created some positive steps between two countries."
Dink was laid to rest at Balikli Armenian Cemetery, where his parents were also buried.
