24/04/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 24/04/07
Rosemary DiCarlo, US deputy assistant secretary of state in the bureau of European and Eurasian affairs, visited Macedonia on Monday (April 23rd) for talks with President Branko Crvenkovski and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski. 
The discussions focused on reforms needed for NATO membership, the Ohrid Framework Agreement, and the Kosovo status issue.
"We have a strong partnership with Macedonia and intend to strengthen it," DiCarlo said.
"I think you have been able to see in the past 15 or 16 years how much we are committed to the region and how much we want to see it succeed," she said at a press conference.
Voicing Washington's support for Macedonia's efforts to obtain a NATO membership invitation in 2008, she urged the country to commit itself to reaching a national consensus on the reform process.
The government and opposition must work together to bring about the changes needed for joining NATO and the EU, she said.
DiCarlo pointed to specific steps Macedonia should take. 
These include strengthening the rule of law, fighting corruption and human trafficking, and adopting laws to ensure religious rights and freedoms.
"We advise the government and the opposition to work together on these issues," she said. 
She conveyed this message to the leaders of the opposition Democratic Union for Integration and the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia, Ali Ahmeti and Radmila Sekerinska, respectively.
"More work remains to be done, and time is short," she said.
For his part, Gruevski said he expected the Allies -- particularly Washington -- to help Macedonia get its NATO invitation.
"Macedonia as a country shares the same values as NATO members, and it continues further to be a part of the coalition against terror. 
We will continue to contribute with our forces in Iraq, Afghanistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina," he said.
About ten days ago, US President George W. 
Bush signed a law that provides for granting political and technical support to the Adriatic Charter countries -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- in their bids to join NATO. 
DiCarlo's visit is seen as another sign of support.
The future of Kosovo, which borders Macedonia, was also high on the agenda. 
DiCarlo and Gruevski agreed on the need for a quick resolution. 
He said that resolving the status issue is vital to achieving a lasting peace in the Balkans, attracting investments and creating jobs.
DiCarlo also stressed the regional impact.
"We believe that solving this issue will help the whole region, and are committed to the issue being resolved in a way that would promote stability and prosperity of the region, she told reporters.
