28/03/2011
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 28/03/11
Lorik Cana is arguably the Albanians' most beloved football player.
Born in Pristina, the son of famous Kosovar football player Agim Cana, he spent most of his childhood thinking and dreaming about football.
Little did he know that he would become one of the best Albanian football players on the international level, vice captain of the Albanian National Team, and a player in high demand among European clubs.
Cana, 27, has played for some well known clubs including Paris Saint-Germain and Marseille in France, where he served as captain in 2007, when he was only 23.
He also played for Sunderland of England before joining the Turkish club Galatasaray in July 2010 as a defensive midfielder.
Seven years earlier, he'd accepted an invitation from the Albanian Football Association to join the National Team.
The choice was natural for Cana, the best way, he says, to express his links to his homeland and the patriotism he says everyone should have.
Direct and modest, he's interested in archeology, etymology, history, equestrian jumping and auto racing.
He champions a number of charities in both Albania and Kosovo, and now serves as UNICEF's ambassador to Albania.
He sat down recently to talk with SETimes correspondent Jonilda Koci.
SETimes:
How did you find yourself having this important career in football?
Was it influenced by your father's career?
Lorik Cana:
Of course my passion for football has its roots on my family, because my father had a 15-year career as a professional football player in Kosovo, and was well-known in former Yugoslavia times, when football was quite qualitative.
I can say my father influenced me a lot.
I was raised in the world of football, as a guy from the Balkans, where all the boys have this special passion for football.
Since my family left Kosovo, I have had all conditions fulfilled to become a football player, even though I did not believe that I would become a professional football player.
I have worked hard in this direction, and I have had the strong support of my father.
So I had pretty much everything to reach this goal.
SETimes:
You were born in Pristina, but you also spend time in Albania, coming to play for the national team or for other reasons.
Can you explain your relations with both these countries?
Cana:
Since we did not have a national team in Kosovo, it was completely normal to dream as kids about the Albanian National Team.
I think it was completely natural and there was some patriotism as well.
Nowadays I have a lot of connections with Albania, [dating back to] 2002 when I first arrived here.
I have my best friends in Albania.
Meanwhile in Kosovo I still have a lot of family members.
My relatives live in Gjakova, but still my best and closest friendships [are] here in Tirana.
SETimes:
How do you see your involvement with the Albanian National Team?
Cana:
I have been trying to build my own career as a football player with a strong engagement for action and for results.
And I try to be an example and try to open the road to a lot of other players that will be coming after me.
I am convinced that there are and there will be a lot of other Albanian players in the future that will be successful internationally and will be even better than me.
I am really glad to be one of the first ones to have succeeded on the international arena, but I would like to see more young Albanian players who live abroad choose the Albanian national team.
SETimes:
What about the Albanian National Team needs to be changed?
Cana:
We Albanians have always had distinguished talents … but of course conditions for young players in Albania are still tough.
What I think needs to be changed is finding new football players who live abroad, and we have already started to look for this.
These young players have all the conditions [necessary for] success.
In countries such as Switzerland or Germany, there are a lot of young Albanian players, and I am a good example of this, since I started and reached some of my best levels in Switzerland and France.
This should be changed for sure.
The Albanian Football Federation has already undertaken this initiative of finding new elements.
I think we are some years late, but still it is very positive that we have started.
I support this initiative and I appeal to all young Albanian players to choose playing also for our national team.
Many times, the fact they choose another citizenship becomes a big impediment.
SETimes:
Do you see your future in Turkey?
Cana:
In fact, in choosing this club I have fulfilled a desire.
Galatasaray has a lot of fans in Kosovo, and it shares a common history with our country, since it was established by an Albanian, Ali Samijen [the son of prominent writer Sami Frasheri].
It has been a long time wish to play with them, and I got this opportunity little bit earlier than expected, but if this club gives me the necessary opportunities … I will stay for years.
SETimes:
There are a lot of prestigious international clubs from England, France, etc that would make you offers.
What would be the decisive reason to move?
Cana:
I actually would like to stay for a long time at Galatasaray.
I went to Turkey for … the opportunity to play for the European leagues, and if this does not happen and if I am not able to fulfill my objectives, I can re-evaluate my position.
This year we have had some problems … but if everything goes well, I will continue to stay there.
SETimes:
You have created a very interesting public image, while participating in several charitable initiatives.
You were also named UNICEF ambassador in Albania.
What can you tell us about these experiences?
Cana:
It is something very normal … when you are a public figure, especially in sports, since a sport can act [in a sense] as an extraordinary ambassador of a country.
It doesn't take me a lot of time to engage to these activities that I find very important and necessary.
SETimes:
You are also one of Albania's favorite public figures, especially among girls.
Does your fame influence your privacy?
Cana:
I generally keep details of my personal life personal, but I think that if there is anything important in my life that people need to know, I have no problem telling them.
If I am in a relationship with someone, or decide to get married -- something really important in my life -- I will tell this to the public.
But, until now there haven’t been any important details to announce.
It is as simple as this.
