08/11/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 08/11/04
As people cast around for ways to make a living in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s (BiH) stagnant economy, some in Herzegovina are looking to a centuries-old wine-making tradition.
This year’s harvest, which ran from mid-September to the beginning of October, was the best in ten years for one of the region’s larger wineries -- Citluk Winery, about 40 minutes southeast of Mostar.
"This year was exceptionally good, up 10 per cent from last year," said Citluk Winery executive director Spomenka Brkic. 
"We had a lot of hours of sunshine and good climate conditions."
For the past 2,000 years, Herzegovinians -- from the ancient Illyrians to the Romans to today's Slavs -- have grown grapes and made wines and grape brandy. 
The rocky hills of Herzegovina are not the snowy, forested mountains that most people think of when they think of the Balkans. 
Rather, Herzegovina -- located between Croatia’s Adriatic coast and the mountains of Bosnia proper -- has a more Mediterranean climate, with an average annual temperature of 14 Celsius, a great deal of sun, and rain that mostly falls in the spring and early autumn.
The grapes grown here, white Zilavka and red Blatina, stand up well to drought and make for dry wines that are relatively inexpensive. 
Quality wines can be picked up in BiH supermarkets and shops for around 9.7 euros and up per bottle, while the cheapest no-cork types run for about 1.6 euros.
Prior to 1992, all wine production was centralised under the Hepok agricultural conglomerate. 
During the 1992-1995 conflict, however, the company -- like every other industry in wartime BiH -- fell to pieces.
Citluk Winery was once part of Hepok. 
Carving a business out of the once-giant company was difficult, Brkic said, but its workers were willing to hold out for better times -- unlike in nearby Mostar, where unpaid workers struck and the company went out of business.
"The years 1993 and 1994 were bad," she said. 
"No one received a salary for six or seven months, but our workers were patient and now they make an average salary for BiH."
Citluk Winery currently employs 90 people and produces 960,000 litres of wine per year. 
Competition is becoming stiff, according to Brkic. 
The area hosts the similarly-sized Ljubuski Winery, as well as 35 smaller, family-owned wineries.
Competition aside, many producers have joined the Association of Herzegovinian Wine Producers, a non-profit organisation founded in 2001 that lobbies BiH’s various governments to improve the lot of wine producers.
Association secretary Marin Sivric said the post-war problems that each winery faces -- lost export markets, more competition in the domestic market and decreased buying power among the local people -- are problems shared by all the wineries.
"The idea for the association came from wine-makers who understood that their individual problems can be more easily presented when we appear together rather than if it’s done individually," he said, adding that the local authorities would be helping BiH in general if they help wine producers.
"BiH’s trade deficit is about 1.6 billion euros per year, and the question now is when this country will be able to sell anything [for export]. 
That’s why we think that it’s time to devote more attention to primary agricultural products," he added.
The Association has already achieved one of its major goals by successfully pushing for parliament to consider a new law on wine. 
Wines are currently classified as "alcohol" according to state law, which means higher taxes and a ban on television advertising. 
Most European countries classify wine as a food product. 
This law, if passed, will do the same.
Marijo Leko, an assistant professor of viticulture at the University of Mostar, said the governments here should wake up to the underdevelopment of Herzegovina’s wine country. 
He noted that some 12,000 hectares of land -- as opposed to today’s 4,000 hectares -- should be under cultivation if BiH is to reach European levels of wine production.
"BiH has exceptional possibilities," he said. 
"Wine-making is one of the few things that can really use this area, because grapes can thrive without irrigation here. 
It’s a tradition -- we feel it in our souls and in our hearts -- and it includes the whole family, from the children to the very old."
One of the dozens of family-owned wineries making a comeback since the BiH conflict is the Andrija winery just outside Citluk. 
It’s been in the Coric family for 200 years. 
The two brothers who own it, Miro and Valentin, decided to blend the up-to-date with the traditional when they invested in expansion in 1995.
The small winery, which produces between 200,000 and 300,000 litres per year, has a modern, 20-foot-long bottling contraption on which some of the winery’s 18 workers work. 
But the several dozen enormous oak casks in the cellar, where the red wine ages for two years and the white wine ages for one, are traditional.
The homey, high-ceilinged room with a kitchen and pub-style tables -- where visitors can sample the red Blatina, white Zilavka or Andrija’s Rose -- is also a traditional touch.
Though exports to Croatia, Serbia, Germany, Switzerland and Poland make up about 50 per cent of Andrija’s business, the brothers hope to expand production and sell to more markets in the future.
"The big shift [for family wineries] is towards building new cellars, and that’s one of the ways in which Herzegovina is returning to viticulture," said Miro Coric.
Another family-owned winery, Domanovici, which is based near Stolac, has built up its business by doing just that. 
General Manager Ivan Zadro invested 1.8m euros in modernising the winery about five years ago. 
Domanovici now produces several types of high-quality wine, including BiH's only brand of champagne.
Back at Citluk Winery, Brkic said that up until now the wineries have had to go it alone. 
"We don’t have any support from the state, from politicians, from anyone. 
We’ve done all of this ourselves," she said. 
"Every year we say it’ll be better. 
For Herzegovina the only future is in wineries."
