15/11/2006
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 15/11/06
UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker has warned Kosovo political leaders against "unilateral actions" in the wake of a decision to postpone a UN blueprint for the province's future.
His comments came amid suggestions that Kosovo's parliament was considering a declaration of independence from Serbia.
Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku said last week that parliament might make such a declaration if the proposal put forward by UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari falls short of independence.
"It's a possibility that we have foreseen," he said.
Such a move would harm rather than help the process, Ruecker said at a meeting Monday (November 13th) with Ceku and KFOR Commander Roland Kather.
"Any statements that allude to Kosovo taking unilateral actions are in contradiction to the Contact Group's Guiding Principles.
Such statements can undermine support for Kosovo at this crucial time," he said.
Ruecker called on all communities in Kosovo to "exercise restraint and show understanding".
Kosovo's leaders should continue with efforts to reach out to minority communities and promote reconciliation and dialogue, he added.
Discussions at the trilateral meeting focused on the latest developments in the status process and the priorities that confront the Kosovo leadership, UNMIK and KFOR in the run up to a determination of Kosovo's status.
Ceku reiterated that the Kosovo Albanian leadership is disappointed with Ahtisaari delaying his proposal until after January elections in Serbia.
However, he said he is convinced there will be no further postponements.
In Albania, meanwhile, Prime Minister Sali Berisha cautioned against dragging out the status process, saying this could harm stability in Kosovo and in the region.
"Only a free and independent Kosovo will contribute to regional peace and stability," Berisha said.
At the same time, he urged Kosovo's people to remain calm and support their government in what he described as "a delicate moment".
He also spoke out against any change in Kosovo's borders, saying this could prompt a reaction from radical groups in the area.
Any redrawing of Kosovo's borders would "encourage adventurers and demons of all Balkan nationalisms to … turn the Balkans back to its darkest times", Berisha said.
