20/12/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 20/12/06
President Traian Basescu on Monday (December 18th) denounced the country's former communist system as "criminal" and said it is responsible for crimes against humanity.
Two weeks before the country's planned EU accession, Basescu presented a 650-page report to the joint session of the legislature's two chambers. 
The document -- prepared by the Presidential Commission for the Study of the Romanian Communist Dictatorship -- said about 2 million people were killed or persecuted by the system.
"I categorically condemn the communist system in Romania, from its creation until its collapse in 1989," Basescu told parliament Monday. 
"Dissidents were crushed ... 
The regime condemned the entire nation to misery, starvation and despair."
The extraordinary session was attended by King Michael I of Romania, former Polish President Lech Walesa and former Bulgarian President Jelio Jelev, among others.
"For 16 years, Romania has avoided confronting her communist past, a procrastination which has resulted in the hegemony of lies and mystification. 
This, in turn, has created a climate of frustration and anger, manipulated by demagogues," Commission Chairman Vladimir Tismaneanu said. 
"Transparency is the only way a democratic political culture can be established," he added.
The Presidential Commission -- formed by well-known historians, former political prisoners and dissidents -- was granted special access to some previously inaccessible archives. 
However, the commission did encounter difficulties.
Files on former Romanian President Ion Iliescu -- formerly a communist apparatchik -- were missing. 
Iliescu's opposition Social Democratic Party (PSD) , viewed as the heir of the communists, has joined the ultranationalist Greater Romanian Party (PRM) in condemning the work of the commission.
"It is a false, politically orchestrated report," said PRM President Corneliu Vadim Tudor. 
"I agree we should unmask the crimes of the Stalinist era, but shouldn't it also condemn the Queen of England, who was in the same car with the dictator?"
Earlier this month, the PSD Congress accused some within the Commission of "neo-Stalinism" and "McCarthyism", charging that a campaign was under way to demonise and destroy the Left.
Responding to those accusations, Tismaneanu said the PSD repeatedly has avoided facing the truth about communism. 
"For years, Iliescu and his party have claimed that dealing with the past is a waste of time. 
In reality, an unconfronted past does always come back with a vengeance, haunting our lives," he said.
The report makes substantial recommendations. 
These include introducing the study of the Communist dictatorship into the high school curriculum and the establishment of a memorial day to commemorate victims.
