21/03/2007
(Reuters, AP, DPA, BBC, VOA, ERT, US embassy in Athens - 20/03/07; Kathimerini - 12/03/07; Inter Press Service/Global Information Network - 19/02/07; DPA, BBC, International Herald Tribune - 25/01/07)
The Greek and US governments announced on Tuesday (March 20th) separate rewards of about $1m each for information leading to the arrest of members of an extremist group responsible for an attack on the US Embassy in Athens more than two months ago.
On January 12th, a rocket pierced the glass facade of the heavily guarded embassy in the heart of the Greek capital, wrecking a third-floor washroom, but injuring no one. 
About two weeks later, the Greek left-wing radical group Revolutionary Struggle claimed responsibility for the attack, confirming the authorities' initial suspicions.
"A reward of 800,000 euros ($1.06m) will be given to anyone providing information that will lead to the capture of Revolutionary Struggle," the Greek public order and finance and economy ministries said in a statement. 
The anonymity of those who would come forward would be guaranteed, it added.
Later in the day, embassy personnel made a similar offer.
Anyone who provides information that will "help bring terrorists to justice and save lives" could be "eligible for a reward, of up to $1 million or more, through the US embassy," its statement said, noting that the United States has paid over $62m in similar rewards worldwide. 
Those who come forward and their families could "also be eligible for relocation," the statement added, promising "strict confidentiality".
Revolutionary Struggle emerged following the dismantling of the leftist militant November 17 group, responsible for the killings of four US officials and 19 other foreign diplomats and Greeks during its 27-year reign of terror. 
The Marxist group was broken up in 2002, following the capture of its leaders, who are currently in prison.
The January attack was the latest blamed on Revolutionary Struggle, described as Greece's most dangerous organisation presently. 
The group is said to have been behind a number of bombings since 2003.
In its five-page proclamation in late January, when it claimed responsibility for the strike on the embassy, the group threatened to stage more attacks on Greek and foreign targets.
"We will get rid of US military bases and NATO from our country and overthrow those who work with them," Revolutionary Struggle said in the proclamation, also attacking Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and Public Order Minister Vyron Polydoras, who visited the embassy right after the attack and condemned it publicly.
The investigation continues and hundreds of witnesses have been questioned, but no one has been arrested.
