23/01/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 23/01/07
The majority of Albanians back EU membership -- and this support has increased since the June 2006 signing of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), a recent survey shows. 
However, it also found that many Albanians still lack information about the accession process and what it entails.
According to the survey, conducted by the Institute of International Relations (IIR), 92.5% of Albanians are in favour of joining the bloc, up from 84.9% in 2004. 
But most also lack specific knowledge about the requirements for entry. 
Instead, they see EU membership primarily in terms of fostering the free movement of peoples around Europe.
"The majority of people connect the integration process with escaping from the tough visa regime in the European countries, while economic development, the strengthening of democracy or improvement of living standards are seen as less important," the IIR said.
The results, it said, show confusion about where Albania stands in terms of its EU bid. 
While 49% believe Albania is ready to join, 24% think the country will be invited even if it is not fully ready.
"Such opinions are reason for concern, especially when you see the answers of the public administration clerks, who are included directly in the integration process. 
More than 54% of them did not know if Albania is ready to join the EU or not," the IIR says. 
"The public administration staff is one of the categories that lack information regarding what the SAA means."
More than half of administration officials think that the SAA does not bring anything to the country, while only 6.6% view it as a contractual relationship.
The agreement, considered a first step towards EU membership, governs ties between the EU and Albania. 
It focuses mainly on enhanced political and economic co-operation as well as the creation of a free-trade area within the next ten years.
Brussels wants Albania to show progress on a range of issues, including press freedom, institution building and ethnic minorities. 
It is also expected to observe international standards for free and fair elections.
