20/03/2007
(The New York Times, AP, AFP - 20/03/07; Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, AKI, RFE/RL, RIA Novosti, Beta, B92, UN News Centre, UNMIK - 19/03/07)
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has full confidence in former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari and is not planning to replace him as his special envoy for the Kosovo status process, Ban's spokeswoman indicated on Monday (March 19th).
"This process has to go on and Mr. 
Ahtisaari is in charge," Michele Montas said at a regular press briefing. 
Her statement followed calls by senior Russian officials for the appointment of a new UN special envoy and fresh Kosovo talks.
If Ahtisaari "has exhausted his resources, we can surely find someone else to handle this issue," Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said in comments on Saturday, a week after Ahtisaari announced the end of more than a year of largely fruitless talks between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials. 
He then finalised his proposal for a settlement to the Kosovo status issue and submitted it to Ban last week.
The plan is due to reach the Security Council by the end of this month, with the 15-nation body expected to open debate on it shortly after and then issue a resolution on Kosovo's future status later this year.
The plan, envisioning internationally supervised statehood for Kosovo, has been accepted by the province's ethnic Albanian majority. 
Insisting on retaining sovereignty over Kosovo, Serbia has rejected Ahtisaari's blueprint. 
Belgrade, like Moscow, has called for fresh talks on the status issue.
"Our position hasn't changed," Reuters quoted Ahtisaari's spokesman, Remi Dourlot, as saying on Monday. 
"The talks held between the two parties in Vienna have been exhausted."
Meanwhile, senior EU and US officials voiced strong support Monday for envoy and his efforts.
"We think he has done a very good job in a very difficult and complex issue," EU External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner said in New York. 
"Ahtisaari will present his proposals and then this will go to the Security Council."
A similar statement came from State Department spokesman Sean McCormack, who also made clear that Washington still seeks a quick Security Council resolution on Kosovo.
"We think Mr. 
Ahtisaari is doing a good job with a very, very tough issue," the spokesman said. 
"It is time to bring some possible solution to the issue of Kosovo."
UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker told the Security Council Monday that any delay in the process of determining the province's final status could make a sustainable solution impossible to achieve. 
Keeping the momentum in the status process would allow the international community "to take advantage of a window of opportunity," he told Council as he presented his quarterly report on Kosovo.
Reiterating Moscow's position regarding the need for more talks under a new UN mediator, Russia's UN envoy accused Ruecker of presenting an "extremely one-sided and unhelpful" account of developments in Kosovo in recent months and of "preaching" for the province's independence.
Acting US Ambassador Alejandro Wolff had a contrasting view, however, describing Ruecker's report as very "balanced" and "objective".
