22/05/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 22/05/07
One of the main issues defining the status of Serbian women in society is economics.
Unfortunately, as it currently stands in the country, almost one-third of qualified women are unemployed.
Of the 1.4 million employable women in the country, only 900,000 have jobs, according to the Ministry of Labour and Employment.
Women in Serbia are less active in the workforce than men and they advance to management positions in companies much more slowly.
Despite the fact that regulations have been adjusted, implementation is slow.
The unemployment rate of women is almost 20% higher than that of men, according to the UNDP.
"Out of the 900,000 women with jobs, 57% are employed in the private sector.
Among the half a million unemployed women, 20,000 have a university degree, while 32.6% have no qualifications," says the Assistant Minister of Labour and Employment, Radmila Bukumiric-Katic.
This year, a campaign called Flower of Success for the Woman Dragon was launched -- it includes the selection of the best company for women in Serbia.
It was initiated by the Women's Business Club section of the Association of Business Women.
Association President Sanja Popovic-Pantic says the aim of the campaign is to highlight that women can be very successful in business.
Representatives of the NGO Women Government of Serbia say that are discriminated against because in job applications they are asked questions about their age and looks, which are forbidden by the 2001 Serbian Labour Law.
Ordinarily, women are not informed that such questions are banned and that they have the right to file against employers who ask them.
During a job interview, employers also ask women inappropriate questions about their marital status, their plans for marrying and about having children.
Co-Minister of Defence in the Women Government, and MP of the Democratic Party, Gordana Comic, said that in the future, there must be more of a fight against such job-related discrimination.
According to the Women's Centre for Human Rights, women are the first to lose jobs --particularly high-level ones -- as a result of privatisation.
More and more women are working in low-paid industrial and service sectors, with a growing pay equity gap.
The obstacles for women, according to the NGO, include the lack of national strategies for the advancement of women, the still gender-segregated education system, the absence of the implementation of laws the advocate for women's rights and developmental policies that do not take gender equality into account.
In an effort to overcome these barriers, the international community has increased pressure on Serbia, and other countries in the region, to ramp up measures to promote gender equality, to end sex-based discrimination and to set quotas for women's political participation.
