23/01/2007
(Blic - 23/01/07;
AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, Bloomberg, BBC, VOA, International Herald Tribune, B92 - 22/01/07)
With preliminary results showing that democratic forces will dominate in Serbia's new parliament, top EU and NATO officials called on Monday (January 22nd) for the speedy formation of a government committed to the country's Euro-Atlantic integration.
None of the parties that passed the 5% threshold in Sunday's parliamentary elections has mustered enough support to govern alone.
The far-right Serbian Radical Party, which finished first in the poll with 81 seats, has made it clear that it will not join a coalition with any party from the democratic bloc.
President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DS), which is set to take 65 seats, has emerged as the strongest pro-European party in Serbia..
The next in line -- a coalition led by Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia and the pro-reform G17 Plus -- won 46 and 19 seats, respectively.
A coalition agreement between those three would ensure a 130-seat parliamentary majority for the next government.
A pro-Western four-party coalition led by the Liberal Democrats has won 15 parliamentary seats.
Final election results are expected to be announced by Thursday evening.
"A majority of Serbs have voted for reform-oriented parties, and NATO looks forward to the formation of a government committed to ever-deeper Euro-Atlantic integration," NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said in a statement Monday.
He also assured Serbia that the Alliance would work with its new government "to further deepen our good relations, including through the Partnership for Peace".
Welcoming the results of Sunday's vote, top EU officials reassured Serbia of its EU prospects.
"Together the democratic forces have the majority, we are obviously satisfied with that," European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said on Tuesday.
"Once again I want to say to the Serbs that we think their place is in Europe, among us in the EU, if they can put the nationalist past behind and collaborate completely with a Europe which wants to have Serbia with it."
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana voiced hope that a "pro-democratic and European-oriented government" will be formed soon.
According to German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, the results of Sunday's elections provided "a sound basis for creating the kind of government that will lead Serbia towards the EU".
Forming a government, however, will require the often-quarrelsome parties to reach common ground on a number of key issues, including Kosovo and the handover of war crimes indictees to the UN tribunal at The Hague.
The parties also need to agree on a prime minister.
Former Finance Minister Bozidar Djelic, the DS's nominee, has voiced confidence that he will take the post.
However, Kostunica has made it equally clear that he aspires to a second term.
By law, the new parliament must convene by February 25th and the government must be formed within 90 days after that.
If that does not happen, new elections will have to be called.
