19/12/2006
(Reuters, AP, BBC, The Christian Science Monitor, Darik Radio, Sofia News Agency, Focus News Agency, Sofia Echo - 19/12/06; AP, DPA, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 18/12/06)
The retrial of a Palestinian doctor and five Bulgarian nurses, accused of intentionally infecting more than 400 Libyan children with HIV, ended in Tripoli on Tuesday (December 19th) with the court confirming their death sentences.
"In the name of the people and after reviewing the documents and hearing the arguments by lawyers of both sides, the court decided on death sentences," Judge Mahmoud Haouissa said, announcing the verdict at the retrial's closing session, which lasted less than ten minutes.
Palestinian doctor Ashraf Ahmad Jum'a and Bulgarian nurses Valya Chervenyashka, Snezhana Dimitrova, Nasya Nenova, Valentina Siropulo and Kristiana Valcheva were arrested in February 1999, less than a year after they arrived in Libya to help care for patients at the Al-Fateh Hospital in Benghazi. 
In the course of 1998, 426 children at the hospital were diagnosed with AIDS. 
Fifty-two of them have since died.
The first trial of the six medics ended in May 2004, with judges condemning them to death by firing squad. 
Following a wave of international outrage, Libya's Supreme Court overturned the ruling and sent the case for retrial at a lower court.
Top international AIDS experts, including French Professor Luc Montagnier, who first detected the HIV virus, have maintained that the outbreak at the Benghazi hospital preceded the medics' arrival in Libya. 
They cited unhygienic practices as the reason.
Research conducted by British and Italian scientists and published earlier this month also exonerated the Palestinian doctor and the Bulgarian nurses.
"All the lines of scientific evidence point in the same direction, towards a longstanding infection control problem at the hospital, dating back to the mid 1990s or earlier," one of the researchers, Oxford University's Oliver Pybus, said.
The analysis of genetic information from HIV samples taken from 44 of the infected children showed that they were part of a single outbreak of a strain that is common in West Africa, home of many immigrants to Libya.
"From a legal perspective the trial has been neither fair nor impartial," a Reuters report Tuesday quoted Paris-based lawyer Emmanuel Altit, who helps advise the defence team, as saying. 
"The court has refused to hear scientific evidence by leading international experts that counter the prosecution case."
Maintaining their innocence, the Bulgarian nurses have insisted that their confessions were extorted by torture, including beatings with barbed wire, rape, electrical shocks and dog attacks.
Nine Libyan officers charged with torturing the medics were acquitted in June 2005.
Tuesday's verdict was met with tears of joy by relatives of the infected children, attending the hearing. 
Many of them shouted, "God is greatest".
Backing the medics' case, the United States, the EU and a number of international rights groups have accused Libya of using the six foreign health workers as scapegoats.
"I’m shocked by this decision; it is a great disappointment," EU Justice Commissioner Franco Frattini said on Tuesday.
Bulgarian officials quickly condemned the verdicts. 
Foreign Minister Ivailo Kalfin, who is on an official visit to the United States, described the ruling as "deeply disappointing". 
He pledged further efforts to bring the five Bulgarian nurses home.
"Judiciary gears are still in place, we can still count on appealing the verdicts," Kalfin said in a phone interview with the local Darik radio. 
He suggested that his country, which will join the EU on January 1st, could exercise its right to block dialogue between the Union and Libya.
Libya has indicated that it would withdraw the death sentences if each of the families of the infected children is paid repartiations of 10m euros.
Bulgaria has rejected such demands, saying any payout would be tantamount to admitting the nurses' guilt.
