14/11/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 14/11/06
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) made limited progress last year in its bid to join the EU, according to the European Commission report released last week. 
Although the technical part of negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) is expected to be over soon, the agreement cannot be signed until all of the demands from Brussels are met.
The main stumbling block continues to be police reform. 
"Police reform is essential. 
We expect BiH to accept and implement police reform state agency propositions," the head of the European Commission Delegation in BiH, Dimitris Kourkoulas, said.
Republika Srpska (RS), however, is opposed to some elements of the reform -- such as the abolition of entity interior ministries and the creation of police districts that cross entity lines.
"If one wants to force solutions upon us then we do not need the EU," RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik has said. 
The ruling RS party, SNSD, has called for a referendum in which the entity's citizens could decide if the RS police should be abolished.
The EC report also touched on the issue of public broadcasting. 
The Commission has long made it clear that an effective public broadcasting system is a requirement for concluding the SAA. 
However, progress on this issue has been blocked, this time over demands by Croatian politicians for a TV channel in Croatian.
The report also called for accelerating the privatisation of state-owned assets and implementating reforms in other areas.
But the report also noted significant progress in meeting political criteria. 
Public service and judicial reforms are also on the right course, it said. 
The expected closure of the Office of the High Representative is viewed as a sign of progress in security and stability.
The EC also praised the steps taken towards establishing a functional market economy. 
This has been achieved by introducing a value-added tax and by continued fiscal consolidation with a high rate of economic growth.
BiH should get the green light to start negotiations on liberalising the visa regime by the end of the year, the EC said. 
By the end of 2007, it should be much easier for BiH citizens to get a visa to travel in EU-member countries.
The EC also has announced that it will continue providing financial assistance to the country. 
In the framework of the 2006 CARDS programme, 51m euros in pre-accession assistance has been allocated to BiH.
