15/11/2010
(Various sources -- 11/10/10 - 09/11/10)
The leaders of the NATO member states will meet for a two-day summit in Lisbon on Friday (November 19th) to approve the Alliance's new long-term strategy, as well as reforms aimed at boosting effectiveness.
The talks will also focus on a collective missile defence plan, the future of the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan and relations with Russia.
The new Strategic Concept, which will replace the one adopted in 1999, defines the Alliance's roles and responsibilities in coping with military and other modern-day threats to stability and security, such as terrorism, cyber warfare, missile attacks and piracy.
"We are investing in new capabilities such as cyber and missile defence," NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said about two weeks ahead of the summit.
"We are enhancing our partnerships and promoting a more efficient use of resources, including within our own NATO structures.
In short, we are preparing NATO to be fit for purpose for the 21st century."
He believes that, given the looming defence cuts in a number of key member states, the Alliance should take steps to reform its command structure and agencies and that Allies should buy and operate more equipment together that they could not afford individually.
"The Alliance is already good value for the money.
By standing together, we get more security than we ever could by going it alone.
But we must do better," Rasmussen said last month.
"NATO must become more effective, and more cost-effective, at the same time."
One of the thorniest issues on the agenda in Lisbon is a plan to develop a missile defence system to protect all Alliance nations from potential threats.
Outlining his proposal for a new Strategic Concept in a speech in early October, Rasmussen said there was a "real threat" of a NATO state becoming the target of a missile attack.
"Over 30 countries are now acquiring ballistic missile technology.
Some can already hit Europe," the former Danish prime minister said during an event in Brussels hosted by the German Marshall Fund of the United States.
"Again, that's today.
And that problem will only get worse."
NATO has already developed a system ensuring the protection of Alliance forces, which it now wants to expand to cover the territory of all member states -- a combined population of around 900 million people.
"There is technology available -- tested and ready to go -- that can defend against a missile attack," Rasmussen said at the Brussels event on October 8th.
"And we can afford it;
the cost of expanding the current system for protecting our troops, to include all citizens, would be less than 200m euros, from NATO's common budgets, over ten years, divided among the NATO Allies.
That is a lot of defence, for a very good price."
A previous US proposal for a missile defence shield envisioned the deployment of ten missile interceptors in Poland and a radar system in the Czech Republic by 2012.
But the shield would not cover NATO members Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and Turkey.
Staunchly opposed by Russia, which viewed it as a possible threat to its military deterrent, that plan turned into a major bone of contention in relations between Moscow and Washington.
Viewing co-operation with Russia as essential to US and global security, the administration of President Barack Obama eventually agreed to scale back the plan.
The decision to green light the new proposal -- for a NATO-wide anti-missile shield -- needs to be approved by all member states.
While indicating that it is not planning to block such a decision in Lisbon, Turkey, has raised certain conditions for backing a deal, although it is unclear if it will actively participate in the proposed system.
Ankara, which has been meticulously trying in recent years to improve its relations with neighbouring countries, has clearly stated its opposition to the shield being presented as aimed against any specific country.
"We do not have a perception of threat in our adjacent areas, including Iran, Russia, Syria and the other adjacent countries," Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said.
"NATO should exclude any formula that confronts Turkey with a group of countries in its threat definitions and planning … We do not want a Cold War zone or psychology around us."
A NATO member since 1952, Turkey helped broker a controversial nuclear swap deal with Iran in May.
The following month, it became one of the two countries, along with Brazil, to vote against a fourth round of sanctions against the Islamic republic over its nuclear programme at the UN Security Council.
Those moves raised concerns in the West that Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party, which has its roots in political Islam, is pushing the country towards the East.
In September, however, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu insisted no such realignment is under way, and confirmed that EU membership remains his country's top priority.
"Our integration process into the EU is the most strategic objective of Turkey.
Nobody can blame Turkey for the delay in this process," he told the Financial Times.
President Abdullah Gul and Prime Minister Recep Tayip Erdogan have both stressed their country's unique role as a link between East and West.
"Look, this is the European side of Istanbul, there is the Asian side over there and the bridge stands right in the middle," Gul told reporters in June.
Progress in Afghanistan and the steps ahead for the NATO-led force there will be discussed on the second day of the event.
The talks will be attended by Afghan President Hamid Karzai, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, EU Council President Herman Van Rompuy, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso and World Bank President Robert Zoellick.
A statement on the Alliance's website ahead of the summit indicated that an announcement was likely to be made in Lisbon on "the start of a transition to Afghan-led for security, early in 2011".
The session on Afghanistan will be followed by a meeting of the NATO-Russia Council (NRC) with the participation of Russian President Dmitry Medvedev.
The talks are expected to focus on possible Russian collaboration on the Alliance's plan for a missile defence system, as well as on NATO-Russia co-operation aimed at stabilising Afghanistan, including issues such as transit, counter-narcotics training and provision of helicopters for the Afghan Army.
"The time has come for a fresh start for NATO-Russia relations," Rasmussen said following consultations with Medvedev and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov in Moscow on November 3rd.
"The Lisbon Summit of the NATO-Russia Council is the place to make a fresh start.
I am confident that the summit will deliver, to the benefit of all 29 countries in the NRC -- on Afghanistan, on fighting terrorism and proliferation, and, I hope, on missile defence," he said.
