14/11/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 14/11/06
Former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase has been charged with abuse of office, blackmail and bribe taking to the tune of 1.37m euros. 
His wife and two other people also face corruption charges. 
All firmly deny the accusations. 
Their trial will start on December 14th at the Romanian Supreme Court of Justice.
According to prosecutors, Nastase used his influence as prime minister and leader of the ruling Social Democratic Party to secure illegal financing for his campaign and to obtain expensive goods and construction materials from China to refurbish two of his houses.
The National Anticorruption Directorate (DNA) also sued the former prime minister for blackmailing the Romanian consul in Hong Kong, Ioan Paun. 
Nastase allegedly asked the diplomat not to disclose his knowledge of the illegal shipment of 12 containers of Chinese goods and to destroy customs documents, the DNA said.
Prosecutors say they had evidence proving "the existence of threats which gave the victim a profound sense of fear for his life, his family and the development of his career".
Nastase has denied the accusations, saying he is the victim of "big, dirty, political manoeuvres". 
His indictment was meant to justify the waste of taxpayers' money after years of judicial harassment, Nastase said.
"An entire system of prosecutors, policemen, and people from the secret services was deployed in order to make up this case," he claimed.
This investigation began in August 2004, while Nastase was in power. 
It was closed in January 2005, a few weeks after Nastase lost his presidential bid and became the speaker of Chamber of Deputies. 
The file was reopened in autumn 2005, after a young prosecutor, Daniel Morar, was appointed as the new chief of a reinforced Anticorruption Directorate.
Earlier this year, Nastase resigned from his posts as speaker of the Chamber and executive president of the Social Democratic Party.
He is the most important Romanian politician to face such charges.
While he was prime minister, the EU repeatedly asked Romania to fight high-level corruption. 
From 2001 to 2005 Brussels often criticised the former Anticorruption Prosecution for dealing mainly with petty cases and failing to prosecute the "big fish".
A key turnaround occurred when Monica Macovei, a former rights activist, took office as justice minister. 
Backed by the European Commission, Macovei fought to allocate resources and new, young prosecutors to the Anticorruption Directorate, to preserve its autonomy and to protect it from political influences.
According to the findings of the last European Commission Monitoring Report, Romania has made "significant progress … in establishing a solid track record of serious non-partisan investigations of high-level cases that have led to indictments and judicial proceedings".
The report praised the DNA's activity, stressing the importance of revisiting old investigations: "The qualitative improvement of DNA's investigations has continued as is demonstrated by the reopening of cases which had been closed under the previous management team and by the launch of new investigations into long-standing public procurement scandals," it said.
At the same time, however, the European Commission is concerned that political will has decreased as the anticorruption campaign has proved it legitimacy.
"There needs to be a clear political willingness of all political actors to demonstrate the sustainability and irreversibility of the recent positive progress in the fight against corruption," Brussels told Romania.
