16/02/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi and Bekim Greicevci in Pristina – 16/02/07
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, on a visit to Kosovo, warned that KFOR would not tolerate any form of violence in the province. 
"If there are people in Kosovo who might think that inciting violence could be the answer, they are wrong and KFOR will prove they're wrong," he said at a press conference Thursday (February 15th) following talks with Kosovo leaders, UNMIK head Joachim Ruecker and the commander of KFOR, Lieutenant General Roland Kather.
De Hoop Scheffer arrived in the province five days after weekend clashes between Albanian pro-independence demonstrators and police. 
Two people died and about 80 were injured after protestors attempted to storm government buildings, leading police to respond with tear gas and rubber bullets.
"Unfortunately, last Saturday we saw an example of how things should not go," the NATO chief said. 
"There should be no need for more fatalities and more victims in Kosovo."
On behalf of the Alliance, he expressed full support for UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's status plan, while urging local leaders and all ethnic groups to show maturity in shaping Kosovo's future.
"As we speak, the world is watching very carefully what kinds of messages come from Kosovo," he said. 
"You will be heard, you will be seen, you will be watched by the international community."
De Hoop Scheffer then travelled to the northern part of Kosovo to meet with the political leaders of Serb communities, who said they do not support Ahtisaari's plan.
"We support the plan of Belgrade and the resolution adopted by the parliament of Serbia, which rejects Ahtisaari's package," said Slavisa Ristic, the mayor of Zubin Potok. 
Should Kosovo become an independent state, Ristic said, local Serbs will not allow its government to extend its authority to the territories controlled by them.
For his part, de Hoop Scheffer reiterated a Contact Group principle ruling out any breach in Kosovo's territorial integrity. 
"The people who would like to work for partition should realise that this is not the solution and this can never be the solution," he said.
He said he would soon go to Belgrade "to work on Ahtisaari's basis, because there is really no alternative".
He promised no downsizing of KFOR troops, saying Kosovo is in an important and sensitive period that needs KFOR at full strength. 
At present, NATO has approximately 16,000 troops in Kosovo.
Under Ahtisaari's plan, NATO would continue its presence in Kosovo after the status settlement. 
"The Western Balkans are an important part of Europe," de Hoop Scheffer said, stressing the need to "bring this part of the world closer to the Euro Atlantic institutions".
