18/12/2006
(The Guardian, Kathimerini - 18/12/06;
VOA, ANA-MPA, Zaman - 17/12/06;
Reuters, AFP, CNN, DPA - 16/12/06;
AP, AFP, International Herald Tribune, 10 Downing Street - 15/12/06)
Reiterating his support for Turkey's EU bid, British Prime Minister Tony Blair said on Saturday (December 16th) the country's accession was of "fundamental importance" to Europe's future.
"Turkey is placed right between the Middle East and Europe and if we needed no other reminder of the strategic importance of Turkey to the EU, it is what is happening in the Middle East today," Blair told reporters in Ankara following talks with his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Blair arrived in Turkey on Friday, shortly after the leaders of the 25 EU member states endorsed a decision freezing membership talks with Ankara on eight of the 35 negotiating chapters.
The move was in protest of Turkey's refusal to open its ports and airports to traffic from Cyprus, which joined the EU in 2004, but whose administration is not recognised by Ankara.
Under a protocol signed in 2005, Turkey agreed to expand its customs union with the EU to all its members, including Cyprus.
However, it has not yet done so.
Speaking at a joint news conference with Blair at the Ankara airport Saturday, Erdogan criticised the EU leaders' decision as "very unfair".
"The relationship with the EU dates back 40 years and unfortunately that relationship has been reduced to a secondary issue of opening the ports," the Turkish leader said.
Despite the partial suspension of Ankara's talks, the negotiation process should continue, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said last week, calling for the opening of the next negotiating chapter, which covers economic and monetary policy.
A similar statement came from Blair, who believes a move in that direction could take place before the end of Finland's EU presidency on December 31st.
"Even though the eight chapters are frozen, we have another 27 that are not," German news agency DPA quoted the British prime minister as saying.
"We've got to change the dynamic."
While urging Turkey to honour the 2005 protocol, Blair also called on the EU to end the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community, whose breakaway state is recognised by Turkey alone.
He voiced hope that South Korea's Ban Ki-Moon, who will assume the post of UN secretary-general on January 1st, will revive international efforts to end the 32-year division of Cyprus
Blair also suggested that Britain is considering the launch of direct flights to the Mediterranean island's Turkish-occupied north.
"If it is lawfully possible, then I would like to see us do it," the Greek daily Kathimerini quoted Blair as saying.
