18/04/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 18/04/11
According to Edith Harxhi, Albania's foreign policy is based on two things: friendly relations with neighbours and pursuing Euro-Atlantic integration. 
In this exclusive interview with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku, the deputy foreign minister elaborates on developments at home and in the region.
SETimes: A woman was elected president of Kosovo this month. 
Do you think Kosovo is setting a model for other countries in the region?
Edith Harxhi: The election of the new president was something new and a big victory, not only for Kosovo, but also for … women who are active in the social, political life in the region. 
I think that a person like [Atifete] Jahjaga … is the right person to lead a country.
SETimes: How difficult is it to be a woman in Albanian politics, in senior posts?
Harxhi: It is very difficult, and it is more difficult to stay up there than to climb there. 
It is still a male-dominated society, and that being the case, what is essential is not only to be a woman, but also to have and produce quality. 
I think that in societies like Albania's that have undergone dramatic transformations over the past 20 years, strengthening women's positions will be and remain a process, a difficult process.
SETimes: Albania has invited Serbian President Boris Tadic to visit Tirana. 
Any feedback from Belgrade?
Harxhi: President [Bamir] Topi extended an invitation to Mr Tadic some months ago, in December 2010. 
Unfortunately, even now, we have no answer. 
I think it would be best for relations between Albania and Serbia, to have an answer from the office of President Tadic regarding the invitation and the timing of his visit to Albania. 
However, I think there has been good will on both sides, not only for this visit, but also for other issues of priority for the past two to three years.
SETimes: At what stage are the relations between Albania and Greece?
Harxhi: Relations between Albania and Greece, for us, the Albanian Foreign Ministry, are very good. 
We have been trying to keep a trend of visits, in the last two to three years … [but they have been less frequent recently] due to the financial crisis in Greece.
However, meetings at the level of presidents and prime ministers have been held during this period, such as the meeting between Prime Minister Sali Berisha and Prime Minister George Papandreou at the UN in 2010.
All issues related to our relations were discussed, including those which in certain moments [stemmed more from] media excess than politics or a sign of strained relations between the two countries.
SETimes: What about Montenegro and Macedonia?
Harxhi: Relations with Montenegro are very good, warm and friendly, as with Macedonia. 
Albanians living in Montenegro have a relatively good life, considering the fact that Montenegro is making good steps towards the EU. 
Albanians are well represented in the government of Montenegro.
We have very good, excellent relations with Macedonia. 
However, the issue of lack of proper implementation of the Ohrid Agreement might cause problems in the future, not in relations between Albania and Macedonia, but in relations between Albanians and Macedonians.
Any time we talk about Albanian-Macedonian relations, we stress the importance of full implementation of the Ohrid Agreement. 
I hope the elections in Macedonia will bring something new to the Macedonian and Albanian political scene. 
Coalitions have already been formed there. 
Albania has a totally neutral position in this process, because we do not deal with Macedonia's internal problems and we never wanted to be part of those problems.
SETimes: What about Albanians living in the Presevo Valley?
Harxhi: The number of Albanians living there has been shrinking, be it in Medvegje, Presevo or Bujanoc. 
We can talk about only seven villages remaining in Medvegje. 
There were 70,000 Albanians in the 1950s. 
Most of them left due to the wars that followed the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia. 
A part of them left during or after the Kosovo war, a part left during or after the fighting in Presevo Valley.
We are talking about a population that still does not get an education in Albanian. 
There is a faculty of pedagogy now in Medvegje, but not completely in Albanian yet. 
That's why Albanians from the Valley are still forced to get education in Albanian either in Albania or Kosovo.
Unfortunately, an agreement with Serbia on the mutual recognition of diplomas, something we've asked for since 2002, has not been signed yet. 
It would have made it possible to have diplomas that Albanians from the Valley earn in Albania's schools, be recognised in Serbia and they could get employment based on those diplomas. 
We should start from the essential things, which directly touch the daily lives of people.
SETimes: How much did the January 21st opposition protest in Tirana -- which ended with four protestors dead -- damage Albania's image?
Harxhi: If I was asked that question on January 22nd, or on February 10th or even at the end of February, I would have said -- as I said at that time -- that the image was heavily damaged. 
I think differently today. 
I think that Albania has finally managed to prove that it is another European country, like all other European countries, which can have in certain moments, political or social excesses, for different reasons. 
In Albania, the excess was political, caused by the opposition, but Albania has shown that it was able to be managed.
