22/01/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 22/01/07
Following Sunday's parliamentary elections in Serbia, the single strongest party in the country continues to be the far-right Serbian Radical Party (SRS), according to the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy (CeSID).
The SRS, led by Hague indictee Vojislav Seselj, won 81 seats.
However, it will again not be able to form a government.
The Radicals have said they will not join a coalition with any party from the democratic bloc, and minority parties have turned down SRS proposals for a coalition.
Party deputy leader Tomislav Nikolic called on his supporters to be patient until the next election.
According to CeSID, voter turnout was around 60.4%.
Second after the Radicals was the Democratic Party (DP), headed by President Boris Tadic.
It will have around 65 seats in the new parliament.
Third was Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DPS), with 47 seats.
The G17 Plus party, led by former Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic, will have about 19 seats, whereas the Socialists will take some 16 seats.
The coalition of parties headed by the Liberal Democrats' president, Cedomir Jovanovic, will have around 15 seats.
Minority parties, which have announced their support for a democratic cabinet, will have some seven or eight seats.
With these results, the three strongest parties of the democratic bloc -- the DP, DSS and G17 Plus - could form a new government with support from 132 MPs.
But bickering among the parties could make that goal hard to achieve.
"The main conflict will revolve around the future prime minister," says political analyst Vladimir Goati, while adding that the posts of interior and justice minister are also likely to spark contention.
Another analyst, Djordje Vukadinovic, says forming a new government could also be hampered by the Kosovo issue, given UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plans to unveil his status proposal in early February.
G17 Plus leader Dinkic said that it would be best if the government was formed by the DP, the DSS and his party.
"The election results show that the citizens have opted for the road to Europe," Dinkic said.
Kostunica, meanwhile, called on Tadic to give the mandate for forming a new government "to the one who can secure a majority in the Parliament".
"I expect all parties to act responsibly," Kostunica said, declining to elaborate on possible government partners.
Tadic said that the new government "should be formed as soon as possible".
He went on to say that his party would demand the post of prime minister.
By law, the new convocation of the Serbian Parliament must be completed within a month of the election.
The new government must be formed within three months of constituting the new parliament.
Otherwise another election will be called.
