21/05/2007
(AFP, AP, FT, Beta - 20/05/07;
Javno.hr - 18/05/07;
Balkan Investigative Reporting Network -- 15/05/07-20/05/07)
Celebrating the first anniversary of their country's independence, Montenegrin leaders pledged on Sunday (May 20th) to take the Adriatic republic into the EU and NATO.
Montenegro held an independence referendum on May 21st, 2006, when the majority of eligible voters supported secession from the loose union with Serbia, which was established in 2003.
The country -- which has an estimated population of 685,000 people -- became the last of the former Yugoslav republics to end its close alliance with Serbia.
"We are proud to have realised the dream of our forefathers," the AP quoted Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic as saying Sunday, as he addressed government officials and diplomats gathered for a ceremony in Podgorica.
"We remain committed to the rule of law, liberal economy ...
and maintain good co-operation with our neighbours", as well as with world powers, Vujanovic said.
Iceland and Switzerland were the first nations to recognise Montenegro, shortly after it officially declared its independence on June 3rd, 2006.
Recognition by the other former Yugoslav republics, other countries in the region and the world soon followed.
By the end of June, Montenegro was recognised as an independent state by the EU and the OSCE and became the UN's 192nd member.
The country also participates, or is a full member of at least two dozen other international organisations, including the IMF, the World Bank Group and the Council of Europe.
Euro-Atlantic integration is a top priority as well.
Along with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, Montenegro joined NATO's Partnership for Peace programme in December, taking a first major step towards eventual membership of the 26-nation pact.
On March 15th, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and Montenegrin Prime Minister Zeljko Sturanovic initialled a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), the first key step on the accession path.
Signing is expected this autumn.
"Our determination is clear:
full membership in NATO ...
in the EU," Vujanovic said.
Despite the headway made in terms of Euro-Atlantic integration, opposition leaders have criticised authorities for failing to deliver on their promises.
"Time has shown that the citizens have not gained what was promised -- an improvement in their poor economic and social standards," the AFP quoted Predrag Bulatovic, of the pro-Serbian Socialist People's Party, as saying.
Milo Djukanovic, who led his country to independence and stepped down as prime minister in November, said securing Montenegro's economic growth and strengthening state institutions are the main tasks for his party and the coalition government it leads.
Montenegro is expected to get its first constitution as an independent state later this year.
After months of discussion in Parliament, the constitutional draft is now subject to public debate, which is scheduled to close on May 28th.
The document will then be put to a vote in the 81-seat legislature.
It requires a two-thirds majority for adoption.
