22/01/2007
(Sofia Echo - 22/01/07;
Reuters, AP, Sofia News Agency, BNR, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 21/01/07;
AFP, DPA, Sofia News Agency - 19/01/07;
German EU Presidency -- 18/01/07 - 19/01/07)
Libya has said it will not give in to EU pressure aimed at securing the early release of five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor, sentenced to death in a controversial HIV infection case.
"The independence of the Libyan judicial system is a red line, being part of our independence and sovereignty, and we can never accept interference in its affairs," Reuters quoted Libyan Foreign Liaison and International Co-operation Minister Mohammed Abdel-Rahman Shalgam as saying Saturday (January 20th).
His statement came two days after the European Parliament (EP) passed a resolution, calling for the immediate release of the medics, who have been imprisoned in Libya since 1999, and demanding that the EU review its ties with the oil-rich north African country if that does not happen.
In a retrial that ended on December 19th, a Tripoli court handed down death sentences to Bulgarian nurses Kristiana Vulcheva, Nasya Nenova, Valentina Siropulo, Valya Chervenyashka and Snezhana Dimitrova, together with Palestinian doctor Ashraf Ahmad Jum'a, after convicting them of deliberately infecting 426 Libyan children with HIV.
The court refused to admit evidence suggestig that the infection predated the medics' arrival in Libya by at least a year, and was likely due to poor hygenic conditions.
Describing the increasing international protests against the Tripoli court's verdict as "unfair", Shalgam said this contradicted demands on his country to adhere to international standards.
"On the one hand, they (European countries) request the transparency and fairness of the judiciary, but when they see the fairness and transparency of the judiciary, they demand the state's interference in the work of the judiciary," the Libyan foreign minister said.
The Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor have appealed their verdict before Libya's Supreme Court, which is expected to announce its ruling within weeks.
If the medics' death sentences are confirmed, it will be up to the High Judicial Council to decide whether they are to be carried out.
The EP resolution prompted a reaction also from one of Qadhafi's sons, who heads an organisation that has been involved in the HIV infection case.
In a statement issued Friday, Seif al-Islam Qadhafi warned EU lawmakers that attempts to politicise the case could prove counterproductive.
"Calls from European members of parliament for pressure to be put on Libya, and any EU measure against Tripoli, could have negative consequences," the AFP quoted the Qadhafi Goodwill Foundation's statement as saying.
"Such pressures are of a nature that would undermine mediation aimed at resolving this affair."
The death sentence passed on the five Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor is on the agenda of the EU foreign ministers' two-day meeting that started in Brussels on Monday.
The ministers are likely to express their "grave concern over the verdict and to call for a positive, fair and prompt solution to the case," said a background note on the meeting, chaired by German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, whose country holds the rotating EU presidency.
At the same time, they were expected to stress the 27-nation bloc's "compassion and solidarity with the plight of the infected children and their families".
