13/11/2006
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times – 13/11/06
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's decision to postpone announcing his blueprint for Kosovo's future has met with mixed reactions in Belgrade and Pristina.
Kosovo Albanian leaders expressed disappointment but said they were confident the province is on its way to independence.
In Serbia, President Boris Tadic termed the delay "useful", while Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica criticised Ahtisaari for linking the Kosovo status issue and Serbia's elections.
Ahtisaari had originally planned to present a draft status resolution by the end of November.
However, after a meeting Friday (November 10th) with representatives of the international Contact Group, he announced the plan would be put off.
"I have decided to present my proposal for the settlement of Kosovo's status to the parties without delay after parliamentary elections in Serbia," the envoy said after the meeting.
The date for the vote in Serbia is January 21st.
The announcement prompted an emergency meeting of Kosovo Albanian negotiators.
Speaking to journalists afterwards, President Fatmir Sejdiu voiced regret that the process was being delayed due to "a process in Serbia", but insisted that his side stood ready to continue co-operating with Ahtisaari and the Contact Group.
"The citizens of Kosovo are aware of [the importance of] maintaining the current calm for contributing to the democratic processes," he said.
"Kosovo was never betrayed by the West, therefore today, Kosovo and the people of Kosovo should in no way allow themselves to deviate from the determination of partnership with the United States and the EU," said Hashim Thaci, leader of the main opposition party, the Democratic Party of Kosovo.
In Belgrade, most analysts viewed the postponement as a concession to Serbian democratic parties, with the aim of preventing the potential resolution from burdening them in the elections.
However, Kostunica, who has criticised Ahtisaari on several occasions, said the UN envoy did not have "a mandate to think about elections in Serbia, but to enable real talks on Kosovo, which we have not had so far, and to help find a solution in tune with the UN Charter".
Belgrade's stance on Kosovo is defined by the new Serbian Constitution, which terms the province an integral part of Serbia, Kostunica said.
This means "every future Serbian government will have a consistent stand on Kosovo", he added.
Tadic was more welcoming of Ahtisaari's decision.
"I expect the coming period to be used for discussions on potential resolutions and for the finding of a resolution that will satisfy all the sides that have an interest in Kosovo," Tadic said.
He also acknowledged that Serbia's position in the negotiations is difficult.
"Kosovo today is closer to independence than to any other solution, given the international community's stance," he said.
Meanwhile, the US office in Pristina expressed support for Ahtisaari, while stressing that "the time has come" to find a solution.
"We now see that the status process is entering its concluding phase.
After many months of intensive negotiations between the parties and trips to the region by Special Envoy Ahtisaari and his staff, we are confident his recommendations will include adequate arrangements to protect the rights of the people of Kosovo and lay the groundwork for a sustainable status solution," the US office said in a statement.
"The people of Kosovo have a right to clarity about their future," it added.
