17/01/2011
Text and photos by Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 17/01/11
The Macedonian government has crafted a law that would legalise illegally built buildings and houses, and plans to send it to parliament by March, where the ruling coalition VMRO-DPMNE-DUI has a majority, virtually guaranteeing passage.
The measure covers buildings important to the state, such as hospitals, as well as citizens' individually-owned houses, locally dubbed "wild-built".
This usually refers to additions made to enlarge living space -- building up or out -- amid highly defined lot lines, without paying for license or permits.
These are structures that necessarily don't fit the communal plan.
The potential numbers involved are huge -- an estimated 300,000 structures.
They comprise about 60% of the houses built during the migratory wave from rural to urban areas between the 1960s and 1980s.
"By passing this law, we will close a very important issue, solve the existing problem of illegally-built buildings and prevent such additional building," Transport and Communications Minister Mile Janakieski told SETimes.
His ministry will be responsible for legalising buildings important to the state, while municipalities will be responsible for legalising houses up to 10.2 meters high.
All structures not legalised through this law will be destroyed.
Once it is passed, members of the public will have six months to submit a claim to legalise houses built without permits in the last 30 years.
The charge would be 1 euro per square meter, payable, says Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, in 12 instalments.
The government said it decided on the approach during its January 5th meeting, to make it more affordable to struggling homeowners.
"The goal was to create as simple and short procedure as possible.
There will be a period of six months when citizens and legal persons should submit all documents to the municipal authorities.
If not, the municipality will officially submit a documents request to the parties," Janakievski said.
Following that six month period, municipal authorities will tally the houses and examine which are eligible to be legalised.
The authorities will then provide a document for compensation, and after the final sum is paid, a certificate of legalisation, which will be recorded at the state's records office (cadastre).
The proposed law stipulates that the illegally-built buildings must meet environmental and public health standards, fire prevention codes, and construction codes.
Authorities are required to determine the actual situation on the ground.
Owners of structures that were built illegally on land owned by the state will have to submit a request to purchase that land within three months of submitting the legalisation request documentation.
Otherwise, the authorities will determine a long-term lease plan by default.
Ministry officials have begun visiting municipalities to explain the proposed law and conduct public information campaigns on exact procedures.
"The law requires any money the municipalities receive from the legalisation and land purchases is invested in infrastructure.
As expected, affected citizens' interest is huge," Transport and Communications Ministry spokesperson Dragan Simonovski told SETimes.
He explained that the government is committed to ensure the established standards are met, adding that all documentation will be checked.
Most opposition parties would prefer that citizens pay a compensatory amount determined by the municipal councils instead.
It would likely be higher than what the government measure calls for.
There may be another hitch.
"Problems of constitutional-legal nature are possible, [as] the law takes into account compensation from individual houses but not the buildings of state interest," said Karpos municipality president Stevco Jakimovski, a member of the opposition SDSM.
Gostivar Mayor Rufi Osmani, an independent, also notes there is no need for the law to include social cases -- the unemployed who receive government assistance of 50 euros a month.
Some opposition parties have threatened to challenge the measure before the Constitutional Court.
The public however, generally seems to accept the proposed law as an opportunity to definitively settle a decades-old problem.
"We expected this moment for a long time, and as citizens, we will have the opportunity to become legal owners of our homes in which we have invested throughout our lives.
As an elderly person, I will have something to legally give my grandchildren as inheritance," Skopje resident Rade Ristovski, 67, told SETimes.
