14/06/2007
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 14/06/07
It is time to reopen dialogue on constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), High Representative and EU Special Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling told members of the state parliament on Wednesday (June 13th).
In his final speech to lawmakers before his mandate ends, Schwarz-Schilling said BiH is in a serious political crisis because of lack of progress in reforms, a growing lack of confidence in politicians, and negative rhetoric from public figures.
"I have heard politicians making arguments and formulating policies that only exploit fears among the public, instead of building trust between all sides and making concrete progress on real-life issues," the top international envoy said.
"Is it acceptable to use radical rhetoric about referenda and about abolition of entities in order to gain more votes?
Is it acceptable to stir up concerns about other events in the region to spread fear amongst the citizens of this country?
I say this is not acceptable," he added.
Over the last few days, political leaders in BiH have met separately with Schwarz-Schilling and the US and German ambassadors, in a bid to jumpstart the reform process.
Bosnian Presidency member Haris Silajdzic and Republika Srpksa Prime Minister Milorad Dodik visited Washington for talks at the US State Department, but the discussions ended with no shift in their stances.
Since then, Schwarz-Schilling's office has attempted to take the lead.
Last year, a constitutional reform package failed to win approval in Parliament.
Following the last elections, parliamentary support is still below the two-thirds majority needed to push the document through.
"We support the previous package of constitutional reforms, but because of the lack of political will we probably have to start new negotiations," Dodik said after meeting with international representatives.
The key area of disagreement concerns the entity vote in Parliament.
Most Bosniak representatives oppose instituting a requirement under which a certain number of MPs from each entity must approve any bill before it can be adopted.
Bosniak legislators say this would slow progress.
But their RS counterparts are determined to retain the provision, arguing that its elimination would lead to their constantly being outvoted.
International officials warn that the political crisis is blocking BiH's path towards EU accession, and that this in turn feeds public discouragement and lack of trust in politicians.
BiH has been within an arm's reach of initialling a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU for months, yet it has not been able to take the final step and agree on police reform, Schwarz-Schilling said on Wednesday.
Because of the situation in BiH and the region, he noted, the Peace Implementation Council has decided not to close the Office of the High Representative (OHR) as previously planned.
"That is a step back," Schwarz-Schilling said.
"The OHR is staying to ensure that peace and stability continue, even during this difficult time of political instability."
