20/04/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 20/04/07
A UN Security Council mission will visit Belgrade next Thursday (April 26th) and Pristina a day later to assess the situation on the ground, British Ambassador to UN Emyr Jones Perry confirmed yesterday. 
Prior to that, he said, mission members will participate in different meetings with EU and NATO.
Russia's ambassador to the UN, Vitaly Churkin, sought the launch of such a mission. 
He says a "comprehensive review" is needed of the progress made since the UN took charge of running Kosovo in 1999. 
Only after such a review, Churkin insists, can a vote take place on the final status plan put forward by UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari.
Ahtisaari's plan, which would grant Kosovo "supervised independence" with a strong international civilian and military presence, has wide international support, including from the United States. 
However, Moscow has signalled opposition to it, as has another permanent member of the Security Council, China.
During separate visits to Belgrade this week, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and Chinese Deputy Prime Minister Hui Liangyu both said their countries were against imposing a solution on Serbia.
The two officials did not say, however, whether they would veto the Ahtisaari plan.
After meeting with Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica on Thursday, Lavrov said Ahtisaari's plan had "failed" because it had not included the interests of both Belgrade and Pristina. 
He added that the status talks should continue and that a compromise acceptable to both sides should be found.
"For now, there is no draft resolution [on Kosovo]," Lavrov said, adding that Russia would decide on the matter after the resolution is put forward. 
"We believe the negotiations should be resumed."
China's Hui Liangyu, who visited Belgrade on Wednesday, said Beijing opposes deadlines for finding a resolution. 
He too called for a negotiated agreement between Belgrade and Pristina.
After talks with the Chinese and Russian officials, Kostunica said threats of violence in Kosovo -- if it did not gain independence -- are unacceptable. 
He described the threats as "blackmail".
President Boris Tadic said Serbia would never give up Kosovo, but would also not give up its European perspective. 
The EU and Kosovo are two different things and should not be linked to one another, he told Lavrov.
US Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns, meanwhile, addressed the US House of Representatives this week, saying the international community must act quickly to ensure supervised independence for Kosovo.
Failure to adopt the Ahtisaari plan would "strengthen the extremists and lead directly to new conflicts", Burns said.
In a report Thursday, the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network said Serbia is preparing a plan to annex the mainly Serb-populated far north of Kosovo if the province declares independence. 
The report cited comments by Oliver Ivanovic, a prominent Kosovo Serb leader.
Northern Kosovo -- specifically, the three municipalities of Zubin Potok, Leposavic and Zvecan, as well as the northern half of Mitrovica -- is already in many ways a de facto part of Serbia, the report said, since the area is already financially, logistically and administratively tied to Belgrade.
