19/04/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 19/04/07
Serbia's proposed budget has come under strong criticism from the IMF. 
Experts from the Fund say the country needs a thorough change in economic policy, and they do not recommend ratification of the budget by Parliament.
Following several days of talks with government and central bank representatives, an IMF mission last month urged Serbia to push ahead with structural reforms and to reconsider state expenditures in their entirety. 
In the IMF's view, maintaining economic growth and low inflation are the country's two largest macroeconomic challenges.
As an alternative to adopting the new budget, it suggested, the budget law could be amended in order to allow a three-month financing extension.
"Thus there would be enough time to formulate a strong budget for 2007, followed by reconsideration of priorities in the financing of expenses," the mission said in its report.
In 2006, Serbia's budget deficit amounted to 1.5 % of GDP. 
The Fund would like to see a surplus of 2.75% of GDP this year, in order to "curb demand and put Serbia on a sustainable path". 
It also urges Serbia to decrease its current payment balance, continue with privatisation and bankruptcy procedures to increase market competitiveness, and mount a sustained fight against corruption.
The IMF experts criticised last year's salary increases of between 20% and 30%. 
Due to the "wage and budget developments, the current account deficit widened even further to 13% of GDP, financed by additional external borrowing. 
Consequently, external debt rose to 62% of GDP," they said.
At the same time, the IMF expressed satisfaction with some of the steps taken so far -- in particular, the lowering of inflation. 
"In our opinion, it is most important to complete the privatisation and restructuring of public companies, which includes state companies too," said Mission chief Peter Doyle.
Dana Popovic from the Centre for Liberal-Democratic Studies says the changes proposed by the IMF -- including reduced public spending -- are the right way to go.
Such measures would "pave the way to sustainable economic growth," Popovic says, while acknowledging that implementation would be a challenge.
