14/02/2007
By Bekim Greicevci and Blerta Foniqi-Kabshi in Pristina – 14/02/07
The UN police commissioner in Kosovo, Britain's Stephen Curtis, has stepped down from his post at the request of UNMIK. 
The head of the UN mission, Joachim Ruecker, made the announcement Wednesday (February 14th). 
He said he had demanded the resignation in the wake of violent clashes between police and pro-independence ethnic Albanian demonstrators in Pristina last Saturday.
Two protesters died as a result of injuries caused by rubber bullets fired by UNMIK police troops. 
They were trying to prevent the rioting crowd from breaking into Kosovo government and parliament buildings.
The "principle of political accountability" led him to sack Curtis, Ruecker explained.
The police chief is the second top official to have tendered his resignation. 
On Monday, amid criticism that police used excessive force, Kosovo Interior Minister Fatmir Rexhepi said he was leaving his post.
"I personally feel that it is a moral act towards Kosovo citizens, families Balaj and Xheladini, towards my parents and my family, towards our joint project of Kosovo state-building and stability in the place, to offer my resignation," Rexhepi told reporters.
The demonstration, staged by the Vetevendosje (Self-Determination) movement, was intended to voice opposition to UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan for Kosovo's future status, and to urge Kosovo Albanian leaders to declare independence unilaterally.
Top Kosovo leaders convened an extraordinary meeting after the demonstration, accusing Vetevendosje and its leader, Albin Kurti, of harming Kosovo's stability and interests. 
Kurti and other members of the organisation were placed under arrest.
Vetevendosje activists, joined by civic society representatives and a local human rights group, say the police were at fault for using rubber bullets at close range.
"Our scenario did not include an attack on the government buildings," said a member f the group, Glauk Konjufca, while acknowledging protesters had targeted officials' "luxurious vehicles". 
He said the group planned to stage additional protests across Kosovo.
Prime Minister Agim Ceku has condemned the Saturday demonstration, while also criticising the police performance. 
“The death of two citizens is a sufficient indication that can lead to the conclusion that there has been excessive use of force," he said, adding that the government has established a task force to investigate.
Results will be made public within two weeks, Ceku said.
