19/01/2007
(Reuters, DPA, AKI, European Parliament, Sofia News Agency, European Voice - 18/01/07;
AP, Reuters, AKI, EUpolitix - 17/01/07;
Sofia News Agency - 16/01/07)
The European Parliament (EP) urged the EU on Thursday (January 18th) to review its relations with Libya unless Tripoli releases five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor, jailed and sentenced to death in a controversial HIV infection case.
If Tripoli fails to take steps towards a positive resolution, the EU should consider "a revision of the common policy of engagement with Libya in all relevant fields as the Union would deem appropriate," members of the EP (MEP) said in a joint resolution, adopted by a 567-1 vote with seven abstentions.
In a retrial that ended on December 19th, the six medics -- Bulgarian nurses Kristiana Vulcheva, Nasya Nenova, Valentina Siropulo, Valya Chervenyashka and Snezhana Dimitrova and Palestinian doctor Ashraf Ahmad Jum'a -- were sentenced to death for deliberately infecting 426 Libyan children with HIV.
The health workers were arrested in February 1999, less than a year after they arrived in Libya to help care for patients at the Al-Fateh Hospital in Benghazi.
Their first trial ended in May 2004, when they were first condemned to death by firing squad.
Following a wave of outrage, Libya's Supreme Court overturned the ruling and ordered a retrial.
Expressing their "serious concern" about the grounds on which the foreign medics were prosecuted and about the way they were treated while in custody, the MEPs condemned the verdict.
They also stressed that, with Bulgaria's EU entry on January 1st, the case now concerns five citizens of the 27-nation bloc.
Maintaining their innocence, the Bulgarian nurses have retracted the confessions they made early on, insisting they were extracted by torture.
Leading AIDS experts, including French Professor Luc Montagnier, one of the co-discoverers of the HIV virus, say the outbreak in the Benghazi hospital preceded the medics' arrival in Libya by at least a year and was likely caused by poor hygiene at the facility.
Urging Libyan authorities "to take the necessary measures to review and annul the death sentence," the MEPs said this would help meet the requirements for the continuation of the common policy of engagement with the oil-rich country.
They also urged Libyan leader Muammar Qadhafi "to exercise his powers and bring about the release of the imprisoned medics as a matter of urgency".
In an address at the end of last year, Qadhafi said the six medics would only be released if a Libyan national serving a prison sentence in Scotland for the 1988 Lockerbie bombing were set free and if Libya received financial compensation for the HIV infections.
Libya has demanded that each of the families of the 426 infected children be paid 10m euros as "blood money".
Under Islamic law, this would allow the victims' relatives to pardon the nurses.
Bulgaria has ruled out such a move, saying it would amount to an admission of guilt.
"There isn't the slightest proof that these people are guilty and the EU will not allow any other case to be used as leverage," EU Consumer Affairs Commissioner Meglena Kuneva told Reuters.
"It is intolerable."
