18/01/2007
By Nedjeljko Nudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 18/01/07
The parliamentary commission working to draft a new constitution for Montenegro finally met on Tuesday (January 16th), after members of the opposition agreed to participate. 
However, there is still no sign of a broad consensus.
The ruling and opposition parties disagree over a long list of issues, including the country's official language, whether Montenegrins living abroad should have voting rights, and whether Montenegro should be defined as a civic state or a "state of nations".
The ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) wants the constitution to prohibit any initiative that could result in Montenegro losing its statehood again, while the pro-Serbian opposition wants to retain the possibility of a future referendum on rejoining a state union with Serbia.
"The government is trying to cement the current situation by ruling out the possibility of citizens deciding differently," says Velizar Kaludjerovic, a senior official of the Socialist People's Party of Montenegro (SNP). 
His party also seeks voting rights for Montenegrin citizens living in Serbia, most of whom opposed ending the state union.
The government also faces resistance to calling the official language "Montenegrin", again, mostly from the pro-Serbian opposition. 
It argues that 63% of citizens said during a 2003 census that they speak Serbian, while only 26% said they speak Montenegrin.
Bosniak parties, meanwhile, want the coat of arms and flag to be changed in order to include elements of the Islamic tradition.
"We do not agree that state symbols should be defined in a manner that doesn't allow minorities to see them as their own. 
Some symbols are irritating to our faith," said Kemal Purisic, a Bosniak MP.
While the DPS and the Social Democratic Party (SDP) are pushing to preserve a "pure civic" concept and keep Montenegro as a community of sovereign citizens, Bosniak and Serb MPs say the new constitution must define Montenegro as a community of nations.
They say the constitution should include Bosniaks and Serbs as founding nations of the Montenegrin state. 
The DPS says, however, that this could lead to a bid for secession.
By law, the new constitution will be adopted if it receives two-thirds of the majority vote in parliament. 
If it gets only a simple majority -- which the ruling parties have -- it has to be confirmed by a referendum.
"Broad agreement on the constitution is necessary. 
You cannot achieve your goal if the new constitution is not the product of debate by political forces, NGOs and citizens," said Karlo Tuori, a legal expert from the Council of Europe's (CoE) Venice Commission.
Montenegro is seeking to join the CoE, but must first resolve the constitutional impasse.
A report Wednesday in the Podgorica daily <i>Vijesti</i> said the CoE is demanding that Montenegro be "defined as a civic state and adopt legislation providing for civil control over the armed and security forces," and be boosting judicial independence.
Political analyst Milos Besic says he expects a consensus will eventually be achieved, but some degree of EU intervention may be needed. 
"There is a possibility that some European institutions will apply some kind of mediation under the principle of imposed compromise. 
Some kind of latent intervention could come during the negotiations," he said.
