23/05/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 23/05/11
As turbulence continues throughout the Middle East, neighbouring Turkey, long revered as a model of the compatibility between Islam and democracy, is undergoing a political crisis of its own.
With national parliamentary elections scheduled for June 12th, ever-simmering tensions between the state and the Kurdish community have risen to a more dramatic level, with Kurdish candidates banned, students arrested, and threats issued on both sides.
Incidents of violence have been on the rise.
On May 4th, militants linked to the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party carried out an attack against Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's convoy.
Although Erdogan was unhurt, a member of his police escort was killed.
Meanwhile, the High Election Board's decision to ban 12 independent candidates backed by the largely Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) sparked intense protests throughout the southeast and elsewhere.
A Kurdish civilian died during the demonstrations.
"There is a stiff competition between the [ruling Justice and Development Party] AKP and the BDP in Kurdish areas," University of Central Florida Professor Hakan Ozoglu, a historian of Kurdish nationalism, tells SETimes.
"This spike in violence can be seen as a result of this competition for power."
So strong was the public outcry that the board reversed its decision almost immediately, granting permission to the majority of the banned candidates to run for office in June.
Though this decision was met with enthusiasm, the initial ban reflects the periodically arbitrary nature of the Turkish political and juridical system.
Lehigh University Professor and Carnegie Endowment for International Peace scholar Henri Barkey called the attempted ban "a last-gasp attempt by the 'Deep State' to throw a monkey wrench into the elections," referring to anti-democratic elements within the government and military.
That the board revoked its decision so rapidly, Barkey says, "shows that people understand that you cannot prevent BDP from participating in an open way".
This in itself is a positive sign, he says, in terms of an awareness of rights.
Minerva Chair of the Institute for National Strategic Studies Denise Natali emphasises the significance of the protests themselves.
"The fact that these recent events have evoked such 'loud' responses indicates that some positive attitudinal changes have in fact, occurred," she says.
Such events stand in stark contrast to the AKP's overtures towards the Kurdish population of two years ago, when discussion turned to a "Kurdish Opening" that would grant the population unprecedented rights.
Moderate steps in that direction were taken, such as the establishment of a Kurdish-language state television station, a remarkable gesture in a country that still banned the use of the Kurdish language in public settings during the 1990s.
However, the fundamental changes that many hoped for never manifested, and relations have soured in the wake of what seems to some like broken promises.
Natali cautions against viewing current events as a deterioration of temporarily improved relations, noting the heterogeneity of viewpoints within state structures and society.
"These types of responses are not representative of a monolithic Turkish voice.
The 'state' reaction to the Kurdish problem historically has been a mixed one, with different approaches from civilian and military elites, as different groups across the political spectrum," she explains.
Recent arrests and bans are a continuation of a longer historical trajectory.
"The arrests over the past few months were preceded for the past two and a half years by enormous political pressure on political activists," notes Aliza Marcus, Macarthur fellow and author of Blood and Belief:
The PKK and the Kurdish Fight for Independence, adding that "upwards of 2,000 people have been detained and imprisoned in the past two years."
The outcome of next month's election is widely expected to be a victory for the incumbent AKP.
The remaining seats will likely be filled by the Republican People's Party (CHP) and possibly the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), along with a number of independents.
Because the BDP falls short of a 10% electoral threshold required to enter parliament, the party must field candidates as independents.
If 20 or more of these candidates are able to win seats, they can form a bloc and be able to influence the parliamentary agenda, Barkey explained.
BDP, the latest manifestation of a series of banned Kurdish-backed political parties, has exhibited unparalleled success in the past year, so such a prospect is not out of reach.
According to Barkey, the party's heightened status is most evident in its ability to organise "an almost universal boycott" in the southeast of last year's September 12th referendum on constitutional changes.
After the election itself, the AKP has vowed to pursue major reforms to the constitution, an outdated and widely unpopular product of the 1980 military coup.
"Kurds expect that the government has to do something serious, something major," says Barkey.
"The problem is that the Kurdish situation has come to a point where the constitution is what is really holding up" substantive progress in regards to Kurdish rights and state-Kurdish relations.
The opportunity to help shape constitutional reform and cement minority rights is seen as crucial to the BDP and the Kurdish population as a whole.
Natali emphasises that nationalist demands make up only a piece of the Kurdish platform.
Of particular value in the reformed constitution, she says, would be "a more inclusive notion of citizenship", which, "alongside proven facts on the ground, could encourage more positive relations between the Kurds in Turkey and the state".
In the meantime, threats and accusations continue to be voiced on all sides.
In the past two weeks alone, independent BDP Kurdish parliamentary candidate Aysel Tugluk announced that Kurds will "build our own democracy" if the state doesn't grant it.
Erdogan completely dismissed the notion of a "Kurdish problem", though State Minister Bulent Arinc quickly stepped in to clarify that the AKP does recognise the issue.
Meanwhile, PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan warned from his prison cell of large scale violence after June 15th if an agreement between the government and Kurds cannot be reached.
Thus, while the potential for positive change after the coming election is quite real, it is clear that no immediate solution is forthcoming, and that the path forward may not be a straight one.
"Institutions do not change overnight," emphasises Natali, adding that real change and reconciliation are "going to take time, and will include steps forward and backward".
Ozoglu sounded an even starker note:
"I predict that it will get worse before it gets better," he told SETimes.
