17/04/2007
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest—17/04/07
A recently released report from Ernst and Young suggests that many businesses are interested in Romania but worried about its stability. 
Continuing political quarrels are undermining the country's potential as a magnet for investors, it warns.
Out of 200 managers surveyed, 58% said they were concerned about political instability, along with poor infrastructure, a lack of research centres and inadequate living standards.
"At a time of an intense political crisis, there is a negative effect investment decrease in certain areas, mainly in those which much depend on the state administration, infrastructure and utilities," says Ovidiu Nicolaescu, president of the National Council of Small and Medium Enterprises. 
In comments quoted by Radio Romania, he said the unstable political environment could lead foreign companies to begin channeling investments to other countries in the area.
The economic repercussions could be serious, Nicolaescu warns.
Political turmoil is also one reason behind the international ratings company Coface's decision not to boost its rating for Romania, which stands at A4.
"The risks for 2007 mainly originate in the political environment, as the dissensions within the governing coalition may lead to sudden elections and slowing reforms, despite EU monitoring," the Wall Street Journal quoted managing director Cristian Ionescu as saying.
US Ambassador Nicholas Taubman is also concerned about the impact of political instability on foreign investments.
"We need to be realistic and recognise that the recent political turmoil in Bucharest has raised doubts beyond Romania's borders as to whether this is the right place at the moment to pursue investment opportunities. 
People in private industry and in government are asking a lot of questions about Romania, trying to understand where the country is headed," he said.
"What I know for certain is that it is very important for Romania to continue to make progress in key areas such as justice reform and fighting corruption. 
Losing traction on these reforms would not send the right signal to Romania's partners," Taubman said.
The political crisis is far from over. 
Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu's Liberals have succeeded in ousting President Traian Basescu's Democrats from the governing coalition. 
They have formed a new alliance with the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania.
However, the new government is a minority one. 
It depends on support from the opposition parties, particularly the Social Democrats. 
As a result, political analysts say, its prospects are shaky.
