17/04/2007
(AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, UPI, FT, BBC, VOA, Deutsche Welle, EUobserver, EUpolitix, Washington File - 16/04/07)
The EU and the United States expressed concern Monday (April 16th) about the violence used by Russian police in a crackdown on anti-government demonstrators.
"The excessive use of force that we saw over the weekend is worrying and assaults on the media ...
are unacceptable," Thomas Steg, a spokesman for German Chancellor Angela Merkel, told reporters.
Germany currently holds the EU's rotating presidency.
"The German government expects and demands a thorough clarification of the events in Moscow and St. Petersburg, particularly the actions which prevented journalists from doing their jobs," the spokesman added.
Riot police beat and chased peaceful demonstrators who took to the streets Saturday and Sunday to protest President Vladimir Putin's policies.
About 350 people were briefly arrested during the rallies, which were organised by The Other Russia, an opposition coalition.
The detainees included former world chess champion Garry Kasparov, one of the leaders of The Other Russia, and a representative of Germany's public TV.
The European Commission is "very concerned" about the events, said its external affairs spokesperson, Christiana Hohmann.
She said freedom of expression and freedom of assembly were "very important values", and that Russia's membership in international organisations such as the UN and the OSCE obliges it to respect those values.
The EU is expected to raise the issue during talks with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov on the sidelines of a meeting of the bloc's foreign minister in Luxembourg next week.
Merkel is also likely to bring up the matter during a Russian-EU summit due to be held in the Russian city of Samara on May 18th.
"An opportunity to campaign for the opposition and freedom of expression are the necessary conditions for free and fair elections," said Jacek Saryusz-Wolski, the Polish head of the European Parliament's foreign affairs committee.
In Washington, US officials also expressed their concern.
"We are deeply disturbed by the heavy-handed manner in which this weekend's demonstrations ...
were broken up by the authorities and by an emerging pattern of use of excessive force by the authorities in reaction to similar events," White House spokeswoman Dana Perino told reporters.
State Department spokesman Sean McCormack described the crackdown as "inconsistent with the Russian government's stated democratic values".
"The fact that there's an apparent attempt by the security services to stifle that freedom of expression, to stifle the ability of these opposition political parties to fully participate in that political process, is disturbing," he said.
The president of the 46-nation Council of Europe, of which Russia is a member, weighed in as well.
"We condemn this disproportionate use of force," Rene Van der Linden said.
Freedom of expression and freedom of assembly are basic rights in democratic countries," he added.
