16/05/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 16/05/07
The Serbian Parliament appointed a new government on Tuesday (May 15th), only 30 minutes before the midnight deadline stipulated in the constitution. 
If the cabinet had failed to win approval, Parliament would have been disbanded and a new general election called.
The new government brings together President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia, and the G17 Plus party. 
Together, these parties command 130 of the 250 seats in Parliament. 
Three additional MPS, representing minorities in Serbia, also voted in favour of the new government, bringing the total to 133.
According to Kostunica, the coalition partners have reached a consensus on five key principles: preserving Kosovo as an integral part of Serbia, moving ahead with European integration processes, completing co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, improving the social and economic situation, and cracking down on corruption and organised crime.
"This government will carry on with the consistent policy founded on the belief that any kind of unilateral recognition of Kosovo's independence would be the most severe and even a double violation of UN norms," Kostunica said.
"The government voices full readiness to shoulder its portion of responsibility for finding a compromise and just solution, and will be ready to launch talks at any moment and take part in a new negotiating process," he added.
He went on to say that his cabinet would do everything to wrap up co-operation with The Hague tribunal "as soon as possible". 
Talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU were frozen a year ago because of inadequate co-operation, in particular Belgrade's failure to extradite indicted General Ratko Mladic.
The new government will have 25 members -- a prime minister, a deputy prime minister, 22 ministers, and one minister without portfolio. 
The deputy prime minister will be Bozidar Djelic, who had been the DP's choice for prime minister. 
He was finance minister in the cabinet of Serbia's first pro-democracy prime minister, Zoran Djindjic.
The DP will be responsible for the army and foreign affairs, while Dragan Jocic of the DSS will again head the police. 
This is the second time the two largest democratic parties find themselves in power together. 
The first time, in 2001, their government lasted only a few months, with the partners parting ways over the manner in which Slobodan Milosevic was extradited to The Hague tribunal. 
After the extradition, the DSS ministers left the Djindjic government.
The incoming cabinet will include new ministries for Kosovo, economy and regional development, infrastructure, telecommunications and IT, the environment, and youth and sports.
The EU has welcomed the formation of a new government in Serbia. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn arrived in Belgrade on Wednesday to meet with Tadic and Kostunica. 
In Brussels, meanwhile, representatives of Serbia and the European Commission signed an agreement on easing the visa regime, put off last week amid the controversy over hardline nationalist Tomislav Nikolic's brief tenure as Parliament speaker.
While Parliament was holding its late hour debate Tuesday, police mounted a search of the Deligrad Hotel in Belgrade, on suspicion that Mladic was there. 
He was not found, however. 
News of the action caused a stir among lawmakers, with Nikolic's Radicals and the Socialist Party of Serbia demanding time for consultations and an explanation from the authorities. 
They accused the ruling coalition of staging the move to impress Rehn.
Police said the search, conducted on the order of an investigative judge at the Belgrade Regional Court, was routine.
