15/05/2007
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 15/05/07
Ensuring enough energy to meet growing demand is a major problem affecting the Balkans, and leaders from the region have agreed on a common strategy to deal with it. 
Meeting last month in Ohrid, leaders from seven Southeast European (SEE) countries drafted a plan aimed at stabilising the energy situation and ending frequent power shortages, and said around 30 billion euros were needed to put it into effect.
The presidents of Albania, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia attended, as did the vice president of Bulgaria and the chairman of Bosnia and Herzegovina's tripartite presidency.
Modernising the existing facilities and building new ones is a key step, the leaders agreed. 
An emphasis should also be placed on gasification, since the region currently imports up to 80% of its oil, they said in a declaration issued at the end of the summit.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski said his country is willing to participate in the construction of a new energy source in another country, as a replacement for two recently closed units at the Kozloduy nuclear plant in Bulgaria.
Other priorities, Crvenkovski said, include better utilisation of hydro potential, boosting the supply of oil and gas pipeline and electricity transfer systems, and finding ways to make use of Kosovo lignite for the needs of Macedonia's thermoelectric plant at Bitola.
Bulgarian Vice President Angel Marin said the energy supply in the region has become more complicated following the closure of the Kozloduy units. 
Serbian President Tadic, meanwhile, called for building three gas pipelines in Serbia -- towards Romania, Bulgaria and Hungary, respectively. 
He also announced the construction of a large gas depot in Vojvodina.
"The region lacks financial resources, and through better regional co-operation we will create opportunities for greater foreign investment," said Croatian President Stipe Mesic. 
He added that his country hopes to become an energy hub in the Balkans.
"Croatia has come a long way in working both on the Pan-European Oil Pipeline and on energy-related problems with Italy," he said.
Despite the energy strategy agreement, the Ohrid meeting was partly overshadowed by the Kosovo status issue. 
Serbia's Tadic and Albanian President Alfred Moisiu argued during a press conference, with Moisiu charging Belgrade with trying to delay a settlement, and Tadic responding that Serbia had the right to defend its sovereignty.
Other leaders agreed that the issue is the one major stumbling block amid otherwise improved ties.
"Co-operation with all countries in the region is more or less good, and the region is only burdened by the pace of defining Kosovo's status," Mesic said.
