16/05/2007
(Washington Post, Chicago Tribune - 16/05/07; AP, Reuters, DPA, FT, BBC, US Department of State - 15/05/07)
Russia and the United States agreed on Tuesday (May 15th) to tone down their rhetoric, but continue to differ over Kosovo and US plans to build a missile defence shield in Europe.
"I have said while I'm here that the rhetoric is not helpful, that it is disturbing to Americans who are trying to do our best to maintain an even relationship," US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said after talks with Russian President Vladimir Putin just outside Moscow. 
"There are going to be old scars to overcome … There will be times when something like missile defence may hit an old nerve. 
But the relationship needs to be free of exaggerated rhetoric."
In February, Putin accused Washington of pursuing an "extremely dangerous" foreign policy and seeking global dominance. 
Last week, addressing World War II veterans, the Russian leader spoke of "new threats" based on "the same pretensions to world exclusivity and diktat as in the Third Reich". 
Many interpreted his words as referring to current US policy.
But Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said on Tuesday that Putin's allusion to Nazi Germany had been misunderstood, as he was referring to "extremists," not the United States.
"The president supported the American side's understanding that it's necessary to tone down the rhetoric in public statements and concentrate on concrete business," the minister, who participated in the meeting at the Novo Ogaryovo presidential residence, told reporters.
In their talks Tuesday, Putin and Rice also affirmed their countries' determination to work together towards strengthening the international nuclear non-proliferation regime and stepping up international co-operation for the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
But the two nations failed to iron out differences over US missile defence plans and Kosovo's future.
Characterising Washington's plans to place ten missile interceptors in Poland and a radar system in the Czech Republic as a threat to Russian national security, Moscow has voiced strong opposition to the project.
Reiterating Washington's offer to co-operate with Russia on the system, Rice made it clear that her country has no intention to give up its plans. 
The United States says the shield is aimed at ensuring its own and Europe's protection against a potential attack from rogue states, notably Iran.
"The United States needs to be able to move forward to use technology to defend itself and we're going to do that," Rice told reporters at her joint press conference with Lavrov. 
"I don't think that anyone expects the United States to permit somehow a veto on American security interests."
As for Kosovo, Russia has voiced strong opposition to UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's proposal for granting the province EU supervised independence and has hinted it may veto a UN Security Council resolution to that effect. 
Moscow insists that the final decision on the issue must be acceptable not only to Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority, but to Serbia as well. 
Belgrade firmly opposes Ahtisaari's plan and has demanded further negotiations.
Voicing Washington's support for Ahtisaari's proposals and a draft Security Council resolution recently introduced by France, Rice said the United States is trying "to find common ground in order to be able to move forward".
"It was agreed to search for a solution on Kosovo that would be acceptable for all, but there is no such solution immediately in sight," Lavrov said.
In an interview with Russia's Ekho Moskvy radio, Rice said she expects a resolution on Kosovo's final status to be put to a vote at the Security Council "very soon, in a matter of weeks".
"It's important now to recognise that Kosovo will never again be part of Serbia," she stressed. 
"It's not possible."
