17/04/2007
By Aydin Ileri for Southeast European Times – 17/04/07
Registration of presidential candidates began in Turkey on Monday (April 16th) and will run until April 25th.
Because the head of state is elected by Parliament, most political analysts expect a candidate from the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) to succeed incumbent President Ahmet Necdet Sezer.
All eyes are on Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
While many consider him the likely AKP candidate, becoming president would oblige him to give up the party leadership -- potentially weakening AKP ahead of the parliamentary elections.
Furthermore, the prospect of an Erdogan presidency has set off alarm bells among Turkey's secularists.
The AKP rose from the ashes of the now-defunct Welfare Party, a pro-Islamic grouping that was banned in 1998 for allegedly violating Turkey's constitutional principles.
Sezer, who was chief justice of the constitutional court at the time, said the party was shut down "because of its actions against the principles of the secular republic."
In 2001, Erdogan launched his new party, billing it as moderately conservative -- along the lines of Christian Democratic parties in Western Europe.
Since gaining power, the AKP has presided over an economic boom and the launch of membership talks with the EU.
At the same time, Erdogan has courted controversy with steps some see as undermining the division of state and religion -- for instance, by moving to ease a ban on the wearing of headscarves by civil servants, and by attempting to criminalise adultery.
Such actions, secularists charge, are proof that the AKP is simply the old Islamist wolf dressed up in moderate conservative clothing.
They accuse the party of seeking to fundamentally change Turkey's political culture by systematically placing officials loyal to political Islam in senior administration positions.
"The reactionary threat has not changed its objective of altering the basic characteristics of the state," Sezer told Parliament on the first day of the legislative year.
"Attempts to re-interpret the concept of secularism, to elevate religion to the political level and to extend the base of reactionary threat are generating social tension."
With the AKP now poised to control both the government and the presidency, these warnings have grown more heated.
Speaking at a Military Academy conference last week, Sezer claimed the Turkish Republic, since its inception, "has not faced any threat as significant as that of today".
The state has the right and responsibility to "protect the democratic and secular structures as well as the unity of the state".
The Turkish Army's chief of general staff, General Yasar Buyukanit, has on more than one occasion hinted that the military would be ready to step in if it sees Turkey's secular underpinnings being threatened.
"Aren't there those who express the need to redefine secularism at every opportunity?
Are they not in the most senior positions of the state?
Isn't it true that the fundamental principles of the Republic are under attack?
If one cannot answer no' to these questions, then there is a threat of Islamic fundamentalism in Turkey, and every measure must be taken against this threat," he said.
At the weekend, crowds estimated in the hundreds of thousands staged a rally in Ankara, demonstrating against the possibility of an Erdogan nomination.
He has rejected the criticism.
During a trip to the United States last October, he insisted that the alleged threat to Turkish secularism does not exist, and that the debate is pointless.
He called on officials to refrain from making statements that could cause unnecessary tensions in the country.
Parliament will begin electing the next president either on April 26th or May 3rd.
Up to four rounds of voting could be held.
