14/12/2006
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 14/12/06
Non-Serb minorities in Kosovo -- Bosnians, Turks, Gorans Egyptians, Romas, Askalias -- have differing views regarding their future in Kosovo. 
Most of them are concerned about economic and security issues, not whether the province gains independence. 
According to UNHCR figures, there are 5.1% of non-Serb minorities in Kosovo.
"For me and my family, the creation of new work places is very important because we all are unemployed," said Gani Muhaxhir, a Turk living in Prizren. 
Muhaxhir worked before in a small factory in Rahovec. 
"We didn't have enough payments, but is better to have something rather than nothing," he said.
Bosnian Sanela Bilalovic, who works as a journalist for Kosovo's Public Television (RTK), is convinced that Kosovo is on a "good track", and will end up benefiting all the minority communities. 
"We were not, we are not and we will not be the Albanian enemies," she said.
Bilalovic says that Bosnians -- as well as the other minority communities -- have the freedom and the resources to promote their communities. 
"We have a magazine and a daily news edition. 
It would be better if we had more spaces, not only in RTK, but also in other media," she said.
Roma Sabrije Berisha, who lived for seven years in a Plemetina camp, is not optimistic about the future, given the past. 
"We lived for seven years in very bad conditions and nobody was interested in us," she said. 
She said that her 2-year-old daughter is in the hospital as a result of these conditions. 
"We don't have electricity and we don't have any [heat]," she said. 
Berisha has been forced to look for donations for her family so they can buy logs to burn. 
"I don't know how we can wait until the spring."
A young Egyptian boy, Ekrem Sinani, says he wants to go to school, but does not have the opportunity in the province. 
Sinani is convinced that his community will continue to suffer in Kosovo. 
"The majority in Kosovo is working for their interests," he said.
The talks concerning the future of Kosovo have not focused on this small population. 
Some argue that by neglecting them, the international community risks increasing the minorities' sense of alienation, leading to a potential situation, independence or no, in which the non-Serb minorities may no longer feel they have a place.
