10/01/2011
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 10/01/11
City Hall in Sarajevo is a national monument dating back to 1896, the time of Austro-Hungarian rule.
It is the biggest and most representative building from this period in Sarajevo, situated in the Old Town, on the right bank of the Miljacka River.
The building survived two world wars, only to be decimated by a huge fire in August 1992, early in the Bosnian conflict.
Before the fire, the building served as home to the main National Library.
Shells fired from Serb positions that August decimated it and destroyed a significant number of precious books and archive materials.
The daunting reconstruction effort has been split into four phases.
The first two focused on stabilising the structure, particularly the load-bearing walls.
They have been completed, at a cost of 3m euros.
The main financiers have included city authorities, a number of European governments and capitals, the National Libraries of Serbia, France, Austria, The Netherlands, Cyprus and Norway, and the embassies of Croatia, the United States and Britain.
The third phase envisions a donation of 7.5m euros from the European Commission for renovation of the interior, and 1m euros have been pledged by Spain for the building's facade.
The ultimate goal is to restore the building to its authentic faux-Moorish appearance.
When completed, the building will house the National Library again, as well as the city administration offices.
The contractor for the ongoing third phase is one of the major construction companies in the country, GP Bosna.
The work is being overseen by the federal ministry of culture and sports and by an affiliate, the Institute for Protection of Monuments.
Sarajevo Mayor Alija Behmen, says the reconstruction "should take care of even the smallest details", with permanent supervision by experts in order to guarantee the quality of work.
Currently, the focus is on the interior.
One key priority is the dome, whose gaping hole was covered over to keep out rain and snow, and patched as necessary to continue protecting the interior.
It needs a complete rebuilding, as do the windows, which shattered in the fiery attack and were then boarded over.
GP Bosna General-Director Ugljesa Kisic says that this segment of reconstruction should take 21 months.
It involves "cleaning and refurbishment of the space, and of the basement, which is already in use", as well addressing the dome and window issues.
Scaffolding has been put up outside in order to facilitate reconstruction of the façade, he added.
Even as the work progresses, parts of City Hall are already in use.
It has been the venue for a number of events and expositions, and recently the lobby was filled with those attending the MESS Theatre Festival.
City Hall was one of several festival sites.
When it was first erected just over a century ago, many Sarajevans were critical, believing it too different from the surrounding architecture.
Over time, opinions changed and it became a symbol of the city.
Locals refer to it by its nickname, Vijecnica.
It was from City Hall that, one fateful day in 1914, Austro-Hungarian Prince Ferdinand left with his wife and entourage on what would be his last trip.
Serb nationalists shot the royal couple dead, triggering World War I.
Legends surround the building, some dating all the way back to its inception.
Even acquiring the land proved exceedingly difficult.
Austro-Hungarian authorities managed to strike deals with every property owner in the area except for one.
Nothing -- no appeals, assurances or offers of money -- would sway this house owner.
The whole project essentially ground to a halt due to one persistent Sarajevan.
Eventually, a solution was found.
Brick by brick, window by window, fence by fence, his home was picked up and moved to the other bank of the Miljacka River, where it was completely reassembled.
Located about 100m from City Hall, it was dubbed the Spite House and remains there today.
