14/05/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/05/07
Tomislav Nikolic of the Serbian Radical Party has ended his short tenure as parliament speaker. 
He resigned on Sunday (May 13th) after a debate that lasted some 12 hours. 
Nikolic had been voted into the post on May 7th with parliamentary support from Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), when it seemed the reformist parties in Serbia would be unable to agree on a new coalition government.
After stepping down, Nikolic accused Kostunica of betraying their agreement and siding with President Boris Tadic, whom he said would "betray Serbia". 
While he was parliament speaker, Nikolic argued that Serbia should not join the EU and NATO, but rather become part of a new bloc led by Russia.
Nikolic's election as speaker triggered turmoil in Serbia's capital market, with the dinar dropping 2.5% against the euro and shares of top Serbian companies plummetting as much as 13%. 
International repercussions followed. 
European Commission representatives did not sign a previously announced visa benefit agreement, and the country's assumption of the Council of Europe presidency on Friday was met with questions about its suitability for the post.
Finally, after a secret meeting between their leaders, the main parties in the so-called democratic bloc -- Tadic's Democratic Party (DP), the DSS and and G17 Plus -- announced they had reached a coalition deal. 
The new government is to have a total of 25 members: a prime minister, one deputy prime minister, 22 ministers and one without portfolio.
Kostunica will continue as prime minister, and seven cabinet posts will go to his DSS. 
The DP will hold the post of deputy prime minister, 11 ministries and the post of minister without portfolio. 
The G17 Plus party will have four ministries. 
Together, these parties hold 130 of the 250 seats in Parliament.
The DP will control the military services and the DSS will control the police. 
A person who is not a member of any party will head the secret police. 
Tadic is to head the National Security Council, which will co-ordinate the work of all security and intelligence services.
Control of the police and security services had been a key sticking point in the protracted negotiations. 
The DP has insisted it should take over these services to launch major reforms and clear up the obstacles that have been blocking full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. 
Kostunica, however, was reluctant to cede control.
"The parties have put state interests above those of their own," the prime minister said as the deal was announced. 
Parliament will now have to work day and night to appoint the government before the legal deadline of midnight Tuesday.
Commenting on the weekend's developments, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Serbia's journey to EU membership could "resume immediately", if the government proved to be "pro-reform and pro-European". 
Talks with the EU were suspended a year ago after Belgrade authorities failed to extradite indicted General Ratko Mladic to the Hague-based tribunal.
