06/12/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 06/12/04
Albania's agriculture sector will soon be assisted by a specialised bank that will give farmers loans in order to improve their working conditions, according to Finance Minister Arben Malaj. 
Authorities, he says, are preparing to transform the Mountain Areas Financial Fund (MAFF) into the National Rural Bank.
"The Albanian government continues to place a priority on drafting strategies for the agriculture sector and on financing and supporting this sector," Malaj says.
Plans for the transformation were presented during an October conference on rural development, attended by representatives of the government, the business community and the Dutch consultancy firm RIAS, which has drafted a strategy for helping these areas. 
A final version is currently in preparation.
The MAFF is a foundation established by the Albanian government in 2000 in order to enable microfinancing of rural and mountain areas. 
It has taken on some of the activities formerly covered by the Albanian Savings and Credit Union (ASCU), which has been financing rural development for more than a decade -- with considerable success, according to ASCU Executive Director Zana Konini.
The new bank will represent the latest phase in Albania's long-term efforts to alleviate rural poverty and provide support for the transition from a centralised economy to private agriculture. 
In September 1992, the Rural Credit Programme was established as a joint initiative of the Albanian government and the World Bank. 
By the end of 1999, a system of village credit funds covered 238 villages in 11 districts throughout the country. 
More than 20,000 individual loans were disbursed and fully repaid -- though the situation was made difficult by high inflation, pyramid schemes that took people's savings, and a lack of bank services for people in rural areas.
The overall aim has been to support the development of Albanian farms through financing and investments and also by creating civil structures in villages, which have the capacity to manage the credit system and other development projects.
Known for producing wheat, corn, potatoes, vegetables, fruit, sugar beets, grapes, meat, dairy products and tobacco, Albania exports mainly to Germany, Greece and Italy. 
With a climate that favours growing agricultural products around the year, the potential exists for boosting exports to other European countries where the price of organic products is high, the experts say. 
Realising that potential, however, will require investments for building new greenhouses, creating distribution networks and improving marketing methods.
Experts agree that an agricultural bank is vital for the long-term future of the sector. 
Albania has been without such an institution since the liquidation of the National Agricultural Bank seven years ago due to inefficiency and non-performing loans. 
The majority of Albania's population inhabits rural areas, with half obtaining their income from agriculture, livestock and forestry. 
According to OXFAM, an organisation dedicated to finding lasting solutions to poverty around the world, lack of investment is one of the key factors holding back the country's agricultural sector. 
Other factors include high costs, low production and weak infrastructure.
Out of 440,000 farms in Albania, nearly 20 per cent don't produce enough to cover their needs, 65 per cent can cover their needs and generate some profits, and 15 per cent are able to produce for the market's needs, according to official statistics. 
Small farms that are struggling to survive tend to be concentrated in the mountainous areas, where the environmental conditions are far from ideal. 
The farmers who produce for the market are mainly from areas close to the coast.
OXFAM is working to raise awareness of the need to do more to boost the sector. 
During the past several months, it has organised meetings with farmers who work in poor conditions and cannot sell their products in the big cities, due to lack of transportation. 
The sessions are intended to demonstrate better ways of organising production and meeting consumer needs. 
In addition, OXFAM has conducted fairs aimed at giving farmers more opportunity to make contact with consumers.
Last year, agriculture accounted for about 28 per cent of the country's GDP. 
According to the Bank of Albania (BoA), profits from the agricultural sector during 2003 reached 1.4 billion euros, while 5.6m euros were given as loans. 
According to the BoA, the loans for 2003 increased by 25 per cent compared to a year ago, but still covered only 1 per cent of the total loans provided for all sectors.
