16/03/2007
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 16/03/07
Collaboration between the government and opposition, and above all stability, are the main tasks Albanian politicians should focus on as the country moves towards EU integration. 
That was the message EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn brought as he visited Tirana for talks Thursday (March 15th).
"The presidential elections in June will be a chance for Albania's politicians to show their own citizens -- and the EU -- that they can work together in the public interest, Rehn said during his meeting with Prime Minister Sali Berisha. 
His remarks came as the ruling coalition and the Socialist-led opposition wrangle over who should succeed incumbent head of state Alfred Moisiu.
Berisha said his administration was open to "every contribution" from the opposition, but could not go along with its demands regarding a presidential candidate.
"We support a consensual president, but we don't accept imposition," he said.
During his visit, Rehn also stressed the need to speed up reforms, especially those related to economic growth and the fight against corruption and organised crime.
He reiterated his concerns about the last month's local elections, backing the assessment given by ODIR/OSCE monitors. 
"I'm afraid these elections will not enter in the history books as the best example," he told journalists. 
The vote demonstrated that political leaders "still need to improve the way they co-operate", he added.
Meeting with the commissioner, President Moisiu supported his call for compromise. 
Common efforts, he said, are needed especially in the areas of electoral reforms and the provision of new ID cards.
"The fundamental condition in order to achieve positive results remains the consensus between the majority and the opposition," Moisiu said.
Rehn also spoke with Socialist Party head Edi Rama and Ilir Meta, leader of the Socialist Party for Integration. 
Meta blamed Berisha for the lack of consensus.
"The EU expects consensus. 
Therefore, Berisha needs to reflect, especially after the last elections, with their problems," he said.
Rama, meanwhile, appeared this week to be extending an olive branch to the government, offering a compromise package of reforms in a bid to avoid early elections.
"If the majority has the will for another alternative -- one that includes a pact between all political forces in the country -- we Socialists see this alternative as a priority compared to sending the country to early elections," Rama said.
The reform package covers electoral changes and other areas, such as the justice system, decentralisation and public administration.
Rama also offered his party's support for Moisiu, should the latter decide to run for a second term. 
While the incumbent has not yet declared his intentions, most analysts think he is unlikely to seek a new mandate, due to his age.
