13/12/2006
(BBC, The Times, The Christian Science Monitor, Mosnews - 13/12/06;
AP, Reuters, FT, DPA, CNN, VOA - 12/12/06)
Interpol has joined the investigation into the death of former Russian intelligence agent Alexander Litvinenko, who died of radiation poisoning in London last month, news agencies reported on Tuesday (December 12th).
"Co-operation through Interpol channels already has started, as several countries are involved in this case," said Timur Lakhonin, the head of the largest international police organisation's office in Russia.
The 168-nation, French-based Interpol reportedly was asked to help co-ordinate the probe into Litvinenko's killing and is expected to ensure a speedier flow of information between police in Britain, Russia and Germany, where separate inquiries already have been launched.
Litvinenko died at the University College Hospital in London on November 23rd.
The following day, British officials cited the highly toxic radioactive isotope polonium 210 as the cause of death.
Litvinenko, who fled to London in 2000, fell ill on November 1st, hours after he had tea with KGB officer-turned-businessman Andrei Lugovoi and another Russian businessman, Dmitry Kovtun, at the Millennium Hotel's Pine Bar in the British capital.
The former Russian spy is said to have met with another former KGB agent, Vyacheslav Sokolenko, the same day, and likely at the same hotel.
Hours before Litvinenko fell ill, Evgeny Limarev -- a man said to be close to self-exiled Russian tycoon and Kremlin foe Boris Berezovsky, who lives in Britain -- reportedly told the former Russian agent that he was on a hit list drawn up by a team of other former agents working across Europe.
In a statement he dictated in the final days of his life and read following his death, Litvinenko accused Russian President Vladimir Putin of ordering his murder.
Lugovoi, Kotvun and Sokolenko have all denied involvement.
British authorities launched an investigation and by the end of November traces of polonium 210 radiation turned up in a dozen places, including the Millennium Hotel, the British Embassy in Moscow and two British Airways planes that flew Lugovoi between London and Moscow on October 25th and 31st.
Traces of the radioactive element also were found at the Itsu sushi bar in London, where Litvinenko met Italian security expert Mario Scaramella on November 1st and at the Emirates Stadium, where Sokolenko attended an Arsenal match.
Nine Scotland Yard detectives are in Russia to question people who met Litvinenko and Russian prosecutors are said to be preparing to visit London to conduct interviews.
Lugovoi and Kotvun are currently in a sealed-off clinic in Moscow, where they are undergoing radiation checks.
Both reportedly have been questioned there by Russian officials, in the presence of the Scotland Yard detectives.
"I gave testimony exclusively as a witness," Russian ITAR-Tass news agency quoted Lugovoi as saying after his interrogation on Monday.
"They made no charges against me."
Kovtun, who according to the Russian Prosecutor General's office had been diagnosed with radiation poisoning, was in stable condition and "feeling normal," Lugovoi also said.
The results of his own medical tests are expected later this week, but he does not plan to reveal them.
Meanwhile, German authorities have found traces of polonium 210 in several locations visited by Kovtun -- the flat of his ex-wife, in a car he used, and at his mother-in-law's home.
The Russian businessman spent about four days in Hamburg and arrived in London a few hours before the November 1st meeting with Litvinenko.
According to the AP, prosecutors in Hamburg are investigating whether Kovtun may have illegally handled the radioactive material, which they believe was smuggled from Russia through Germany to Britain.
Limarev reportedly has disappeared from his home in the French Alps and has not been seen since Friday.
