15/03/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 15/03/07
On March 5th, the Romanian company Cuprom became the new owner of Serbia's largest copper mines, having purchased the RTB Bor complex for a price of 303m euros -- the largest privatisation deal of 2007.
Cuprom will invest an additional 137m euros in the company, while the Serbian government plans to pump in 60m euros to repair damage at the facilities, as well as another 60m euros for new, environmentally friendly equipment.
If solving the pollution problem requires more than that amount, the Romanian company is contractually obliged to absorb the cost.
"The purchase of the Bor copper mines is one of the biggest transactions in the Balkans, and with our Romanian capacities we will create an important participant in the European copper industry," Cuprom managing board director Horia Simu said.
"The Serbian government has been given the highest possible price and it made a good move in deciding to sell Bor at a time when the price of copper is at its highest."
Serbian Minister of Economy Predrag Bubalo said World Bank experts had proposed that the copper mines be shut down, but the government instead decided to give them a chance on the market.
However, the sale has generated controversy.
Zoran Drakulic, owner of second-place bidder East Point Holdings, says his firm is considering an appeal.
He claims the Serbian government may have eased some of the conditions in the tender to unfairly benefit Cuprom.
Bor Mayor Branislav Rankic, a member of the ultra nationalist Serbian Radical Party, accused the government of selling the mines at an unrealistically low price.
Company management also opposed the Romanian firm's bid.
After the January general election, the Serbian government announced that it would halt privatisations until the formation of a new government.
The Bor sale was brought to a close, however, because the procedure started before the election.
The government hopes that privatising the mines will spur an economic revival in Bor, one of Serbia's poorest towns.
Cuprom has pledged not to dismiss any of the current 4,500 workers over the next three years.
Personnel cut after that will receive 400 euros severance pay for each year spent with the company.
