13/12/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 13/12/06
The New York Times newspaper has included Albania on its list of main holiday destinations for 2007.
Albania -- especially the southern part of the country -- is described as the cheapest tourist destination in this section of the list.
The author writes that in past years, Albania has proven not only attractive for tourists, but also affordable.
"Albania has made enormous strides in democracy and development -- and revealed itself to be not only ripe for tourists, but affordable to boot.
The capital, Tirana, with its brightly painted apartment buildings and with an Italian cafe culture, is a fantastic starting point, especially since it's hard to spend more than $15 a person at the city's nicest restaurants," the review says.
"But it's the southern part of this Balkan country that holds the most intriguing sights and bargains."
The article mentions the southern town of Gjirokastra -- the birthplace of former dictator Enver Hoxha and of writer Ismail Kadare.
"Gjirokastra is built on slippery, cobblestoned hills so steep they seem to defy human habitation, yet the town of stately slate-roofed Ottoman houses bustles." Notable sites include the Ethnographic Museum and the Ali Pasha Fortress -- built in the 19th century.
The newspaper continues with the journey in Sarande, mentioning the hotels near the seaside that include a wonderful view and cost 30 euros per night.
The paper urges tourists to head for the beaches.
"The pebbly beach in the centre of Sarande may not be too exciting, but there are white sand stretches nearby, including the popular beach at Ksamili, 10 miles to the south.
And if you're hankering for a taste of classical Europe, the Greek island of Corfu is a quick hydrofoil ride away," the Times writes.
Southern Albania's greatest treasure, however, is Butrint, a 2,500-year-old city, about 11 square miles, the paper says.
"It's the kind of place where history is still waiting to be discovered."
Situated on a hilly, forest-shrouded promontory south of Sarande, near the Greek border, Butrint -- a UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation World Heritage Site -- was first excavated by Italians in the 1920s, who unearthed an amphitheater and Greek-built walls.
Archaeologists later discovered early Christian basilicas, a baptistery and as many as eight bathhouses.
Like Albania itself, this lost city harbors untold treasures for the intrepid -- and at a price that just about anyone can afford, according to the Times.
The country offers a wealth of attractions, including sandy white Mediterranean beaches, rocky mountains, fertile plains, lakes, natural monuments, and remote, pristine areas.
Ruins and archaeological treasures reflect a rich history dating back to the Illyrians.
