12/12/2006
(AFP, Reuters, DPA, FT, AP, EUROPA, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik, Mediapool - 11/12/06)
EU veterinary experts approved new measures Monday (December 11th), tightening the rules for Bulgarian milk and meat exports as of January 1st, when the Balkan nation will join the Union, along with Romania.
Only those Bulgarian companies already licensed to export milk and meat products to the EU will continue to have access to the bloc's market, the European Commission (EC) said in a statement, announcing the new arrangements. 
According to Bulgarian press reports, this totals around 60 milk and meat processing companies.
"A recent inspection visit to Bulgaria by the Food and Veterinary Office (FVO) found that certain meat and milk establishments still did not meet the necessary EU food safety standards," the EC statement explained. 
"Therefore, as for other acceding states, a transitional period will be given to Bulgaria to upgrade its establishments to the proper standards. 
This transitional period will also give the authorities the opportunity to improve the traceability systems for products of animal origin."
According to EU Consumer Protection Commissioner Markos Kyprianou's spokesman, Philip Tod, the transitional period will last one year. 
Meanwhile, FVO experts will continue their inspections and review of Bulgarian companies, so if others, besides those already licensed, are found to be meeting the appropriate standards, they also will be allowed to send their products to other EU nations.
"Companies which are already exporting milk and beef are not affected," Reuters quoted Tod as saying on Monday. 
"But the 359 meat and 391 milk establishments due to start exporting from January 1st will have to endure further investigations on a case by case basis before being allowed to export to the EU."
The companies that do not meet the requirements will be permitted to serve the domestic market only.
A similar measure, giving nearly 400 Romanian meat, poultry, fish and dairy establishments until the end of 2009 to complete structural changes required under EU hygiene legislation, was adopted a month ago.
Meanwhile, a separate decision adopted by the EU veterinary experts on Monday imposed additional 12-month restrictions concerning animal products introduced into Bulgaria and Romania from third countries before January 1st.
The experts agreed that such "non-compliant products" should only be sold on Bulgaria and Romania's domestic markets after the two countries join the EU. 
In addition, those Bulgarian and Romanian companies already authorised to export their products to other EU countries after January 1st "may not process the non-compliant imported products in question," the EC statement said, noting that all such products must be used up or removed from the market by the end of 2007.
The new measures were adopted a day before an important meeting between EU and Russian officials and in the wake of a recent threat by Moscow to ban all meat imports from the Union following Bulgaria and Romania's entry, citing poor livestock health standards in the two Balkan countries. 
Russia has already moved to ban Polish meat imports.
"Since the EU cannot ensure the safety of meat imported by Russia once Bulgaria and Romania join in 2007, we have decided to hold talks with representatives of veterinary services from each EU member state," Sergei Dankvert, head of the Russian animal and plant health watchdog group, Rosselkhoznadzor, was quoted by the Russian news agency Interfax as saying.
Brussels hopes that the new measures will help avert a crisis with Russia, whose imports of animal products from the EU reportedly are worth around 1.7 billion euros.
