14/03/2007
(Reuters, Sofia News Agency, BNR, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Vseki Den, Sofia Echo, Mediafax - 13/03/07;
AFP, Reuters - 11/03/07;
UPI - 08/03/07;
Reuters - 07/03/07)
Even if their death sentences are cancelled, five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor convicted of deliberately infecting 426 Libyan children with HIV might have to serve another three years in prison, the nurses' lawyer said on Tuesday (March 13th).
In late January, the six medics, who have been imprisoned in Libya since 1999, were charged with slandering Libyan officials by claiming they had been tortured.
"If the court finds them guilty of defamation and sentences them to the highest punishment of three years in prison they will have to serve that time," the Bulgarian national radio (BNR) quoted the nurses' defence lawyer, Othman Bizanti, as saying Tuesday.
"The court will not take into account the fact that they have already spent eight years behind bars."
Bizanti also noted that the trial could drag on if the number of claimants keeps growing.
Libyan police officer Juma Mishri and medical doctor Abdulmajid Alshoul brought the slander charges against Bulgarian nurses Kristiana Vulcheva, Nasya Nenova, Valentina Siropulo, Valya Chervenyashka and Snezhana Dimitrova, and Palestinian doctor Ashraf Ahmad Juma shortly after Sofia said it would initiate a lawsuit against the medics' 11 alleged torturers.
On Sunday, police officer Osama Awedan joined the other two claimants, who insist the accusations against them are false.
During the first trial hearing on February 26th, the six medical professionals denied that they had defamed the Libyan officials, maintaining that they were tortured in prison.
"I have proof of torture," Bizanti said in court, without elaborating.
Bulgarian officials have described the slander trial case as cynical.
Addressing Mishri and Alshoul during the February hearing, the Palestinian physician said they ought to be "ashamed" of the crimes they committed against him and the Bulgarian nurses.
"You tortured us and now you are prosecuting us."
On Sunday, the Libyan court gave the health workers two more weeks to prepare their defence against the charges.
At Bizanti's request, the trial was adjourned until March 25th.
The claimants have asked for compensation equalling more than 10m euros.
Libya has also demanded that each of the families of the 426 infected children be paid 10m euros, as "blood money".
Under Islamic law, such a payment would allow the victims' relatives to pardon the nurses.
Senior Libyan officials have also indicated that Tripoli is not planning to carry out the death sentences handed down to the defendants.
Maintaining their innocence, the health workers have insisted that their confessions were extorted by beatings with barbed wire, electric shock and sexual assault.
Libya has been criticised by international rights watchdogs and others for ignoring scientific evidence showing that the outbreak of the HIV infection at the Al-Fateh Hospital in Benghazi predated the defendants' 1998 arrival by at least a year.
Leading AIDS experts, including France's Luc Montagnier, one of the co-discoverers of the HIV virus, say the widespread infection was caused by poor hygiene.
The trial was neither fair nor impartial, Bulgarian and foreign experts say, suggesting the medics were being scapegoated for the unsanitary hospital conditions.
Bizanti said on Tuesday he expects the medics' appeal against the death sentences before Libya's Supreme Court to open at the end of April or in early May.
