11/05/2007
(BBC, Christian Science Monitor, Irish Times - 11/05/07;
AP, AFP, Reuters, AKI, Beta, B92, Council of Europe - 10/05/07;
New York Times, Council of Europe - 09/05/07;
Human Rights Watch - 07/05/07)
The parties of Serbia's democratic bloc have agreed on forming a new government, and are also ready to remove a controversial ultranationalist politician from the post of parliament speaker, according to reports Friday (May 11th).
Velimir Ilic, leader of the New Serbia (NS) party, told reporters that the Democratic Party of Serbia-NS coalition, the Democratic Party and G-17 have finally struck a deal, well over three months since elections were held.
"All misunderstandings within the democratic bloc have been removed," he said, although he did not provide details on the composition of the new cabinet.
Parliament Speaker Tomislav Nikolic confirmed the agreement, and said MPs would most likely convene on Saturday to vote on the new cabinet.
He also said the democratic parties have agreed to remove him as speaker, adding that he would resign instead.
Nikolic's election as speaker provoked alarm internationally.
He belongs to the Serbian Radical Party, whose leader, Vojislav Seselj, is being tried before the UN war crimes tribunal.
Nikolic opposes co-operation with the tribunal.
More broadly, he opposes Serbia's integration into the EU and NATO, proposing instead that the country align itself with Moscow.
A day after assuming his post, Nikolic suggested Russia would form a new bloc "bringing together nations that will stand up against the hegemony of America and of the EU".
Nikolic's election, along with the protracted delays in forming a new government, have raised doubts about whether Serbia is an appropriate choice for president of the Council of Europe (CoE), even as the country assumed the rotating position on Friday.
"In a crucial moment when Serbia needs more than ever to strengthen its co-operation with such institutions to stake its future on democracy, the defence of human rights and the rule of law, the words of the new speaker sound as a worrying echo of a turbulent past," the president of the CoE parliamentary election, Rene van der Linden, said in a statement.
"Mr Nikolic's election is a burden on Serbia's ability to carry out its task."
Having Serbia in the CoE chair risks undercutting the organisation's credibility and "certainly suggests abandoning the people who were victims of the [Srebrenica] genocide," the New York Times quoted Human Rights Watch director Richard Dicker as saying earlier this week.
"To demonstrate that impunity for war crimes is unacceptable, European leaders should require Serbia to immediately arrest and turn over the remaining fugitives," he added.
"If Serbia wants to join the EU, they should have democratic, modern, pro-European government that fully shares our values," European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said on Thursday in Zagreb, urging the country's reformist parties to pursue efforts to form a new government.
