13/04/2007
(AP, Reuters, Deutsche Welle, Beta, B92, Serbian Government - 12/04/07;
Beta - 11/04/07)
The Serbian government lodged a protest with Germany on Thursday (April 12th) over remarks on Kosovo made by the country's ambassador to Belgrade a day earlier.
"The Serbian government decided at its session today to send a most severe protest to the German government because of the statements of German Ambassador to Belgrade Andreas Zobel in which he most impertinently meddles in Serbia's internal affairs," the government said in a statement.
Speaking at a meeting of the Forum for International Relations of the European Movement in Serbia on Wednesday, the German envoy said that the Kosovo status issue should be resolved as soon as possible in line with UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's proposal.
The plan recommends that Kosovo be granted internationally supervised independence.
While accepted by the Kosovo Albanians, Ahtisaari's proposal has been rejected by Serbia.
Insisting that Kosovo is an integral part of their country's territory, the Serbian leaders have been maintaining that all they can agree to is substantial autonomy.
''Instead of insisting on the borders of Kosovo being part of the borders of Serbia, it would be better to work on getting Serbia and Kosovo into the European Union in 20 to 25 years,'' Belgrade-based Radio B92 quoted Zobel as saying Wednesday.
"Ambassador Zobel has in many ways brought up the issue of Serbia's territorial integrity and sovereignty, as well as the issue of the inviolability of its internationally recognised borders," the Serbian government noted in its statement.
Accusing the German envoy of showing "disrespect for the dignity of state institutions in this country," Belgrade urged Berlin to clarify if his statement reflected Germany's official position.
In a formal complaint sent to the German foreign ministry on Thursday, Serbian President Boris Tadic has called on Chancellor Angela Merkel's government to officially distance itself from Zobel's remarks, Belgrade-based news agency Beta reported.
Meanwhile, at a special press conference on Thursday, the German ambassador apologised for making "possibly unclear remarks", saying his words might have been misinterpreted.
His statement, he stressed, reflected only his personal views and not the official German or EU stances on the matter.
A special statement issued by the German embassy on Thursday explained that Zobel was asked "whether he was worried about possible instability in Vojvodina and other parts of Serbia".
Noting that EU integration was the best guarantee for the country's stability, the ambassador cautioned about the dangers of evoking ''historic claims and parallels," the statement said.
It also sought to clarify interpretations of the envoy's remarks regarding Serbia's political leadership.
"Ambassador Zobel did not generalise that Serbia needed a better political elite, instead he warned that, in his opinion, Serbia's political leadership needed to take on the responsibility to form a new government as soon as possible."
