12/03/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 12/03/07
In what is being hailed as a breakthrough move, Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski met with opposition leader Ali Ahmeti last week, following an almost two-month political crisis.
The Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) left Parliament in January because of the assembly's non-compliance with the Badinter principle in decision-making.
Under the principle, at least two-thirds of the members of Macedonian minorities in parliament should vote in decisions affecting minorities.
The absence of the DUI, and the lack of political dialogue, created a climate of exclusivity and affected the ability to adopt laws necessary for reforms required for EU and NATO membership.
Prior to the meeting, the United States, NATO and the EU encouraged the opposition and ruling parties to sit down and discuss the problems.
After a long exchange of letters, the dialogue was resumed.
Gruevski, Ahmeti and their respective teams discussed political issues for more than six hours.
Ahmeti set a list of conditions, including a constitutional amendment under which the government would be elected under the Badinter principle, and the adoption of laws to solve the status and social problems of former National Liberation Army members.
Gruevski, however, rejected the two proposals.
He said that would mean a change in the state arrangement of Macedonia.
"There is no example in the world of such a way of government formation," the prime minister said.
He encouraged the DUI to return to politics and asked for support for government projects on compulsory secondary education, laws on the public prosecutor and information society, the parliamentary rulebook and constitutional amendments.
The meeting did result in an agreement on drafting a list of laws that would be adopted under the Badinter principle.
A task group, consisting of representatives of the two parties, will be formed to submit a proposed list, which will become a component of the parliamentary rulebook.
A member of the DUI team, Agron Buxhaku, said exclusivity is no model for dialogue.
He said the task groups should discuss all the issues, because without compromise, there cannot be further dialogue.
Foreign embassies' representatives attended the meeting, a precondition set by the DUI, despite initial opposition from Gruevski.
Following the meeting, the US embassy and the EU, NATO and OSCE missions issued a joint press release, saying it was an exceptionally important step towards confidence building among parties.
"We encourage all the parties to continue … in these efforts and work in the spirit of reaching a consensus.
It is essential for continuation of the reform process in both the parliament and state institutions," the statement said.
However, DUI said it would wait to see "concrete results" before returning to Parliament.
