12/04/2007
(Reuters, AP, DPA, BBC - 11/04/07)
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) central government stripped more than 360 people of their Bosnian citizenship on Wednesday (April 11th) as part of its fight against terrorism.
Most of those affected by the decision are former foreign soldiers who fought on the side of the Bosnian Muslim forces during the 1992-1995 conflict. 
They were naturalised during and in the wake of the fighting.
"Of the 367 who were stripped of Bosnian citizenship, most come from Turkey, Egypt, Algeria, Syria, Tunisia, Sudan and Russia," Reuters quoted Justice Minister Barisa Colak as saying at a news conference in Sarajevo on Wednesday.
According to the German news agency DPA, the group included 72 people from Turkey, 31 from Egypt, 30 from Algeria, 21 from Syria, 27 from Tunisia, 23 from Sudan and 20 from Russia.
Those whose citizenship was revoked can appeal within 60 days, after which the "authorities are obliged to deport them if they are found on Bosnian territory", said Colak.
In addition, the state prosecutor will be informed about the cases, so as to decide whether an investigation needs to be opened against individuals or institutions involved in them.
More than 11,000 people are believed to have received Bosnian citizenship between 1992 and 1995, including through the country's embassies. 
Following the end of the conflict, most of the foreign fighters who decided to stay married local women. 
Many are said to be preaching a stricter form of Islam than the more moderate one typically practiced by Bosniaks.
In the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United States, BiH came under criticism for granting citizenship to individuals allegedly linked to international terror networks. 
In response, a special commission was established to review the cases of citizenship granted to foreigners between 1992 and 2006. 
Its decisions are subject to government approval.
In January, commission head Vjekoslav Vukovic reported that of the around 900 cases reviewed over a seven-month period, the panel decided that the citizenship of 330 individuals should be revoked. 
Another 500 cases require investigation, he said, asking for an extension of the panel's mandate, which was set to expire in February.
Colak said on Wednesday that the government has decided to extend that mandate for another year.
Back in early September, Vukovic said that 120 individuals had been stripped of their citizenship and that around 1,500 cases were being scrutinised by his commission.
He also confirmed that some of those who came to BiH to fight were individuals on the UN blacklist for suspected links to al-Qaeda.
