12/01/2007
(AFP, AP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, Bloomberg, The Times, VOA, ANA-MPA - 12/01/07)
A powerful explosion rocked the US embassy in Athens several hours before the start of business Friday (January 12th).
The attack, described as the most serious against the US mission in nearly 11 years, is being attributed to a left-wing group calling itself Revolutionary Struggle.
"A self-propelled explosive was fired at 5:58 am (0358 GMT) from the surrounding area, causing minor damage to the front windows and the roof," the Public Order Ministry said in a statement.
Revolutionary Struggle is believed to have been behind a series of other assaults, including the attempted murder of Greek Culture Minister George Voulgarakis last May and a bomb at the Economy Ministry in late 2005.
It has become Greece's most serious domestic threat since the now-defunct November 17th terror group, which killed scores of people over a two-decade period before being uncovered and broken up.
November 17th victims included several US officers, other foreign diplomats, and the husband of Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis.
Confirming that no one had been hurt in the "very serious attack" Friday morning, US Ambassador to Greece Charles Ries said there could be "no justification for such a senseless act of violence".
Covering an entire city block in downtown Athens and surrounded by a steel fence, the US embassy compound is one of the most heavily guarded in the capital.
Initial reports said the rocket struck the embassy near its central entrance and exploded inside the toilets on the third floor, where the ambassador's office is also situated.
Police said one or two windows had been shattered and the sign outside the mission had been damaged.
The explosion also smashed glass in nearby buildings.
Shortly after the attack, dozens of police cars cordoned off the area surrounding the embassy compound, blocking access to all entrances and exits.
An AP report said the authorities were searching a nearby hospital and apartment buildings for clues.
Bakoyannis visited the embassy Friday morning and condemned the attack.
"Incidents such as these have cost [Greece] a great deal politically, economically and in terms of prestige," the foreign minister said.
"The Greek government is determined to make every effort, as it has achieved in the past, so that such incidents are not permitted to occur again."
In February 1996, the embassy was the target of a similar rocket attack, which caused minor damage to three diplomatic vehicles and several of the surrounding buildings.
