11/12/2006
By Blerta Foniqi–Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 11/12/06
Kosovo's Albanians -- the province's majority population -- differ in their views of what the final status of Kosovo will be. 
Some feel certain that Kosovo will soon become an internationally recognised sovereign state, while others are not sure how or when this will happen. 
However, all agree on one thing: the province cannot remain under Serbian authority.
"I don't know what kind of independence there will be, but I am sure that Kosovo is on a good track," University of Pristina economics student Afrim Kabashi says, adding that unity among Kosovo's leaders is crucial. 
"I am not saying that they aren't united, but they should be closer to each other," he says.
A fellow student, Ard Matoshi, urges Kosovo's people to be patient as the status issue is resolved. 
"I am angry with the delay of the process, but when I remember what kind of progress has been achieved during past years in Kosovo, I think we don't have a reason to be pessimistic and intolerant," Matoshi says.
According to Zijadin Gashi, a journalist with the daily newspaper Zeri, the public is alarmed by the apparent hesistancy and disagreement among Contact Group members. 
These delays are "the main factor that is creating suspicions and turmoil",Gashi believes, adding however that the long-term picture provides reason for optimism. 
"Kosovo is oriented towards the EU. 
I think that over the next several years, we will fulfil all the criteria for being a member of the Union," he says.
Burim Ramadani, of the University of Pristina, thinks there can only be one outcome of the status process, despite the delays. 
"We are at the end of a quite long process of negotiations and transition. 
I think that the status settlement is going to be fully based on the people's political will -- no doubt, everyone knows this will is for Kosovo independence," he says.
Ramadani is confident that Kosovo will be a "consociation state" -- with the minority communities granted the necessary rights to represent their interests and their goals. 
"As consociation theory says, a large scale of decentralisation, community rights, constitutional design and the electoral system will guarantee that minorities, in particular Kosovo Serbs, will have power within the political structure of Kosovo."
However, status will not solve all of the province's long-term challenges. 
"Kosovars are going to have to face real problems," Ramadani said. 
"The large level of corruption could be the most dangerous thing in post-status Kosovo, as well as organised crime."
Bekim Ukaj, a law student, believes democratic institutions, a good justice system and economic growth are the keys to a brighter future for Kosovo. 
"These are necessary parameters for a well-functioning state," he says.
Some -- particularly the unemployed -- are sceptical that things will change for the better. 
Since 1999, says Smajl Sinani, he has been hearing pledges of independence and economic development. 
"The leaders promised us that we will have enough work places and the integration process will help to work not only in Kosovo, but also abroad," Sinani says.
His wife wants their family to leave and work outside the province. 
"I will work anywhere -- we have five children, who many times have had nothing to eat," she says.
Kosovo is a province in southern Serbia which has been under UN administration since 1999. 
While Serbia's nominal sovereignty is recognized by the international community, in practice Serbian governance in the province is virtually non-existent. 
The province is governed by UNMIK and the local Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, with security provided by the NATO-led Kosovo Force (KFOR).
Kosovo Serbs have mixed feelings about their future
