12/04/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 12/04/07
Former Prime Minister Fatos Nano announced on April 5th that he would run for president. 
Citing the tense political climate, he described himself as the candidate best able to restore harmony.
"In line with my concept that the country needs no more artificial crises which are provoked by the lack of consensus, and with the aim of putting an end to 'conflict politics', I think that I am the best candidate for head of state," Nano said.
It is the second time he has sought the presidency. 
A bid five years ago foundered, even though the then-ruling left-wing coalition had the votes to elect him. 
Amid international calls for a consensus candidate, the Socialists and the Democratic Party settled on Alfred Moisiu.
Now, more than a year and a half since stepping down as Socialist Party leader, Nano wants to try again.
The ruling party must allow the opposition to choose the next head of state, he said, or the country will likely face early elections.
"If there was a situation where the risk of early elections becomes real, that would be the one when the president is elected from the ruling party," he said. 
"Any presidential candidacy from the ruling parties would be cause for a crisis and a cause for early elections."
The Democratic Party has already nominated Bamir Topi to run for the post. 
"The majority has decided on its own candidate," Prime Minister Sali Berisha told reporters. 
"An open process will take place in the Parliament. 
The candidate with the most votes will be the next president of Albania," he said.
However, the prime minister only has support from 80 out of the total 140 MPs in Parliament, a figure that falls short of the 3/5ths majority required to pass certain laws and to select a president.
Nano now faces the challenge of rallying Socialist support behind his candidacy. 
A political rival, Tirana Mayor Edi Rama, now leads the party. 
Nano retains influence over one faction, however, and has suggested he could take his supporters out of the Socialist Party and form a new political grouping.
In a television interview with Klan TV, he lashed out at Rama, who he accused of "destroying the party and minimising its democracy".
At the same time, Nano has had words of praise for Berisha, his longtime rival, saying "he has been transformed during the past two years."
On January 11th, Nano and Berisha met and issued a mutual declaration urging the political parties to break their deadlock and pass needed changes to the electoral code. 
Many political analysts speculate that the ruling majority may be prepared to back Nano for president, although for the time being Topi remains the official candidate of the right.
