12/03/2007
(Blic, Beta, B92 -- 11/03/07 - 12/03/07)
Serbia's democratic forces paid tribute Monday (March 12th) to late Prime Minister and Democratic Party (DS) leader Zoran Djindjic, who was assassinated four years ago.
A pro-Western reformist, who played a key role in toppling Slobodan Milosevic and handing him over to the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Djindjic headed Serbia's first non-communist government in January 2001.
His mandate ended abruptly on March 12th, 2003, when he was gunned down outside the main government building in downtown Belgrade by nationalists, loyal to the former regime.
They were enraged by Djindjic's moves to extradite war criminals to The Hague and the crackdown on organised crime he initiated.
Members of the DS, now led by President Boris Tadic, visited Djindjic's grave to mark the somber anniversary.
The party also held an oration competition on the topic "If we should fail today, we have only ourselves to blame," Belgrade-based Radio B92 reported.
Dragoljub Micunovic, a senior DS member described as Djindjic's political mentor, said Djindjic had learned to appreciate time when it came to making decisions.
"In a slow and sluggish country, such as Serbia, it was very difficult to change the concept of time," Radio B92 quoted Micunovic as saying.
"Therefore, Djindjic tried to make a government out of younger people enriched with Western experience, who also learnt the value of it.
I believe that Djindjic's vision of Serbia's spirit is still far from being dominant in our political and social setting."
Former members of Djindjic's cabinet laid wreaths at the site where he was fatally shot four years ago, as did outgoing Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and his ministers earlier in the day.
The assassination sent a wave of shock and dismay through Serbia and beyond, and was condemned by governments the world over.
In the aftermath of his assassination, the Serbian government issued a statement, blaming a Belgrade-based organised crime group known as the Zemun Clan for killing Djindjic, describing it as an attempt "to halt the fight against organised crime".
A state of emergency was immediately imposed and hundreds of people were arrested during the 45-day police crackdown on organised crime.
The trial against the alleged perpetrators and masterminds of Djindjic's assassination opened in December 2003 and continues.
Some of the key suspects are Milorad "Legija" Ulemek, who previously headed a special Serbian police unit -- known as the Red Berets -- that fought in the Balkan conflicts, and Dejan "Bagzi" Milenkovic, a senior member of the Zemun Clan.
"If someone thinks the law and the reforms can be stopped by eliminating me, then that is a huge delusion," Djindjic said weeks before he was killed, following an apparent attempt on his life in which Milenkovic was reportedly involved.
Serbian media quoted Djindjic's widow, Ruzica, as voicing hope Monday that her husband's assassins receive the harshest punishment the law allows.
