10/05/2007
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 10/05/07
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Mostar Peace Connection, an annual international peace award, was presented to former South African President Nelson Mandela last month.
The BiH embassy in South Africa delivered the award to Mandela in Pretoria, in accordance with protocol.
The Centre for Peace and Multiethnic Co-operation in Mostar is a non-profit NGO that was established to investigate and document important events in the history of Mostar and Herzegovina from 1990 to 2004. 
It is headed by Safet Orucevic, mayor of Mostar from 1994 to 2001.
The award is given every year in conjunction with the anniversary of the reconstruction of Mostar's Old Bridge. 
It honours people from different walks of life -- including social and cultural workers, politicians, writers, publicists -- who havecontributed to peace and multiethnic co-operation.
Former Czech Republic President Vaclav Havel received the award in 2004 and Austrian Foreign Minister Alois Mock was the recipient in 2005.
In a letter marking the award presentation, BiH presidency member Haris Silajdzic said that although Mostar's Old Bridge has been rebuilt, the healing of souls in the city needs more time, patience and effort.
"This is where we need your support, encouragement and presence," wrote Silajdzic. 
"The authority of power and wealth is bountiful in today's world, but power of moral authority is the privilege of only a few. 
You, Mr. 
President, carry this authority more than anyone else, and that is what inspired the Centre for Peace and Multiethnic Co-operation in Mostar to offer you the award."
Mandela, whose imprisonment from 1962 to 1990 symbolised South Africa's fight against racism, thanked the citizens of BiH. 
He said that while South Africa is far from BiH, both countries' people are united in the global struggle for peace.
"Although I have received many awards for my contribution to world peace, I was pleasantly surprised when I heard that people from your country decided to present me with this honour," wrote Mandela. 
"I am truly delighted if I inspired in any way the Bosnian people, who suffered so much, to continue to work towards reconciliation and lasting peace."
"Our common goals must be reconciliation and co-existence of different cultures, religions and races," he added.
