11/01/2007
(AP, The Guardian, The New York Times, BBC - 11/01/07;
European Commission, AFP, Reuters, DPA, FT, International Herald Tribune, BBC, VOA, EUobserver - 10/01/07)
The European Commission (EC) proposed on Wednesday (January 10th) an ambitious plan designed to address the challenges of global warming, increased dependence on energy imports and rising energy prices.
The package of proposals sets a series of targets on greenhouse gas emissions and renewable energy and measures for the creation of an EU internal market for energy.
"Europe must lead the world into a new… post-industrial revolution -- the development of a low-carbon economy," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said at a press conference Wednesday in Brussels.
"We have already left behind our coal-based industrial past;
it is time to embrace our low-carbon future."
The proposed Energy Policy for Europe, which EU leaders are expected to vote on during a March summit, calls on the bloc to reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases by at least 20% by 2020, compared to 1990 levels.
If an international agreement is reached on the post-Kyoto framework, this should lead to a 30% cut in emissions from developed countries by 2020, the EC said.
EU countries have agreed to cut their emissions by 8% before the expiry of the international Kyoto climate change treaty in 2012.
Stressing the need for measures to ensure that global average temperature increases do not exceed pre-industrial levels by more than 2°C, the EC said that a rise in temperatures beyond that level would have a serious impact on different aspects of life, particularly human health.
"We need to accelerate the international discussions on what should follow after the end of the first Kyoto period and get down to concrete negotiations," EU Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas said at the Brussels press conference, describing climate change as one of the worst threats to the planet.
"Time is running out."
According to the EC proposal, the 27-nation bloc should make sure that 20% of its overall energy mix will be sourced from renewable energy by 2020.
Achieving this goal will require substantial growth in all three renewable energy sectors:
electricity, biofuels and heating and cooling.
A binding target of 10% for biofuels in passenger vehicles by 2020 has been set.
The proposed new policy also stresses the need for the bloc to lower by 20% its total primary energy consumption by 2020.
It calls for accelerated steps towards the use of fuel-efficient vehicles for transport and improvements in the energy efficiency of buildings and home appliances, heat and electricity generation, transmission and distribution.
The EC also called for unbundling the vertical integration of supply and network activities of European energy giants, as well as for stronger independent regulatory control and national measures to deliver on the EU target of 10% minimum interconnection levels.
"Without effective separating networks of energy production from energy transport and distribution we will not achieve the competition required," Barroso said.
As for nuclear electricity, which currently makes up 14% of EU energy consumption and 30% of EU electricity, the EC left it to member nations to decide.
"The Commission recommends that where the level of nuclear energy is reduced in the EU, this must be offset by the introduction of other low-carbon energy sources.
Otherwise the objective of cutting greenhouse gas emissions will become even more challenging," an EC statement said.
