08/12/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 08/12/06
From April 2003 until June 2006, Montenegro was a member of the Council of Europe (CoE), as one of the constituent republics in the state union of Serbia-Montenegro. 
During those three years, the state completed significant legislative reforms, most of which were carried out in co-operation with the CoE, its monitoring bodies and other international experts.
Shortly after Montenegro became independent, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) requested a report on the new state's conformity with CoE standards. 
It found that Montenegro's legal system meets the standards, "provided an appropriate constitutional reform is carried out in a manner which will ensure its legitimacy".
When the state union came to an end, so did its constitutional charter. 
Currently, the new state's only constitutional document is the Constitution of the Republic of Montenegro, adopted in 1992 during the Milosevic era. 
Changes are needed in several areas.
One of the main concerns expressed by CoE experts concerns judicial independence. 
"The direct links between the judiciary and the parliament, coupled with the weak role of the Judicial Council, are strongly felt as leading to a lack of impartiality of the courts," the report found. 
It also recommended changing the procedure for appointment and dismissal of judges.
Under the existing constitution, moreover, the public prosecutor wears too many hats, so to speak -- focusing not only on the tasks of criminal prosecution, but on remedies for the protection of constitutionality and legality and representing the republic in property and legal matters.
Serbia-Montenegro's Charter on Human and Minority Rights also ceased to be in force as of June 3rd, so the new constitution should provide for at least the same level of human rights protection, says the CoE.
The provision in the 1992 constitution that relates to local self-government is somewhat lacking, according to experts, since it does not clearly define the right to local self-government. 
The CoE recently launched a programme to assist in this area.
In September, a panel of eminent legal experts and political scientists prepared a working document and submitted it to the Parliamentary Committee for Constitutional Issues, a standing body composed of 13 MPs. 
The committee began preparing a draft constitution in November. 
Parliament had said the document would be ready by the end of the year, and then available for public discussion for a month afterwards. 
But Dragan Kujovic, a high-ranking official of the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists, says the timetable has been extended.
PACE Vice-President Jean-Charles Gardetto is in the process of evaluating whether Montenegro is ready for the CoE. 
His report, still in the works, will be discussed by PACE's Political Affairs Committee, after which Erik Jurgens, from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights, is to present his opinion. 
PACE will then discuss the matter at a plenary session and possibly recommend to the Committee of Ministers that Montenegro be invited to join the CoE.
Gardetto has said he will push to get his report on the agenda of PACE's January session, although his colleagues may decide to put the matter off until spring. 
PACE is optimistic about Montenegro's chances, he said. 
If it is able to bring its political framework into line with the requirements, Montenegro will soon be ready to become the CoE's 47th member.
