09/05/2007
(FT, The Guardian, Independent, The Scotsman - 09/05/07; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, BBC, VOA, Euronews, Beta, B92 - 08/05/07)
With Serbia facing a tight deadline to form a new government, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn urged the country's pro-reform parties on Tuesday (May 8th) to quickly reach a coalition deal. 
His call came hours after Parliament elected Tomislav Nikolic, the deputy leader of the hardline Serbian Radical Party (SRS), as its speaker.
"The election of an ultranationalist as Serbia's parliamentary speaker is a worrying sign," Rehn said on Tuesday. 
"The reform-oriented parties should still give careful consideration to their voters' wishes for a European future and act accordingly."
The SRS won the most votes of any one party in Serbia's inconclusive parliamentary elections on January 21st, and now holds 81 of all 250 parliamentary seats. 
Support from Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) enabled Nikolic to gain the post of speaker.
The DSS has been holding talks on a new government with President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DS) and former Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic's G17 Plus for more than three months now. 
But the negotiations collapsed at the weekend after Kostunica and Tadic again disagreed over which party should head the interior ministry and the intelligence agency (BIA).
The two institutions play a key role in relations with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
The Kostunica administration's insufficient co-operation with the tribunal -- particularly its failure to hand over former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic -- led the EU to freeze talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement in May of last year.
Tadic has said the co-operation issue, seen as the main obstacle on Serbia's path to EU integration, would be removed quickly if his party takes control of the interior ministry and BIA.
If a new government is not formed by Monday, new parliamentary elections will have to be held, which analysts believe will benefit the SRS.
Nikolic and his party oppose closer ties with the EU and NATO, arguing instead that Serbia should become part of a bloc led by Russia.
"Russia will find a way to bring together nations that will stand up against the hegemony of America and the EU," Nikolic told lawmakers Tuesday. 
"I hope that a majority in Serbia will strive for membership in such an organisation, not in the EU."
Rehn said on Tuesday he was surprised by the rhetoric during the heated 15-hour parliamentary debate preceding the SRS leader's election, particularly statements painting the EU as an adversary.
"Serbia stands today at a crossroads: choose between the return to a nationalist past or an approach towards a European future," the commissioner said. 
He called on leaders of the pro-European parties to "make one final effort in order to form a government and respect the will of the Serbian voters".
"The fragility of democratic development in Serbia is posing risks towards political integration of the Western Balkans towards the EU," Rehn said.
