10/04/2007
(Office of the High Representative - 09/04/07; AFP - 16/03/07; AP - 14/03/07)
Politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) who oppose police reform are actually rejecting the country's EU integration, the High Representative's principal deputy warned on Monday (April 9th).
"Rhetorically at least, many political leaders in Republika Srpska (RS) appear to believe that they can both support Bosnia and Herzegovina's European integration and reject police reform," Raffi Gregorian wrote in an article published by the Bosnian daily Euroblic. 
"The problem with this position is that without police reform, Bosnia and Herzegovina has no prospect of European integration."
In 2005, the EU made clear that it would move to strengthen ties with BiH only after the country, made up of the Federation of BiH and RS, restructures its police forces in line with European standards. 
The three specific principles the reforms must meet are that all legislative and budgetary competencies for all police matters must be vested at the state level; there can be no political interference in the operational work of police; and functional local police areas must be determined by technical policing criteria.
The EU opened talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with BiH in October 2005, after leaders of the main political parties reached an agreement on police reform. 
However, the envisioned measures have yet to be implemented.
The technical talks on the SAA were completed in December, but the EU has warned that the accord would not be signed until Bosnian politicians agree on implementation of the stalled reforms.
Meanwhile, several rounds of political talks initiated earlier this year on the basis of a report by the Police Reform Directorate, which was completed at the end of last year, have failed to produce a deal. 
The leaders of the Bosniak and Croat parties generally support the unification of the country's divided police forces. 
Bosnian Serb politicians, however, insist they can only agree to partial unification. 
They oppose any moves that would allow police to cross the inter-entity borders.
"Politicians who are responsible for delays in the reforms and blockage of the government are preventing Bosnia and Herzegovina to realise its European aspirations," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said during a visit to Sarajevo last month.
In Monday's article, Gregorian recalled that it was RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik and former RS President Dragan Cavic who proposed the text of the police reform agreement, which was also supported by the Bosniak and Croat parties and endorsed by the BiH and entity parliaments in October 2005.
The provisions of that agreement are reflected in the report prepared by the Police Reform Directorate.
"Solutions are on the table for resolving remaining outstanding issues in a way that everyone gets what they need, if not all that they want," said Gregorian. 
"And we have already come extremely close to a deal."
Therefore, he noted, calls by certain politicians for restarting the process from scratch would delay BiH's European integration progress by several years, but would have no impact on the eventual outcome of police reform. 
"The issues remain the same; the EU principles remain the same; and the areas for compromise remain the same," Gregorian stressed. 
"Rejecting police reform is actually rejecting European integration."
