08/12/2006
(AP, Reuters, The New York Times, The Guardian, Independent - 08/12/06;
AFP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, FT, BBC, International Herald Tribune, VOA, RFE/RL, EUobserver, EUpolitix, Deutsche Welle - 07/12/06)
In a last ditch effort to prevent a derailment of its EU accession talks, Turkey has offered to partially lift its trade embargo on Cyprus for one year.
"We are ready to open one port and one airport as part of our customs union responsibilities," a senior Turkish official told the AFP on Thursday (December 7th), referring to a 2005 protocol under which Ankara agreed to extend its customs union with the EU to all members, including Cyprus.
In return, Turkey reportedly wants the Famagusta seaport and the Ercan airport -- both in Turkish-controlled northern Cyprus -- to be opened to international traffic and trade.
Ankara's three-point plan also calls for the revival of talks to end the 32-year division of Cyprus.
The move came just days before the possible partial suspension of Turkey's EU membership negotiations.
On November 29th, the European Commission (EC) recommended that talks on eight of the 35 negotiating chapters be put on ice, because of Turkey's failure to meet its obligations under the 2005 protocol.
Turkey does not recognise the Greek-run government of Cyprus, which joined the EU in May 2004, and has been refusing to allow Greek Cypriot ships and planes to enter its ports and airports.
It said it would only do that after the 25-nation bloc makes good on an earlier promise to ease the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community, whose breakaway state is recognised by Ankara alone.
EU foreign ministers are to discuss the EC recommendations at a meeting Monday.
Given sharp divisions among member states, however, they are unlikely to reach a decision.
As a result, leaders of the bloc countries likely would decide on the matter during their December 14th-15th summit in Brussels.
Senior EU officials and member nations supporting Turkey's EU bid applauded Ankara's offer.
"If that move can be confirmed, I think it is certainly an important step ...
and in that context I certainly welcome it," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso told a news conference in Brussels.
Britain hailed the move as courageous and positive.
"It is essential that the EU responds," Reuters quoted a British official as saying.
Nicosia, however, flatly rejected the proposal.
The opening of Ercan airport "is out of the question;
there's no way the government of Cyprus is going to give its consent to legalising this airport," Greek Cypriot government spokesman Christodoulos Pasiardis told the Bloomberg news agency.
"It's a mockery of the EU," Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister George Lillikas said.
He warned that Greek Cypriot authorities would "revert to a harder line" if EU members try to limit the sanctions to be imposed on Turkey.
