08/05/2007
(AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC - 08/05/07; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, Kyodo, UPI, Beta, B92 - 07/05/07)
Tomislav Nikolic, the deputy leader of the hard-line Serbian Radical Party (SRS), was elected Serbian parliament speaker early Tuesday (May 8th), signalling the possible return of the ultranationalists to power.
After nearly 15 hours of heated debate, the 55-year-old Nikolic became the second most powerful figure in Serbia after the president, with 142 of the 244 lawmakers present casting their votes for him. 
The SRS, which finished first in inconclusive parliamentary elections on January 21st, has 81 deputies in the 250-seat legislature.
Nikolic secured his post with the backing of lawmakers from former Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic's Socialist Party and from Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS).
The only other candidate for the post was Milena Milosevic, of President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DS), who won 99 votes.
The vote was held during the legislature's second session since the inaugural one on February 14th and less than two days after the parties in Serbia's democratic bloc -- the DSS, the DS and G17 Plus -- again failed to reach an agreement on the country's next government. 
If there is no new government by May 14th, Serbia will have to hold new elections.
The coalition talks broke down at the weekend, with Tadic and Kostunica still at odds over which of the two parties should control the interior ministry and the intelligence agency (BIA). 
The two institutions play a critical role in relations with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
Last year, Brussels suspended talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Belgrade because of inadequate co-operation, and Tadic's DS has vowed to make changes.
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said on Monday he had contacted both Tadic and Kostunica by phone, in a bid to broker a deal, but his efforts produced no result. 
He also voiced support for placing the interior ministry and BIA under DS control.
"I think it's vital that the president be in charge of the security services and have the interior ministry in his control," Reuters quoted Solana as telling a European Parliament (EP) committee on Monday. 
Speaking ahead of the vote for parliament speaker, he said Nikolic's election would be a "big problem".
Critics in Serbia also viewed it as a setback. 
The move also sparked concerns about a scenario in which the DSS forms a government coalition with the SRS and the Socialists. 
Both parties oppose Serbia building closer ties with the EU and NATO and arresting and handing over war crimes indictees to the ICTY.
"Do you want us to the return to the 1990s, for a man who is against European integration to be parliament speaker," G17 Plus leader Mladjan Dinkic said on Monday. 
"No one who calls himself a democrat should raise a hand in favor of Nikolic, and thus strip the citizens of European prospects."
Serbia, he said, was "now entering a period of major political instability".
The leader of the DS caucus voiced similar concerns. 
"Macedonia, Bosnia and Albania will overtake us and Serbia will be the poorest country in Europe," Dusan Petrovic said.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn made it clear Monday that it would be highly unlikely for the Union to resume SAA talks with a Serbian government made up of the DSS and SRS.
"In spite of the worrying signals coming out of the Serbian Parliament today, I hope the reform-oriented parties will still give careful consideration to the wish of a majority of Serbia's electorate for a European future for Serbia, and act accordingly," he said at the EP on Monday.
