09/03/2007
(The Washington Times, Blic, DPA - 09/03/07; AP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, UPI, Beta, B92, NATO - 08/03/07)
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer urged Serbia on Thursday (March 8th) to fulfill its obligations to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
Doing so is a key condition for the country's Euro-Atlantic integration, he stressed during talks with senior Serb officials.
During its summit in Riga in November last year, the Alliance invited Serbia to join its Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme. 
Although the move is considered a step towards eventual full-fledged membership in the 26-nation pact, Serbia must still meet the requirement to arrest war crimes indictees, de Hoop Scheffer said.
"We have not forgotten about that," the AP quoted the NATO chief as saying after his meeting with Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic. 
"That is my main message."
The ICTY is seeking the handover of six fugitive war crimes indictees. 
Topping the list are former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, who is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia, and the wartime leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic.
Both face charges of genocide for their alleged role in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. 
De Hoop Scheffer said the handover of war crimes fugitives remained "an extremely important element" for NATO. 
"The position of the allies is that as soon as possible, rather today than tomorrow, the ones who are indicted for the different crimes should be at the tribunal," he said.
Another issue the NATO chief discussed with Serbian officials, including President Boris Tadic and outgoing Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, was the process of determining Kosovo's future status. 
His visit to Belgrade came two days before a high-level, final round in the UN-led talks on the issue in Vienna on Saturday.
Tadic and Kostunica will lead the Serbian delegation, which will also include Draskovic and the members of the Serbian negotiating team for the status talks.
De Hoop Scheffer voiced hope that Saturday's meeting would be "positive" and pave the way for a Security Council resolution on Kosovo's final status. 
He vowed that the 16,000-strong KFOR will continue to guarantee security for all in the province.
"I can assure you that the NATO soldiers... 
will remain in Kosovo in the future to do what they have been doing, and that is protect every and any citizen," he told reporters in Belgrade. 
"NATO will not forsake its responsibility."
