09/02/2007
By Bekim Greicevci for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 09/02/07
Despite its unresolved final status after being a UN protectorate for almost seven years, Kosovo has made some steps towards fulfilling EU accession criteria.
The desire to become an EU member is shared by all of the ethnic groups there.
The EU has been involved in Kosovo since 1999, under the umbrella of UNMIK.
Since then, it has devoted over 1.6 billion euros to the province.
The main instrument of EU donor assistance is managed by the European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR).
Although not a member of the Eurozone, the euro has been the official currency in Kosovo since January 2002.
Since Kosovo could not start Stabilisation and Association Process (SAP) negotiations because of its undefined political status, the European Commission (EC) created an instrument called the Stabilisation Tracking Mechanism (STM).
The goal was to avoid isolating Kosovo from the mainstream of European integration.
The STM guides and monitors Kosovo's development in regards to European standards.
Kosovo has signed four bilateral free trade agreements -- with Albania, Macedonia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina -- and on December 20th, 2006, the province signed the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA).
On January 17th, the province's government decided to hold monthly meetings to discuss its European agenda.
"At these meetings, we will evaluate the progress in terms of implementing the European Partnership Action Plan and look at the challenges ahead," said Shenoll Muharremi, head of the Kosovo Agency for EU Integration.
"Kosovo and the Western Balkans have no other future apart from the EU."
In its last progress report on Kosovo, the EC said that the province has made some headway towards approximating its legislation and policies with European standards.
"Limited progress has been made in the effective implementation and enforcement of legislation passed.
More efforts are needed to create an administrative environment that will ensure further approximation to European standards," reads the report.
"Some progress has been made in the environment, transport, energy, customs, taxation, police and border control," says the EC.
However, it adds, the province "needs to improve in areas such as fight against organised crime, trafficking of human beings and drugs, agriculture, statistics and intellectual property rights."
Now the EU is preparing for an enhanced role in post-status Kosovo in the field of rule of law.
It is planning to establish a mission of up to 1,300 police officers, prosecutors and judges, who will assist authorities in dealing with organised crime, corruption, interethnic incidents and other areas.
The EU will also lead the International Civilian Office (ICO) that will replace UNMIK after the status resolution.
The ICO will oversee the implementation of the status settlement, and will be led by an EU diplomat.
To establish a new mission and be able to fully co-operate with Kosovo in terms of integration, EU officials have said that Kosovo should have a clear political and legal status, which is expected to be fully resolved within a few months.
