07/12/2006
(The New York Times, Telegraph, Los Angeles Times - 07/12/06;
Nature, AP, Reuters, BBC, VOA, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Sofia News Agency - 06/12/06;
International Herald Tribune - 04/12/06;
Nature - 02/12/06;
Medical News Today - 01/12/06)
A Palestinian doctor and five Bulgarian nurses did not deliberately infect more than 400 Libyan children with HIV, a team of scientists said on Wednesday (December 6th), announcing the results of a new study.
Palestinian doctor Ashraf Ahmad Jum'a and Bulgarian nurses Valya Chervenyashka, Snezhana Dimitrova, Nasya Nenova, Valentina Siropulo and Kristiana Valcheva were arrested 11 months after they arrived in Libya in March 1998 to help care for patients at the Al-Fateh Hospital in Benghazi.
The same year, 426 children at the hospital were diagnosed with AIDS.
At least 50 of them have died since then.
After analysing the HIV and hepatitis virus samples taken from some of the infected children, British and Italian scientists have concluded that the viral strains "were already circulating and prevalent" in the Benghazi hospital and its environs prior to the arrival of the foreign medics.
"All the lines of scientific evidence point in the same direction, towards a longstanding infection control problem at the hospital, dating back to the mid 1990s or earlier," Reuters quoted Oxford University's Oliver Pybus, co-author of a report published in Nature magazine on Wednesday, as saying.
The analysis of genetic information from HIV samples taken from 44 of the infected children showed that they were part of a single outbreak of a strain that is common in West Africa, home of many immigrants to Libya.
The scientists' report was released about two weeks before a Libyan court is expected to announce its verdict against the six foreigners, on December 19th.
Their second trial ended in Tripoli on November 4th, with the prosecution demanding the death penalty.
Five Libyan experts stood by their 2003 report, which concluded that the infections were the result of a deliberate act.
In May 2004, a court sentenced the medics to death by firing squad, prompting a wave of international outrage.
Eventually, the Libyan Supreme Court overturned the verdicts and ordered a new trial.
The six defendants insist they are innocent and said their confessions were the result of torture, including beatings with barbed wire, electrical shocks and dog attacks.
Nine Libyan officers charged with torturing the medics were acquitted in June 2005.
The new analysis supports earlier scientific evidence provided by French doctor Luc Montagnier, who first detected HIV, and Italian microbiologist Vittorio Colizzi.
They also concluded that poor hygiene and improper needle sterilisation caused the infections.
But Libyan courts have rejected evidence which points to poor hospital hygiene as the main reason for the outbreak.
Last month, more than 100 Nobel laureates in the sciences wrote an open letter to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, calling for a fair trial.
"A miscarriage of justice will take place without proper consideration of scientific evidence," the Nobel winners said.
"We urge the appropriate authorities to take the necessary steps to permit such evidence to be used in this case."
