07/11/2006
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 07/11/06
Responding to comments by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan suggesting that a decision on Kosovo's status might have to be postponed, authorities in Pristina this week reiterated their call for the issue to be resolved this year.
"The Kosovo side insists on settling the final status as soon as possible … in 2006," said spokesman Skender Hyseni, on Monday (November 6th).
"We have not been given anything official [indicating] that Kosovo's status process will be postponed.
In an interview published Saturday by the Croatian daily Vjesnik, Annan said the constitutional referendum in Serbia and planned elections there could necessitate a delay.
"We have to be cautious, so that the issue of the final status of Kosovo is not used for pre-electoral purposes," he said.
"We may not stick to the deadlines we had originally planned."
Amid growing uncertainty about the timetable, the Contact Group for Kosovo -- consisting of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States -- is due to meet on Friday to address the issue.
"If they have another decision, then we will see how can we react," Hyseni said.
He said Pristina was willing to continue negotiations with the international community, but ruled out further talks with Belgrade.
"The negotiations with Belgrade are unnecessary and they will not yield any result.
So it is very non-beneficial to continue these negotiations," the spokesman said.
In Washington, meanwhile, State Department deputy spokesman Tom Casey said the United States still supports reaching a solution in 2006.
However, he suggested Washington might back a postponement if called for by UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari.
"Obviously we want to support him and we'd be interested in hearing from him if he believes it needs to require additional time to do it," he said.
He reiterated Washington's support for the efforts of Ahtisaari, who the Serbian government attacked Monday as being pro-Albanian.
The envoy is plotting behind Serbia's back to turn over Kosovo to its ethnic Albanian majority, a spokesman for Prime Minister Vojislav Kostinica claimed, demanding that Ahtisaari be replaced and his blueprint for status discarded.
Annan, however, has made it clear that Ahtisaari will stay on until the Kosovo issue is resolved.
