09/04/2007
By Gabriela Preda for Southeast European Times– 09/04/07
Five Southeast European countries have pledged to boost co-operation under a plan to build a new oil pipeline that would link the Black Sea with Italy and supply oil from the Caspian region to the European market.
Economy ministers and state secretaries of Croatia, Italy, Romania, Serbia and Slovenia voiced their support for the Pan-European Pipeline (PEOP) in a declaration signed in Zagreb on April 3rd.
The 1,856km-long pipeline, which will pass through all the five countries, will be capable of carrying 40 million tonnes of oil annually during its first phase, with capacity due to grow to 90 million tonnes.
EU Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs signed the declaration as well.
"The Pan-European oil pipeline corresponds greatly to the EU criteria," he said.
Officials from the bloc say building the necessary infrastructure to link markets with oil-rich regions will prove essential if global oil demand increases by the expected 41% in the next 25 years.
The pipeline is expected to be operational between 2011 and 2013, and the total construction cost is envisioned at $2.62 billion for an annual capacity of 60 million tonnes, or $3.96 billion for a 90 million tonne capacity.
It would effectively cut down on the number of oil tankers in the Turkish straits and Northern Adriatic.
The project is of "strategic importance" for the Southeast European countries involved in its development, as the regional economy is expected to benefit greatly from it, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said at the signing last week.
Until now, the governments of Romania, Serbia and Croatia have been promoting the project most actively.
Romanian President Traian Basescu has been the biggest booster, citing a study predicting that his country could receive between $2.27 billion and $4.39 billion in benefits over 20 years of operation.
The government of Slovenia, by contrast, has been hesitant, pointing to environmental concerns and a lack of domestic interest.
With the Zagreb declaration, the project appears to be set in motion.
Companies wishing to export oil from the Caspian region via this route and potential buyers can now be officially identified.
If interest is sufficient, the necessary documentation -- such as feasibility and environmental impact studies -- will have to be drawn up.
According to Slovenian Economy Minister Andrej Vizak, the declaration should not be binding, but instead convey political will.
Last week's signing took place in a complicated regional energy context.
Just a few weeks earlier, an agreement on a competing pipeline, linking Burgas and Alexandroupolis, was signed by Russia, Bulgaria and Greece.
Unlike the Trieste-Constanta declaration, the earlier deal is a proper plan of action, establishing a four-year deadline for pipeline construction.
According to analysts, as competition heats up on the energy market, the next months are expected to be more intense than ever.
