08/03/2007
By Igor Jovanovic and Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times – 08/03/07
The US Assistant Secretary for European and Eurasian Affairs, Daniel Fried, paid visits this week to Belgrade and Pristina.
He reiterated the US stance that Kosovo's status should be resolved by the end of 2007.
On Monday (March 5th) he was in Belgrade, just days after Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Titov held talks with top Serbian officials.
He assured them that Moscow would not back UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's status proposal if it were unacceptable to Belgrade.
Asked by journalists whether Russia might use its Security Council veto power, Fried said only that Russia is a partner of the United States in the six-member Contact Group, and that the group would work to resolve the issue.
He called for a constructive approach by Belgrade, saying that although Serbian officials are not expected to welcome a solution that would not suit Serbia, they are expected to act according to international principles.
Serbian President Boris Tadic responded by saying his country would continue to take a constructive part in the status talks, and that it is very important to preserve peace and stability in Kosovo.
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, however, accused Ahtisaari of breaching his mandate with a proposal that "changes Serbia's borders".
"Every state in the world insists on the inviolability of its internationally-recognised borders," Kostunica said.
Fried also met with Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, who told him that without Kosovo, Serbia would feel "frustrated" and could not be expected to show enthusiasm in continuing down the path towards EU integration.
For his part, the US official stressed that after the status is resolved, the international mission in Kosovo would be responsible for protecting the Serb population and its religious and cultural heritage.
A day later, Fried was in Pristina to meet with Kosovo leaders and members of the negotiating team.
He described the Ahtisaari plan as balanced, and warned extremists on both sides that their actions could have a very harmful impact on Kosovo.
"What they are against is a plan which so far is not only the best plan, but the only plan which provides a good future for Kosovo," he said.
The plan does not give everything to one party, but something to both parties, Fried added.
President Fatmir Seijdiu expressed confidence that the United States will continue to support Kosovo.
He repeated his side's position that independence is the only acceptable solution.
“We cannot support anything less," he said.
Fried also visited northern Kosovo, where he met with municipal mayors and talked with members of the public, reiterating that nobody will win everything and nobody will lose everything.
