02/05/2011
Text and photos by Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 02/05/11
Rapid urbanisation, demographic changes, and economic growth have expanded the boundaries of Istanbul and resulted in the transformation of the city's character. 
With a population estimated at 15 million, at its widest point the city sprawls over 100km.
Professor Tahire Erman, an urban planning expert at Ankara's Bilkent University, told SETimes that Istanbul is so large it is more accurate to talk about it as a region than a city.
"Istanbul is the centre and it is surrounded by industrial development peripheries," he said.
After World War II, most of Turkey's population lived in rural areas, whereas today over 70% live in urban environments, with Istanbul as the main attraction. 
The rapid, often haphazard growth of the city has put pressure on infrastructure, in particular by creating more need for housing.
"There are two very different groups of people who are moving to Istanbul," Erman explained. 
"The people who come from the eastern and southeastern part of Turkey after losing their livelihood in their local villages because of the growing political conflict [with the separatist Kurdistan Workers' Party], and the new middle class people who move to Istanbul because the city is more connected to global finance and the information economy."
A tight race for real estate
Istanbul's cosmopolitan environment and strategic position are drawing many international companies to establish their regional headquarters in the city. 
These business moves are promoted by the Turkish government, which would like to turn Istanbul into a regional business hub.
Such a policy, however, can have unintended consequences on the city's inhabitants. 
"People's space is so valuable in Istanbul, and an increasing number of global entrepreneurs are becoming interested in Istanbul. 
There are many powerful actors who are competing with each other over the land," Erman said.
"This will increase the burden on the infrastructure and its relationship with the disadvantaged population," he added. 
"Profitability is used to legitimize the interventions of municipal authorities into the spaces of the poor people. 
Istanbul has large-scale projects and there is some resistance to these projects."
Some say the imminent earthquake threat Istanbul faces has been used as an excuse to tear down gecekondu ("built by night"), or shanty homes, leaving the poor without shelter.
In Atasehir, a neighbourhood located on the Anatolian side of the city, many residents say they are scared of losing their homes. 
The neighbourhood is currently going through one of the largest urban transformation projects Istanbul has ever seen.
The government wants to centralize the country's financial sector, including key banks and the Istanbul Stock Exchange, in Atasehir. 
Development has already started and skyscrapers are quickly rising.
"The Turkish company Agaoglu is building more luxury houses in the district. 
These are being built very quickly and it is invading into the settlement of people living there," explained Erman. 
"The people are very concerned about their lives. 
They are worried over what will happen to them, their houses and their neighbourhood."
"Developers want to buy up the land for new apartment buildings. 
They have already built apartment complexes inside a gated community on the other side of the road," explained Ahmet, a resident of the neighborhood.
The plot of land where he lives is problematic for eager developers because it is owned by about 800 individuals. 
Many of the original owners have died and left the land to their children, dividing up the parcels into hundreds of smaller parcels. 
A developer is now trying to force an agreement from the owners to build an apartment complex on the land.
"Because of this process I am not sure I will get a new apartment," said Ahmet, who explained that the owners of land on the other side of the road received a new apartment from the developer, instead of having to move. 
But on his side of the road, the landowners were being far less co-operative.
Another Atasehir resident, who works as a mechanic, said he was prepared to move due to the construction of the new financial district and developers buying up the surrounding land. 
"I don't know when I will have to go," he added.
According to Necati Koz, a real estate agent from Umraniye, a neighbourhood next to Atasehir, the new buildings being constructed by the Housing Development Administration of Turkey and developers such as Agaoglu are not going to kick people out of their homes.
"Everyone that is living in the gecekondu in Atasehir is going to be relocated to the new buildings," Koz told SETimes. 
"They are not going to be pushed out; they are going to be pushed up."
Dispute pits locals against developers Istanbul's urban renewal projects are worrisome to people living in Tarlabasi, an old rundown neighbourhood with a large Kurdish population just a short walk away from the city's central Taksim Square.
Due to the gentrification process in Tarlabasi, many Kurdish and Roma renters are worried they will be forced to move since they cannot afford the new apartments being offered by TOKI -- which is asking for a 4,000 lira down payment and 400 lira monthly rent for the houses.
The renewal project in Tarlabasi began in 2007, when Calik Holding’s GAP Construction Company won the tender. 
However, the property owners in the neighborhood claimed the municipality did not consult with them or ask permission before awarding the project.
Only a few property owners came to an agreement with Calik Holdings. 
Property owners decided to form the Association for Solidarity with Tarlabasi Property Owners and Renters.
The association claims that the municipality is more focused on financial gain than the cultural and historic value of the buildings.
"The cultural and historical heritages of Tarlabasi are going to be sacrificed to financial benefits of some people or companies," Mucella Yapici, an architect from the Union of Chambers of Turkish Engineers and Architects, told the Hurriyet Daily News last year.
Although they acknowledge that many buildings in Tarlabasi are in poor condition, the property owners allege that the holding company also plans to demolish newly renovated building as well.
To make sure their side of the story is heard, critics of the urban renewal plan have taken action at the international level. 
The European Court of Human Rights will decide on a complaint filed by the association last year.
