08/03/2007
(EurActiv - 08/03/07; AFP, BBC, European Commission, Council of Europe - 07/03/07)
Most of the new jobs created in the EU are being filled by women, who also represent the majority of graduates in each of the Union's 27 member nations, the European Commission (EC) said in a new report, released on Wednesday (March 7th). 
However, they still face inequalities, as they continue to be employed less and paid less than men, stressed the paper, issued on the eve of International Women's Day.
"Women are driving job growth in Europe and are helping us reach our economic targets, but they still face too many barriers to realising their full potential," EU Commissioner for Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities Vladimír Spidla said on Wednesday.
"Out of 8 million jobs created in the EU since 2000, six million were filled by women, and 59% of university graduates are now female," he added. 
"But while women are outperforming men in educational achievement and boosting Europe's overall employment rate, they are still underpaid, earning on average 15% less than men for every hour worked."
As for the four Southeast European (SEE) countries that are members of the Union, the pay gap between women and men is lowest in Greece, at 9%, and is largest in Cyprus, at 25%. 
The figures for Bulgaria and Romania, which joined the bloc in January, are close to the EU average -- at 16% and 13%, respectively.
The absolute gender gap in employment rates in the two newcomers, however, was much smaller than the EU average of 15% in 2005. 
It stood at a little over 8% in Bulgaria and at about 12% in Romania. 
The difference between women and men's employment rates in Cyprus stood at nearly 21% and in Greece it was slightly over 28%.
"Women also face greater difficulties in reaching decision-making positions," the EC noted. 
The results of a recent Eurobarometer survey showed that 77% of Europeans thought there is a need for more women in managerial positions and 72% believed there should be more female members of the European Parliament (EP).
As for the gender gap in managerial positions in the EU's four SEE member nations, in 2005, it was lowest in Bulgaria, where men filled about two-thirds of the managerial posts. 
In Romania, 69.3% of the managers were men and 30.7% were women. 
The gaps were even bigger in Greece and Cyprus -- at close to 50% and 73%, respectively.
Only eight of the 27 EU commissioners are women. 
In the 784-seat EP, the proportion of women members also stands at about 30%.
"You cannot have genuine democracy until you have both sexes equally represented," the BBC quoted Portuguese MEP Ana Gomez as saying.
