06/12/2006
(EUobserver, The Guardian, The Times - 06/12/06; AFP, AP, FT, Bloomberg, DPA, BBC, International Herald Tribune, VOA - 05/12/06; DPA - 04/12/06)
Voicing support for the European Commission's (EC) proposal for a partial suspension of Turkey's EU membership talks over Cyprus, Germany and France called on Tuesday (December 5th) for a review of the country's accession progress before spring 2009.
"We will campaign for the European Commission to draft a report some time between the elections in Turkey in autumn 2007 and the European elections in spring 2009," German Chancellor Angela Merkel said following talks with the French and Polish presidents, Jacques Chirac and Lech Kaczynski. 
"We are not fixing a date but around that time we will see whether Turkey has adopted the Ankara accord," she said.
Merkel was referring to a protocol Turkey signed in 2005, extending its 1963 customs union with the EU to all members, including Cyprus.
Turkey does not recognise the government of Cyprus's Greek-run south, which joined the EU in May 2004. 
Ankara refuses to open its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot ships and planes.
As a result, the EC recommended last week that talks on eight of the 35 negotiating chapters with Turkey be put on ice until Brussels has confirmed that the country has fulfilled its obligations to the bloc.
The EU foreign ministers are expected to discuss the EC recommendations at a meeting on Monday, but reportedly are unlikely to reach a decision. 
It will then be up to the leaders of the 25-nation bloc to decide on the matter during their December 14th-15th summit in Brussels.
Merkel's statement followed reports suggesting Germany and France were planning to push for setting an18-month deadline for Ankara to lift its trade embargo on Cyprus, or face a suspension of its EU negotiations. 
The two countries since appear to have eased their stance.
"We don't want to set any kind of ultimatums, but we want the commission to say to us what has been achieved and how we can go forward," Merkel said at a news conference with Chirac and Kaczynski.
"The position set out by Chancellor Merkel is exactly France's position," Chirac told reporters.
Several hours before the Mettlach meeting, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan called Merkel, urging her not to commit an "historic mistake" by dashing prematurely his country's EU aspirations.
"Turkey is as important for the EU as the EU is for Turkey," he later told Turkish lawmakers.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn made a similar statement.
"I would ask Chancellor Merkel and President Chirac to look for a balanced solution which on the one hand shows the consequences of non-compliance by a candidate state but at the same time keeps the accession process with Turkey alive, because of its strategic importance for both Europe and Turkey," Reuters quoted him as saying.
