07/03/2007
(AP, AKI, DPA, Fena, B92, Irish Times - 06/03/07)
A previously unknown militant group has sent a letter to Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, threatening to kill him, the Bosnian Serb leader's office said on Tuesday (March 6th).
It was the latest in a series of death threats he has received following the February 26th ruling by the International Court of Justice (ICJ), which cleared Serbia of direct responsibility for genocide in the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
"We have already installed a legion of fighters in Banja Luka, who are in the possession of the most sophisticated equipment for destroying tanks from a distance, as well as aircrafts and helicopters," Bosnian news agency Fena quoted the group, identifying itself as "Nova BiH" (New BiH), as saying in the letter.
"The aim is to blow up the vehicles that are a part of your escort, along with yourself.
We have paid a man from your party who agreed to give us the information about your movements."
Vera Sajic, head of Dodik's public relations office, told reporters on Tuesday that the letter had arrived the previous day and has been sent to the entity's Interior Ministry with instructions to take the needed measures within its powers.
The relevant central institutions in Sarajevo also have been informed.
RS Interior Minister Stanislav Cadzo would not comment on what actions authorities plan to take.
He also declined to reveal any information regarding the author of Monday's letter, reportedly sent from the Tuzla region.
Besides threatening to kill Dodik, his family and Serbs in general, Nova BiH also said it would blow up all trucks and buses with Serbian car plates and destroy all bridges over the Drina River, a natural border between BiH and Serbia.
"It's your turn now, and all Serbs will be the eternal target of guerilla attacks and destruction by those insulted and humiliated;
whose fathers, brothers, children and others were slaughtered, helpless to defend themselves," the organisation said.
Two days after The Hague-based ICJ ruled that the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys by Bosnian Serb forces constituted genocide, Dodik issued a statement on behalf of his government, apologising to the victims of the 1992-1995 conflict.
"The government of the Republika Srpska expresses its deepest regret for the crimes committed against non- Serbs during the recent war in Bosnia and condemns all persons who took part in these crimes," the statement read.
Meanwhile, top Bosnian Serb officials are expected to issue a new statement on Wednesday, rejecting the community's collective guilt for the conflict.
It will be announced at a special press conference, called by RS President Milan Jelic, and attended by Dodik, RS National Assembly Speaker Igor Radojicic, BiH Council of Ministers Chairman Nikola Spiric and BiH Presidency Chairman Nebojsa Radmanovic, Fena reported on Tuesday.
The ICJ ruling has been followed by increasing calls from Bosnian Muslim leaders for the complete abolition of RS as a "creature of genocide" and a push by representatives of this community in Srebrenica that their town be given special "neutral" administrative status outside RS jurisdiction.
"All those who attempt to manipulate the citizens in local communities and citizens in RS must bear responsibility," Fena quoted Jelic as saying Tuesday.
"I think that this is not necessary and that nobody should take advantage of the current situation in BiH and score cheap political points."
