06/06/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/06/11
With Serbia engrossed in political and economic problems, its educational system has languished over the past two decades.
Fewer than 7% of residents are highly educated, while more than 1.3 million, out of the 7.5 million total population, lack basic elementary education.
Given the circumstances, educational reform is no small task.
Education Minister Zarko Obradovic talked about it with SETimes correspondent Bojana Milovanovic.
SETimes:
What do you see as the biggest problem with the educational system?
Obradovic:
The biggest problem is that many still do not perceive education as the greatest resource of our future development and there is no desire for improvement and full commitment to the task among all participants in the educational process.
A number of unresolved issues were inherited.
Education requires constant work and reform.
When someone asks if I have completed educational reform, I just laugh, as reforms are an ongoing process.
Science and technology are on the cutting edge of innovations which are quickly implemented, which shows us that we must learn from others and apply positive experiences.
Some things can be applied even without money.
The inclusion of children with special needs in regular schools in Serbia started last year.
I could not get an answer as to why that had not been done sooner.
Some had the good will, but inertia and the habit of not engaging in anything new, the fear of facing the unknown and of the new always, put the brakes on innovation.
Over the last few years, Serbia has devoted too little attention to the problem of professional enhancement of education professionals.
It is interesting to note that Serbia came up with various strategies, but never an educational one.
However, things are moving forward and we will have an education strategy by the end of this year.
SETimes:
How far can the Serbian educational system progress and harmonise with European standards with an investment of about 3.5% GDP?
Obradovic:
We did not invest in education for a long time.
If the excuse during the 1990s is the sanctions -- the isolation, the 1999 bombing, lack of funds -- then the question remains why no solution was found for investing funds in education from foreign donations or privatisation projects after the democratic changes of 2000?
A legal provision could have introduced a binding solution for the investment of privatisation funds in educational infrastructure.
It all came down to the employees' salaries and the enhancement of teaching, whereas equipment and infrastructure were left at the margins.
Quality education is not possible unless the conditions are appropriate and in line with European standards.
For years, about 96% of the education ministry's budget was spent on employee salaries, leaving little behind.
The figure mentioned in the media, 3.5% of GDP for investment in education, is not fully accurate, since it does not include the 0.8% investment from local self-governments and money from the government's Fund for Young Talent, which accounts for 0.5%.
Education, of course, should receive more investment.
The fact is that we have a lot of stagnation that has nothing to do with funds.
We passed a number of laws over the past three years, introduced internet to all elementary and high schools in Serbia, and accomplished far more that does not require money.
SETimes:
The student trend, especially within technical faculties, of finding jobs and continuing to build careers abroad is still strong.
How can it be stopped?
Obradovic:
That is not a recent problem;
it has been there for years, even decades.
Perhaps the problem was never given much attention as today.
It only appears more visible now because the economic crisis has limited the number of potential jobs.
The problem cannot be solved overnight and will never be solved completely.
In order to tackle it, we have to have an exceptionally strong economy, with a large number of companies that could employ students.
In a bid to stop the brain drain, as of 2010 Serbia decided to finance a number of students attending PhD studies.
We are investing in graduate studies as the foundation for future development, but also creating grounds for young scientists.
It may be necessary, following the example of some other countries, to grant young professionals more favourable housing loans, so that they can purchase apartments more easily.
SETimes:
What is your assessment of regional co-operation in education?
Obradovic:
This ministry has established good relations with colleagues in the region.
About a year ago, the representatives of all former Yugoslavia countries gathered at an education conference in Belgrade, for the first time since the 1990s conflict.
We began co-operating well, but the process takes time to expand.
In my opinion we should push for better collaboration, since we were once a part of a single educational system.
We share more similarities than differences;
there is no language barrier and can therefore help each other.
I think a new page has been turned in educational co-operation [in the region] compared the previous years.
SETimes:
Recently teachers staged a strike for two months, dissatisfied with their salaries and working conditions.
What position, in your opinion, are teachers in, and is the monthly salary of about 350 euros adequate for the job they are doing?
Obradovic:
Teachers should certainly earn more, but one should always take economic conditions into account.
Bigger salaries require a healthier economic situation.
In the absence of a better economy, greater fund inflow into the budget and higher investment in education, one cannot expect any sudden changes.
SETimes:
After the recent cabinet reshuffle, the science department merged with your ministry.
What is your assessment of the scientific progress and achievements in Serbia?
Obradovic:
We have many scientific institutes that do valuable work.
They all have their place -- those working in natural and social sciences.
I am pleased with how many of our institutes are involved in successful international co-operation and how many projects they are given at the EU level.
That shows we truly have quality and potential.
I think now is a good time to promote our qualities.
