05/12/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 05/12/06
Due to a decisive victory in the last elections, Milorad Dodik is again prime minister of Republika Srpska.
His new government, which has only five new ministers, was approved on Thursday (November 30th) by a two-thirds majority in parliament.
Dodik's party, the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), came close to being able to govern independently, falling only one vote short.
Instead, the party decided to form the government with its present coalition partners, the Party of Democratic Progress (PDP) and Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (SDA).
Their support was crucial during the ouster earlier this year of the former Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) government.
Addressing MPs, Dodik said his government's priorities would be economic development, decentralisation, the continued existence of the RS police, co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, and progress towards joining Euro-Atlantic structures.
"Our permanent interest will be the RS," he said, warning that his government would propose a referendum on RS's status should there be continued demands for its abolition.
The RS government was formed without major difficulties.
However, formation of the state-level government and that of the other entity, the Federation of BiH, continues to be mired in difficulties.
Leaders of the main BiH parties recently met in Banja Luka, but the talks were unsuccessful.
The key problem is the election of MPs to the Upper House of the Federation of BiH parliament.
These should be delegated from the lower levels of power in the respective entities.
In accordance with a previous agreement, the Bosniak bloc in power should be formed by the SDA and Party for BiH (SBiH), while the Serbian bloc should consist of the SNSD and PDP.
The hottest issue is which Croat party -- HDZ BiH or HDZ 1990 -- should be part of the new government.
The parties are also at odds over who should become the new chairman of the Council of Ministers.
Dodik's SNSD has insisted on its candidate, Nikola Spiric.
SDA has proposed incumbent chairman Adnan Terzic, and the HDZ has put forward its candidate, Dragan Vrankic.
Representatives of the international community have expressed dissatisfaction over delays in implementing the election results.
"It is of concern that the meetings don't give results," said High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling.
"The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the international community expect coalition formation to move forward in a spirit of co-operation and without delay."
The delay has led the international community to intervene, in the hope not only of resolving problems with formation of the new government, but also of unblocking police reform.
BiH party leaders plan to attend a meeting in Brussels, on the sidelines of the Peace Implementation Council session on Wednesday and Thursday.
