05/12/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/12/06
In an operation targeting corruption in the customs administration, Serbian police on November 28th arrested 17 people suspected of receiving and giving bribes, abusing official positions and smuggling.
Among the arrested are eight customs administration officers and nine businessmen.
The sting took place in as many as six towns.
Police officials say they will also investigate whether the highest levels of the Customs Administration were involved.
New arrests may be made.
According to senior police official Milorad Veljovic, two top officials in charge of suppressing smuggling -- Velibor Lukovic and Igor Miskin -- headed a criminal group within the administration.
They organised six more officers who, in exchange for money, ensured large profits for the nine businessmen.
Police suspect that the customs officers falsely presented imported goods as only passing through Serbia, while they actually were being unloaded into secret warehouses all around the country.
After that, the goods were sold, with no taxes paid to the state.
The customs officers then allegedly issued false certificates indicating that the trucks carrying the goods had left Serbia.
In this way, investigators say items were smuggled in from Turkey, Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Macedonia.
For these services, the customs officers received between 3,000 and 12,000 euros from the businessmen, according to Veljovic.
The goods were transported in trucks with foreign license plates that were driven by people who are not Serbian citizens.
The group is suspected of damages to the state budget worth at least 5m euros.
Veljovic also said that the crackdown was "only just beginning", that surveillance had been in progress since March, and that all those found to be involved in corruption will be arrested.
Footage showing masked special police unit members arresting members of the so-called customs mafia was released to the public.
Some of the suspects were arrested in warehouses full of goods.
The arrest of these 17 suspects is one of series of actions taken by the government of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica in the fight against corruption.
On October 12th, charges were unveiled against members of the so-called bankruptcy mafia, accused of damaging state-controlled companies in illegal bankruptcy proceedings to the tune of more than 10m euros.
The 35 charged include former Belgrade Commercial Court president Goran Kljajevic and a judge of the court, Delinka Djurdjevic, along with several well-known Serbian businessmen.
On November 30th, two days after the customs sting, charges were filed against 53 members of the so-called highway mafia.
They are accused of causing damages of more than 6.5m euros to the state budget by issuing double certificates for vehicles using highways.
