06/04/2007
(AP, RFE/RL, OSCE - 05/04/07;
Sense News Agency - 12/10/05;
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia)
A move by the municipal authorities in Serbia's northern city of Novi Sad to name two streets after two wartime commanders prompted a protest from the OSCE on Thursday (April 5th).
The commanders in question – generals Mladen Bratic and Veljko Milankovic -- were allegedly involved in atrocities during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s.
"Such a naming contradicts the important process of bringing justice to all victims of war crimes, the need for regional reconciliation and co-operation, and for resolving the regional refugee problems," Anthony Pahigian, acting head of the 55-nation organisation's office in Belgrade, said in a statement.
A Yugoslav Army officer, Bratic headed a tank unit that took part in the attack by Serb forces on the eastern Croatian town of Vukovar in 1991, during which he died.
More than 1,000 civilians were killed in the three-month siege that left the once wealthy Danube port virtually razed.
Milankovic was the commander of a paramilitary unit known as the "Wolves from Vucjak", which operated out of the town of Prnjavor in northwestern Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) in the early 1990s.
He was killed in battle in 1993.
According to UN prosecutors, Milankovic and his "Wolves" were involved in looting, harassment and similar activities, aimed at forcing Muslims to leave the Prnjavor municipality.
Noting the recently improved co-operation between the former Yugoslav republics in addressing the issue of war crimes through joint investigations or exchange of data, the OSCE urged people in Serbia to pursue that goal.
"We strongly support all regional processes of reconciliation and improved regional co-operation, as a basis for building a common European future," Pahigian said in his statement.
"In this context, we encourage all democratically oriented forces and citizens of Serbia to remain committed to this path."
The Novi Sad city assembly, which made the decision, is controlled by the nationalist Serb Radical Party (SRS).
Opposition parties within the assembly have also protested the move, walking out of the session at which it was endorsed.
"I believe it is utterly unacceptable for Novi Sad to have a boulevard named in this way," League of Vojvodina's Social Democrats caucus chief Aleksandar Jovanovic said in remarks quoted by Belgrade-based Radio B92 on Wednesday.
"Munich doesn't have a boulevard named after Adolf Hitler, therefore Novi Sad has no reason to have streets reminding people of times and events that represent the town's, Vojvodina's, Serbia's and the region's darkest hour."
But Novi Sad Mayor Maja Gojkovic of the SRS saw nothing wrong with the assembly's decision.
"I read it recently in the newspapers that street names change every couple of years in Serbia, ever since 1945," Radio B92 quoted her as saying.
"New times -- new street names, that's how I see it."
