06/02/2007
(FT, The Guardian, AP, Blic, Focus News Agency - 06/02/07;
AP, Reuters, AKI, Euronews, Interfax, Beta, B92 - 05/02/07)
Seeing no reason for further delays in the process of determining Kosovo's final status, UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari said on Monday (February 5th) he was planning to submit his final proposal for a solution to the issue to the Security Council by the end of this month.
The former Finnish president unveiled his plan, envisioning internationally supervised independence for Kosovo with broad autonomy for its Serb minority, during visits to Belgrade and Pristina on Friday.
Serbia, which considers Kosovo an integral part of its territory, immediately rejected the blueprint, while the Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90% of the province's population and who have long been pushing for independence, hailed it.
Ahtisaari will submit his final proposal to the Security Council after discussions with Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials, which are due to begin in Vienna on February 13th.
While telling British daily The Guardian that he would incorporate any "brilliant idea" that would help bring the positions of the two sides closer together, he appeared pessimistic Monday about the outcome of the upcoming consultations.
Nine months of direct talks between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian negotiators last year failed to bridge the gap in their stances.
Ahtisaari was initially due to present his proposal for a solution before the end of 2006, but he decided to put it off until after the January 21st parliamentary elections in Serbia.
Speaking to the Financial Times Monday, he suggested that little would be achieved by any further postponements.
"If somebody asks for more time, I ask them:
Will it make any difference to your views?" he said.
"I don't think giving more time will make much difference."
He also warned that a failure by the Security Council to settle the issue could rekindle violence in the province.
"If the international community wants to solve the situation, it has to be courageous enough to decide [Kosovo's] status, because the parties can't do it," he told the British daily.
Meanwhile, the EU and Russia urged Belgrade and Pristina on Monday to engage in talks on Ahtisaari's proposal.
"The EU and Russia's joint stand is that we clearly invite Belgrade and Pristina to launch negotiations on Ahtisaari's plan," EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said in Moscow, where he and German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier held talks with Russia's top diplomat, Sergey Lavrov, on a number of issues, including Kosovo.
"We need a new resolution in order to change Kosovo's status.
It would be much better if the new resolution was accepted by both sides.
If not, it will be a resolution imposed on them by the Security Council," Solana said.
In earlier statements, senior Russian officials, including President Vladimir Putin, had hinted that Moscow could use its veto power to block any Security Council resolution that is unacceptable to Belgrade.
In remarks published at the weekend, Lavrov said Russia never made any such promise to Serbia.
