05/04/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/04/07
The UNMIK Customs Service was turned over to local officials during a ceremony Tuesday (April 3rd), which also marked the opening of the new Customs Operational Centre. 
Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku attended the event, praising UNMIK Customs for its work. 
Ceku expressed his and the government's full support for the new director, Naim Huruglica, who took office Sunday.
"This centre is bad news for smugglers. 
It will enable the service to better control the goods coming into Kosovo and, through this, support the fight against contraband and organised crime," the prime minister said.
He also noted that with this transfer of competencies, the Customs Service increased its capacities to "fight" negative phenomenon. 
"Kosovo institutions step by step are taking the competencies to lead Kosovo in all levels," Ceku said.
UNMIK deputy chief Steven Schook also praised the work of UNMIK Customs. 
"The 567 members of the Customs Service have a right to be very proud today. 
Naim Huruglica has taken over a service that is already 95% compliant with EU standards," he said .
The chief of UNMIK's Pillar IV, Paul Acda, voiced confidence that the Customs Service -- with its leadership and personnel -- would achieve the highest standards.
Outgoing Director General Peter Walker symbolically handed over his epaulettes to his successor Huruglica at Tuesday's ceremony. 
He accepted them saying "I am very honoured by the trust given to me to lead this Service.
UNMIK Customs is a young service. 
It was founded seven and a half years ago and managed to develop into a modern Customs Service. 
The staff is professionally ready to manage all duties and challenges to come."
After the ceremony, the guests visited the Customs Operational Centre.
Using modern IT and video equipment, customs officers will monitor and check all border crossing points of Kosovo -- including three customs terminals, where a total of 84 video cameras are installed.
According to UNMIK, the centre will not only support the fight against smuggling, but also ensure transparency and professionalism among Customs Service personnel.
