05/04/2007
(AFP, HINA, Makfax, Sofia News Agency, Focus News Agency - 04/04/07;
Government of Bulgaria -- 03/04/07 - 04/04/07)
The prime ministers of Bulgaria and Croatia, Sergey Stanishev and Ivo Sanader, expressed their support Wednesday (April 4th) for UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's Kosovo status plan, which calls for internationally supervised independence.
The two leaders met in Zagreb, hours after the UN Security Council (UNSC) held its first debate on the former Finnish president's blueprint.
"Ahtisaari was given a mission impossible from the start -- that is, to come up with a solution acceptable to two sides with irreconcilable positions," Stanishev said at a press conference following his meeting with Sanader.
"In that regard, Ahtisaari's proposal is the only good solution, a good foundation."
What was important for Bulgaria, he added, is that the settlement to the Kosovo issue "would guarantee stability in the region and would bring it closer to European standards".
The UNSC, which plans to send a fact-finding mission to Belgrade and Pristina within the coming weeks, is likely to see a draft resolution on the province's political future by the end of this month.
Echoing Stanishev's remarks, Sanader stressed that ideal solutions to issues such as the Kosovo one were impossible to reach.
"There are no ideal plans in international policy, and both sides can find shortcomings in Ahtisaari's plan, but at this point it is the best that could have been achieved," he said.
Besides Kosovo, boosting bilateral co-operation and the region's Euro-Atlantic integration prospects, particularly Croatia's EU and NATO membership bids, were among the key issues Stanishev and Sanader discussed.
They agreed that while relations between their countries are excellent and friendly, there is room for further expansion of bilateral trade and economic co-operation.
Trade between Bulgaria and Croatia amounted to nearly 240m euros in 2006, representing a 26-fold increase from its level in 2000, when it stood at a mere 9m euros.
Stanishev and Sanader also said direct flights should be established between Zagreb and Sofia to facilitate bilateral economic ties.
They agreed that efforts should be made to encourage closer co-operation between the Croatian Adriatic port of Rijeka and the Bulgarian Black Sea port of Burgas.
Stanishev, whose country joined the EU in January and has been a NATO member since 2004, voiced Bulgaria's support for Croatia's aspirations to join the two organisations.
"It is in our interest that Croatia fulfils the criteria for membership in NATO and the EU as soon as possible and becomes a full member of these organisations," he said, adding that Sofia stood ready to share its accession experience with Zagreb.
Croatia expects to receive an invitation to join NATO during the Alliance's summit in the spring of 2008 and to be able to complete its EU accession talks by the end of that year, so that it could become the bloc's 28th member in 2009, said Sanader.
"Bulgaria believes that only Euro-Atlantic integration can guarantee lasting stability, prosperity and democratic development in the whole region," Stanishev stressed.
"The European future of this region will not be guaranteed unless we show our maturity and ability to develop regional co-operation."
After the plenary session of the official delegations, senior representatives of the Bulgarian and Croatian Defence Ministries signed a written statement of co-operation in the field of military training.
During his official one-day visit to Zagreb at the head of a 35-member business delegation, Stanishev also met with President Stipe Mesic and Parliament Speaker Vladimir Seks.
He and Sanader then attended a Bulgarian-Croatian business forum.
Stanishev wrapped up his visit with a lecture at Zagreb University.
