03/01/2011
By Nefeli Politis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 03/01/11
Muslims welcomed Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou's recent announcement that plans are moving full steam ahead for the construction of the first mosque in Athens.
Among them is Egyptian-born Naim Elghandour, chairman of the Muslim Association of Greece (MAG). 
He migrated to Greece in 1972 at the age of 18. 
His role as head of MAG, established in 2003, keeps him busy.
"We have worked very hard to raise people's awareness of issues concerning Muslims, to demonstrate that we are moderates, we are not terrorists and that no one should fear us," he told SETimes.
Although the media often claims that Muslims in Athens have been waiting decades for a mosque to be built in the capital, Elghandour said MAG submitted a formal proposal to the education and religious affairs ministry in 2006. 
It was approved, and a relevant law passed the same year.
Papandreou announced in parliament on December 10th that procedures for the mosque's construction had been accelerated, because the right to a place of worship is fundamental, the Athens News Agency (ANA) reported. 
It will be government-funded and built in the Votanikos district, near the city centre.
Although no official figure exists, Elghandour estimates there are close to one million Muslims in Greece, mostly from Asia, the Middle East and Africa. 
Based on migrant residence permit figures, there are about 500,000 Muslims registered in the greater Athens area -- many of whom Elghandour says move to rural areas to find work.
There are about 250,000 Muslim asylum-seekers, about 120,000 Muslims in Thrace, as well as tens of thousands of undocumented migrants and children of Muslim migrants.
Muslims in Athens rent offices, shops, basement apartments and garages that they use as places of worship. 
Elghandour commended the government's decision on the project. 
"I have a sense of both joy and anticipation. 
I am eagerly waiting for this project to move forward," he said.
Elghandour's Greek wife, Anna Stamou, is also actively involved in the Muslim Association of Greece. 
The pair met in 2003 while working as humanitarian aid volunteers for the Doctors of the World organisation during the Iraq war.
Stamou decided to adopt the Muslim faith two years after she married Elghandour. 
"There is no pressure for this. 
The Koran forbids us from pressuring anyone to become a Muslim," he points out. 
Stamou was among more than 500 Muslims who participated in an open-air prayer for Islam's Eid al-Adha religious celebration, organised by MAG and held in front of the University of Athens.
The celebration, in the heart of Athens' business district, proved to be an unusual sight in a country where more than 90% of the population is Greek Orthodox.
A civil servant in his early forties, who had never witnessed a Muslim prayer celebration before, said it made him "happy", as he believes everyone should have the right to freely practice their religion.
An estimated 13,000 Muslims attended Eid celebrations held at 12 sites throughout greater Athens.
At another Eid prayer gathering, held at the inner-city Attiki Square, members of the extreme-right group Chrysi Avgi and a number of residents tried to disrupt proceedings by playing loud music and throwing eggs at the faithful kneeling on prayer mats.
Elghandour said he disagreed with holding the Attiki Square celebration, as he believed it would add to tensions that have arisen between residents and migrants who have gathered at Athens' Agios Pandeleimonos district over the past year.
"Today's show of strength by African and Asian Muslims in Athens on the occasion of their religious celebration is a matter that should be of major concern for… incoming [Athens] Mayor [George] Kaminis," Greek media reported the spokesperson for the ultra-nationalist Popular Orthodox Rally (LAOS) party, Kostis Aivaliotis, as saying.
The atmosphere was far different outside the university, says Elghandour, where many Greeks extended their wishes to those praying. 
"There was one priest, who lived in Jerusalem for 40 years, who embraced me and … told me he stands by us. 
Now, when people like him, who are educated and civilised, act this way towards us, we are not concerned about a small number of right-wing extremists," he said.
He noted that the Greek people "have embraced us".
Elghandour said that some politicians and extremist groups are cultivating fears and racist attitudes to gain political advantage "in an attempt to convince a despairing youth that migrants are to blame for the [economic] crisis Greece is experiencing".
"A Greek high school graduate will not go and work as a painter or baker or fisherman or construction worker … All families want their children to study and take an office job. 
Therefore in practice, 90% of migrants have not taken the jobs of Greeks," he explains.
Speaking in parliament on the day of Papandreou's announcement regarding the mosque plans, LAOS Chairman George Karatzaferis referred to what he described as a "shocking" report on Islamic extremism in Greece, which charges that the majority of Muslim migrants in the country are obviously not terrorists, "yet they [fanatical Islamists] use this growing community to penetrate into societies", ANA reported.
Responding to a question tabled in parliament by Karatzaferis, who cited press reports of an alleged "mobilisation of Muslim extremist circles in Athens", Papandreou said "the absence of places of worship leads to the creation of semi-illegal spaces, or it forces the faithful to practice their religion outdoors, making what should be a normal event appear like an uprising or a protest," according to ANA.
Elghandour said that if Karatzaferis or anyone else has information concerning Muslims, they should give it to the police.
"If he is not certain, however, then he should remain silent because it is a disgrace for the leader of a political party to sell populism and influence the Greek on the street, who may not be well informed," Elghandour said.
He believes Greece is viewed differently than other Western countries as it has never been an "occupier" of other nations. 
"Greeks who lived around the world lived in peace with locals," he explained.
However, he said that right-wing elements in Greece attempt to "create a climate of hate so that Muslims abroad will think that Greece mistreats Muslims".
"We are aware of their plans, which were spoiled because we are here. 
The image of Greece and its population of 11 million will not be ruined by two or three hundred who engage in these types of practices," Elghandour said.
As for Papandreou's support for places of worship for all individuals in Greece, Elghandour said "it is a matter of culture. 
A civilised country must have places of worship for all faithful, of all religions."
