04/05/2007
(B92 - 04/05/05;
FT, AKI, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network, B92 - 03/05/07;
DPA, Beta - 02/05/07)
With the deadline for the formation of Serbia's next government looming, coalition talks between the parties in so-called democratic bloc again failed to produce a deal Thursday (May 3rd).
Serbian President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DS), outgoing Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) and former finance minister Mladjan Dinkic's G17 Plus have until May 14th to reach an agreement.
Failing that, the country will face new parliamentary elections, which would benefit the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS), the winner of the largest share of votes in the country's inconclusive poll on January 21st.
The DS, which was second in the elections, has already conceded the prime minister post to Kostunica, but insists on getting more than half of the ministerial seats in the new cabinet, expected to include at least 21 members.
During Thursday's brief and tense meeting between the leaders of the three parties, Tadic reportedly told Kostunica that there was no way his party could agree to the DSS taking the top positions in the interior and transportation ministries, and at the state security agency (BIA).
Kostunica, whose party was third in the January elections, insisted however that outgoing Interior Minister Dragan Jocic, BIA head Rade Bulatovic and Minister for Capital Investments Velimir Ilic retain their posts.
The DS, which cites Serbia's EU integration as its top priority, says it will be able to advance the process if it has a majority in the new government.
Serbia began talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU in October 2005.
But negotiations were suspended a year ago following the Serbian government's failure to arrest and hand over former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) by April 30th, 2006, as Kostunica had promised.
The EU has made full co-operation with The Hague-based tribunal a key condition for the country's accession progress.
The top interior ministry and BIA posts are thus key to meeting that requirement.
The DS insists that if the two institutions come under its control, it would act quickly to arrest and hand over Mladic to the ICTY, which is also pushing for the arrest of five other war crimes fugitives, including former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
The European Commission (EC) said on Wednesday that it expects the new Serbian government to meet its obligations to the ICTY for the SAA talks to resume, stressing its readiness to do so "as soon as possible."
The condition remains the same, there is nothing new in relations between the EU and Serbia and the Serbian authorities are expected "to demonstrate a clear political resolve and take effective steps towards arresting the remaining war crimes suspects," Beta news agency quoted EC sources as saying.
"We are currently in a very difficult situation regarding relations between Serbia and the EU," Tanja Miscevic, head of Serbia's EU integration office, said on Wednesday.
"All our obligations regarding the fulfilment of priorities are at a standstill now -- it is simply necessary to wait for the new government in order for processes to continue -- primarily the process of internal reforms.
The new cabinet must be in place as soon as possible so the process can continue."
According to a report in the Serbian daily, Kurir, published hours before Thursday's coalition talks, the new government would be formed by next week.
However, the meeting between the DS, DSS and G17 Plus leaders ended without them announcing a date for further negotiations.
