03/11/2006
By Marina Stojanvska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 03/11/06
Following a month of debate, the Macedonian parliament on Monday (October 30th) adopted a new law on police.
Seventy-one MPs voted "yes", 12 abstained, and none present opposed it.
MPs from the opposition Albanian coalition, consisting of the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) and the Party for Democratic Prosperity (PDP), declined to support the legislation, as did the Liberal Democrats.
The vote revealed divisions within the main opposition party, the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia.
MPs seen as close to outgoing party leader Vlado Buckovski supported the bill, while lawmakers close to Radmila Sekerinska -- considered the most serious candidate for new party leader -- abstained.
The EU mission in Macedonia praised the adoption of police reform as a significant step.
However, it also expressed regret that continuing disagreements over some key aspects of the law are obvious.
It encouraged all parties to work for consensus.
Immediately after the law was adopted, however, the DUI-PDP coalition warned that mayors from their parties would not co-operate with the police.
The coalition has 15 mayors out of the 16 municipalities with a majority Albanian population.
Without a majority vote of the MPs representing ethnic Albanians, there will be serious implications, the coalition said.
"The president of the government should consider carefully whether the announcement of protests by the DUI mayors should be seen as disobedience, rebellion or radicalisation," said Izet Mexheti, the mayor of Skopje's Cair Municipality and a DUI member.
One day after parliament adopted the law, President Branko Crvenkovski signed a decree for its promulgation.
At the same time, he expressed regret that an opportunity for a wider consensus in parliament had been missed.
He called on the government and opposition to overcome their differences before the law comes into effect a year from now.
The new law establishes eight interior sectors, within which 38 police stations of general competence will operate.
The only amendment the government accepted was made at the request of the Democratic Party of Albanians, a member of the ruling coalition.
It reduces the amount of prior service required for police chiefs from 12 to ten years, and for police station commanders from ten to six years.
One innovation in the law relates to the selection of these station commanders.
The council of the municipality in which the station is located will elect a commander by a majority vote.
The list of candidates must include at least three people, one of whom must belong to the majority community in the respective municipality.
