04/04/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 04/04/07
Croatia's state-owned radio and television has a new interim head, but the selection process was marred by controversy.
With members of the governing body unable to agree on a choice, tensions at a March 29th meeting erupted into physical violence.
"This Council has behaved inappropriately, disgracing itself," said Zdenko Ljevak, the president of the broadcaster's Programme Council and a major Croatian publisher.
"We all crossed a line and this kind of behaviour is unacceptable!"
Trouble started as disagreements over the new general manager escalated into personal attacks.
Some Council members accused others of being brainwashed by political parties.
Then one member, Jadranka Kolarevic, took off her shoe and started hitting her colleague Danko Bljajic.
Both emerged from the incident slightly injured.
"I apologize for the incident, but I was defending myself," Bljajic said afterwards.
"This Council has proven to be a political masquerade and I cannot take part in this circus anymore." He and Kolarevic have resigned.
Despite the fracas, the Programme Council did manage to appoint a temporary general manager to replace Mirko Galic, who has been appointed ambassador to France.The new head is Vanja Sutlic, a veteran television journalist who previously served as Galic's deputy.
Although Sutlic received six out of eleven votes, this was not enough for a permanent appointment.
After one month, the post will be open again and the selection process will resume.
In his initial statement after the vote, Sutlic called on his colleagues to continue with their good work and responsible journalism.
He declined to comment on the circumstances of his election.
Officials and politicians generally refrained from comment on the incident, saying they did not want to undermine the independence of the Programme Council.
Off the record, several politicians expressed dismay.
"Any comment on the behaviour of the Programme Councillors is redundant," said one MP, Pero Kovacevic.
"It is obvious that they have their own interests, which gives rise to insults and even fights."
