02/11/2006
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 02/11/06
Romanians have had their say about who is their country's greatest figure, digging deep into the past to choose Stefan cel Mare (Stephen the Great).
On October 21st, after six months of public discussion, nearly 363,000 citizens chose among ten candidates who made it to the finals of a show organised by Romania's state television, TVR.
Stephen the Great (1433-1504) won a landslide victory, receiving 77.5% of the votes.
Ruler of Moldova, one of the three historic provinces that were to unite in 1918 to form Romania, he remains popular among Romanians due to the 44 monasteries and churches he built throughout his reign, the second longest in Romanian history.
Vanquisher of Sultan Mohamed II in the battle of Vaslui (1475), Stephen the Great gained the respect of European leaders, who saw him as a gifted military strategist.
Pope Sextus IV dubbed him "Christ's Athlete", and the Romanian Orthodox Church sanctified him in 1992.
The goal of the TV production was to single out, through the eyes of a people, outstanding persons who, by means of their deeds and accomplishments, remained in the collective memory of a nation across centuries and even millenniums -- embodying, to the highest degree, the values of humanity, knowledge and action.
Some critics, though, argue that the show is simply entertainment.
It is meaningless, they say, to single out one special character among the many personalities who left their mark on Romanian history, society and culture.
"Great Romanians" was an adaptation of a BBC production.
The idea has been a success in many other countries around the world.
Romania's winner will now compete in an international match up of personalities.
The contest is structured in two phases -- nominations and the voting.
The nomination process started on May 27th and ended on July 8th, assembling 100 distinguished Romanian personalities on a single list.
The ten who qualified for the final were each honoured with a documentary featuring a current celebrity who pleaded to the viewers on behalf of his or her "client".
The evaluation criteria were courage, genius, greatness, leadership abilities and spiritual legacy.
The other nine finalists were, in descending order according to the number of votes, King Carol I;
poet Mihai Eminescu;
the ruler Mihai Viteazu (Michael the Brave);
evangelical Christian minister Richard Wurmbrand;
dictator Ion Antonescu;
writer, philosopher and religious historian Mircea Eliade;
ruler Alexandru Ioan Cuza;
sculptor Constantin Brancusi;
and gymnast Nadia Comaneci.
