02/11/2006
By Igor Jovanovic and Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times – 02/11/06
Postponing a decision on Kosovo's status "would contribute nothing", US special envoy Frank Wisner said in Belgrade on Tuesday (October 31st). 
"The issue should be resolved as soon as possible, so that the region is not left in a vacuum," he said.
He also pledged that Serbs would be ensured a future in Kosovo. 
"The rights of no people in the Balkans will be as strongly protected as will the rights of Serbs and their churches and monasteries in Kosovo," Wisner told reporters after talks with Serbian President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic.
Asked about the possibility of deferring a decision on Kosovo because of upcoming elections in Serbia, Wisner said he could not "speak hypothetically, as the date of the vote in Serbia has not been set".
The same day, however, EU security chief Javier Solana suggested that UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari should delay presenting his final proposal on status until after the Serbian elections, if the vote is held this year.
"If this were the case, I think that [former Finnish] President Ahtisaari and those who are helping him, should wait," Solana told reporters in Madrid.
Meanwhile, a spokesperson for Ahtisaari downplayed media reports this week that leaked details of the envoy's draft proposal. 
Citing Western diplomatic sources, the reports said it does not stipulate independence outright, but rather sets out benchmarks leading to "conditional independence".
Kosovo would initially be a state without a chair in the UN, a foreign ministry or an army, the reports said. 
After a period of 12 to 18 months, however, the Kosovo Assembly would adopt a new constitution, declare independence, and gain the right to request full membership in the UN.
But Ahtisaari's spokesperson, Hua Jiang, stressed that the envoy has neither finished his proposal nor presented anything to UN officials in New York other than initial ideas. 
"We are still working on it, talking with the Contact Group members, and the future status of Kosovo cannot be determined in this stage," Jiang told the Belgrade based Beta news agency.
Leaders in Belgrade and Pristina have reacted critically to the reported details. 
Serbian Prime Minister Kostunica said the proposal would be "doomed to failure" if it violates Serbian territorial integrity, while Kosovo counterpart Agim Ceku told visiting EU envoy Stephan Lehne that "there will be a problem" if Ahtisaari's document does not refer to Kosovo independence.
"The majority of Kosovo's people are waiting for independence. 
It is very important that Ahtisaari's report mentions Kosovo's independence," Ceku said.
For his part, Lehne highlighted the need to push ahead with the implementation of UN-set standards for Kosovo. 
While the Kosovo institutions have achieved much progress, they "still have much work to do", Lehne said.
Declining to comment on any specific solution for Kosovo's future, he said the timetable should become clearer after the Contact Group meeting scheduled for November 10th.
"I think that on November 10th, we will know more clearly the agenda," Lehne said. 
"Until now there has been no clear decision, even though we have seen individual statements."
