05/03/2007
(EurActiv, The New Anatolian, Turkish Daily News - 05/03/07; Journal of Turkish Weekly - 04/03/07; New Europe, Today's Zaman, The New Anatolian - 03/03/07; AP, EUobserver, Turkish Daily News - 02/03/07)
The EU aims to open talks on up to four new chapters in its negotiations with Turkey by the end of Germany's presidency of the EU on June 30th, a European Commission (EC) spokeswoman said on Friday (March 2nd).
Ankara began its accession negotiations with the EU in October 2005, but has so far completed only one chapter, science and research. 
In December, the EU endorsed a decision, freezing membership talks with Turkey on eight of all 35 negotiating chapters, for Ankara's refusal to open ports and airports to traffic from Cyprus. 
The Greek part of the divided island joined the EU in 2004, but its administration is not recognised by Ankara.
"The EC hopes ... 
to see up to four chapters opened [by the end of] the German presidency," Krisztina Nagy, the EC spokeswoman for enlargement, said at a daily news briefing Friday.
The first of the new chapters, covering enterprise and industrial policy, could be opened by the end of March and the other three -- economic and monetary policy, statistics, and financial control -- in the course of the next four months. 
The opening of new chapters, however, must be approved by all 27 bloc members.
According to the December decision, no chapter can be provisionally closed until Turkey has met its obligations under a protocol it signed in 2005, extending its 1963 customs union agreement with the EU to all its members, including Cyprus.
Nagy stressed that progress in the negotiations would only be possible if Turkey continues to implement the EU required reforms with determination.
Following the partial suspension of its accession talks, Ankara said it would draw up its own reform strategy, on the basis of its "own priorities and deadlines".
Stressing his country's commitment to reform, Turkish Economy Minister Ali Babacan, who is also the country's chief negotiator with the EU, said on Friday that Ankara would unveil its plan by the beginning of April. 
Speaking to reporters during a meeting organised by the European Policy Centre in Brussels, he said the road map covers the period until 2013. 
It also reportedly covers the areas of the eight suspended chapters.
"Our priorities are in the road map because we want to show Europe that we have serious intentions and we are working with precision on each of the chapters rejected by the Commission," Babacan said.
Turkey's accession talks are widely expected to take another ten years to complete.
Ankara appears to believe, however, that it will be fully prepared to join the EU in less than seven years. 
During his visit to Brussels, Babacan called on NGOs to promote January 1st, 2014 as the target date for membership.
"We deem it useful for civil organisations to mention 2014 as Turkey's EU membership target, but if we express it as the government, it may cause a counter reaction," the Journal of Turkish Weekly quoted the minister as saying. 
"We said we would achieve everything in adapting to the EU acquis by the end of 2013."
