04/04/2007
(AFP, DPA, Reuters, Independent, VOA, B92 - 04/04/07; AP, DPA, BBC, The New York Times, AKI, Beta, B92 - 03/04/07)
The UN Security Council (UNSC) met behind closed doors Tuesday (April 3rd) to discuss UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's Kosovo status plan, marking the start of a decisive phase in efforts to resolve the issue.
"This is an important day because it starts a process," Ahtisaari said Tuesday. 
"I wouldn't like to say that this is a marathon, but it may be at least a 10,000-metre run."
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, the EU Presidency and the United States have expressed their support for Ahtisaari's proposal, which recommends internationally supervised independence for the Serbian province. 
Kosovo's Albanians, accounting for 90% of its population of 2 million, have also accepted it.
Belgrade, which insists on retaining some degree of sovereignty, has rejected the plan. 
Addressing the UNSC closed-door session on Tuesday, outgoing Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica reiterated his country's offer to grant Kosovo "substantial autonomy".
Speaking to the press after the session, he said the Ahtisaari plan "has not been accepted by the Security Council". 
He reiterated Belgrade's call for new negotiations and the appointment of a new mediator.
But Britain's UN Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry, who currently presides over the Security Council, said the Serbian prime minister's remarks were "entirely erroneous". 
He dismissed the suggestion that a new mediator is being sought.
"There was considerable support among member states for [Former Finnish] President Ahtisaari's proposals," Jones Parry told reporters, noting that the 15-nation body would decide soon on whether to visit Belgrade and Pristina, as Russia has proposed.
"I will expect further discussions this month. 
I don't think it's likely there will be an early presentation of a Security Council resolution," he said. 
He added that the six-nation Contact Group – consisting of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States – is likely to begin drafting a proposed resolution within weeks.
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu also attended Tuesday's meeting, but could not address the Council for protocol reasons. 
He told reporters later that "unfortunately we have exhausted all possibilities of a negotiated agreement".
The acting US ambassador to the United Nations, Alejandro Wolff, said granting Kosovo supervised independence "is the only option really available", though he noted a need for "more information and education" showing why Ahtisaari's plan is the right way to proceed.
French Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sabliere also voiced support for the UN special envoy's proposal for Kosovo and cautioned against any attempts to delay a decision on its final status.
"What is at stake is the stability of Europe and this is the completion of the process of the breakup of the former Yugoslavia, so it's a very specific situation," the French envoy said. 
"To keep the status quo is not an option. 
It would be even dangerous."
