05/01/2007
(AFP, AP, OSCE, Makfax - 04/01/07; SEE Security Monitor -- 27/12/06 - 29/12/06; AP - 21/12/06)
Albania's ruling and opposition parties were criticised by the international community on Thursday (January 4th) for their continuing dispute over the local elections, scheduled for January 20th.
"We are deeply concerned by the lack of progress in preparations" for the vote, the heads of the OSCE, Council of Europe, European Commission and US mission in Tirana said in a joint statement. 
The document also was signed by the German charge d'affaires, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency.
The politicians' failure to implement agreements on voter lists and other technical issues makes it increasingly likely that the vote will be postponed. 
Last week, Prime Minister Sali Berisha, leader of the ruling Democratic Party (DP), suggested that the poll could be rescheduled for February 20th, to allow time for resolving disagreements with the opposition.
EU security chief Javier Solana also voiced concern. 
"Failure to ensure democratic elections would risk doing harm to Albania's progress towards Europe and would reflect negatively on the political forces in the country," he said in a statement.
Previous elections in Albania's post-communist history have been marred by irregularities, drawing criticism from the OSCE, the EU and NATO. 
The upcoming one is viewed as another major test of the country's ability to meet international standards.
Citing the DP-led coalition's unwillingness to reform the electoral code, despite having agreed to do so in an August bipartisan accord, the main opposition Socialist Party (SP) threatened last month to boycott the vote.
Noting the Albanian political leadership's failure to implement the agreements reached by the country's two main parties thus far, representatives of the international community called for quick action to resolve all outstanding issues, including the one involving birth certificates.
The SP has accused the government of distributing fake birth certificates, allowing people to vote more than once. 
The government has denied the accusation.
Macedonian Makfax news agency reported on Thursday that representatives of Albania's governing coalition and the opposition parties reached an agreement on electoral boards and other technical issues late Wednesday and were continuing talks on new election legislation.
"We expect the Albanian ruling majority and the opposition to enact all necessary legislative changes without further delay, to engage immediately in constructive preparation for and to participate fully in the local government elections," the representatives of the international community in Tirana said. 
"Co-operation of all Albanian actors is essential for the success of the elections. 
The failure of one side to contribute to consensus and act in good faith must not penalise the whole country."
