05/01/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/01/07
After a long wait, Belgrade is finally in talks with Brussels concerning visa system mitigation for certain categories of Serbian citizens. 
An agreement is expected to be reached by spring 2007 and put into effect by the end of the year.
Visa mitigations, also known as Schengen visas, apply to certain European countries. 
Under the anticipated deal, they would be granted only to some categories of Serbian citizens -- students, businessmen, scientists and academic professionals.
Serbia wants to make it easier for its citizens to get visas allowing them to work temporarily in EU countries. 
Brussels, meanwhile, is concerned about illegal immigration. 
Before relaxing the visa conditions, it wants to see Serbia show it is ready and able -- via a readmission agreement -- to deal with citizens residing illegally within the EU.
The Serbian delegation to the talks is led by Interior Minister Dragan Jocic and the head of the government's office for EU accession, Tanja Miscevic.
According to Srdjan Majstorovic of the EU accession office, success in the Schengen visa talks would be a major milestone in terms of Serbian aspirations to join the EU.
Serbia must meet certain predefined standards, such as the security of personal documents, Majstorovic said. 
"I'm primarily referring to certain technical standards, such as travel documents, introduction of visa and information systems in our diplomatic-consular missions, civilian border control, gradual withdrawal of military forces from the borders, as well as the task of border-police training for the implementation of these standards," she explained.
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Montenegro also are hoping for visa system mitigation. 
European Commission Vice President Franco Frattini, the organiser of the negotiations, says the talks clearly demonstrate the EU's political support for the Western Balkans.
Cedomir Jovanovic, president of Serbia's Liberal Democratic Party, said a visa agreement would be more than welcome. 
However, he charged that current government policies present obstacles to Serbia's further integration.
"Now we have to think of the next step, which would be the complete visa abolishment," Jovanovic told reporters. 
"This can be realised when we meet the technical conditions of the visa negotiations -- signing of the readmission agreement, the introduction of new passports and border-police control."
"Above all, though, we must change the political climate in our country and accept European values. 
It is essential that we create Europe within Serbia, and this is entirely up to us," Jovanovic said.
