03/05/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 03/05/07
Unemployment, one of the most serious problems in Macedonia, is rising again. 
According to the latest statistics from the State Employment Agency, 372,078 people were without jobs in February 2007, compared to 361,335 in October 2006 -- an increase of nearly 11,000.
Officially, the unemployment rate is estimated at 37%, putting Macedonia at the top of countries in Europe. 
However, many local experts believe the figures are unrealistic. 
They argue that the way official statistical records are kept does not provide objective results.
The key problem is that unemployment data is based on the number of people who register at the employment agency so they can receive health insurance "blue cards". 
But many Macedonians work in the informal or "grey" economy, or at enterprises where they are paid under the table. 
Even though they are generating income, they register as unemployed for the purpose of gaining access to the state health insurance system.
Similarly, farmers often register as unemployed, again for the purpose of getting a blue card.
Successive governments have tried to address the problem, but without result. 
When President Branko Crvenkovski was prime minister, his administration offered tax relief to companies as an incentive to come clean, but the effects were miniscule.
Subsequently, former Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski tried to update the list of unemployed by erasing those who had not reported for more than six months. 
Around 85,000 people were dropped from the lists in 2005 and 2006, but many have started reporting again.
The most recent idea is to have the Health Fund issue the blue cards instead of the Employment Agency. 
That way, farmers and temporary employees would not have to list themselves as jobless. 
As a result, the unemployment level is expected to drop by about 100,000.
According to unofficial estimates, the actual unemployment rate -- that is, representing people who do not have an income or steady work -- is closer to 20%. 
This figure is still high, and the government of Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski is under pressure to make good on campaign promises to boost employment.
The government hopes the introduction of new tax rates -- the lowest in Europe -- will spur investment and create opportunities.
