03/04/2007
By Bekim Greicevci for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/04/07
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, on a visit to Kosovo, said the UN Security Council would arrive at a just settlement of the status issue. 
He warned that no one should be under the illusion that violence, or the threat of violence, could lead to a solution.
"I am quite sure that the Security Council will come to a just conclusion. 
No rush, no unnecessary delay," he told reporters Monday (April 2nd), following talks with Kosovo leaders, UNMIK officials and the commander of KFOR, Lieutenant General Roland Kather.
"Anybody who would like to resort to violence is not only wrong, but is harming the process from whatever side of Kosovo society he or she comes, de Hoop Scheffer said. 
"Moderation is the key word … leaving the responsibility where it now belongs and that is the Security Council of the United Nations."
The NATO chief visited Kosovo together with the North Atlantic Council (NAC), comprised of the 26 NATO Permanent Representatives. 
The trip came one day ahead of the first formal Security Council discussions on the province's future status.
After the talks in Pristina, the NAC ambassadors toured different parts of Kosovo to assess the situation on the ground. 
One group paid a visit to the Serbian Orthodox Decani monastery, part of which was damaged by a mortar attack Friday. 
KFOR and police have since boosted security measures and are promising a thorough investigation.
Meanwhile, a senior US diplomat is urging the EU and the international community to reach a consensus on the future of Kosovo, as the status quo in the province can no longer be maintained.
"We can't keep going on like this, with Kosovo in limbo. 
After eight years of rule and administration by the UN they deserve more clarity about their future and further delay will destabilise the situation," US Assistant Secretary of State Daniel Fried told journalists in Berlin on Monday.
He added that Washington favours an independent Kosovo under international supervision, as called for by UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has given his full support for Ahtisaari's recommendations. 
"I hope that Security Council members will constructively engage in dialogue on this issue," he said on Monday.
