28/11/2011
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 28/11/11
At 33, Macedonian Foreign Minister Nikola Poposki represents a new generation of Balkan politicians. 
He has lived abroad in France and Ireland and has worked at the European Commission. 
Before becoming foreign minister, he served as Macedonia's resident representative to the EU in Brussels.
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Poposki talks about the dispute with Greece, co-operation with other neighbours and the diplomatic offensive Macedonia is waging to get a date for negotiations for EU accession and NATO membership.
SETimes: In 20 years of independence, what are Maceodonia's most significant diplomatic achievements and challenges?
Nikola Poposki: In terms of success, I believe they are linked to our strategic objectives. 
The fact that we have fulfilled the predefined conditions to become a NATO member state is definitely making the most significant. 
Based on the EC's three latest annual assessments, it applies to the start of accession talks with the European Union, as well.
The benefits from visa liberalisation are invaluable. 
They have required a tremendous effort from an extremely wide range of our administrative and diplomatic capacities. 
Both objectives (NATO and EU membership) bring us to the key challenge: the Greek tendency to have a de facto unfavourable position towards Macedonian membership in both families.
SETimes: Is the name issue between Macedonia and Greece frozen long-term because of the difficult situation in -- and instability of -- Greece?
Poposki: Obstructive behaviours historically are not unknown to our region, but it is quite unique that they are based on such an irrational foundation and nourished by entirely inexistent threats. 
This gives ground to concerns that the resolution prospects might not be perceived as being the brightest ever.
The Greek debt crisis and its political consequences are certainly not what one can wish for. 
But there is perhaps one great opportunity that can be seized.
Never has our southern neighbour had a government with such a wide base in parliament. 
With some political wisdom, the oldest NATO and EU member state in the region can become a constructive champion of the "Balkans' peace and stability project". 
I am convinced that this is a historic opportunity to shift from "I block, because I can" to a regional concept that would promote inclusiveness and respect of core human European values.
SETimes: Following the EU report in October that pointedly omitted use of the word "Macedonian" as an adjective, the public sending waves of mail to the EC. 
What effect does this "letters to Brussels" protest have?
Poposki: The content and number of these letters reflect the reaction of a nation, being denied a fundamental right. 
Considerable Greek efforts have been invested to make disappear any references to national self-identification parameters in the EU institutional paperwork. 
The natural effect of this kind of practice has on a human being is the one of profound injustice. 
Not to mention how incompatible such a pressure instrument is with core European values.
It seems expectable that in a postmodern European environment, the overall supranational interest and values will prevail over a tendency to deny to your neighbour the right to self-identification. 
From that perspective, I am confident that Europe will preserve the attractive force it has. 
"United in our diversities" shows the way the EU has and should favour.
SETimes: Can you assess relations with two of Macedonia's other neighbours, Serbia and Bulgaria?
Poposki: With Serbia we have a continuity of excellent relations dating back to the federal past. 
People, business, cultural events have established strong links between our states. 
A critical challenge emerged with our decision to recognise Kosovo's independence.
Historically relations with Bulgaria have always been predetermined by the larger political context. 
Still, human and economic ties that are linking our bilateral relationship I believe have prevailed. 
During initial phases of the modern state creation process in the Balkans, much of Macedonian intellectual elite was Sofia-based educated. 
This has been both an asset and an obstacle for the development of our bilateral relations. 
We were also for several decades separated by the curtain.
Today our relations are enhanced by our common future in the larger Euro-Atlantic family. 
We have to encourage better infrastructural linkages that will strengthen regional ties. 
The potential for economic co-operation is really huge for both countries. 
This is our shared regional interest.
SETimes: Is the Albania-Kosovo decision to open joint consular offices a threat to the political status quo in the Balkans?
Poposki: Joint consular offices are in fact quite forward-looking, if you observe it from a regional integration perspective. 
If this is not limited to only two countries -- and it is clearly not the case -- I tend to observe it as an opportunity rather than a threat. 
The current status quo means lack of integration in the Balkans. 
What can help the prosperity of our region is more integration.
