02/05/2007
(AFP, AP, DPA, US Department of Defence, US Department of State, Radio and Television Montenegro - 01/05/07)
The United States and Montenegro signed an agreement Tuesday (May 1st), paving the way for enhanced bilateral military co-operation.
The pact, known as Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), was signed by US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic, less than nine months after the formal establishment of diplomatic ties last August.
Montenegro declared independence on June 3rd, 2006. 
Two weeks earlier, the majority of voters in the Adriatic republic of just over 630,000 people supported its secession from the loose union established with Serbia in 2003.
"The United States welcomes Montenegro as a friend and a partner, a partner in the increasing stability in the Balkans," Rice said at a joint press conference with Vujanovic. 
The military co-operation agreement, she added, "establishes a basis for United States military personnel to operate in Montenegro for mutually agreed activities".
A statement issued by the US Defence Department on Tuesday, further explains that SOFAs define the legal status of US military personnel and their property in the territory of the host nation. 
They also delineate rights and responsibilities between the governments of the two countries "regarding criminal and civil jurisdiction, tax and customs matters, entry and exit of personal property, and resolving damage claims".
The pact, Rice said, will allow the Montenegrin and US armed forces to carry out regular exchanges, training exercises and other co-operation activities.
Vujanovic, who heads a delegation that includes Montenegro's foreign and defence ministers, Milan Rocen and Boro Vucinic, signed the agreement during his first official visit to the United States since his country became independent.
The conclusion of the deal "is a confirmation of the friendship between Montenegro and the United States and a major step towards enhancement of these relations," he said in remarks at the signing ceremony. 
"I wish to thank the US administration and the US citizens for the assistance they have provided to Montenegro in building democratic institutions, in affirming democratic values, and in reforming our economy."
Montenegro is seeking entry into the EU and NATO. 
In December, Vujanovic signed the framework document for his country's accession to the Alliance's Partnership for Peace programme, a major first step towards eventual membership.
Voicing support for Euro-Atlantic integration, Rice pledged on Tuesday that her country would work with Montenegro to achieve that goal.
Vujanovic expressed hope that Tuesday's deal would encourage more US companies to invest in his country, participate in its privatisation process and establish partnerships with Montenegrin businesses. 
"The signing of the SOFA agreement sets a new basis for our relations in securities here and it is indeed fresh proof, evidence that Montenegro is a safe environment and thereby, this is a new additional invitation for new economic partnerships."
In Montenegro, which adopted the deutschmark in 1999 and then the euro in 2002, almost all banks and nearly 90% of state-owned enterprises and property have already been privatised. 
Tourism, particularly along the Adriatic coast, is booming and the country is ranked among the fastest growing tourist destinations in the world.
