03/04/2007
(Zaman, The New Anatolian - 03/04/07; FT, Bloomberg, Turkish Press - 02/04/07)
Official figures released on Monday (April 2nd) showed that Turkey's real GDP growth reached 6.1% in 2006, well above the 5% forecast for the fifth year since the devastating financial crisis of 2001.
"The cumulative rate of real GDP growth reached 40% in the past five years, marking it as the longest stretch of uninterrupted growth in Turkey's history," Bloomberg news agency quoted Serhan Cevik, an economist at London-based Morgan Stanley, as saying in a note to investors.
A report published by the Turkish Statistical Institute on Monday showed that GDP growth for the fourth quarter last year was 5.2% year on year, much higher than an earlier projection of 4.3% for the last three months of 2006 and 0.4% higher than the 4.8% rise in the third quarter.
Turkey's gross national product (GNP) -- the total wealth earned or brought into existence in a particular year by a country -- rose by 6% in 2006, to stand at almost $400 billion.
Describing Turkey's macroeconomic performance since 2001 as "impressive," an IMF statement last month attributed it to political stability, structural reforms, and favourable external conditions. 
"In particular, improvements in the bank supervisory framework, tax reform, and privatisation have strengthened the banking system, promoted foreign direct investment, and enhanced productivity."
A move by the Turkish Central Bank last spring to raise its overnight lending rates by 4.25 percentage points to 17.5% in response to a major outflow of capital from emerging markets in May and June fuelled expectations for a contraction in the latter half of 2006. 
But that did not materialise and the economy continued to grow.
"Everybody was expecting a contraction in the second half of last year after the crisis, but that didn't happen," Cevik said. 
"There has been a significant decoupling of financial volatility and economic performance in Turkey, which is part of being a normal economy."
However, the higher costs of borrowing have brought about a slowdown in consumer spending. 
A 24% increase in consumer credits in the three months preceding the rate increase was followed by a sharp decline, with banks posting an only 3% rise in the third quarter of last year. 
This was followed by a rebound in the final quarter, when total outstanding loans to consumers increased by 6.5%.
The fiscal discipline pursued by the government has translated into a reduction of the net public debt stock to 44.8% of GDP in 2006, the Turkish daily Zaman quoted Economy Minister Ali Babacan as saying at a press conference Monday in Ankara. 
The public debt to GDP ratio for the previous year was 51%, down from 91% in 2001.
Babacan also noted that the national income per capita grew from $2,598 in 2002 to $5,477 last year. 
As a result of a significant improvement in income distribution, only 0.01% of Turkey's population now lives on less than $1 a day, the minister said.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who is also the leader of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), has promised to boost per capita national income to $10,000 by the end of the next five-year period.
"A secure and stable environment allowed for historic jumps in terms of figures in Turkey," a report Monday by the Turkish Press quoted Erdogan as saying. 
"Foreign investments exceeded $10 billion as of March, which shows that Turkey has become a promising economy for not only domestic investors but also for international ones who trust the economy's stability and resilience."
His statement came ahead of the country's May presidential election. 
Erdogan is widely expected to run for the post, subject to a vote by Parliament. 
If he wins the ballot, he will have to step down as AKP leader, potentially affecting the party's chances in the November parliamentary elections.
The AKP won a landslide victory in the November 2002 legislative elections, allowing it to run the country on its own for the past almost five years. 
It credits the victory with ushering in an era of political stability.
