02/04/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --02/04/07
During the last election, many parties promised there would be more women in the next Parliament.
The legislature has been formed, but the promises have not translated into results.
The number of female MPs is still below 30%.
At the urging of the European Movement in Serbia (EMS), the daily Blic conducted a survey allowing readers to choose a women's government.
Heading it is "Prime Minister" Ruzica Djindjic, a Democratic Party (DP) member and widow of assassinated Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
Serbia's new constitution calls for both sexes to be equally represented in the assembly, the EMS points out.
With women only amounting to 20.4% of members, the actual situation is at odds with this constitutional requirement.
Nevertheless, it is an improvement.
In the previous Parliament, the figure stood at only 10.8%.
"We are all trying to affirm women's participation in politics, but the quotas cannot be met overnight.
In some younger parties -- formed later -- it is easier, but in parties like ours, existing for 16 years, it is hard to change the structure," said DP representative Milan Markovic.
Of the DP's 64 parliamentary representatives, only 15 are women.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica thinks imposing gender quotas does not yield results.
"I am strongly against deciding on things according to a code, that election lists have to have 20% women, 10% young, 5% national minorities.
That is not good," he said.
Dusan Bajatovic of the Serbian Socialist Party says women have to fight for themselves.
"If somebody wants to get something in society, as a general rule, he has to steal it," he believes.
One party that did meet its campaign pledge was G17 Plus.
Out its nine seats in Parliament, seven went to women.
The party also has a woman vice president.
"G17 Plus supports the constructive critique by the women's government and the EMS," the party said in response to the <I>Blic</I> initiative.
"By pointing out positive examples, we can contribute even more to achieving equality among men and women in politics."
