02/04/2007
(FT, Rompres, Nine o'Clock, Ziarul Financiar - 02/04/07; AP, Reuters, DPA, Mediafax, Sofia News Agency - 01/04/07)
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu proposed a new government Monday (April 2nd), made up of representatives of his National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR).
The move came a day after he ousted all eight ministers from the Democratic Party (PD), confirming the end of his party's partnership with the PD. 
The alliance between the parties was victorious in the December 2004 elections, but subsequently broke down amid a feud between Tariceanu and President Traian Basescu, the head of the Democrats.
"We need a breath of fresh air," the prime minister said in a televised address Sunday. 
"The current Liberal-Democrat ruling alliance no longer has what it takes to overcome the political crisis and find solutions for the good of the Romanian people."
Months of bickering between the PNL and PD, and particularly between Tariceanu and Basescu, have brought reforms to a virtual standstill. 
Their deteriorating relations sank to a new low last week, when the prime minister renewed his proposal for the withdrawal of Romania's 600-strong contingent from Iraq -- a move Basescu opposes.
The two have also clashed over the timing of elections for members of the European Parliament. 
Last month, over Basescu's objections, Tariceanu postponed them until later this year. 
The prime minister's campaign to have two PD cabinet members -- Interior Minister Vasile Blaga and Justice Minister Monica Macovei -- replaced has also contributed to the deepening of the crisis between the two parties.
In recent weeks, Tariceanu has been serving as acting foreign minister, following the president's refusal to confirm Adrian Cioroianu to replace Mihai Razvan Ungureanu, who resigned as foreign minister earlier this year.
Less than 24 hours after announcing the end of the coalition with the PD, the prime minister sent his proposal for a new cabinet to Parliament on Monday. 
Lawmakers in the 469-seat bicameral legislature are expected to vote on Tariceanu's proposal on Wednesday.
The new PNL-UDMR government needs to be supported by at least 235 MPs to take office. 
Otherwise, under Romania's constitution, Basescu must name a new prime minister to form the country's next government, Romanian daily Ziarul Financiar reported on Monday.
Urging Tariceanu to resign, the president has on numerous occasions called for early elections. 
Under normal conditions, the next parliamentary elections should be held in 2008.
"Some politicians will certainly suggest organising early elections," Tariceanu said in his address Sunday. 
"You should know that early elections are a solution for one, maybe two politicians and sheer disaster for Romania. 
If we were to organise early elections, Romania would lose the strength necessary to support and promote its interests in Europe."
Members of the PD would not comment on the prime minister's move to oust the party's representatives, while the main opposition Social Democratic Party said it would decide whether to support a new Tariceanu-led government on Monday. 
The Conservative Party and the Greater Romania Party have both indicated they will vote against the new cabinet.
