01/11/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 01/11/06
While football hooligans often direct abuse at an opposing team, they normally don't target their own side.
Yet that's exactly what happened in the western Serbian town of Cacak last month, when hardcore supporters of the local Borac club put on an ugly display of racist behavior -- directed at one of their own team's players.
During a match against Vozdovac Belgrade, around 40 young men donned Ku Klux Klan-like hoods, made Nazi salutes and heckled Mike Temwanjira, a black player from Zimbabwe who plays for Borac.
"Go away because nobody likes you", read a banner hoisted by the group.
The match was interrupted, resuming only after police removed 37 hooded young men from the stands.
Most of those present at the stadium applauded the police action and showed their support for Temwanjira.
The incident was particularly upsetting to the Serbian public because it coincided with the 65th anniversary of a brutal event during World War II -- the execution of around 2,200 anti-fascist Serbs by Nazi occupation forces.
Ceremonies marking the occasion were under way near Cacak that same day.
Temwanjira, who has been playing in Serbia for five years now, said he feared for his family and was for the first time thinking about leaving Serbia.
He said he had not had any problems until now and that he had given his son a Serbian name -- Nikola -- out of love for the country.
Cacak Mayor Velimir Stanojevic apologised to the player and urged him to stay in Cacak, "despite the disgrace the local supporters have brought on the town".
Only a few days later, there was another serious incident a football match in Serbia, when ultra nationalist backers of the Belgrade club Rad taunted the visiting team Novi Pazar, hurling ethnic insults and praising the Srebrenica massacre.
Novi Pazar is a Serbian town with a Bosniak majority.
"The offenders shouted slogans inciting racial, ethnic and religious hatred and intolerance," police said.
Around 154 Rad supporters were arrested.
The same day, police in the southern Serbian city of Nis arrested two young men who, under the influence of alcohol, had been insulting worshippers in a mosque.
Serbian authorities have reacted fiercely to these demonstrations of intolerance.
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said the government "is revolted by any threats directed at minorities" in Serbia and would take strong action against perpetrators.
Sports Minister Slobodan Vuksanovic urged judicial authorities to impose strict punishments.
"If we punish hooligans only by placing them in 24-hour custody, we will accomplish nothing.
However, if we give them prison sentences of up to five years, there will be no more of those who will even think about shaming a town, the country and all of us that way," the minister said.
Economic woes, including unemployment, are widely seen as contributing to racism and ultra nationalism in Serbia.
In addition, the country has yet to come to terms with the wars in the former Yugoslavia during the 1990s, while a continuing stalemate over war crimes indictees -- notably Ratko Mladic, whose non-extradition has scuttled Serbia's talks with the EU -- fuels radical sentiment.
