02/02/2007
(Reuters, Focus, SITE Institute, AKI, European Parliament, BTA, Sofia News Agency - 01/02/07;
Stratfor, Sofia News Agency - 31/01/07;
Global Information Network/IPS - 30/01/07;
DPA - 27/01/07)
A top al-Qaeda militant criticised Libya's leadership on Thursday (February 1st) for changing tack in the case of five Bulgarian nurses and Palestinian doctor sentenced to death in a hotly disputed HIV infection case.
"(Libya wants) to cajole the West and please its masters ...
by dropping the case of this heinous crime," Reuters quoted Abu Yahya al-Libi, a mujahid commander and ideologist who escaped from Bagram prison in Afghanistan in 2005, as saying in a 17-minute web-posted video.
"It is time for people to recognise these hateful infidels for what they are ...
and not be fooled by their slogans."
His statement came days after Libyan leader Muammar Qadhafi's son, Saif al-Islam, said in an interview published Monday that the medics would not be executed.
"There will be no executions," Bulgarian daily 24 Chassa quoted Saif al-Islam as saying.
"I hope there will be a happy end soon ...
My father is also against the executions."
The AP quoted him as describing in the interview the medics' verdict as unjust and as saying that "the case went the wrong way from the very beginning."
"The original files were manipulated and there were many mistakes, but it was the fault of the policemen and investigators who handled the case at the initial stage," he added.
On December 19th, Bulgarian nurses Kristiana Vulcheva, Nasya Nenova, Valentina Siropulo, Valya Chervenyashka and Snezhana Dimitrova, together with Palestinian doctor Ashraf Ahmad Jum'a, were sentenced to death for a second time for allegedly infecting more than 400 Libyan children with HIV at a Benghazi hospital.
The court refused to accept evidence suggesting the outbreak predated the medics' 1998 arrival in Libya by at least a year, and was likely due to poor hygenic conditions.
The health workers, who have already spent eight years in jail, insist that confessions signed by some of the nurses were the result of torture.
In his first speech before the European Parliament (EP) since his country joined the EU on January 1st, Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov welcomed the "solidarity shown by the whole European Union" regarding the nurses' case and urged that a solution be "a high priority" for the Union.
"We appreciate just as much the compassion that the European institutions and the member states are showing to the Libyan children affected by this tragedy, and their families," the Bulgarian leader said.
He also called for further efforts to meet the goals of the International Benghazi Fund, established to alleviate the plight of the infected children.
Meanwhile, the Union of Muslims in Bulgaria issued a declaration Thursday, calling for an independent and fair trial, and for the quick closure of proceedings against the Libya-jailed medics, which has been "dragging on meaninglessly for so long".
The Bulgarian Muslims also voiced support for the Libyan children infected with HIV, out of whom at least 50 have died.
