02/02/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/02/07
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari, in Belgrade on Friday (February 2nd), handed the draft resolution for the status of Kosovo to Serbian President Boris Tadic. 
He then travelled on to Pristina for meetings with Kosovo Albanian leaders.
After a 50-minute meeting with Tadic, Ahtisaari told journalists that his proposal aimed to "set the foundations of a future Kosovo that is stable and sustainable".
However, he also said that he would be able to state his opinion on Kosovo's status only after he submitted his final proposal to the UN Security Council.
Ahtisaari went on to say that after the presentation of his proposal, Belgrade and Pristina would have a few weeks to voice their objections. 
The UN envoy said he hoped he would be able to submit a final proposal to the Security Council "this spring".
According to Ahtisaari, new consultations with the Belgrade and Pristina delegations will start in Vienna on February 13th. 
It is likely that the consultations will be conducted separately -- that is, the two sides will not negotiate directly.
The UN envoy described his proposal as the fruit of compromise, following nearly a year of talks between Belgrade and Pristina.
He said it contains a number of guarantees for Serbs and other minorities in Kosovo. 
He stressed the guaranteed involvement of minorities in the Kosovo Assembly and government, the forming of "a number of new municipalities" with Serbs as the majority population, and the protection of Orthodox churches in Kosovo.
Ahead of Ahtisaari's visit, sections of his proposal were being circulated in the media. 
According to the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network (BIRN), it would give Kosovo the right to negotiate and conclude international agreements, including the right to seek membership in international organisations.
Kosovo would be able to adopt a flag and other national symbols, and would be called on to draft a constitution. 
A new, lightly armed Kosovo Security Force would be established and the existing Kosovo Police Service disbanded.
At the same time, Serbian municipalities would have the right to "inter-municipal and cross border co-operation", and the Serbian Orthodox Church would enjoy enhanced security and other protections.
In a statement following his meeting with the envoy, Tadic said the draft proposal "opens the doors for independent Kosovo", adding that it contains no word of Serbian sovereignty. 
He said he would now call for a meeting of Serbian parliamentary party leaders and decide what to do.
Tadic also said that Serbia would never accept Kosovo's independence.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica refused to meet with Ahtisaari, claiming that he no longer has the mandate to do so.
However, Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia set the obligation for partners in the government to always consider Kosovo part of Serbia as a condition for the forming of a new Serbian government.
"Any country that decides to recognise the independence (of Kosovo) must bear in mind that this will result in serious consequences to their relations with Serbia," the party said in its document.
