04/01/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 04/01/07
The end of the Serbia-Montenegro state union left Montenegrin citizens living in Serbia with a pending status problem. 
Formerly, they were simply residing in another part of their country. 
However, they now find themselves living in another counry.
Little has changed for the time being. 
Technically, the Montenegrins are now tourists in Serbia and, as such, should register with the Serbian Department of Foreign Citizenship for permission to stay in the country. 
In practice, though, this rule is not being applied.
"Montenegrin citizens can enter the country and stay in Serbia with an ID card as though with a passport," explains the head of the Serbian Department of Foreign Affairs, Nenad Banovic. 
"They don't need to register their residence. 
They have unlimited residence."
Montenegrins in Serbia agree. 
They report few problems with formalities, except for occasional problems on public transportation -- usually isolated incidents involving hostile behaviour by those still angry over Montenegro's split from the state union.
The situation, however, is bound to change as Serbia-Montenegro relations become clarified legally. 
When Montenegro introduces Montenegrin passports and ID cards, it will be treated as a neighbouring country, officials say. 
Serbia already has passed a law classifying Montenegrin citizens as foreigners.
"When new borders are defined, passport control and border crossings established, new passports issued and stamped so as to accurately verify when a person enters the country, then the deadline for ID registration will be determined," Banovic explains.
Looking ahead, some Montenegrins have decided to apply for Serbian citizenship. 
Since the disintegration of the former state, the number of such applications has quadrupled.
Serbian citizens living in Montenegro are in limbo as well. 
However, the Montenegrin authorities so far have not imposed any requirements or restrictions. 
Serbs are not currently obliged to register their stay at authorisation centres or security departments in Montenegro.
