04/01/2007
(Turkish Daily News, The New Anatolian, Daily Star - 04/01/07; AP, AFP, DPA, VOA, AKI, Middle East Online - 03/01/07; DPA - 23/12/06; Reuters - 12/12/06)
Dialogue is the only possible way to resolve Lebanon's ongoing political crisis, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said on Wednesday (January 3rd), warning that further tensions could impact the entire Middle East. 
Turkey, he said, is ready to join efforts to end the standoff between Lebanon's pro-Western government and the Hezbollah-led pro-Syrian opposition, if asked to do so.
The political crisis erupted in November following the resignations of six pro-Hezbollah cabinet ministers. 
Since December 1st, Hezbollah has been leading a mass sit-in in downtown Beirut in a bid to topple the government.
"We favour domestic peace and political unity amongst Lebanese," Erdogan told reporters following talks with his Lebanese counterpart, Fouad Siniora, in Beirut on Wednesday. 
"I told Siniora that sectarian differences will have repercussions on the region. 
I also told him that all parties in Lebanon and all states in the region must act to solve this problem."
Erdogan, who visited Hezbollah's main allies -- Syria and Iran -- last month, said Ankara had contacted all domestic and regional parties in a bid to help end the political stalemate in Lebanon.
Citing Turkey's good relations with the Arab world, Siniora said it could play "an important role" in efforts to resolve the Lebanese crisis.
An international tribunal due to be set up to try the assassins of Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri -- killed in a Beirut bomb attack in February 2005 -- is said to be one of the sticking points in the dispute between Siniora's government and the opposition.
"Syria and Iran are not opposed to the international tribunal, but they do question certain points of its statute and give priority to forming a government," the AFP quoted Erdogan as saying, without offering further details.
Noting Lebanon's will to maintain good ties with the two countries, Siniora said his government was "ready to look at observations concerning the tribunal, on condition it is not emptied of its essence". 
But he also stressed that relations should be based on mutual respect and non-interference.
"Lebanon must not be used as a theatre for others' conflicts," he said.
During his one-day visit to Lebanon, the Turkish prime minister also held talks with President Emile Lahoud, Parliament Speaker Nabih Berri and Hezbollah parliamentary leader Muhammed Raad. 
He was scheduled to meet also with parliamentary majority leader Saad Hariri, son of the assassinated prime minister.
After the talks with officials in Beirut, Erdogan visited Turkish troops serving with the UN-led peacekeeping force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
