02/03/2007
(FT, Reuters, AFP - 02/03/07; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, CNN, RFE/RL, German Government - 01/03/07; EUROPA - 28/02/07)
The EU said on Thursday (March 1st) it would be ready to launch a large police and rule-of-law mission in Kosovo after the province's final status is resolved.
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari is due to submit his final proposal for the province's future to the Security Council by the end of this month. 
The Council in turn is expected to pass a resolution on final status later this year.
"If the UN resolution asks the European Union to do something ... 
we will be ready to do it," EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said on Thursday, after the first session of an informal two-day meeting of the bloc's defence ministers in the German city of Wiesbaden.
Under the plan Ahtisaari presented at the beginning of February, the subject of ongoing talks between Belgrade and Pristina officials in Vienna, an EU-led international civilian presence is to replace UNMIK, taking over tasks, including judicial assistance, policing and economic aid.
"UNMIK remains fully in charge until UN Security Council Resolution 1244 is replaced by another (resolution), which should provide a clear mandate for the future international presence," Solana said.
EU planners are working on the details of the proposed police and rule-of-law mission, tentatively set to number some 1,500 people. 
The force is expected to include up to 600 police officers, tasked with maintaining order in Kosovo and dealing with potential riots. 
The mission will also include police trainers, magistrates and officials for strengthening the rule of law.
Until the Security Council passes a new resolution on Kosovo, the EU nations "can only prepare as much as they can so that when the time comes, they can be as efficient, clear and precise as possible," the AFP quoted a diplomat as saying.
Both the EU and NATO are seeking assurances that the UNMIK police force will remain in place until the 27-nation bloc is ready to take over.
"It is important that we don't see gaps," NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, who participated in Thursday's discussions, said at a recent security conference in Munich. 
"Because if there were gaps, that would immediately have consequences for KFOR."
German Defence Minister Franz Josef Jung, chairman of the Wiesbaden meeting, stressed the need for NATO's 16,000-strong peacekeeping force to remain intact for now.
"In the context of the negotiations [in Vienna], it would give completely a wrong signal to start talking about troop reductions in Kosovo," he said.
The EU military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) was also at the focus of discussions Thursday. 
Citing the improved security situation there, the EU confirmed plans earlier this week to scale back the current 6,000-strong EUFOR over the next three to four months.
"Under the transition plan, in 2007 the EU force will retain around 2,500 troops in BiH, able to respond should the security situation require it," the EU said in a statement Wednesday.
Amid calls by some Bosnian officials for the force's full withdrawal next year, Jung indicated it is too early to say when that would become possible.
"We need to look at how stability evolves in the region," he said. 
"We must not jeopardise what we have gradually built up over the years."
Britain confirmed on Thursday that it would withdraw more than 600 of its troops from BiH. 
Reports on Friday suggested that Germany, whose contingent numbers over 800 troops, also plans to draw down its presence.
