01/02/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 01/02/07
UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari is due to present his report and recommendations for Kosovo on Friday (February 2nd).
Most Kosovo Albanians expect the plan to set the province on the road to independence, with strings attached.
For Pristina resident Njomza Pevqeli, it's no problem if Ahtisaari's plan calls for "monitored independence" -- what's important is that responsibilities are turned over to the province.
"It is very important to know that Kosovo will have a stronger economy … implementation of the standards, respect for the human rights," Pevqeli says.
Her boyfriend Agon, a political science student, agrees.
"I am looking for better life in Kosovo.
The name of the solution is not so important, even though we insist on independence." Kosovo, he thinks, is on the right track not only for Albanians, but also for other ethnic communities.
"I think that Kosovo will be a good place for all," he says.
Not everyone is so optimistic.
Another political science student, Sami Kastrati, worries that the international community risks creating a failed state by saddling Kosovo with unworkable conditions.
One of the problems, he says, is the so-called "double majority" of Serb representatives in the Kosovo Assembly.
"I think that in the near future, this right of the Serbs will create a non-functional state," he said.
Fellow student Betim Deva thinks the proposal is unlikely to satisfy either side completely.
However, he says, paving the way for a sovereign Kosovo is vital to preventing future problems in the Balkans.
Independence alone will not spur Kosovo's economic development, Deva believes.
"Kosovars need motivation.
An independent Kosovo would be a good example if we want to see some progress in Balkan economies.
However we should not expect it to be 'magical' anytime soon," he said.
Journalist Shpend Cocaj doubts the plan will provide a definitive solution.
"Given the experiences we had in the past, I don't expect that Ahtisaari will wave a magic wand," he says.
"It will be only the next step, for the beginning of another process."
However, Cocaj adds, the plan will be "a good fusion for the people of Kosovo -- to please both sides, Serbian and Albanian.
Maybe it is good that the international community again has brought Kosovo to their daily agenda."
International media are reporting that the UN envoy's plan provides for limited sovereignty for the province, and significant autonomy for the Serb minority.
Pristina would be able to seek admission in international organisations and run Kosovo under the supervision of an EU official.
In a speech last week to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) in Strasbourg, France, Ahtisaari described his proposal as "fair and balanced".
He stressed that its main goal was to ensure that all of the province's communities would live together in peace.
