02/01/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 02/01/07
Albanian authorities announced late last month that they have frozen more assets of an alleged associate of Osama bin Laden. 
According to the Finance Ministry, four apartments, a house, four bars and shops, as well as two hectares of land were seized. 
A spokesman for the ministry declined to give an exact figure regarding their value.
The property belongs to Yasin al-Qadi, a Saudi businessman whom the US Treasury Department has designated a global terrorist, and who is also on a UN Security Council list of suspected terrorists. 
He allegedly channeled funds to al-Qaeda via a foundation he headed.
Al-Qadi, who left Albania years ago, is thought to be associated with Abdul Latif Saleh, who holds Jordanian and Albanian citizenship and is suspected of being linked to Egypt's Islamic Jihad, a terror group connected to al-Qaeda. 
The United States has alleged that bin Laden provided Saleh with funds to encourage the formation of extremist groups in Albania.
Saleh set up an Albanian jihadist organisation, financed by the al-Haramain Foundation, with the goal of destabilising Albania by "fomenting conflict among the different religious groups in the country", according to the US Treasury Department.
In addition, Saleh and al-Qadi ran several joint business partnerships -- including a sugar importing business, a medical enterprise and a construction business. 
"Saleh served as the general manager of all of al-Qadi's businesses in Albania, and reportedly holds 10% of the Qadi Group's investments in Albania," the department said.
Albania has blocked bank accounts, investments and other assets of other individuals and organisations alleged to be funding terrorist activities. 
The country has also endorsed the UN Security Council terrorism list.
In October 2005, the Albanian authorities took possession of office space at the so-called Twin Towers of central Tirana. 
In 2004, the government confirmed that the location was being used to launder financial activities for al-Qaeda. 
Al-Qadi owned 18% of the buildings, which are located across from the prime minister's office.
