01/03/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 01/03/07
As a troubling element of Croatian economy, national export is undergoing strategic changes that should, in the long run, raise the standard of living, lower the unemployment rate and generally improve the economy. 
The new strategy proposes 29 measures to tackle the issues that are preventing export growth.
The private sector, which mostly focuses on highly subsidised shipbuilding and tourism, does not focus enough on export. 
Croatia exports mainly to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovenia and Italy.
High costs and high prices make Croatian products uncompetitive. 
For years, Croatia has been faced with large trade deficits. 
Export was less than half of import last year, with a share of only 10% of the total national economy.
As the government attempts to make improvements, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader presented the national export promotion strategy for 2007-2010 at the Croatian Export Convention in Zagreb at the end of January. 
The plan -- called the Croatian Export Offensive -- aims to increase the number of exporting companies, change the existing export structure and increase the competitiveness of production materials.
The project was devised by the Ministry of the Economy, Labour and Entrepreneurship in collaboration with the Croatian Exporters' Association, the Croatian Chamber of the Economy, the Croatian Chamber of Trades and Crafts, the Croatian Employers' Association and the Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Speaking at the convention, Sanader said that Croatia should increase its exports in order to have a successful economy, higher GDP growth, higher living standards and more jobs.
The aim is to increase the number of export companies by 25% and change the basic structure of export.
Instead of exporting bare products and services, the initiative aims to set up six main export clusters-- water, fish, textile, shipbuilding, forestry and communication technologies. 
Croatia should start exporting knowledge and skills, Sanader said.
Although the government will not intervene in the work of small entrepreneurs, the plan suggests that production should be reduced and specific products targeted that can be competitive both on domestic and international markets.
The government provided 3.3m euros for the implementation of the export strategy. 
The legislative framework already exists, as Croatia is adopting a series of new economic laws that strengthen market competition and export of Croatian goods.
