31/08/2007
(The Moscow Times - 31/08/07; FT, AP, AFP, AFX, Euobserver, RIA Novosti, Dnevnik.bg - 30/08/07)
The European Commission (EC) is considering a package of measures to limit the access of foreign companies, including Russian ones, to the bloc's energy networks, the British daily Financial Times reported on Thursday (August 30th).
One option is to apply a "reciprocity clause", the paper said. 
This would seriously affect companies from Russia and Saudi Arabia, where European firms also face strong investment restrictions.
Asked to comment on the report, EU Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs's spokesman, Ferran Tarradellas, confirmed that such a measure is indeed under discussion.
"The commission, in the package that it is going to present on September 19th, certainly has been taking into consideration the concept of reciprocity in our energy activities and in our foreign energy policy," he told reporters.
The most lenient measure reportedly under consideration is to give Brussels the right to thoroughly examine any potential investor.
Under the toughest option, however, the European energy sector would be declared "a strategic industry", effectively making access by foreign investors almost impossible.
It would be absolutely "unfair" for the EU to impose discriminative measures against Russian companies, a senior Moscow official told the Financial Times on Thursday.
"Russia will use any legal means possible in accordance with international law to ensure equal access to markets for its companies," the Kremlin's deputy press secretary, Dmitri Peskov, said.
In a bid to boost competition and ensure a reduction of energy prices in the bloc, the EC is also expected to propose that European gas and electricity giants separate their delivery businesses from generation and supply operations -- a process often referred to as "ownership unbundling". 
But some EU member states, such as France and Germany, have voiced opposition to such measures.
Tarradellas said that the same rule should apply to companies from outside the EU, as well.
"If there is unbundling, there will be unbundling for everyone," he said.
Such a move could bar the Russian state-controlled giant Gazprom and the Saudi Arabian Oil Company from entering the EU energy market.
Gazprom has been seeking to become a leading player on the European energy market. 
It already has strong positions in Germany through its partnership with E.ON and BASF. 
In recent months, the Russian giant has been attempting to enter the business with end users of gas by offering record low prices.
According to the Sofia-based daily Dnevnik, the measures being considered by the EC could affect at least two Russian energy projects, involving Bulgaria -- the planned Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline and the South Stream gas pipeline.
