01/03/2007
(Blic - 01/03/07;
DPA, AP, International Herald Tribune, RFE/RL, FENA - 28/02/07;
UN News Centre - 26/02/07)
The government of Republika Srpska (RS) apologised on Wednesday (February 28th) to the victims of the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), pledging also to bring war criminals to justice.
The apology came in a statement that read, “for the sake of BiH's future ”, it was "essential that a deepest apology be extended to the victims, their families and friends, regardless of their ethnicity".
It was issued two days after the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague ruled that the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys by Bosnian Serb forces constituted genocide.
"The government of the Republika Srpska expresses its deepest regret for the crimes committed against non- Serbs during the recent war in Bosnia and condemns all persons who took part in these crimes," said the RS statement.
Wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, are among the six war crimes suspects still sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
They have been on the run for more than 11 years since they were initially indicted for their alleged involvement in war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH.
Both face charges of genocide over the Srebrenica massacre.
Mladic is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia.
While Karadzic's whereabouts are unknown, he is thought to be moving between BiH, Serbia and Montenegro.
"In co-operation with Bosnia and Herzegovina's central institutions and the international community, Republika Srpska will make the maximum effort to bring to justice all those responsible for the crimes, especially the massacre committed in Srebrenica," German news agency DPA quoted the RS government's statement as reading.
It noted that, for a better future for all in BiH, Bosnian Muslims and Croats should also apologise for the war crimes committed by members of their communities.
The ICJ's verdict on Monday cleared Serbia of direct responsibility for the Srebrenica massacre, but said it had failed to comply with its obligation to stop and punish those who carried out the genocide there.
The judgment also said that "the most appropriate form of satisfaction" would be for Serbia to issue a declaration admitting its failure.
Following a call by Serbian President Boris Tadic for a parliamentary resolution condemning the atrocities in Srebrenica, one of his advisers said on Wednesday that such a move would demonstrate the country's respect for international law.
"We are at a point where we need to decide whether we indeed respect the international law or not, whether we are a part of the global system, or have decided to take a different road," Jovan Simic told Belgrade-based Radio B92.
"This is an issue of political maturity [of the parliament] and I hope this resolution will be adopted.
Otherwise, the UN Security Council will adopt a resolution or measures that will lead to further problems, which could end in repercussions."
Meanwhile, a coalition including former Deputy Prime Minister Cedomir Jovanovic's Liberal Democratic Party has drafted a resolution -- now ready for parliament's approval -- apologising for the Srebrenica massacre.
A report in Thursday's Belgrade-based daily Blic quoted the draft as saying that "Serbia recognises the responsibility of its state bodies for violation of the convention on genocide" as defined by the ICJ ruling and that it will "undertake all measures required for arrest without delay of all war crime suspects".
