31/01/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 31/01/08
During Serbia's presidential run-off Sunday (February 3rd), voters will choose between incumbent Boris Tadic of the Democratic Party and Serbian Radical Party (SRS) candidate Tomislav Nikolic.
In the first round two weeks ago, Nikolic won about 5% more votes then Tadic.
But a poll by the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy (CESID) suggests Tadic has a slight advantage -- about 100,000 votes -- as the two head into the runoff.
Estimates say that Tadic will receive between 2.1 million and 2.35 million votes, while Nikolic will get between 2 million and 2.25 million.
A strong turnout by SRS voters could put Nikolic over the top, however.
"It is really difficult to say who will win.
Tadic's slight advantage does not necessarily mean anything," CESID representative Djordje Vukovic said, adding that it all depends on the turnout.
Around 4.5 million voters are expected to vote on Sunday, according to CESID.
The vote could mark a turning point for Serbia.
Tadic is a pro-Western reformer while Nikolic -- formerly a minister in Slobodan Milosevic's government -- represents a party whose leader, Vojislav Seselj, is being tried at the UN war crimes tribunal at The Hague.
Brussels has made no secret of its dismay at the prospect of a Nikolic presidency, although the candidate has softened his nationalist rhetoric in recent weeks.
He now says he does not oppose EU membership, but that the bloc must respect Serbia's sovereignty over Kosovo.
Nikolic has met with Dimitry Medvedev, considered a leading candidate to succeed Vladimir Putin as Russian president, and says Serbia could be a link for co-operation between the EU and Russia.
Tadic has based his campaign on Serbia's hopes for EU accession.
His slogan is "Let Us Conquer Europe Together".
However, he also insists on the preservation of Kosovo within Serbia and on closer relations with Russia.
The EU has offered to sign a special political agreement with Serbia on February 7th, prior to signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA).
The offer could help Tadic at the polls, since EU officials have linked it to the election outcome.
It remains to be seen what impact voters from Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) will have on the result.
Kostunica has declined to back either candidate, instead inviting citizens to vote "according to their conscience".
Earlier, he had made DSS support conditional on Tadic pledging not to sign the SAA if the EU deploys a mission to Kosovo without UN approval.
Tadic declined to do so.
On Wednesday, Nikolic and Tadic held their first and only televised debate ahead of the runoff, expressing two different models for Serbia's future.
"Serbia's European path has no alternative," Tadic said, saying integration would help the country overcome problems it has faced in recent years.
Nikolic, however, said many obstacles hampered co-operation with Brussels.
"We should talk openly with the EU.
Serbia has only one condition -- to enter the EU as a whole," he said.
