29/08/2007
(Nine O'clock, Ziua - 29/08/07;
AP, NewsIn, Hotnews.ro, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool - 28/08/07;
AP - 09/08/07)
The files of 16 senior clerics were burned during the 1989 anti-communist revolution in Romania to prevent their links to the country's former secret police, Securitate, from being revealed, a Romanian official said on Tuesday (August 28th).
"Their files were burned in December 1989 so that their names could be covered up," Mircea Dinescu, a member of the National Council for Studying the Securitate Archives (CNSAS), told reporters.
Ahead of the September 12th election of a new Romanian patriarch to succeed Teoctist, who died on July 30th, the council announced its plans to review the files of all top clerics and publish the names of those found to have collaborated with the former secret police.
"One of them will be the patriarch of the Orthodox Church and it would be a shame to discover later that he's a Securitate general," Dinescu said on August 9th.
He officially confirmed Tuesday that Nicolae Corneanu, the head of the Banat Metropolitan Church and a member of the Holy Synod, and Constantin Balaceanu-Stolnici, an academic and member of the electoral college that will choose the next patriarch, had collaborated with the secret police.
Both have previously acknowledged this.
A total of 20 high-ranking Orthodox clerics, including potential candidates for the patriarchal post, are suspected of ties with Securitate, Dinescu said, noting that there is solid evidence of involvement of up to four of those priests in secret police activities.
"Of what we've checked out so far, there are three or four whose situation is pretty clear, and there are 16 others for whom we only have suspicions," the Romanian daily Ziua quoted the former anti-communist dissident as saying Tuesday.
Several church leaders reportedly will be called to hearings at the CNSAS in the coming days in connection with their communist pasts.
The archbishop of Suceava and Radauti, Pimen Zainea, the archbishop of Alba Iulia, Andrei Andreicut, and the bishop of Arad, Timotei Seviciu, will be among those to be heard first.
"There are indications that these priests had ties with the Securitate and that, following their collaboration, they were nominated to higher posts within the church structures," an unnamed CNSAS source told the Romanian English-language daily Nine o'Clock.
Dinescu angered the Orthodox Church earlier this month by telling the daily Cotidianul that the late head of the Transylvania Church, Antonie Plamadeala, had been a Securitate officer.
He even cited a letter the cleric sent to Romania's communist dictator, Nicolae Ceausescu, asking him to be promoted from colonel to general.
Plamadeala died in 2005.
An AP report Tuesday said at least 700,000 people are believed to have worked for Securitate as informers.
Earlier this month, a local NGO urged senior clerics with Securitate links not to run for the patriarchal post in a country where the Orthodox Church is still considered the most trustworthy institution.
The 52-member Holy Synod will pick the candidates for the post.
Teoctist's successor will then be elected via secret ballot by a church assembly including Orthodox clergy, lay people and several politicians.
