01/11/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 01/11/10
SETimes:
This is the 50th anniversary of MESS.
Can you tell us a little bit about the history of the festival and how it was started?
Dino Mustafic:
MESS was established in 1960 by a group of young, talented people, artists, led by Jurislav Korenic.
The festival was conceived as a Yugoslav theatre review event.
However, what is impressive, at least for me … is its connection with the world, with the world of culture, with the then avant-garde, and the desire for some new, investigative and radical theatre topics and forms.
Since then, the festival has changed and evolved.
Following the war, the festival turned international, but it retained its avant-garde, experimental spirit, as well as very high artistic standards established by its founders.
The loyalty of the public that has grown up with the MESS, but also of the new, young public, suggest that what we are doing is good and that this festival has a future.
The motto of this year's 50th MESS is "Forever Young", because we at MESS believe in this and that the best years of this festival are yet to come.
SETimes:
How many plays do you have this year, how many theatre groups and which countries do they come from?
What are the sites of the festival?
Mustafic:
This year, the MESS Festival will host about 600 guests from 15 countries (Croatia, Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia, Slovenia, Italy, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Romania, Belgium, Germany, Great Britain, Spain, Holland, Poland), and will feature over 50 plays, concerts, workshops, exhibitions and other events.
The festival is divided into the main programme, the Future MESS and the students' International Young Makers Exchange (IYME) programme, Children MESS, OFF MESS, and the workshops.
Also, the plays "Red", directed by Martin Kochovski, and "On Love", directed by Paolo Magelli, are the result of a co-production under the New European Theater Action programme.
All of this will be run in two cities, Sarajevo and Zenica, at nine festival sites.
SETimes:
Can you single out any special plays this year?
Does MESS offer plays for children?
Mustafic:
We are particularly excited at being hosts to the most modern theatre creators in Europe and beyond.
When saying this, I primarily refer to Frank Castorf, who has this year received the Golden Laurels from us for his contribution to theatre art, for his overall contribution to both our Festival and to the theatre art in general.
I also refer to Viliam Docolomansky's play "Waiting Room", Andriy Zholdak, whose play "Life with An Idiot" opens the festival, and the play "Krapp's Last Tape", directed by one of the major theatre directors of today, Bob Wilson, who also acts in this play.
This year, we organised the Children MESS, because I believe it is extremely important to keep the continuity in the programme for the youngest audience, because this also has its educational role.
I believe that with this programme we are raising an audience that will watch plays in the future.
The youngest audience will have the opportunity to see six plays.
SETimes:
How is MESS financed and organised, and what, in your opinion, is the relevance of the festival for Sarajevo and Bosnia and Herzegovina?
Mustafic:
The MESS Festival is a public institution, and as such, it is funded from the state budget, and of course, based on the generous support of our patrons and sponsors.
Unfortunately, this year's budget is the lowest in the past 14 years.
In spite of all the extenuating circumstances, through the persistence of the people involved in the organisation of the festival, we have managed to compile a high-quality programme with varying content.
The fact that we have succeeded in this in spite of the negligent, and I would say irresponsible, anti-civilisational approach of our government towards art and culture in general is a real little marvel, and I am happy that this marvel has occurred in Sarajevo.
SETimes:
What is your message and the message of the festival for the citizens of Sarajevo and of the world?
Mustafic:
Through its long history, the festival has addressed various topics, but its message has in essence always been the same, and it says that art, real art -- not that which is often sold as art, while being entertainment only -- is exactly what makes us human.
It is what makes us more humane, because it permits us to investigate ourselves, our human depths, encouraging us to face our fears, making us believe that utopias are possible and, maybe most importantly, making us compare our perception of the world with the perceptions of other people.
