29/08/2007
By Ahmet Gormez for Southeast European Times in Ankara - 29/08/07
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul is Turkey's new president, succeeding Ahmet Necdet Sezer.
Parliament elected him Tuesday (August 28th) in a third round of voting.
Gul, a member of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), won two earlier rounds but fell short of the necessary two-thirds majority.
In the third round, however, a simple majority was enough.
Two other candidates sought the post.
Sabahattin Cakmakoglu of the Nationalist Action Party (MHP) received 70 votes, and Tayfun Icli from Democratic Left Party (DSP) received 13.
There were two invalid and 24 blank votes as well.
"I am fully aware of the difficulty of my task," the new president said in his acceptance speech.
Gul, 56, is a devout Muslim and a former member of the now banned Welfare Party.
However, he has pledged to uphold the secular system in Turkey and to be everyone's president.
"In a democracy which is a system of rights and liberties, secularism, one of the core principles of our Republic, is as much a model that underpins freedom for different lifestyles as it is a rule of social harmony," he said.
"Not only that;
commitment to the principle of secularism is also the most expedient way of eliminating from the outset conflicts and elements of altercation that from time to time manifest themselves in every society."
"When we think about the realities and sensitivities inherent to our geography, we will better comprehend the significance of the principle of secularism which also guarantees the freedom of religion and conscience," the new head of state added.
US President George W. Bush, German President Horst Koehler and German Minister of Foreign Affairs Frank Walter Steinmeier were among the world leaders who have congratulated Gul on his election.
The president of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), Rene van der Linden, was one of the first international officials to make a statement.
"I warmly welcome the election of our former colleague, Abdullah Gul.
He is a modern reformer and I am confident that he will be a president for all Turks," van der Linden said.
Gul is "very well acquainted with European and international affairs and I am confident he will succeed in bringing his country closer to the EU as well as further developing the role of Turkey as an important player in the international arena," he added.
US Ambassador to Turkey Ross Wilson also congratulated Gul.
"Once again, Turkey's commitment to democratic institutions and the rule of law has proven durable and strong," Wilson said.
"We know President Gul well and worked closely with him throughout his tenure as prime minister and then foreign minister.
We look forward to continuing to work with him on issues of importance to both of our countries."
As foreign minister, Gul is best known for his role in launching Turkey's accession talks with the EU.
A key member of the ruling party, he also helped pass reforms and improve the country's human rights record.
He has said he will cut ties with the AKP after assuming the presidency.
