31/07/2007
(The Guardian, Zaman - 31/07/07; Reuters, AFP, Washington Post, Stratfor, The New Anatolian - 30/07/07)
The Pentagon said Monday (July 30th) that it is working closely with Ankara to tackle the problem posed by the separatist Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), which is using bases in northern Iraq as a springboard for terrorist attacks in Turkey.
"We recognise that the PKK is a serious problem, and we're working closely with both the government of Iraq and the government of Turkey to resolve this," US Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defence for Public Affairs Bryan Whitman told reporters.
Comprised primarily of Turkish Kurds, the PKK's goal is to create an independent Kurdish state, encompassing parts of southeastern Turkey, northeastern Iraq, northeastern Syria and northwestern Iran.
In 1984, the PKK began an armed campaign for self-rule in Turkey's Kurdish-dominated southeast which lasted 15 years and left more than 30,000 dead. 
Some 4,000 PKK rebels are believed to have found shelter in northern Iraq following the end of their campaign in 1999.
The group is considered a terrorist organisation by Turkey, the EU and the United States.
The recent months have seen an increase in Kurdish rebel attacks on targets in Turkey, which has in response beefed up its military presence along its border with Iraq, with 250,000 troops said to be currently stationed in the region. 
The escalation of violence has prompted calls for a military incursion into Iraq to deal with the guerillas.
Late last month, Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said detailed plans for a cross-border operation into Iraq had been prepared, and Turkey would take the matter into its hands if US or Iraqi forces fail to deal with the rebels.
"The military plans have been worked out in the finest detail," Reuters quoted the minister as telling the Turkish newspaper Radikal in an interview on June 29th. 
"The government knows these plans and agrees with them."
Despite calls by US officials on Ankara to avoid such steps, only two days before the July 22nd parliamentary elections in Turkey, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan threatened a cross-border operation into Iraq against the Kurds.
Analysts at Stratfor, a private security intelligence forecasting agency, suggested Monday that Erdogan's Justice and Development Party (AKP) is unlikely to approve such an operation until after the country's presidential election, expected to be held next month. 
Gul is expected to run for the post. 
Should he win, Stratfor says, "the AKP will have an even stronger incentive to go after the PKK to neutralise any potential backlash".
