29/01/2008
(AFP, FT, The Guardian, Euobserver, Blic - 29/01/08; Reuters, AP, DPA, BBC, AKI, International Herald Tribune, Balkan Insight, Beta, B92, EU - 28/01/08)
EU foreign ministers decided on Monday (January 28th) to offer Serbia an interim political agreement providing for expanded co-operation in the areas of trade and education and relaxed visa requirements for Serbian travellers.
"We have adopted a very interesting text that opens the door to Serbia's entry into the EU," Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, whose country holds the rotating EU presidency, said after the meeting in Brussels.
Most of the ministers arrived intending to support the finalisation of Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the Union, which was initialed in November. 
But a decision to that effect was blocked by the Netherlands, which insisted that Serbia must first meet the EU's requirement for full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The Hague-based court is still seeking the arrest and handover of four remaining war crimes fugitives from the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s, including former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic.
Eventually, the EU foreign ministers agreed on the new proposal to Serbia, which Rupel later described as a major first step towards eventual membership in the bloc.
According to EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, the people of Serbia should see the bloc's new proposal as an "exceptionally strong message" that their country is an important part of Europe and has clear prospects of joining the Union.
The EU plans to sign the new framework agreement on February 7th, four days after Serbia's presidential run-off election. 
Brussels hopes setting that date will boost the chances of incumbent President Boris Tadic, who is pro-European.
The EU fears that a win by Tomislav Nikolic of the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party could return the country to isolation and set the stage for regional instability. 
Nikolic's party is headed by Vojislav Seselj, a war crimes indictee now in detention at The Hague.
Some EU officials have voiced doubt about the prospects of either the SAA or the new deal being signed, should Nikolic win the presidency.
"In the case of a victory for Nikolic, things would be very different," the AFP quoted Spanish European Affairs Minister Alberto Navarro as telling reporters on the sidelines of the Brussels meeting.
"There's much at stake in Serbia these days," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said. 
"The Serbian people are choosing between a nationalist past and a European future ... 
I trust the Serbian people will choose and indeed embrace their European future.
