28/02/2008
(AFP, AP, BTA, SNA, BNN, Beta, Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs - 27/02/08)
Nearly nine years after its creation, the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe was transformed into the Regional Co-operation Council (RCC) during a meeting of foreign ministers of the South-East European Co-operation Process (SEECP) in Sofia on Wednesday (February 27th).
At the initiative of the EU, the Stability Pact was established in June 1999 with the goal of strengthening Southeast European (SEE) countries' efforts in promoting peace, democracy and economic prosperity in the wake of the Kosovo conflict.
Building on the Pact's achievements, the RCC is intended to foster further progress in various areas of co-operation, while continuing to provide a platform for the European and Euro-Atlantic integration of the SEE countries.
A joint declaration adopted on Wednesday lists all SEE countries, many other European nations, Canada, the United States and key international organisations -- including the UN, EU, UNDP and the World Bank -- as participants in the new initiative.
Hidajet Biscevic of Croatia was named as secretary-general of the RCC, which is headquartered in Sarajevo and will have a liaison office in Brussels.
"The future of regional co-operation in South Eastern Europe starts here, today," Stability Pact Special Co-ordinator Erhard Busek said as the meeting opened.
"Flexibility, adaptability, perseverance and tenacity have been prominent features of the Stability Pact's approach and success.
I therefore encourage you to persevere and be tenacious in your efforts to continue on the path of co-operation and integration."
Taking place ten days after Kosovo's declaration of independence, the forum was the first to bring together representatives of both Belgrade and Pristina.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic reiterated Belgrade's opposition to Kosovo's secession.
While assuring participants that Belgrade had "no intention of obstructing the important work" of the RCC, he also noted that "the minimum requirement" for Serbia to continue going forward is "for the procedural status quo to be maintained".
As in previous Stability Pact meetings, Kosovo was represented by UNMIK officials.
Its delegation included three members of the UN administration, as well as Kosovo Chamber of Commerce chairman Besim Beqaj, who is also responsible for regional co-operation.
"We are treating Serbia as a neighbouring country," Beqaj told the AFP on the sidelines of the meeting.
"Very soon our president and prime minister will send a letter to the government of Serbia for recognition as well from their side."
According to Beqaj, the sooner Belgrade "becomes realistic in its approach" on the issue of Kosovo's status, the better it would be for both Serbia and the region.
Addressing the meeting, Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, urged the SEE nations to "look into the future," rather than dwell on events of the past.
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivailo Kalfin, whose country currently serves as Chairman-in-Office of the SEECP, echoed Rupel's call for mutual support.
