27/12/2007
(BBC, B92 - 26/12/07;
AFP - 21/12/07;
AP, Euronews, Balkan Insight, Slovenian Foreign Ministry - 20/12/07;
EurActiv - 28/11/07)
Preparing to take over the rotating EU presidency from Portugal on Tuesday (January 1st), Slovenia has named Kosovo as one of the greatest challenges for its six-month tenure at the helm of the 27-nation bloc.
"Kosovo requires particular attention," Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel said on Thursday, as he outlined the priorities of his country's chairmanship of the Union.
Slovenia, which was the first of the six republics in the former Yugoslavia to emerge as an independent state in June 1991, "believes that it is high time for the Yugoslav crisis to end", the minister added.
His remarks came a day after the UN Security Council failed to agree on the next steps in the process of determining Kosovo's final status.
After 18 months of internationally mediated talks, Belgrade and Pristina are as far apart in their positions as ever, with the Kosovo Albanians set on independence and Serbia determined to retain some form of sovereignty.
The United States and most EU member nations have signalled their preparedness to recognise independence for Kosovo, even without the UN's approval.
But a handful of EU states remain opposed to such a step, fearing it could encourage separatist movements elsewhere.
Voicing concern that the issue could cause a split within the bloc and jeopardise its common foreign policy, Rupel pledged that his country would "work hard to maintain EU unity".
The bloc must act "in a reasonable manner without any blackmailing, although it is clear that certain processes cannot be held back", he said.
He expressed hope that the Kosovo status issue will be resolved before Slovenia hands over the EU presidency to France on July 1st 2008.
One of the first tests Rupel will face will be on January 28th, when he chairs a meeting of EU foreign ministers to discuss the "action plan" for deployment of the Union's 1,800-strong justice and police mission to Kosovo.
In a bid to boost regional stability, Slovenia has made speeding up the EU integration of former Yugoslav republics a central item on its agenda at the bloc's helm.
"Slovenia would like to see an intensification of this accession process," Rupel said last week.
"If there is a momentum, things can advance very quickly, especially if Serbia and Croatia advance faster."
Croatia began its EU accession talks in October 2005 and is widely expected to become the bloc's 28th member by 2010, while Macedonia, which was recognised as an official candidate for membership about two years ago, is still awaiting a start date for its entry negotiations.
Other candidate countries have completed talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement, with Serbia hoping to have its accord finalised by the end of January.
Other top issues for Slovenia during its presidency include speeding up ratification of the Lisbon Treaty, which includes many reforms that were part of the failed EU Constitution, and boosting efforts to address climate change.
The country also will seek further progress in EU energy policy.
