30/10/2007
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times - 30/10/07
Bosnian Serbs took to the streets in Banja Luka and other cities Monday (October 29th), protesting new measures imposed by the international community's top envoy to Bosnia and Herzgovina (BiH), High Representative Miroslav Lajcak.
Several thousand people attended the main protest, organised by the Serbian Association of NGOs and supported by all Bosnian Serb parliamentary parties. 
Posters and signs bore messages opposing the elimination of Republika Srpska (RS), and several demonstrators carried pictures of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Lajcak announced the steps on October 19th, saying they were needed to improve the functionality of BiH institutions. 
But RS leaders have reacted angrily, saying they violate the Dayton Accord.
Among other things, the changes are intended to discourage ministers and lawmakers from any ethnic community from blocking decisions by staging walkouts, a common practice in BiH. 
To prevent this, Lajcak moved to allow the state government to hold sessions as long as most ministers are present.
Bosnian Serbs argue that their representatives could now be outvoted, thus undermining the equality of BiH's three nations. 
Because of Lajcak's measures, decisions could now potentially be taken by Bosniak and Croat leaders alone.
RS political leaders have threatened to walk out of all joint institutions if the measures are not revoked. 
"The decision of the high representative is unnecessary and we see it as a fraud," said RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik. 
"We urge politicians in Sarajevo to accept RS so we could accept BiH."
The entity's parliament opened an extraordinary session Monday, but temporarily suspended it so the parties could work out disagreements and reach a common declaration regarding the measures.
The same day, the entity government issued a statement rejecting the Office of the High Representative's (OHR) legal explanations for the measures. 
The cabinet urged the steering board of the Peace Implementation Council to discuss the issue at its meeting in Sarajevo Tuesday and Wednesday.
Lajcak, meanwhile, has refused to rescind his orders, insisting they are completely in line with the BiH Constitution and do not harm the position of either entity or any of the constitutive nations.
"If there should be unnecessary escalation of tensions then it would be the choice of the RS authority and it would be responsible for the consequences," said OHR spokesperson Ljiljana Radetic.
