28/09/2007
(AFP, DPA, BBC, FT, The Scotsman, Blic - 28/09/07;
AP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, VOA, International Herald Tribune, Beta, B92, UN News Centre - 27/09/07)
The six major powers leading the negotiations on Kosovo's future status urged officials from Belgrade and Pristina to be constructive and seek common ground ahead of their historic meeting in New York on Friday (September 28th).
Following a one-hour closed-door discussion Thursday, the foreign ministers of the Contact Group, comprising Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, called for a quick settlement to end the current political limbo.
"It has damaging consequences for Kosovo's political, social and economic development and for the underlying stability of the region," the AFP quoted the ministers as saying in a joint statement.
"A solution therefore has to be found without delay."
Three diplomats -- Germany's Wolfgang Ischinger, representing the EU, Alexander Botsan-Kharchenko of Russia and Frank Wisner of the United States -- are tasked with leading the talks on behalf of the Contact Group.
They must report to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon on the outcome of the negotiating process by December 10th.
Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials "need to engage with the troika with a constructive spirit", British Foreign Secretary David Miliband, who chaired Thursday's meeting, told reporters.
Reuters also quoted him as saying that the plan for Kosovo submitted by former UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari in March after 13 months of largely fruitless talks, remained the basis for a settlement.
The former Finnish president's call for supervised independence was accepted by the province's 90% ethnic Albanian majority.
Serbia, however, flatly rejected it and said the most it can offer is broad autonomy within its borders.
Since the resumption of Contact Group troika-led talks in August, officials in Pristina have been reiterating their position that the independence of Kosovo is a fait accompli and non-negotiable.
They have threatened to declare independence unilaterally after the talks end in December.
The question of Kosovo's status tops the list of five topics Belgrade wants discussed on Friday, when Serbian and Kosovo Albanian leaders will hold their first face-to-face talks since March.
The Serbian delegation will be headed by President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, while Kosovo will be represented by President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Agim Ceku.
Addressing the UN General Assembly on Thursday, Tadic reiterated Belgrade's position that an independent Kosovo would be unacceptable.
He called for a compromise solution.
"We call on the legitimate representatives of Kosovo Albanians to proceed to the resumed negotiations without prejudging the outcome, so that a compromise solution, acceptable to both parties, could be achieved, a solution that would lead to long-term Serbian-Albanian reconciliation," the Serbian president said, warning Pristina against taking unilateral steps towards independence.
Western countries withdrew a draft UN Security Council resolution based on Ahtisaari's plan in July, in the face of a potential Russian veto.
Backing Serbia's stance, Moscow has been insisting that the final status must be acceptable to both Belgrade and Pristina.
The United States and several EU countries have signalled their readiness to recognise an independent Kosovo even without Security Council approval.
