29/11/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi and Artan Mustafa for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 29/11/07
A final, three-day round of talks on Kosovo's status ended in Baden, Austria on Wednesday (November 28th) with no progress.
The session effectively concluded a 120-day period of negotiations brokered by an international "troika" of envoys representing the EU, Russia and the United States.
The troika will now report to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon on December 10th, telling him more or less what former UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari said back in March -- that Belgrade and Pristina cannot reach agreement on final status.
"We left no stone unturned," said EU representative Wolfgang Ischinger.
Asked if there is any need for further talks between Belgrade and Pristina, he said "my answer is no."
Although the troika had more or less given up on the possibility of reconciling the Kosovo Albanian demand for independence with Serbia's offer of broad autonomy, the envoys had hoped to at least strike a deal on regulating future ties between Belgrade and Pristina.
Even this proved impossible, however.
"It was a good idea, but the Serbian side was against it," Ischinger said.
Belgrade's delegation said it did not want to discuss anything that might prejudge Kosovo's status.
"There has been no agreement with Serbia," the spokesperson for the Kosovo Albanian side, Skender Hyseni, confirmed for Southeast European Times.
"We didn't expect anything spectacular, because Belgrade is not ready to discuss Kosovo as an independent state."
US envoy Frank Wisner urged both sides to make good on promises to keep the peace and continue dialogue beyond the end of formal negotiations.
Stability in the region is "very much at stake", he said.
Serbian President Boris Tadic said his government would take legal and diplomatic action to protect its interests.
"We do not want violence and will not apply it, and we want to defend our interests in a legal manner.
We will abolish any acts of independence and use all legal and diplomatic means in defence of our legitimate state interests," he said.
The Serbian government has already ordered its ministries to draw up action plans in case Kosovo Albanian leaders make a unilateral declaration of independence.
Details have not been made public, but media reports suggest Serbia could impose a trade blockade and cut off electricity supplies.
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica insists that any decision should go through the Security Council, where Russia has veto power.
Fearing that a precedent could be set for separatist movements elsewhere, Moscow threatened to use that power in July when Ahtisaari's plan for supervised independence was under consideration.
Moscow continues to call for new talks.
"We think that there is a need for more negotiations," the Russian representative to the troika, Alexander Kharchenko, said this week.
But Kosovo Albanian leaders are adamant that the process must now come to an end.
Even the last 120 days of talks were unnecessary, said Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu.
He suggested Serbia is simply trying to drag things out indefinitely.
Hashim Thaci, whose party won the November 17th elections in Kosovo and is expected to become prime minister, said Kosovo is ready for independence and will declare it soon after December 10th.
"We will do it in close co-ordination with Brussels and Washington," he said.
Veton Surroi, leader of the ORA party, said Kosovo can't remain hostage to procedures.
"We have fulfilled our obligations," he said.
"Now it is our partners' turn."
Igor Jovanovic contributed to this report
