27/09/2007
(AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, RFE/RL, Fena, Javno.hr - 26/09/07)
High Representative Miroslav Lajcak urged Bosnian Serb politicians on Wednesday (September 26th) to stop obstructing an agreement on police reform, a key condition for further movement towards EU integration.
"Too much time has been lost and if there is no agreement by Sunday, you will lose even more time," Lajcak told lawmakers at the Republika Srpska (RS) parliament.
"The train is leaving and will not return for at least another year."
Similar comments came from EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana.
"Bosnian politicians are gambling with the future of their own country," he said in an interview with the newspaper Dnevni Anaz.
In December, BiH completed technical talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Union, a major first step towards eventual membership in the 27-nation bloc.
But Brussels has made it clear that the accord will not be sealed this year if BiH politicians fail to reach an agreement -- by the end of the month -- on bringing the country's police structures into line with EU standards.
Currently, the two entities in BiH -- the RS and the Federation of BiH -- each have their own police force.
Brussels wants them unified into a single force, with legislative and budgetary competencies for all police matters vested at the state level.
The EU also has called for establishing new policing zones on the basis of professional criteria, rather than on ethnicity, and for an end to political interference in the operational work of police.
Efforts to reach a deal have been deadlocked for more than two years.
Bosnian Serb politicians view the EU's demands as a step towards the abolition of RS, and have rejected successive proposals to unify and restructure the country's two forces.
On Wednesday, Lajcak reassured Bosnian Serb lawmakers that the creation of a single and more efficient police force poses no threat to the existence of their entity.
If politicians do not support police reform, they are rejecting BiH's European path, he said.
As a consequence, the country would face isolation, turn into a "black hole" in the region and lag behind neighbours in the process of EU integration.
"The choice is yours -- you will either continue to opt for isolationist solutions and limit your own prospective in that way, or you will be a driving economic force with positive effects for the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina," the high representative said.
However, RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik again said he would not agree to eliminate the entity's force.
"Regardless of the consequences, I am not ready to accept anything that does not include a clearly positioned structure for a Bosnian Serb police on the territory of Republika Srpska," he said.
The same day, Bosnian Serb officials warned they might withdraw from state-level institutions if Lajcak uses his sweeping powers to impose tough sanctions against Dodik and others accused of obstructing police reform.
Meanwhile, representatives of the eight main political parties in BiH held their fourth round of technical talks on police reform in Banja Luka, but again failed to reach an agreement.
They reportedly will resume negotiations Friday.
