27/08/2007
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 27/08/07
For years, forest fires have been common in Greece, many of them set by would-be developers seeking to make protected land available for use.
But the inferno that has swept over the country in recent days is unprecedented.
Fires are burning across more than half of Greece's territory, officials say.
The death toll has reached 62 and is expected to climb.
With firefighters already pushed to the limit, new blazes broke out for a fourth straight day Monday (August 27th), with dozens of them reportedly serious.
And one of the country's most treasured cultural monuments – the ancient birthplace of the Olympics – has barely escaped destruction.
"The museum is as it was and the archeological site will not have any problem," Culture Minister George Voulgarakis said after an all-out effort was made to save ancient Olympia.
As the inferno raced towards the site, firefighters used aircraft to drop water and foam on the 2,800-year-old ruins.
The foundations of the International Olympic Academy, however, were completely burnt down.
So was a nearby grove where the heart of Pierre de Coubertin -- the founder of the International Olympic Committee-- is laid to rest.
While fire has affected the entire country, the worst hit is the Peloponnese region south of the mainland.
Villages are tucked throughout the hills and mountains, and many have been reduced to ash.
Fanned by strong winds, the blaze trapped residents in their homes or on the road.
The village of Zacharo suffered the most, with 30 dead and the fires still raging.
The people of Athens woke up on Saturday to shocking news -- the area of Ymittos, the mountain closest to the capital city, was ablaze.
Buildings and monasteries near the area were quickly evacuated, and residents took decisive action with hoses, buckets of water and even tree branches.
The fire service and the water companies were quick to respond, and managed to get the fire partially under control within a couple hours.
The fire advanced to the outskirts of the city towards Keratea and Lavrio, near the public electricity company's power plant.
Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis has declared a state of emergency.
He also expressed a suspicion that many Greeks share – that nature alone is not to blame.
While heat and strong winds have undoubtedly exacerbated the fires, arson is also suspected.
"So many fires breaking out simultaneously in so many parts of the country cannot be a coincidence.
The state will do everything it can to find the people responsible and punish them," Karamanlis said.
Greece has often been faulted over the years for lax environmental protection.
Although forestland is protected by law, experts say enforcement is difficult, in part because of inadequate records.
Development, meanwhile, remains only loosely regulated.
The country is set to hold general parliamentary elections on September 16th.
In an official letter to President Karolos Papoulias, Greek ecological organisations have demanded that the vote be put off by three months.
Meanwhile, the leader of the main opposition party PASOK, George Papandreou urged the president to convene an urgent meeting among all political leaders.
