27/09/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 27/09/07
Iraqi Interior Minister Jawad al-Bolani was in Ankara on Wednesday (September 26th) to discuss terrorist attacks in Turkey by the Kurdistan Worker's Party (PKK). 
Al-Bolani and his Turkish counterpart, Besir Atalay, agreed to sign an accord on eliminating the threat.
The deal-- which will be signed Thursday after being translated into Turkish, Arabic and English -- will allow Turkish "hot pursue" operations into northern Iraq against PKK militants, but with some conditions. 
These small-scale military operations would require prior authorisation by the Iraqi central government.
Under the agreement, the two countries will also establish new security mechanisms, including "contact points" between Turkish and Iraqi security units.
Rising attacks by the PKK, whose militants are encamped in mountainous northern Iraq, have been a source of increased tensions between Turkey and Iraq. 
Around 100 Turkish soldiers have died this year as a result of PKK attacks.
Turkish officials have been warning of a cross-border operation if the terrorist threat is not eliminated. 
The United States, however, has urged Turkey to work with Baghdad and the Iraqi Kurdish regional government to solve the problem. 
Washington is concerned that a military incursion by Turkey could destabilise a relatively peaceful region in Iraq.
On Monday, Turkish Land Forces Commander General Ilker Basbug said he expects concrete action."Since 1984, Turkey has been fighting alone against terrorism," Basbug said in a speech to cadets at the Military Academy in Istanbul. 
"Turkey's concerns in Iraq are also affecting Turkey's relations with the United States. 
The United States has to understand and to demonstrate that it is now time for action, not words."
US State Department deputy spokesman Tom Casey said Washington is aware of the importance of the problem. 
"It's important to us as well. 
The PKK is a designated foreign terrorist organisation. 
And we are working with the government of Turkey, as well as the government of Iraq, to make sure that they cannot operate safely out of northern Iraq or any place else," Casey said.
