28/11/2007
(Nine O'clock, Ziua - 28/11/07;
DPA, Hotnes.ro, Rompres, Mediafax - 27/11/07;
Nine O'clock - 21/11/07)
Romanian President Traian Basescu will soon be able to decide alone whether to authorise the launch of criminal investigations against ministers following a constitutional court ruling Tuesday (November 27th) against a recent government ordinance.
In early October, the government passed an emergency ordinance that modified the law on ministerial responsibility and dissolved a presidential commission that examined requests by anticorruption prosecutors to investigate former and current cabinet members.
Under the measure, the commission -- composed of representatives of the justice and interior ministries and presidency officials -- was to be replaced by a new five-member panel of judges.
Justice Minister Teodor Chiuariu, who sponsored the ordinance, said it was aimed at depoliticising the process.
However, the ordinance prompted criticism from both EU lawmakers and officials, as well as Romanian politicians and experts.
Opposition party members said it was intended to block the prosecution of ministers.
The measure was adopted shortly after the National Anticorruption Department said it had sought Basescu's permission to start a criminal investigation against Chiuariu for alleged corruption and abuse of power.
According to reports, criminal prosecution requests have also been filed against another member of Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu's cabinet -- Labour Minister Paul Pacuraru -- and ministers from previous administrations.
Among them are former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase, former Agriculture Minister Decebal Traian Remes, former Economy Minister Codrut Seres, former Telecommunications Minister Zsolt Nagy and former Defence Minister Victor Babiuc.
In remarks following the enactment of the ordinance last month, Basescu said Chiuariu was in "a flagrant conflict of interest, working out an emergency ordinance that blocks his own file and the files of his cabinet colleagues".
Eventually, the Ombudsman challenged the legality of the emergency ordinance before the constitutional court, which decided Tuesday that the measure violated the constitution.
The court, which is expected to announce the reasons for its decision shortly, is said to have expressed opposition to the possibility of judges sitting on the commission.
Chiuariu said he would not comment on Tuesday's decision until he sees the constitutional judges' arguments.
Opposition party members welcomed the ruling, which according to Democratic Party leader Emil Boc, confirmed that the government violated the constitution in a bid "to cover up the ministers suspected of corruption".
Describing Tuesday's decision as clear proof of Chiuariu's incompetence, others called for the justice minister's dismissal.
Victor Ponta, vice-president of the Social Democratic Party (PSD), said both Chiuariu and Popescu could be charged with abuse of power, as they were aware that the ordinance was unconstitutional.
"If the government won't make the honourable gesture of tendering their resignation, as this is not the first time the constitution is encroached on, then, the prime minister must revoke Teodor Chiuariu, who stands behind this ordinance," the online paper Nine o'Clock quoted Valeriu Stoica, a Liberal-Democratic Party legal expert, as saying.
