26/09/2007
(World Bank, AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA - 26/09/07)
Economic reforms implemented between April 2006 and June 2007 have allowed Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union to surpass East Asia in terms of ease of doing business, the World Bank said in a new report, released Wednesday (September 26th). 
Some countries in the region have passed many Western European economies in this area, it added.
Three Balkan countries -- Croatia, Macedonia and Bulgaria -- were named among the top ten reformers in the world in the Bank's fifth annual Doing Business report. 
The group, led by Egypt and including also Ghana, Georgia, Colombia, Saudi Arabia, Kenya and China, accounted for nearly a fifth of all 200 pro-business reforms introduced in 98 of the surveyed 178 economies in 2006-2007.
"The results show that as governments ease regulations for doing business, more entrepreneurs go into business," said Simeon Djankov, lead author of the report. 
"Eastern Europe has witnessed a boom in new business entry that rivals the rapid growth in East Asia in the past."
Croatia is among the top ten performers for a second year in a row, thanks to efforts to improve the conditions for starting and closing a business, registering property and getting credit -- four of the 10 areas studied by the report.
"Two years ago registering a property in Croatia took 956 days. 
Now it takes 174," the Bank said.
Still well behind Singapore -- the most business friendly country in the world -- Croatia now ranks 97th in the world, up from 124th last year.
Macedonia, which implemented reforms to speed up company startup, ease the licensing regime and cut or simplify taxes, moved 17 places up the global scale to take the 75th position in this year's ranking.
Bulgaria -- the 10th on the top reformer list -- has emerged as a leader among the countries in Southeast Europe (SEE) in terms of ease of doing business, and is now 46th on the list. 
Reforms in the areas of dealing with licenses, paying and enforcing contracts allowed the country to move up nine places.
Of the other SEE countries, Romania, Turkey and Greece also have improved their rankings, while Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Montenegro and Serbia moved down the ladder.
Romania ranks 48th, Turkey is 57th and Greece is 100th. 
Of the three, Turkey has made the greatest progress, moving up 34 places.
Bulgaria and Romania, which joined the EU in January, are ahead of four other older members of the Union -- Italy, Slovenia, the Czech Republic and Greece.
Reforms appear to have slowed down in Serbia, which now ranks 86th among the 178 countries in the world, down from its 68th position last year. 
In the Bank's 2005 report, Serbia-Montenegro topped the list of countries that had done the most to improve the climate for doing business.
Albania ranks lowest among the SEE countries. 
It is 136th now, 16 positions down the ranking it was given last year. 
Montenegro is 81st and BiH is 95th.
Besides Singapore, the other 24 countries seen as best for doing business are New Zealand, the United States, Hong Kong (China), Denmark, the United Kingdom, Canada, Ireland, Australia, Iceland, Norway, Japan, Finland, Sweden, Thailand, Switzerland, Estonia, Georgia, Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, Latvia, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, and Austria.
