26/09/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 26/09/07
After a year-long impasse, President Branko Crvenkovski and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski have finally reached an agreement on staffing Macedonian diplomatic missions throughout the world. 
Poor co-operation between the two leaders has hampered progress in this area, and many Macedonian embassies currently do not have ambassadors.
On Monday (September 24th), Gruevksi appeared at a press conference and accepted the president's proposal that ambassadors should be selected only from a list of professional career diplomats. 
The foreign ministry will now draw up a list of job vacancies and deliver it to Crvenkovski.
Currently, Macedonia is without ambassadors to Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Britain, Denmark, Montenegro, Qatar, Romania, Serbia and Spain. 
In addition, the country does not have an ambassador to the UN, and the ambassadors to Greece, Ukraine and NATO have had to stay on past the end of their terms. 
Two other ambassadors -- to the Netherlands and Switzerland -- have been recalled, leaving those posts vacant as well.
According to Gruevski, the situation has not caused serious damage. 
The foreign minister has appointed officials who can perform all the duties of an ambassador, he told reporters.
The stalemate was a byproduct of the way Macedonia's constitution distributes responsibilities between the presidency and the government. 
The government nominates ambassadors and consular officials, but it is up to the president to accept the nominations. 
Under current law, two thirds of the ambassadors must be career diplomats, while the remainder may come from the ranks of distinguished public figures or politicians with a partisan background.
The deal between Crvenkovski and Gruevski may signal better co-operation between the two branches, analysts say. 
It comes after open criticism by NATO and the EU, which say political dialogue must be improved to resolve various issues.
The Macedonian public, meanwhile, hopes that removing roadblocks to ambassadorial appointments will help the country improve its representation abroad and attract foreign investment, which is part of an ambassador's duties.
