26/10/2007
(AFP, Reuters, FT, BBC - 26/10/07;
AP, Bloomberg, DPA, Euobserver - 25/10/07)
Differences over a host of issues, including Kosovo's final status and energy, are expected to dominate the agenda of the 20th EU-Russia summit in Portugal on Friday (October 26th), but no major breakthroughs are expected.
The meeting in Mafra, about 40km from Lisbon, coincides with a critical phase in a last-ditch effort to reach a solution on Kosovo's future.
With the December 10th deadline for the conclusion of the talks approaching fast, Russian President Vladimir Putin called for "patience" on Thursday.
Supporting Belgrade's rejection of a Western-backed plan to grant Kosovo internationally supervised independence, Russia insists that allowing the province to follow the path to statehood would encourage separatists in Europe and elsewhere to push for the same.
Moscow also opposes any deadlines being set for the negotiations, saying the process should continue until a mutually acceptable solution is reached.
But the Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90% of the province's population of 2 million people, have threatened to unilaterally declare independence on or shortly after December 10th.
Many EU member states have signaled they would recognise an independent Kosovo, even if it is not backed by a UN Security Council decision.
The Mafra meeting will not likely result in the EU and Russia ironing out differences over an approach to Iran's nuclear ambitions, either.
On the eve of the last such summit he attends as Russia's president, Putin again voiced opposition to Western calls for further sanctions against Iran over its defiance of a UN Security Council demand that it give up its uranium enrichment plans.
Maintaining that Iran is not working on nuclear weapons, the Russian leader said imposing sanctions would only "make the situation worse".
Energy issues are also expected to be high on the agenda in Portugal, which currently holds the rotating EU presidency.
The EU gets 25% of its oil and gas supplies from Russia.
Following signals last year that Moscow could use its energy dominance for political gains, the European Commission proposed new legislation last month that would restrict foreign companies' access to the EU energy market.
Viewing the move as directed specifically at the Russian monopoly Gazprom, Moscow has described the proposed measures as protectionist and unfair.
Still, the two sides are expected to hammer out details Friday on an early warning system, aimed at preventing disruptions in Russian oil and gas deliveries.
The only minor deals expected on Friday, according to the AP, would pave the way for greater co-operation in the fight against drug use and trafficking and for an increase in Russian steel exports to western Europe.
Trade issues are also on the agenda, including Russia's bid to join the WTO.
The EU has said that Russia must first resolve issues, such as its export duties on timber, to get the 27-nation bloc's blessing.
The Marfa summit comes only weeks before the current EU-Russia Partnership and Co-operation Agreement expires in December.
While it will be automatically renewed until the parties agree on a new document, progress on a new deal has stalled following Russia's decision in late 2005 to ban Polish meat exports.
