27/11/2007
(AP, AFP, DPA, ANA-MPA, ERT, BIRN - 26/11/07)
Reiterating Tirana's position, Albanian President Bamir Topi voiced support for Kosovo's independence during an official visit to Athens on Monday (November 26th).
"An independent Kosovo would be a valuable contribution towards bringing a final and lasting peace to the region," he said following talks with Greek President Karolos Papoulias.
Topi, who arrived on a three-day official visit Sunday, four months after being elected president, also expressed confidence about the European future of Balkan nations.
"I am convinced that the region of Kosovo and Albania, but also Serbia, see their future in the European family," Topi said. 
"That is why the award of independence status would be a valuable contribution to peace."
Albania signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU in June 2006, thus completing the first major step towards its eventual entry into the bloc. 
Serbia, whose accord was initialled on November 7th, expects the document to be sealed by the end of January.
Kosovo, technically still part of Serbia, has been under UN administration for more than eight years. 
Its ethnic Albanian majority hopes to become an independent state with the possibility of joining the EU.
Topi's remarks in Athens came on the first day of a critical phase in the internationally sponsored talks on Kosovo's final status.
Senior Belgrade and Pristina officials began a three-day meeting with the EU-US-Russian troika mediating the negotiations in Austria's spa town of Baden on Monday, amid widespread scepticism about the chances for an agreement by the December 10th deadline. 
Rejecting Kosovo's independence bid, Serbia insists on retaining some sovereignty over the province, while offering it broad autonomy.
Because Belgrade remains unlikely to ease its stance, leaders in Pristina have threatened to unilaterally declare independence after negotiations end.
Greece is among a handful of EU member states that have expressed reservations about Kosovo's possible secession. 
A prominent analyst on the Balkans suggested on Monday, however, a possible change in Athens' position. 
"Greece is signalling quietly that while it will not recognise Kosovo immediately, it will, given a decent interval of time," Tim Judah wrote in a report posted on the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network's website.
Kosovo was one regional issue Papoulias and Topi discussed. 
Other topics included the Macedonia name dispute, Turkey's EU accession path, the Cyprus problem, and relations between their countries.
Emphasising the strategic importance of Greek-Albanian ties, Papoulias also expressed his country's support for Albania's Euro-Atlantic integration.
"Greece supports Albania's EU and NATO bids, because it will contribute to stability in the region," Papoulias said.
Topi also met with Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis on Monday, and the leaders of the Greek Communist Party and the Popular Orthodox Rally, Aleka Papariga and Giorgos Karatzaferis, respectively.
