25/09/2007
(Turkish Daily News, Zaman - 25/09/07; Reuters, AFP, Arab News, NTV, MSNBC, Stratfor, Turkish Daily News, Turkish Press - 24/09/07; AFP - 22/09/07)
Well-established principles of secularism should not be up for discussion, a top Turkish general said on Monday (September 24th), as debate over a new constitution heats up.
"Secularism is the cornerstone of all values of the Turkish Republic," General Ilker Basbug, the head of land forces, said at a ceremony at the Military Academy in Ankara, marking the start of the new academic year. 
"The principle of secularism that is enshrined in the constitution ... 
should not be a topic for discussion. 
The Turkish Armed Forces is and will always be a party to the protection of this characteristic and structure."
The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) is working on a new "civilian constitution", meant to replace one adopted two years after the 1980 military coup in Turkey. 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has promised broad public debate on the draft before its submission to parliament for approval. 
According to a party official, this will likely happen early next year. 
The AKP is also planning to ask the public to vote on the new constitution in a referendum.
This new version reportedly aims to broaden personal freedoms and remove obstacles on the country's path towards EU membership. 
For example, while affirming Turkish as the official language in the country, the document is expected to allow Kurdish language education in state schools.
In his speech Monday, Basbug stressed the army's opposition to providing education in Kurdish or other minority languages. 
Turkey's military, which has toppled four governments over the past half-century, views any move to grant more rights to the Kurds as a potential national security threat.
"The Turkish Army has always been a party to the protection of the nation-state and always will be," Basbug told army cadets. 
Condemning what he referred to as "the anarchy of ideas", he also urged intellectuals to be on the alert.
Viewing itself as a guardian of secularism, the military have been suspicious of the AKP because of its roots in political Islam. 
Some fear that the party may use the new constitution as a tool to undermine the separation of state and religion, enshrined in the current charter.
Erdogan's call last week for an end to the ban on wearing the Muslim headscarf in universities has already sparked debate.
"Movements against secularism and ethnic nationalists have a common target, which is the structure of the nation-state," Basbug said on Monday. 
"The functional definitions of the secularism principle in the constitution should not become a topic of discussion."
