24/09/2007
By Gabriela Preda for Southeast European Times - 24/09/07
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis, whose ruling New Democracy party retained a slim majority following snap elections on September 16th, says he wants immediate results from his reshuffled cabinet, which includes several new faces. 
Although Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and other key members kept their posts, others have been replaced in a bid to inject new momentum and win back public support.
''I will be closely watching the work done by every ministry,'' Karamanlis said. 
He also warned that deputy ministers now needed direct approval to make public statements. 
"Too much television, too many statements, too much public speaking is seriously harmful. 
Measure and much caution are necessary," the prime minister said.
Although his party saw its strength in parliament trimmed, Karamanlis stressed his determination to push through his agenda. 
Initiatives aimed at streamlining bureaucracy and reducing costs have run into opposition from unions and the left, and Karamanlis had hoped the elections would bring him a strong show of support from the public at large. 
Instead, New Democracy received a weaker mandate from a disenchanted electorate.
Many analysts are sceptical about prospects for change. 
"The election campaigns made it clear that the parties are not willing to deal with the uncertain present," the daily Kathimerini wrote. 
"Both New Democracy and the left wing PASOK kept their cards close to their chests when it came to telling voters what are the clear measures that would increase wages or reduce the cost of living, while creating a fairer job market for the young, women in particular."
According to Transparency International, fighting corruption is one of the major areas in which the government will have to demonstrate progress. 
The prime minister needs to restore New Democracy's credibility, which was recently undermined because of a pensions fund scandal. 
More than 50 people, mostly officials at state pension funds, banks and brokerages, may face charges of fraud, money-laundering and tax evasion.
Following the devastating fires of August, many will be watching to see if the Karamanlis administration takes action to close the legal loopholes that have encouraged arson by would-be developers. 
In the past, fires have often been the prelude to new construction. 
But with unprecedented damage this time around, the public is in no mood to tolerate business as usual.
Karamanlis, 51, called early elections in August, six months before the end of his government's mandate. 
His party now has 152 seats in the 300-seat parliament -- a loss of 13 seats since 2004.
According to Economy Minister George Alogoskoufis, the government's immediate priority is the drafting of the 2008 budget. 
Next on the list is passage of a bill on the use of investment subsidies under the EU's 4th Community Support Framework.
The first bill to be tabled in parliament will concern the fight against tax evasion, Alogoskoufis told reporters. 
The government also has said it wants to move forward with abolition of the inheritance tax, as well as taxes on first home purchases.
