24/01/2008
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 24/01/08
Greece wants "to go beyond the difficulties of the past and to look towards the future with hope", Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis said after meeting with his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. 
Erdogan described 2008 as a year of new opportunities to develop further ties between the two countries.
Although Turkey and Greece are traditional rivals, political relations have drastically improved in recent years, despite ongoing disagreement about airspace and territorial waters. 
The two NATO allies stopped just short of going to war in 1987 and 1996 over oil and gas exploration and a sovereignty dispute involving two tiny, barren islets in the Aegean Sea.
The Turkish and Greek prime ministers agreed on Wednesday to further develop bilateral co-operation, but they differed on the politically sensitive issues of Cyprus, the reopening of a Greek Orthodox seminary in Istanbul, problems in the Aegean and issues concerning the Turkish minority in Greece and the Greek minority in Turkey.
They pledged to work together to resolve the long-standing dispute over the territories in the Aegean, although they remain far apart on the means to be used in this effort. 
Karamanlis reiterated Athens' position that the matter should be decided by the International Court of Justice in The Hague, whereas Erdogan continued to insist on a bilateral solution.
Meanwhile, the stalemate over efforts to reunify the divided island of Cyprus has hampered Turkey's EU bid. 
In December 2006, Brussels froze the opening of eight of 35 negotiating chapters because of a Cyprus-related impasse.
The Republic of Cyprus joined the EU in May 2004, claiming to represent the island as a whole. 
However, the Turkish part of the island is in international isolation and is only recognised by Turkey. 
"It is necessary for Turkey to also normalise its relations with Cyprus for its EU bid," Karamanlis said, adding that the EU should accept Turkey as a full member after Ankara fulfils all of its commitments to the organisation.
Erdogan responded by saying there is a need to redouble diplomatic efforts regarding Cyprus and expressed hope that the February presidential elections there will create a new window of opportunity.
Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos, who led his community in rejecting a UN reunification plan in a 2004 referendum, is seeking re-election. 
Turkish Cypriots held a separate referendum at the time and voted in favour of the plan. 
But it had to be endorsed by both sides in order for a reunified Cyprus to enter the EU.
