25/01/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 25/01/08
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader told EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn on Wednesday (January 23rd) that his county will not retract the fishing zone implemented at the beginning of the year.
Severe opposition to the protected environmental fishing zone (ZERP) in the Adriatic by the EU and some of its member states could cause major hardships for Croatia's accession bid.
Sanader said anything is possible, even worst case scenarios such as blocked negotiations.
Although the prime minister hopes this will not happen, he is determined to maintain the zone.
Croatia has offered to hold talks with Italy and Slovenia -- countries most affected and against the ZERP -- in order to facilitate a solution, but have received no response.
The EU has warned Croatia on several occasions to give up the zone and has repeatedly said the consequences could be harsh.
The unilateral decision by Croatian authorities also provoked reactions in Slovenia and Italy.
As Slovenia is currently holding the rotating EU presidency, diplomats in Ljubljana have put the dispute high on the list of priorities.
"If Croatia wants to speed up the negotiations process, it clearly knows what to do," diplomats in Brussels said.
However, the ZERP is not the only issue facing Croatia in terms of its accession bid.
Judicial reforms and efforts to fight corruption are being implemented very slowly, with no visible results.
If Croatia wants to join the EU in 2009, negotiations must be completed by the end of this year.
Sanader, however, has said that he is not satisfied with the development of relations with the Union and wants this to change.
He promised that the state administration will do its best to fulfil all requirements, but also reiterated there will be no change regarding the fishing zone.
European Parliament (EP) Rapporteur for Croatia Hannes Swoboda on Wednesday urged the country to settle the ZERP dispute and speed up judicial reforms.
Swoboda will present a report on the country's progress next week and will again ask EP members to approve Croatia's EU accession agreement.
Reportedly, he will recommend Croatia give up the protected zone but will also encourage Slovenia to be more proactive in resolving the border dispute with Croatia.
Part of Slovenia's objection to the zone stems from a longstanding disagreement over the sea border between Croatia and Slovenia.
However, if Croatia refuses to budge on the fishing zone, and does not implement the necessary reforms in time, the country may lose six to nine months because the ratification process in member states cannot be launched without EP approval, Swoboda explained.
