25/10/2007
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 25/10/07
Participants from 12 countries met in Ohrid, Macedonia, on October 14th for a three-day forum titled "Public Opinion as a Factor of NATO Membership". 
The main objectives were to discuss the future integration of countries in the region into NATO and public opinion, and to give approximately 60 representatives of the Southeast European media a chance to share their experiences.
The event was organised by the Macedonian Information Agency and the Bulgarian Telegraph Agency (BTA) in partnership with the Macedonian A1 Television and the daily Dnevnik.
BTA director Maksim Mincev discussed the role of the media in Bulgaria prior to the country's entry into NATO in April 2004. 
"Bulgarian media every day assured the citizens that the country should become a full-fledged member of the Alliance. 
It was a very big challenge because Bulgaria previously was the member of the Warsaw Pact."
Addressing the conference, Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki said he expects his country to join the Alliance soon. 
"Public opinion polls show Macedonia is on the path to becoming a NATO member," he said. 
"The optimism stems from not only the national and political consensus, but also because more than 90% of Macedonians support joining the Alliance."
"Public opinion is an integral part of the political climate in every country and a precondition for politicians to accomplish their goals," Milososki said. 
He added that Macedonia is expecting an invitation for membership at the next NATO summit in Bucharest, in April 2008.
Solomon Passy, the Macedonian government counselor for NATO integration, also said that he expects Macedonia will receive an invitation to join NATO next April because NATO values highly Macedonia’s progress.
Others agreed that NATO integration for the region is near. 
"We expect Macedonia, Albania and Croatia to become NATO members and in the near future our partners from the region as well with which the last 'black hole' in Europe will be closed. 
It is only a question of time when we are to become part of the European family," Defence Minister Lazar Elenovski said addressing the panel discussion at the Balkan Media Forum.
Topics discussed in the forum included the transformation of public opinion into NATO support, the place and role of the media in the assessment process of NATO values in society, the role of nongovernmental organisations, situations in dealing with NATO, expansion of the Alliance and the connection between membership and business.
Besides the 20 representatives from Macedonian media, general directors and representatives from press agencies from 11 countries in the region also participated in the forum. 
Represented countries were Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Greece, Italy, Romania, Slovenia, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine, Croatia and Montenegro.
