23/08/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 23/08/07
Macedonia has been fined millions over its failure to meet commitments under a 1999 sales contract with Hellenic Petroleum. 
The Greek firm bought Macedonia's only oil refinery, OKTA.
As part of the deal, Macedonia was obligated to procure 500,000 tonnes of crude oil exclusively from OKTA each year for the next two decades. 
In addition, Hellenic Petroleum was given the right to import customs-free derivatives to Macedonia.
In 2003, the former Social Democrat-led government breached the contract by importing crude oil from another company. 
The customs-free imports were also terminated. 
The authorities claimed that the deal, signed by a previous administration led by the VMRO-DPMNE, was illegal and harmed the state.
Hellenic Petroleum cried foul, and this month the International Court of Arbitration in Paris agreed. 
Macedonia will now have to pay $53m, plus interest, in compensation to the Greek company.
The ruling has reignited debate over what had become an all-but-forgotten scandal. 
At the time of the OKTA sale, many complained that the deal was not transparent, damaging to Macedonia's interests, and involved elements of corruption.
The government at the time, headed by Ljupco Georgievski, sold the refinery for $32m without a public tender. 
The law stipulating the sale was presented to parliament in an incomplete form, without key annexes. 
In 2002, the Constitutional Court ruled that the sale was not in compliance with the constitution. 
The following year, the state anti-corruption commission requested that a criminal investigation be launched, but this did not happen.
Signing the contract with Hellenic Petroleum meant terminating existing contracts with Mamit Jet Oil, which sued. 
In 2004, a London-based arbitration court ordered Macedonia to pay the firm $17m in compensation.
The OKTA sale is a "historic example" of damaging one's own state, says National Bank Governor Petar Gosev.
But Georgievski, the former prime minister who presided over the deal, says the blame lies with his successors for breaching the contract.
A government spokesman, Ivica Bocevski, insisted that the court's ruling is not final and that Macedonia will file an appeal. 
He also vowed that accountability will be sought from all involved in the case, from the moment of signing to the unilateral termination by the Social Democrat-led government.
