23/08/2007
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 23/08/07
Montenegro's government is defending its decision to send surplus weapons and ammunition to Afghanistan as a contribution to the global fight against terrorism.
On August 14th, the cabinet agreed to donate around 1,500 automatic rifles, 100 machine guns and 250,000 bullets to Afghan troops battling the Taliban. 
The explanation was that Montenegro wants to help stabilise Afghanistan and contribute to global security.
Opposition parties have questioned the move. 
The Liberal Party (LP), which opposes Montenegro's entry into NATO, says it would be better if humanitarian aid were sent to Afghanistan, rather than weapons.
The Serbian List, which argues that Montenegro should not rush to join NATO, charges that rules were violated because parliament did not endorse the government's decision.
However, authorities are convinced they made the right decision.
"Terrorism is identified in our defence strategy as a major danger to our national security. 
With this contribution, Montenegro shows devotion to the interests of the international community and protects its own interests," the defence ministry said in a statement.
The ministry says everything was done lawfully. 
Parliamentary approval, it argues, is only needed when troops are being sent abroad, and not in case of a simple donation.
According to the ministry, obligations of this kind stem from Montenegro's membership in the NATO Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme.
The LP ridicules the government's argument that weapons donations are needed to stabilise Afghanistan. 
"Donations in guns and ammunition are a great contribution to establishing peace in that part of the world," it commented sarcastically.
"What kind of humanitarianism is when you help someone by sending him weapons instead of humanitarian aid?" said LP deputy Zoran Zivkovic.
While military analysts agree that sending weapons and ammunition to Afghanistan will help Montenegro draw closer to NATO, some say there is a potential cost to national security.
Savo Kentera of the Euro-Atlantic Club thinks Montenegro should not only donate weapons but also send troops.
By contrast, Aleksander Dedovic of the Alpha Centre says the government's decision should be seen as nothing more than a form of membership dues for PfP. 
Montenegro will not gain any friends in the Muslim world with this move, he argues.
Several other countries in the region have also sent weapons and ammunition to Afghanistan in recent years.
In 2003. 
Croatia sent $2m worth of ammunition, and in January of this year the country decided to send 1,000 automatic rifles and 300,000 bullets.
In 2004, Albania sent weapons and ammunition worth $746,000. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has sent automatic rifles, uniforms and ammunition worth $2.8m.
