23/08/2007
(AP, Reuters, DPA, VOA, RFE/RL, Office of the High Representative - 22/08/07)
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has warned the Bosnian Serb entity's prime minister to stop making provocative remarks if he wants to avoid sanctions.
"His statements questioning the sovereignty and territorial integrity of BiH are detrimental to the country's ongoing efforts to continue reforms and integrate into Euro-Atlantic institutions," High Representative Miroslav Lajcak said Wednesday (August 22nd).
Milorad Dodik, who took office as Republika Srpska's (RS) prime minister in February 2006, has made a number of controversial remarks, including suggestions that the entity could secede. 
On Monday, he said in an interview that RS is a "permanent" category, while BiH is unlikely to last long as a state.
"Prime Minister Dodik should consider carefully whether he wishes to challenge the international community by statements that question the constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Dayton Peace Agreement," Lajcak warned. 
The high representative has broad powers, allowing him to fire even senior BiH officials.
The international community "will not tolerate any attempts to undermine the Dayton Peace Agreement and it will not remain passive in the face of provocative statements and acts," said Lajcak, who also serves as the EU's special representative to BiH.
In a declaration signed ahead of the October 2006 elections in BiH, Dodik pledged that his Alliance of Social Democrats would "fully comply" with the Dayton Accords and that he would accept sanctions if he fails to abide by its terms, Lajcak noted.
In an interview with BiH daily Dan, he also criticised Dodik for his repeated threats to call an independence referendum in RS that would allow it to secede from BiH.
Dodik's office has issued a statement, saying that was not the prime minister's goal.
"But he also asks the international community to obey the reality and the BiH constitution and not to constantly violate it by the permanent insistence on reforms which take authority away from the Serb Republic."
BiH has been asked to implement a number of reforms to progress along its EU integration path. 
Brussels has made clear that it will not sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with BiH, a first major step towards eventual membership of the Union, until the country's politicians reach an agreement on police reform.
Lajcak said last week that if there is no deal by the end of September, the SAA will not be finalised by the end of this year.
The EU also stressed the need for constitutional reform to strengthen BiH's institutional makeup.
"Let us be clear, Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it is today, is a state that is not very efficient and too expensive," Lajcak said last week. 
However, police reform is first on the agenda, he added.
