24/09/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 24/09/07
NATO would like to extend an invitation to Macedonia at its Bucharest summit next year, but the country must show more results.
That is the gist of messages coming recently from the Alliance's headquarters in Brussels.
A Macedonian delegation travelled there this month to present the country's annual programme for NATO membership preparation.
According to sources within the Macedonian delegation, most representatives in the NATO Political Committee expressed hope that the latest national programme will be the last.
NATO has signaled that new invitations will be forthcoming at Bucharest, and the three Adriatic Charter countries -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- are considered the most serious candidates.
However, Macedonia does have work to do.
According to the national co-ordinator for Euro-Atlantic integration, Nikola Dimitrov, officials in Brussels cited judicial reform as a particular area of concern.
The message was that the Judiciary Council should be completed and laws reforming the public prosecution should be adopted.
NATO also would like to see an improved political dialogue, with better co-operation among the government, the presidency and the opposition.
Political obstacles blocking judicial reform should be overcome.
The Macedonian Army (ARM) and defence matters are in far better shape.
The Macedonian Army contributes to missions in Afghanistan, Iraq and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The ARM has been completely professionalised and downsized, and a programme for a small, flexible and efficient army that can deal with new asymmetric threats, such as terrorism, has been implemented.
Last week, the chairman of NATO's Military Committee, General Ray Henault, met in Skopje with senior officials.
After talks with the ARM Chief of Staff, General Miroslav Stojanovski, Henault said the delegation was impressed by the progress made in military reforms.
The Republic of Macedonia has been a very good candidate so far, but its NATO membership will be decided on at the political level when all accomplishments are considered, Henault said.
"My expectation is that we will get support for full membership in the Alliance.
The motivation and obligation for the members of the ARM is that there is a consensus between the political parties in Macedonia for NATO membership as well as great support by the citizens," Stojanovski said.
