25/10/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 25/10/2007
Approximately 1,100 soldiers from 25 countries, mostly members of NATO and the Partnership for Peace (PfP), are participating in three-week military exercises named Co-operative Longbow/Lancer 07. 
They began at an Albanian Army base near the capital, Tirana, on October 7th.
"Holding the largest and the most important international exercise of NATO for 2007 in Albania is an important event for our country. 
This helps train the Albanian forces according to international standards," said Albanian Minister of Defence Fatmir Mediu.
"We need this, as we are expecting to receive a NATO membership invitation by spring of next year," said Mediu, speaking about the importance of the exercises for fulfilling NATO aspirations.
Lieutenant General Roland Kather, Commander of the Allied Land Component Command Heidelberg, is directing the exercises. 
"This exercise is one building block towards achieving military interoperability, a common and mutual effort undertaken by both Alliance and Partner nations," said Kather. 
"In their broadest sense, these exercises are linked to the stability of the Balkan region. 
They are also a way for us to oversee Albania’s bid to join NATO."
Participants are from seven NATO member nations -- including Greece, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States -- and 12 PfP nations, including Albania, Austria, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Switzerland. 
The observers are from Morocco, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates.
As the manoeuvres started in Albania, NATO's Parliamentary Assembly approved a resolution on October 9th calling on all member nations to invite the countries of the so-called Adriatic Charter -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- to join the Alliance at the Bucharest Summit in April 2008.
The resolution, adopted at a session in Iceland's capital earlier this month, also encourages the three countries to step up efforts to implement necessary reforms, saying membership would boost security and stability in the Euro-Atlantic zone.
The three countries were praised for contributing to NATO operations, most notably the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. 
All regularly participate in military exercises with NATO, and in all of them defense reforms have been centered on standing up small, professional, modern, deployable forces that can work in the NATO context.
