26/11/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 26/11/07
Despite vocal opposition from French President Nicolas Sarkozy, the EU appears ready to open additional negotiation chapters with Turkey.
According to EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, two more policy areas are set to be opened next month.
Portuguese Foreign Minister Luis Amada -- whose country currently holds the EU's rotating presidency -- said the health and consumer policies and transport chapters will open on December 18th.
Sarkozy's opposition has become the key sticking point along Turkey's accession path.
The French president argues that Turkey is not part of Europe and thus does not belong in the EU.
He wants talks to be put on ice until European leaders agree to a meeting of "wise men" to determine the "final borders of Europe".
However, the European Commission (EC) has already warned Sarkozy against using this proposal as a means to block Turkey's negotiations.
"It is essential that the EU honours its commitments and keeps the negotiation process with Turkey on track and that chapters are opened as soon as the technical conditions are met," the EC said in a strategy paper released this month.
Progress has been slow and troubled since negotiations with Turkey began in 2005.
In the last two years, only four out of 35 chapters have been opened -- science and research, industrial policy, statistics and financial control.
Only one -- science and research -- has been closed.
Additionally, eight key chapter openings were suspended due to the decades-old Cyprus issue.
Despite these setbacks, the EC -- which views the major political and economic transformation in Turkey in the past eight years as one of its success stories -- says it wants to speed up the process.
Slovenia, which assumes the EU presidency in January, has also signaled that it will support opening new chapters in the accession talks.
"Slovenia will do everything in its power to help Turkey in its EU accession process," Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa said during an official visit to Ankara last week.
Additionally, Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema visited Istanbul last week and said membership negotiations with Turkey should be carried out as quickly as possible.
But Turkish efforts to stamp out violence by the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) -- including warnings of a possible cross-border operation -- could pose yet another obstacle in the negotiations.
Addressing the issue, Rehn said Europe understands Turkey's need to protect its people from the PKK and ensure security in the region.
However, he also said that Turkey and Iraq need to work harder to increase co-operation and find a political solution to the problem.
