19/12/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 19/12/11
The very first sentence in its constitution states that Montenegro "is a civil, democratic and ecological state".
Yet, 20 years after the proclamation, the country remains peppered with litter, impromptu dumps and worse.
On the anniversary of Montenegro's statehood, September 20th, authorities acknowledged environmental shortcomings.
"The concept of 'ecological state' exists only on paper," UNDP Representative Kristine Blokus told the media earlier this year when an international delegation of UN, UNDP and EU representatives visited Montenegro.
The country still has no waste recycling facility, and almost every town offers a local example of environmental ennui.
"This is the situation:
100m from the magnificent buildings, marble shining, with green [surroundings], a holiday for the eyes...
a few feet further, there is a tall tree whose top is full of nylon bags fluttering in the breeze, while under the tree are drained beer and plastic wine bottles.
That's the summer scene in Budva," resident Djon Lakcevic told SETimes.
He adds that that every year, people are becoming more aggressive in destroying the environment, showing "no mercy" when it comes to waste.
"Trash is everywhere.
Authorities also do nothing to improve the situation," Lakcevic said.
According to official data provided by the government, total waste produced annually in Montenegro is about 193,148 tonnes;
half that, only 96,574 tonnes is collected.
The rest ends up in the environment.
Vasilije Mugosa, a farmer from the village of Mareza, near Podgorica, told SETimes that the ecological disaster is epitomised by the Mareza River, from which Podgorica draws drinking water.
Starting from its spring to its confluence with the country's biggest river, the Moraca, the Mareza River is small but important, and full of garbage, he says.
"I swear that I drank the water from this river every day, 20 years ago, and look at it now.
I think even a rat would be poisoned by it," the farmer notes.
"It's hard to tell who treats the environment worse:
the people who live here or the authorities who do not protect it."
No ecological progress in 20 years
The most difficult situation involves the country's five ecological "black spots".
One of the most critical is Zeljezara, a Niksic iron factory.
Experts say that iron is produced without any protection and the city's air is among the most polluted in Europe.
There are no filters on smoke stacks, and the steel-producing plant has no chimney.
Niksic residents have been warning about the problem for years, protesting and signing petitions to close the factory, but without success.
Aleksandar Perovic, director of the eco movement Ozone, a Niksic-based NGO that works on local environmental problems, told SETimes that Montenegro made no progress in the 20 years since its authorities signed that proclamation declaring Montenegro an ecological state .
He says authorities must give up this orientation or begin to apply the law.
"Our government is like David Copperfield, creating an illusion of an ecological state with its highlighting [of] natural resources, but also hiding huge pollutants that poison Montenegro," Perovic said.
He also says that funding levels are unacceptable.
"Niksic municipality donated 5,000 euros for environmental protection in two years;
that speaks for itself."
"The penalties for industrial pollutants are minimal.
So far, for the management of Zeljezara, it is more profitable to pay the fine at the end of the year than create a system of environmental protection," Perovic adds.
Darko Pajovic, executive director of Green Home, Montenegro's biggest ecology NGO, told SETimes that he blames negligence by the "highest authorities in the country".
"For now, we are still far from the ecological state, and when we get there depends on the decision-makers and their political will," Pajovic said.
"It's too harsh to say that a declaration on the ecological state of Montenegro exists only on paper, but I also think that we can always do more," Predrag Sekulic, minister of sustainable development and tourism, told the media on the 20th anniversary marking environmental efforts in Montenegro.
Ivana Vojinovic, deputy minister of sustainable development and tourism, told SETimes that Montenegro was proclaimed an ecological state in a specific period, when it was not possible to devote equal attention to environmental problems in ways available today.
Caring for the environment is a lengthy process, she explained.
"From May 2006 until the end of 2010, funds collected for projects and activities for environmental protection and infrastructure will amount to nearly 165m euros, including the allocations at the national and local level, grants and credit arrangements.
We passed a number of important environment bills, and the most important focus on [those five] 'black spots'," Vojinovic said.
She added that solving the problem of waste and waste water management is also a priority and that the government, in co-operation with international financial institutions, plans significant projects related to ecology in the future.
Black spots and other ecological threats to Montenegro
Among the pressing eco threats are the aluminum factory in Podgorica that spread red industrial mud pools and industrial waste landfill;
the Niksic iron processing factory generating an industrial waste landfill and lacking eco chimney filters;
the Bijela shipyard, near Herceg Novi, a landfill of industrial waste and sea pollution;
Pljevlja thermal power plant, featuring a landfill of poison ash and industrial waste;
and Pljevlja coal mine, producing industrial fog and river pollution.
A case that critics say local authorities have ignored for years is the area called Vasove vode near Berane, in northern Montenegro, where the local waste collection company dumps its loads at the source of 15 drinking water springs.
A year ago, Skadar National Park Lake was on the edge of ecological disaster after floods washed tonnes of waste onto the lake shore.
A rapid response by the eco movement saved the lake from a disaster.
Montenegro authorities, in co-operation with their counterparts from Bosnia and Herzegovina, intended to build a hydro power plant that would have literally sank the Tara River Canyon, second largest in the world [after Colorado] and one of the cleanest rivers in Europe.
"I don't want a swamp, I want Tara," chanted members of eco NGOs while asking citizens to sign a petition against the construction.
In one day, on September 8th, 15,000 people from all over Montenegro signed it
As a result, authorities scrapped the project.
One of Montenegro's key obligations as an EU candidate country remains resolving the problem of waste.
So far, the only sanitary landfill in Montenegro is in Podgorica.
