23/01/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 23/01/08
Monday's (January 21st) round of negotiations on the name dispute between Greece and Macedonia ended in Ohrid, Macedonia, without any concrete suggestion or solution.
Despite the outcome, UN special envoy to the negotiations Matthew Nimetz described the talks as constructive.
"Both sides, for their own reasons, have great interest to leave this problem behind them and to continue to establish a positive and constructive relationship," Nimetz said after the meeting.
"I would not say that we are in the end of the problem.
I think that we should continue thinking for the benefit of both sides.
I think that this is a productive meeting in a direction of finding solution."
The talks were hosted by Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki.
"This was the first time we had participation on the ministerial level," Nimetz said.
The talks were held in a government villa on Lake Ohrid, and were attended by Greek representative Adamantios Vasilakis, Macedonian representative Nikola Dimitrov, Milososki and Nimetz.
The talks began with a discussion about already identified strategies.
Vasilakis said the only acceptable solution for Greece is the use of a composite name that includes the name Macedonia and a geographic term.
Previously, Greece refused to discuss any name that included the word Macedonia.
According to Dimitrov, Macedonia will only accept a "double formula", which would mean using Republic of Macedonia for international instances and a special name for bilateral communications with Greece.
Currently, 120 countries recognise the country under its constitutional name.
Dimitrov said a fast solution may not be possible, as the differences over the issue are broad.
Negotiations are additionally burdened with Greece's threats to veto Macedonia's NATO and the EU accession bids, he said.
"The proposal for a complex name, which Greece considers to be a huge concession, is not such a great concession, because even the reference FYROM -- which is used in the UN -- is a complex name.
There is nothing new in the proposal," Dimitrov said.
According to Milososki, Macedonia poses "no territorial threat against Greece".
The foreign minister proposed that a declaration to that effect be signed, and a commission be formed to examine all aspects of the dispute.
However, Vasilakis said he wasn't authorised to sign any agreements.
He said Athens has made "huge concessions" to Skopje and would make a decision when the question of Macedonia's accession bids to NATO and the EU are on the agenda.
The next round of negotiations is scheduled to take place in Athens in two weeks.
