24/07/2007
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/07/07
"The Town beneath the Marko Fortress" -- as Prilep, Macedonia is traditionally called -- was the site of beer and grills last week.
Pivofest was first organised five years ago at the initiative of the then local self-government and the Prilep Brewery.
This nyear, six breweries from Macedonia and abroad presented their achievements in the beer making industry on the 8,000-square meter Metodija Andonov Cento Square.
Prilep locals and visitors were surrounded by suds from July 12th through the 15th.
They sampled brews by Skopsko, Zlaten Dab, Lasko and Bavaria Kamenza Zofman, among others.
As for food, alongside local caterers' stands, were restaurant owners and food service companies from Leskovac, Serbia -- a town known for its grill specialties.
About 250,000 guests from Macedonia, Greece, Bulgaria and Serbia visited Prilep for the festival.
More than 100 tonnes of beer, and more than 20 tonnes of food was consumed.
The festival was opened by Macedonian singer Elena Velkovska and the Jane Sandanski Folk Ensemble from Melbourne, Australia.
The festival traditionally takes place in July, when most Macedonian emigrants come home to visit relatives and enjoy vacations.
"Pivofest has already become a recognisable brand in Macedonia.
The event is a good opportunity for the town to be visited by many home and foreign guests," Prilep Mayor Marjan Ristevski says.
He and Prilep Brewery director Saso Samardzioski hosted several government ministers.
Deputy Prime Minister Zoran Stavrevski called it a perfectexample of how a modestly devised event could develop into a true regional festival.
Other guests seemed equally delighted.
"We are having a really good time," Zdravko Taleski, a Macedonian emigrant in Australia said.
"I hope that it will be held many more years to come."
Hotels in Prilep were completely filled, as were private accommodations.
"I haven't seen so many people at one place in Macedonia.
I congratulate Prilep authorities for the successfully organised event.
I am positive that I will come again next year," a guest from Gevgelija, Ivan Kavazov, said.
