21/12/2007
(Reuters, AFP, Xinhua, Blic, B92, Nine O'clock - 21/12/07;
AP, DPA, FT, International Herald Tribune, Euronews, RFE/RL, BIRN, B92, Beta - 20/12/07)
Russia will block any UN Security Council resolution endorsing independence for Kosovo, Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov warned in an interview with a Russian newspaper, published on Friday (December 21st).
"If a decision approving a unilateral declaration of Kosovo's independence is put forward (in the Security Council), there will certainly be a veto," the minister told Vremya Novostei daily.
His remarks were published two days after the Security Council's closed-door session on Kosovo, which ended without an agreement.
Still technically part of Serbia, Kosovo's 90% ethnic Albanian majority is seeking independence, while Belgrade is offering broad autonomy within Serbian borders.
Maintaining that Kosovo cannot remain in limbo, the United States and most EU member states support former UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari's proposal, which recommends granting the province internationally supervised independence.
Following the failure of the subsequent, EU-US-Russian troika-led talks to produce a deal, leaders in Pristina are now expected to take matters into their own hands.
Western nations have signalled their readiness to recognise a unilateral declaration of independence that Kosovo is likely to announce within weeks.
Backing Serbia, Russia however insists that the talks must continue until an agreement is achieved.
"If the partners from the West accept the continuation of negotiations, Russia has already prepared a plan containing further steps that would make it possible to reach a generally acceptable solution to the Kosovo status," the Belgrade-based daily Blic quoted the Russian troika representative, Aleksandr Botsan-Kharchenko, as saying Friday.
But he offered no details about "concrete measures" contained in that plan.
With the Security Council members split in their positions on the future of Kosovo, the EU has made clear its intentions to play a leading role in efforts to resolve the problem and move towards implementing Ahtisaari's plan.
Leaders of the 27-nation bloc agreed last week to deploy an 1,800-strong EU administrative, judicial and police mission to Kosovo to replace the current UNMIK.
But some EU member states have voiced opposition to recognising independence for Kosovo without the UN's approval.
Romania's parliament adopted a declaration Thursday, calling for the continuation of talks between Belgrade and Pristina and for an EU summit on the issue of Kosovo's status and the Euro-Atlantic integration of the Western Balkans.
Meanwhile, Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, whose country will assume the rotating EU presidency from Portugal on January 1st, cited Kosovo as one of the top priorities of his country's upcoming six-month chairmanship.
Rupel stressed the need for the EU and Kosovo "to agree on what to do next".
EU foreign ministers, according to him, will meet on January 28th to discuss the "action plan" for the Union's justice and police mission to Kosovo.
If they fail to reach a consensus, the issue will be revisited in an extraordinary meeting of EU ministers.
"If [UN Security Council Resolution] 1244 is good enough for a military presence, it should be good for a civilian mission as well," Rupel said, in an apparent reference to Serbian and Russian claims that an EU mission to Kosovo would be illegal.
