22/08/2007
(Zaman - 22/08/07;
AP, Reuters, AFP, VOA, RFE/RL - 21/08/07)
In the midst of a presidential election that is expected to be won by the ruling Justice and Development Party's (AKP) candidate, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has warned the country's military to stay out of politics.
"All institutions should act in line with the mandate they are given by the constitution," he said in an interview aired on Turkey's Kanal D, late on Monday (August 20th).
"If we believe in democracy, we should not involve the Turkish armed forces in politics.
For us, the armed forces are sacred ...
They have their own place and politicians have another place in democracy."
The army has toppled four governments since 1960.
In recent months, it has voiced objections to the AKP's presidential candidate, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, because of his roots in political Islam.
Gul was first nominated in April, triggering a crisis that forced the government to call early parliamentary elections.
The AKP won those elections handily.
Claiming a popular mandate, it then decided to renominate Gul, whose earlier bid ran aground amid an opposition boycott.
On Monday, parliament began the presidential election process anew.
In the first-round vote, Gul won the support of 341 MPs, but fell short of the two-thirds majority required for outright victory.
The same rule applies to the second round, scheduled for Friday.
In the third and fourth rounds, however, a simple majority will suffice.
Most analysts expect Gul will be elected during the third round, on Monday.
In the first ballot, the other two presidential contenders -- Sebahattin Cakmakoglu of the Nationalist Action Party and Tayfun Icli of the Democratic Left Party -- finished well behind Gul, with 70 and 13 votes, respectively.
Seeking to allay the suspicions of Turkey's military and the secular elite, Erdogan and other AKP leaders have repeatedly pledged their commitment to secularism and democracy.
"If I am elected, the constitution will be my guide," Gul said following his renomination.
"Protection of secularism is one of my basic principles.
Nobody should worry about this."
In his interview with Kanal D, Erdogan said that Gul's ties with the AKP will end with his election to the presidency.
"Once Mr. Gul is elected, his link with our party would be over," the AFP quoted the prime minister as saying.
"From that moment on, he will be the president of the Turkish Republic."
The military has made no specific comments on Gul's fresh bid for the presidency.
However, Chief of General Staff General Yasar Buyukanit said last month that the person who takes the post must be secular not only in words but also in deeds.
On Tuesday, he denied press reports suggesting that he had held secret talks with Gul.
He said the army would never resort to bargaining on any issue.
"There are efforts to mislead the public through completely fictitious reports that the chief of staff met with certain politicians and reached an agreement," a statement posted on the general's website read.
"The chief of staff has no secret schedule and he holds all his meetings in line with the established traditions of the state."
