24/10/2007
(Reuters, Bloomberg, The Guardian - 24/10/07; AP, Reuters, BBC, FT, VOA, RFE/RL, International Herald Tribune, Washington File - 23/10/07)
Iraq pledged Tuesday (October 23rd) to take a range of measures against the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), in a bid to stave off a potential Turkish military incursion into its north.
"The Kurdistan Workers' Party is a bad terrorist organisation and we have decided to close its offices and not allow it to work on Iraqi territory," Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki was quoted as saying in a statement issued by his office. 
"We will do everything to curtail all terrorist activities that threaten Iraq as well as Turkey."
The measures, announced following al-Maliki's meeting with Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan in Baghdad on Tuesday, also include restricting the PKK's freedom of movement and blocking its funds.
An estimated 3,000 members of the militant group are believed to be based in northern Iraq. 
Ankara has long been urging the Iraqi authorities to crack down on the PKK and prevent its insurgents from launching attacks on Turkey. 
On October 17th, the Turkish parliament endorsed a resolution authorising cross-border military raids against the terrorist group.
"Turkey as a whole is very annoyed and concerned about what is going on and the public reaction in Turkey is huge," Babacan said Tuesday. 
According to him, there was no conflict between his country's respect for Iraq's territorial integrity and its own fight against terrorism.
"We also don't wish our historical and friendly ties with Iraq to be ruined because of a terrorist organisation," Babacan told reporters at a joint news conference following talks with Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari, himself a Kurd. 
"On the other hand, we are expecting support from the international community and our neighbors in the struggle against terrorism."
Babacan rejected a PKK truce offer announced Monday, saying there was no option for any ceasefire with a terrorist organisation.
Zebari, meanwhile, expressed his country's readiness to "actively help" Turkey deal with this "menace". 
The foreign minister also announced Iraq's plans to send a high-level political and military delegation to Ankara for further talks.
Iraqi President Jalal Talabani, also a Kurd, told reporters following his meeting with the Turkish foreign minister, that his country would not tolerate any PKK attacks on Turkey. 
The group, he said, has been given the option to "leave or disarm".
"We care for every drop of Turkish blood like we care for every drop of Iraqi blood," Reuters quoted Talabani as saying.
Meanwhile, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said Ankara was willing to allow some more time for diplomatic efforts. 
But Turkey's patience is running thin, he warned.
"Right now we are in a waiting stance but Iraq should know we can use the mandate for a cross-border operation at any time," Erdogan said at a joint news conference with British Prime Minister Gordon Brown in London on Tuesday.
He also suggested that Turkey "may impose some sanctions with respect to some goods we export to Iraq," but offered no details as to which specific goods could be embargoed. 
He said only that Turkey had been helping Iraq with water, fuel and food.
