22/01/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 22/01/08
One of the first actions by Croatia's new ruling coalition government earlier this month was to ban smoking in public places and to amend the zero tolerance alcohol policy for drivers older than 24.
Talks among the Croatian Democratic Union, the Croatian Peasant's Party (HSS) and Croatian Social Liberal Party resulted in the adoption of a smoking ban that will apply to all public areas, restaurants, clubs and bars by the end of 2008 and an amendment that will restore a law allowing older, more experienced drivers a maximum of 0.5 per ml of blood alcohol.
According to the new measures, smoking will be banned from public places because cigarette smoke is a general health hazard.
Because every fourth adult in Croatia is a smoker, the announcement has sparked protests.
The current law on smoking in Croatia, which was implemented in 2006, forbids smoking only in workplaces.
Violators can be fined 14 euros, while the work area supervisor must pay 69 euros.
Additionally, any employer who does not properly mark the work area with a sign prohibiting smoking may be punished with a fine of 138 to 413 euros.
The law, however, has not been widely enforced.
Smokers passionately oppose the new law, while non-smokers are adamant about its implementation.
The situation is complicated by the fact that the country makes a large profit from the tobacco industry.
Nevertheless, if Croatia wants to keep up with other, more developed countries -- especially members of the EU -- the government must eventually prohibit smoking in all public places.
Croatia's strict ban on drinking and driving, however, will be amended.
In 2003, when the government decided to impose a new, strict traffic safety law, one of the most controversial measures was the zero tolerance for alcohol.
Before the ban, a driver was allowed to drink either a small beer or a glass of wine, for a maximum of 0.5 per ml of blood alcohol, but the new measure demanded drivers have 0.0 per ml of blood alcohol.
The drinking ban was challenged by former police officers, experts and even medical doctors who protested that the sanctions were not only too harsh, but also hurt the tourism industry.
Restaurant patrons were drinking soda with fish instead of wine and drinking juice or mineral water meat and sausage instead of beer.
Croatian wine and beer makers argued that the measure hurt their business, but the law remained until this month.
The HSS made its support for the new government contingent on the repeal of the law permitting 0.0 per ml of blood alcohol per driver.
