24/10/2007
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 24/10/07
Earlier this month, Socialist Party of Albania (SPA) leader Edi Rama met with officials in Brussels in an effort to boost support for the ratification of the country's Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU. 
He also sought to promote his Qemal Stafa Foundation (QSF), which was launched in late September.
The foundation aims to increase public involvement in the political process -- thus approximating Western practices and helping consolidate democracy in Albania.
Its establishment reflects Rama's quest to bring his party closer to its base. 
The SPA has been facing trouble internally, and Rama has been striving to fight off attempts by his predecessor, former Prime Minister Fatos Nanos, to regain control. 
The launch of QSF was in response to Nanos' new initiative, Movement for Solidarity , which was founded only a few days previously.
Named after the founding member of the Albanian Communist Party and leader of its youth section, Qemal Stafa, the QSF will provide a platform for information and research on social democracy.
"Qemal Stafa brought in difficult times the spirit of freedom, reforming and modernisation, reflecting the values that today's politics is in need of," said foundation head Saimir Tahiri. 
"For this reason we decided to name the foundation after him."
According to Tahiri, the QSF will serve as a bridge between the party of and citizens. 
"Similar political structures of the left political parties of Europe have served as examples," he said.
The foundation will also have an advisory board comprised of current and former political officials. 
Former Albanian President Rexhep Mejdani will serve as the board's head.
The QSF will organise projects, programmes and governing alternatives in co-operation with citizens and independent experts. 
Polls and surveys aimed at measuring the efficiency of the SPA, analytical studies, and scientific studies for enriching politics and governing stances will be among its activities.
The foundation also plans to help modernise the SPA by consolidating communication channels with citizens and interest groups. 
According to Tahiri, it will work to enhance the party's administrative and political capacities.
"We will be lobbying for the establishment of such foundations in other parties … to be financed by the state. 
We are also working to acquire financing from our partners," the foundation head said.
Although closely tied to the Socialists, the QSF is an independent structure and its mission is to help boost civic involvement in general. 
"It is simply a political foundation -- not a political group -- where every Albanians can find himself through participation and involvement," Tahiri said.
