22/01/2008
(B92 - 22/01/08; Reuters, Serbian Government - 21/01/08; FT, New Europe, B92 - 19/01/08; RFE/RL, Balkan Insight, B92 - 18/01/08; AP - 14/01/08)
Serbia approved an energy co-operation agreement with Russia on Tuesday (January 22nd), paving the way for its inclusion in the South Stream natural gas pipeline project. 
In return, Russia's Gazprom is expected to receive a majority stake of Serbia's Naftna Industrija Srbije (NIS) oil monopoly, further strengthening its foothold in the region.
"This is Serbia's biggest economic undertaking, and this agreement will guarantee our country's huge economic development," Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said late Monday. 
"In this way, the government is securing a stable and constant supply of energy for all our citizens and economy for years to come," he added in the statement.
B92 reports that that Infrastructure Minister Velimir Ilic will sign the deal with Gazprom in Moscow on Friday.
The accord, first floated on December 11th, has been criticised by some Serbian officials, such as Economy Minister Mladjan Dinkic of the pro-Western G-17 party, who described Russia's offer as "humiliating". 
While the financial parameters of the deal have not been officially disclosed, media reports cited Serbian officials as saying that Gazprom had offered to pay 400m euros for a 51% stake in NIS, pledging an additional 500m euros in investment until 2012.
"I'm sure that we would get five to eight times more for NIS if it was sold through international bidding," Dinkic said. 
"I am very worried. 
I was told it was indecent to ask the Russians for a market price."
Other companies said to have shown an interest in the Serbian oil monopoly include Austria's OMV, Poland's PKN Orlen, Hungary's MOL and Romania's Rompetrol.
Earlier this month, the European Commission (EC) also voiced concern about the deal.
"The commission hopes that the sale of an important asset such as the Serbian oil company will be open and driven by objective, commercial and economic interests," the AP quoted EC spokeswoman Krisztina Nagy as saying.
As the two sides continued their talks on the deal, reports suggested that Gazprom would likely agree to pay a higher price for NIS, but no figures have been cited.
In addition to millions of euros it will get for NIS, Serbia is also expected to earn nearly 140m euros a year in transit taxes after it is linked to the South Stream gas pipeline, provided other Balkan countries join the project.
South Stream, a 10 billion-euro joint project by Gazprom and Italy's Eni, which is expected to be completed by 2013, would stretch from Russia's Beregovaya compressor station under the Black Sea to Bulgaria. 
It would then split into two branches -- one going west to Greece and Italy and the other going north through Serbia to Central Europe. 
The pipeline would carry 30 billion cubic meters of natural gas each year to Europe.
Getting 90% of its gas supply from Russia, Serbia hopes that its inclusion in the South Stream project will result in cheaper power, thus paving the way for faster economic growth. 
Observers and analysts link the energy deal to Russia's backing for Serbia's opposition to Kosovo gaining independence.
"Despite government denials, it's an obvious payoff to Russia and a part of Serbia's turning away from the West and the European Union," the AP quoted political and economic analyst Braca Grubacic as saying earlier this month.
