20/12/2007
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica –20/12/07
Just weeks before the European Parliament ratified Montenegro's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU on December 14th, the government drafted a report on the country's foreign policy priorities.
"By establishing and implementing basic foreign policy priorities, Montenegro will strive towards integration into European and Euro-Atlantic structures and all regional initiatives," the document says.
Among the top aims of the government is to strengthen relations with Germany, the United Kingdom, France and Italy, with China also ranking high on the list.
Also mentioned in the report are the Mediterranean countries as well as India, Japan and Brazil.
Participation in international organisations -- including the UN, the Council of Europe and the OSCE -- is as important, especially "in light of preparations for and progress towards membership in the EU and NATO".
The document emphasises EU membership as the key strategic goal that will "dominate" Montenegrin foreign policy for the immediate future.
Also highlighted in the draft are the country's relations with Serbia, which, due to a host of historical, cultural and economic reasons -- as well as their common European and Euro-Atlantic perspective -- will continue to be strengthened and nurtured.
However, some opposition members have criticised the report over its emphasis on potential NATO membership and because it does not make relations with Serbia one of the highest priorities.
During a session last month of the parliamentary committee for international affairs, some opposition parties said membership in NATO's Partnership for Peace programme is enough.
"Nothing more than that," People's Party president Predrag Popovic said.
The fact that the government's position on Kosovo's final status is not in the draft was also criticised.
However, Foreign Minister Milan Rocen said Montenegro will not prejudge the issue.
"We should leave that to the main negotiators.
Regardless of the final solution, Montenegro will be wise enough to avoid internal problems and preserve interethnic harmony," he said.
If Montenegro hopes to join the EU, however, it will need to do more than draft priorities, according to the head of the European Parliament's (EP) Committee for Southeast Europe, Doris Pack.
She is leading a European Parliament delegation that is scheduled to meet on Thursday in Montenegro with President Filip Vujanovic, Prime Minister Zeljko Sturanovic and Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic.
Prior to her arrival Wednesday, Pack suggested the country could join the EU within the next few years.
However, she warned this would be possible only if Montenegro works to eliminate some factors that harm its image, such as corruption and organised crime.
"Words, commitments and promises need to be put into practice, reform of the justice system and public administration needs to be carried out.
The quicker, the better," Pack said.
