20/12/2007
(Zaman, FT - 20/12/07; AFP, Reuters, DPA, Bloomberg, Deutsche Welle, Euronews - 19/12/07)
Croatia and Turkey both began talks Wednesday (December 19th) on new chapters of the more than 35 policy areas that a candidate country must conclude before joining the EU.
For Croatia, opening talks on the trans-European networks and the financial and budgetary provisions chapters at a formal ceremony in Brussels on Wednesday brought to 16 the total number of policy areas opened since accession negotiations began.
Turkey also began talks on two more areas. 
The negotiating chapters on trans-European networks and health and consumer protection were officially opened during the conference in Brussels, which was chaired by Portuguese Foreign Minister Luis Amado, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency. 
The Turkish delegation was headed by Foreign Minister Ali Babacan, who also serves as Ankara's chief negotiator with the 27-nation bloc.
Welcoming the progress, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, who also attended Wednesday's conference, said it showed that, in spite of certain difficulties, Turkey's accession negotiations are on track.
"The EU accession process of Turkey continues and it delivers results," he said.
Wednesday's move should be seen as proof that "the EU sticks to its commitments and keeps its word," Rehn added. 
He urged Turkey to "relaunch its reform process in full, especially regarding freedom of expression and religious freedom".
To complete talks on the two chapters, Turkey must implement a number of measures to bring its legislation in line with EU standards and norms in those areas, as well as take steps to improve the institutional and administrative capacity of some of its structures. 
But with the opening of the talks on the trans-European networks chapter, for example, Turkey will also gain access to EU subsidies that will help it upgrade its infrastructure.
Wednesday's move brings to six the total number of negotiating chapters opened since the official start of Turkey's accession talks with the Union in October 2005.
A year ago, the EU suspended negotiations in eight policy areas due to Turkey's refusal to open its ports and airports to traffic from Cyprus, which joined the Union in 2004.
While stressing that Turkey's accession process "is still totally alive", Amado voiced concern Wednesday about the decline in support for Ankara's EU bid both domestically and in Europe.
According to the results of a new survey released on Tuesday, support for EU membership in Turkey has dropped to 49% from 54% last year and 73% in 2004.
Meanwhile, the country's bid to join the 27-nation club is supported by only 21% of Europeans, according to a poll conducted by the German Marshall Fund in September.
