21/09/2007
By Ahmet Gormez for Southeast European Times - 21/09/07
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan sparked controversy earlier this week by calling for an end to the ban on wearing headscarves in universities.
The call comes as the prime minister tries to change the country's constitution, which went into affect after the military coup in the 1980s.
Under the existing constitution, it is illegal for women to wear headscarves in state-funded institutions such as hospitals and universities.
The rule was originally intended to prevent Islamist activists from "taking root" with the younger generation, but it has been widely criticised as excessive.
Erdogan, who held a press conference in Ankara on Wednesday (September 19th) to defend his draft constitution, said efforts were focused on preparing new laws for Turkey, not for his ruling AKP party.
"We set out on this road to prepare a constitution for the Republic of Turkey," he said, "We are going to submit the draft constitution to parliament after a great deal of discussion is made on it."
The prime minister, whose wife and daughters cover their hair with an Islamic style headscarf, said the headscarf is not a political symbol.
"We are talking about freedoms here," Erdogan said, adding that "the headscarf is not a symbol of a political party." He insists that the current law prevents all girls and women from receiving a proper education.
However, members of the opposition accuse the government of trying to put an Islamic stamp on the constitution and erode secular traditions.
For some, the issue is not how students will wear their hair, but how secular women can thrive in a Muslim society.
"I am 100% convinced that the ban on headscarves is an anti-democratic practice," Serif Mardin, a prominent liberal sociologist, told Turkish daily Hurriyet.
"But I also believe Turkish women are justified in thinking that their status is in jeopardy."
After the announcement Tuesday, university rectors -- one of the strongest sectors of Turkey's secular establishment -- called an "urgent" meeting with the head of Turkey's Board of High Education, Professor Erdogan Tezic.
"Only [constitutional] articles other than the ones that are regulating the foundations of the state, can be amended," Tezic said after the meeting.
"The quorum required for constitutional amendments in the stage of proposal or discussion, different from ordinary laws, reveals the necessity for amendments to be done in consensus between political parties."
"Everyone should know his place," Erdogan said in response to the rector's statement.
"It is parliament's responsibility to make law, not the rectors'."
The ruling party Justice and Development (AKP) has been criticised for having a "secret Islamist agenda" by some secularists in Turkey.
Those criticisms peaked when Erdogan announced that then Minister of Foreign Affairs Abdullah Gul was the party's choice for president.
After protests and two failed elections, Gul withdrew his candidacy, and the country held early elections in July.
The vote ended with the victory of Erdogan's AKP, and Gul's election to president.
"We always knew that the AKP wanted to lift the ban on headscarves, but democracy is as much about style as it is about institutions.
It would be better if [Erdogan] was less dismissive of secularist concerns in this country," Hakan Altinay, head of the Open Society Institute, a pro-democracy group in Istanbul, said.
