23/07/2007
(AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, The Guardian, BBC, CNN, VOA - 23/07/07; DPA, RFE/RL, Sofia News Agency - 22/07/07)
Hopes are high Monday (July 23rd) that a new EU push will speed up the release of five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor, who have been held in a prison in Libya for more than eight years now.
In Sofia, officials and the medics' relatives were closely following the news on French First Lady Cecilia Sarkozy and EU External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner's visit to Tripoli. 
They and President Nicolas Sarkozy's chief of staff, Claude Gueant, arrived in the Libyan capital Sunday.
The visit was made within "the framework of efforts for the release of the Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor", the European Commission (EC) said in a brief statement, voicing hope that "this situation, which is so painful and has continued for so long, can be resolved in a humanitarian spirit."
The five nurses and the Palestinian doctor -- who was recently granted Bulgarian citizenship -- were imprisoned in February 1999 on charges of deliberately infecting 438 Libyan children with HIV. 
They were first convicted and sentenced to death by firing squad in May 2004. 
The same verdict was issued at the end of their December 2006 retrial. 
Despite evidence showing that the outbreak at the Al-Fateh children's hospital in Benghazi in 1998 was most likely caused by poor hygiene and that it predated the medics' arrival there by at least a year, Libya's Supreme Court upheld the death sentences earlier this month.
For years now Bulgaria, the EU and the United States have been urging Libya to free the medics, who maintain their innocence and insist that the confessions some of them made were extracted under torture.
Prospects for release brightened last week, when Libya's top legal body decided to commute the death sentences to life in prison. 
The move followed a deal with the families of the 438 children, under which each received $1m in compensation.
Pursuant to a 1984 bilateral prisoner exchange agreement, Sofia sent an official request to Tripoli on Thursday, calling for the six medics' repatriation to serve their sentences in Bulgaria. 
"
We are at the stage now where the decision is purely political," Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin said on Monday, ahead of a meeting of the EU nations' top diplomats in Brussels. 
"I hope there will be enough will from the Libyans' side today in order to finalise talks ... 
If they show this will, then the transfer can be done very quickly."
His statement followed a report by French weekly <i>Le Point</i> that Cecilia Sarkozy and Gueant had met with Libyan leader Colonel Muammar al-Gaddafi late Sunday to arrange "the final details" of the medics' repatriation.
This new push for the medics' release is part of a well-co-ordinated Paris-EC initiative. 
According to a statement by the French president's spokesman, David Martinon, Sarkozy and EC President Jose Manuel Barroso spoke several times by phone Sunday "to discuss the timetable for an agreement to have the five Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor released and repatriated immediately".
Relatives of the nurses voiced cautious optimism Monday.
"Hope is bigger today as we see [President] Sarkozy so involved in the case," the AFP quoted Ivaylo Nikolchovski, the son of nurse Snezhana Dimitrova, as saying. 
"A part of me believes, but we have been deceived before."
