23/07/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times --23/07/07
Turkey's Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party (AKP) won a decisive victory in Sunday's (July 22nd) general elections, and claimed that it will be the new address of the country's political centre.
According to unofficial results, with 99.9% of the ballots counted, the AKP won 46.6% of the votes, up from 34% in 2002.
This translates to 340 seats in the 550-member parliament, enough for the AKP to once again form a single-party government.
It is short however of the 413 seats needed to claim three-fourths of parliament, elect a new president and change the constitution.
AKP currently holds 352 seats.
It will lose seats despite winning a bigger percentage of the vote because two other parties, and a number of individuals, also made it into parliament.
The other two parties to cross the 10% threshold are the Republican People's Party (CHP), which received 20.8%, or 111 seats, and the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), which received 14.2%, or 71 seats.
Twenty-four pro-Kurdish independents also won seats, and are expected to form the first pro-Kurdish political group in the assembly since the early 1990s.
The results were interpreted as a moral triumph for Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government, which was forced to call early elections following a controversy involving Turkey's military and secular opposition on selecting a consensus president.
The military weighed in three months ago, with opposition to AKP's presidential candidate, former Islamist Abdullah Gul, and warned that it would defend secularism at all costs.
Sunday's elections also introduced a significant change to the political landscape, with liberal centre right parties totally excluded from the parliament.
Two old centre right parties -- the Motherland Party (ANAP) and the True Path Party (DYP) -- sought to form an alliance before the elections, but negotiations failed.
ANAP ran no candidates, and DYP only won 5% of the votes.
Leader Mehmet Agar quit hours after the early results were announced.
AKP leader Erdogan vowed on Sunday night to open a "new page" in Turkey.
"
We've passed a very important test of democracy that is an example to the world," Erdogan told thousands of supporters at party headquarters after unofficial results were announced.
"We are committed to Turkey's democratic, secular and social system and rule of law".
He also promised to continue with economic and democratic reform to boost Turkey's bid to join the EU.
Calling on hundreds of thousands of frustrated voters who voted for the secular opposition, Erdogan said:
"I can understand your concerns;
your votes are also valuable for us.
You are richness for our democratic life.
It is our duty to protect this richness."
A group of those frustrated party members staged a protest Sunday evening, demanding CHP leader Deniz Baykal's resignation.
CHP Vice-President Onur Oymen said the party continued its public support despite "huge foreign support to AKP" and a "media campaign targeting CHP".
Oymen also described the increase in AKP's vote as "irrational".
He said he hopes that AKP had learned lessons from its first term in office, and would seek compromise policies this time around.
Voter turnout was about 80%.
Eight people were injured in a number of minor incidents, and there were demonstrations in several provinces, opposing a president from the AKP.
