23/10/2007
By Ahmet Gormez for Southeast European Times -- 23/10/07
In a referendum Sunday (October 21st), Turkish voters approved a series of major constitutional changes, including one establishing direct election of the country's president.
Sixty-nine per cent of voters said yes to the changes, while 31% rejected them. 
Turnout, at 67%, was comparatively low for Turkey, where the figure is normally over 80%.
Until now, Turkish heads of state have been chosen by parliament. 
They will now be elected by popular vote. 
Other changes include allowing the president to serve two five-year terms instead of the current single seven-year term, and reducing the term of office for parliament and the government to four years instead of five. 
In addition, parliamentary sessions can now be opened if at least l84 MPs -- out of the total 550 -- are present.
"I consider it very important for our country and our democracy that people take part in this referendum and express their preferences on the constitutional changes” regarding to referendum," President Abdullah Gul said of Sunday's vote.
Gul, who succeeded Ahmet Necdet Sezer in late August, will be the last president to have been selected by parliament. 
Some experts, including the head of Turkey's Electoral Council, Muammer Aydin, have suggested that the referendum results could oblige Gul to stand for re-election, and could make it necessary to reduce the tenure of the current parliament by a year.
If Gul is not required to run, his mandate will continue for five more years. 
After that, Turks will go to the polls to elect the next head of state. 
Under the measures endorsed Sunday, the presidential vote must be held at least sixty days before the incumbent's term ends.
The opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) is unhappy with the referendum and says it will challenge its legitimacy at the Constitutional Court.
The court's president, however, has not welcomed the idea. 
"I do not support such an attitude. 
Negative or positive, ideas should be reflected at the ballot," Hasim Kilic said. 
"I do not know how it is possible to put the case to the Constitutional Court. 
But we will do what's necessary if it does."
Meanwhile, the low turnout has triggered a discussion over whether voting requirements in Turkey should be enforced. 
By law, every eligible voter is required to participate in elections and referenda or pay a fine of 19 lira (around 11 euros). 
Around 14 million voters stayed away from the polls on Sunday.
CHP leader Deniz Baykal says he doesn't believe any citizens should be punished because they refused to vote. 
It is their democratic right to choose whether to participate, he said.
