19/12/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Fushë Kosovo – 19/12/07
Thirty Serb and 4 Albanian families came back to their homes in the villages of Nakarade and Lismar in Fushe Kosovo on December 11th.
Senior domestic and international officials welcomed their return.
Two former neighbours -- one Albanian, the other Serbian -- met in Fushe Kosovo on December 11th, shook hands and pledged to live peacefully together in a multiethnic Kosovo.
"We are friends," Haxhi Ibrahimi told Southeast European Times, speaking about his neighbour Zhivorad Gjorgjevic.
He added that his family is ready to coexist with Serbs.
Serb Minister for Return and Communities Branislav Grbic said, "This is another successful project of the Kosovo government, UNDP and other organizations, which have supported and continue to support the process of returns." He added that while the process of returnees is complex, it can be achieved through joint efforts.
Thirty Serb families' houses were reconstructed and improved, with new energy and water lines added.
Four Albanian families' houses were also reconstructed.
According to officials, this project is a step forward in the return process.
The chief of the British Office in Pristina, David Blunt, said that Britain will continue to allocate funds for returnees.
The process, however, continues to be overshadowed by the looming political question of status.
With negotiations at an impasse and Kosovo Albanians warning they may declare independence unilaterally, there are worries that Serbs in northern Mitrovica and surrounding areas might try to split from the rest of the province, in order to stay united with Serbia.
Were that to happen could spark an exodus of Serbs living elsewhere in Kosovo.
In a move that sparked international concern, the Serbian government opened an office in Mitrovica on December 10th -- the day negotiations on Kosovo's future status officially ended.
Officials say the facility will oversee public services in Mitrovica, which is home to more than half of the 120,000 Serbs who remain in the breakaway province.
UNMIK spokesman Alexander Ivanko called the act a "provocation", and mission head Joachim Ruecker called it unacceptable.
Ruecker said he has informed UN headquarters about the office and is awaiting instructions on how to proceed.
A spokesperson for KFOR, Bertrand Bonneau, said that currently KFOR does not consider the office a security threat.
KFOR will act only if Ruecker requests it, he added.
