23/10/2007
(Vseki Den, News.bg, Darik Radio, Focus News Agency - 23/10/07;
Sofia News Agency, Sofia Echo, Dnevnik, Mediapool - 22/10/07;
BIRN - 18/10/07)
The chances for a quick end to the ongoing teachers' strike in Bulgaria appeared slim Tuesday (October 23rd), as a member of the strike committee denounced the government's latest proposal for a deal.
The government is trying to end the teachers' protest by using economic pressure, Nikolay Nikolov told the web-based daily Vseki Den daily, commenting on the agreement proposed by the education ministry late Monday.
The strike continues and teachers will hold a new rally in Sofia on Thursday, he said.
Nine days after the official start of the school year on September 15th, teachers launched a nationwide strike.
They are demanding a 100% increase in their salaries, which currently stand at less than 200 euros a month, below average for the country.
They also want the government to allocate 5% of GDP for education in the 2008 budget.
The government ruled out any chance for that demand being met, arguing that it would further push inflation above the record 13% it reached in August.
It also stressed the need for much delayed educational efficiency reforms and for reversing recent declines in the quality of education.
It said any move to increase teachers' salaries should be accompanied by a significant downsizing of the sector, which currently employs 120,000.
Following weeks of tense talks, the trade unions said Monday that the teachers would accept a deal that would see the average gross monthly salary for the entire sector, including auxiliary staff, reach about 325 euros as of July 1st, 2008.
The government's latest proposal for an agreement provides for an average gross salary of 325 euros in the second half of 2008, but for teachers only.
By proposing this, the government is trying to push through its earlier proposal that would raise wages in three steps, with a 10% increase each time, Nikolov said Tuesday.
The failure of the two sides to reach a compromise has left the classrooms empty for more than a month, with many parents voicing concern that students might not be able to receive grades for the first term.
The continuing crisis will have the worst impact on 7th and 12th graders, who face major exams after the end of the school year.
With little prospect for a quick solution, the opposition parties in parliament filed a no-confidence motion against the government last week.
During the parliamentary debate on the no-confidence motion on Monday, former Prime Minister Ivan Kostov, who heads the right-wing Democrats for Strong Bulgaria, blamed the government for the strike.
"It's the biggest strike in Bulgaria's history and it can't be blamed on the teachers, who have accepted 13 of the 15 reform proposals made by the cabinet," Kostov said.
He criticised the three-way coalition cabinet for its overall approach to the crisis and Stanishev's party for making pre-election promises for pay increases which have since been broken.
Given the comfortable 168-seat majority the government has in Bulgaria's 240-seat assembly, the cabinet is expected to survive the no-confidence vote on Tuesday.
