22/02/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 22/02/08
The Croatian Association for Consumers' Protection (CACP) revealed on February 15th the results of a week-long boycott of non-essential shopping. 
The association urged consumers to restrict shopping for one week beginning February 8th to protest significant price increases.
Although CACP representatives said they were pleased with the boycott's outcome, they acknowledged that the general public did not participate as fully as organisers had hoped. 
In fact, consumers flocked to shopping centres throughout the week, particularly during Valentine's Day.
This outcome surprised CACP. 
Surveys conducted prior to the boycott suggested a majority of shoppers would join the protest. 
A survey by the newspaper Vecernji list, for example, found 75% of respondents would participate.
Retailers said that even if consumers didn't by non-essential items now, they would need to refill their refrigerators in a week. 
None planned to lower their prices, blaming the hikes on high taxes.
CACP president Vesna Brcic-Stipcevic said food prices rose 7.8% on average in December and January, but some products, such as butter, increased by 50%. 
He added that transportation and utility prices in Zagreb rose by between 17% and 49%.
The latest survey by the Croatian Market Research Institute suggests that three out of four Croatian households have significant trouble with their monthly budget. 
Groceries are the largest part of their budgets -- an average of 32% of monthly costs. 
Household utilities -- electricity, gas, heating and water -- are 16% of the average budget. 
Croatia's food prices are equal to those of EU members, but salaries are not.
The CACP has suggested the re-introduction of parliament's consumer commission to prevent future dramatic price increases. 
The commission would review and discuss all bills and other measures that could impact consumers.
Similar boycotts in other countries have generally been deemed successful. 
Greek shoppers staged a daylong boycott in 2002 when the country joined the European Monetary Union and new regulations caused prices to jump dramatically. 
In 2007, after Italian pasta factories raised prices by 40%, the consumers' protection associations organised a week-long boycott that was very successful.
