21/01/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/01/08
As most experts predicted, neither of the two frontrunners in Serbia's election won 50% of the vote Sunday (January 20th).
Therefore on February 3rd, reformist incumbent Boris Tadic and ultranationalist Tomislav Nikolic will face each other in a runoff.
The candidate who wins the majority of votes will be president for the next five crucial years.
Far-right Serbian Radical Party (SRS) candidate Nikolic -- who advocates closer ties with Russia -- won 39.4% or 1.6 million votes, according to the Belgrade NGO, The Center for Free Elections and Democracy (CESID).
Tadic, of the Democratic Party, who made EU accession a centrepiece of his campaign, got 35.4%, or 1.4 million votes.
The only candidate to have advocated Kosovo's independence, Cedomir Jovanovic, won 5.5%, and was fifth out of the nine candidates.
Belgrade analysts predict the battle will be extremely uncertain in round two and will most likely be decided by support from Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
He has yet to say who he will back, but it is clear that Tadic faces tough negotiations.
Kostunica and Tadic agree that Kosovo's independence is unacceptable for Serbia, but disagree on policy regarding the EU.
Kostunica wants the EU to abandon plans to deploy a mission to Kosovo, describing that move as the beginning of Serbia's breakup and claiming this was why Belgrade could not sign the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU.
Tadic, however, strongly favours Serbia's quick EU integration.
Former Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic agrees that Kostunica will be the one to decide the next president.
"I think that Kostunica will back Tadic in the second round, and that support is crucial."
This election was also marked by an unexpectedly high voter turnout -- 4.1 million or approximately 61% of voters went to the polls.
According to analyst Slobodan Vucetic, the public has shown an interest in the fate of the country and intends to help resolve its problems.
Kosovo Serbs also voted in the election in what many see as a plebiscite on Belgrade's position in the world as it prepares for the loss of Kosovo.
While this is not the first time that Kosovo Serbs have participated in Serbian elections, it is the first since Serbia became independent from Montenegro in 2006.
Kosovo Serbs hope the future president will improve living conditions.
A pensioner from Gracanica, Rada Markoviq, told <i>Southeast European Times</i> "We vote for a better life."
Some Kosovo Serbs believe that Nikolic will support them more than Tadic.
"We believe in his diplomacy," Maja Radomirovic said.
Others, however, fear that Nikolic's victory would be dangerous for Serbs in Kosovo.
"Kosovo will remain in Serbia only if Tadic wins the election," Serb leader Oliver Ivanovic told Southeast European Times.
SE Times writer Blerta Foniqi–Kabashi contributed to this report.
