19/12/2007
(Blic - 19/12/07; AP, DPA, Reuters, BIRN - 18/12/07)
A single phone call from Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica is all that is needed for the two most wanted fugitives from the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s to be captured, according to Principal Deputy High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Raffi Gregorian. 
Former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, are "for sure" hiding in Serbia, Sarajevo-based media quoted the US diplomat as saying on Tuesday (December 18th).
Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac responded to Gregorian's accusation by urging the US diplomat Tuesday to share any information he might have about the fugitives' whereabouts with Belgrade authorities, so they could "act and arrest them," the AP reported.
"Such statements benefit no one, they are damaging and such an attitude towards a country which -- at least where its military is concerned -- is doing its best, is not right," the minister told reporters.
The two former Bosnian Serb leaders, who top the list of four remaining war crimes indictees still sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), have been fugitives for 12 years. 
They disappeared within months after UN prosecutors issued an initial joint indictment charging them with a list of war crimes stemming from the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH.
International peacekeepers have made numerous attempts to capture the fugitives since they fled. 
It is widely believed, however, that networks of supporters have been helping the two evade justice.
Gregorian said earlier this month that a series of raids on the homes of Karadzic's relatives have proven that, despite their repeated denials, they have been in contact with and have helped him. 
Mladic is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia with the support of hardliners in the country's military.
Serbia's failure to arrest the former Bosnian Serb military commander led to the suspension of its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU in May 2006. 
After a 13-month break -- and following the arrest and transfer to The Hague of two other prominent war criminals sought by the ICTY -- the two sides returned to the negotiating table.
At the end of their one-day summit in Brussels on Friday, EU leaders said that Serbia's progress towards candidate status could be accelerated if it meets the conditions for the finalisation of the SAA, a major first step towards eventual membership in the Union.
Dutch Foreign Minister Maxime Verhagen suggested Tuesday that his country would not sign the SAA with Serbia -- and thus block any attempts to put the country on a fast-track to EU membership -- as long as Mladic remains at large.
"If we water down these conditions, the EU would lose its credibility," Reuters quoted him as telling a meeting with the foreign press club in The Hague. 
"Ratko Mladic will have to be arrested and handed over to the tribunal."
