22/02/2008
(Bloomberg, AFP, DPA, BBC, VOA, FT, International Herald Tribune, Independent, The Guardian, Javno.hr, Blic - 22/02/08; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, CNN, RFE/RL, UN News Centre, Balkan Insight, Beta, B92, Serbian government - 21/02/08)
Condemning mob attacks against a number of embassies in Belgrade on Thursday (February 21st), the UN and EU have urged Serbia to abide by its obligations to ensure adequate protection to foreign diplomatic missions.
The violence erupted after a government-organised protest against Kosovo's independence, which drew at least 150,000 people from around the country. 
Eventually, about 1,000 protesters left the peaceful rally outside the main parliament building and stormed the US Embassy. 
A number of other diplomatic missions, including those of Croatia, Germany, Britain, Canada, Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina were also attacked.
But the US Embassy sustained the worst damage. 
Witnesses said a group of at least 100 rioters broke into the compound, torching part of its main office building, as hundreds of other protestors cheered. 
Some of the vandals jumped onto a first-floor balcony, ripped the US flag off its pole, replacing it briefly with that of Serbia. 
Others threw papers and chairs out of windows as smoke billowed from the building.
The incident ended about half an hour later, when around 200 riot police, backed by armoured personnel carriers, arrived at the scene, fired tear gas and beat and arrested some of the rioters. 
Firefighters then extinguished the blaze, which had engulfed the first two stories. 
A charred body later found on the second floor has not been identified. 
US officials believe it was probably a protester, as all embassy staff have been accounted for.
About 100 people, including many policemen, were injured in the clashes during and after Thursday's rally, held under the slogan "Kosovo is Serbia".
In a statement to the press, the UN Security Council unanimously condemned "in the strongest terms the mob attacks against embassies in Belgrade". 
Stressing "the fundamental principle of the inviolability of diplomatic missions," Panama's Ambassador Ricardo Alberto Arias, whose country currently chairs the 15-nation council presidency, urged the Serbian government to take the appropriate steps to ensure foreign embassies are protected.
Officials from the countries whose diplomatic missions were targeted by rioters also weighed in.
US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns called Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic to express Washington's objections.
"The message was very clear that the situation was intolerable'' and that Serbia should take urgent steps "to provide adequate security forces so that our embassy compound and our personnel were not under attack", State Department spokesman Sean McCormack told reporters Thursday. 
"We are interested in a political dialogue with the Serbian government," he also said, noting that no disagreement between Belgrade and Washington could serve as "an excuse or justification to incite others to violence".
Kostunica delivered an impassioned speech at Thursday's rally, accusing the West of trying to rob Serbia of its territory and trick it into submission.
"There is no force, no threat and no punishment big and hideous enough for any Serb, at any time, to say anything different but Kosovo is Serbia," the prime minister said. 
"As long as we shall live, our brothers in Kosovo will neither be alone nor forgotten."
