21/01/2008
(Zaman - 21/01/08;
Bianet - 20/01/08;
Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, UPI, BBC - 19/01/08;
Amnesty International, Reporters Without Borders - 18/01/08)
Thousands of people gathered in downtown Istanbul on Saturday (January 19th) to commemorate the first anniversary of Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink's murder.
Carrying banners reading "For Hrant, For Justice", the mourners placed red carnations on the spot where the founder and editor of the bilingual Turkish-Armenian weekly, Agos, was last seen alive.
Dink, who devoted his life to the reconciliation between his community and the majority Muslim Turks, was gunned down on January 19th 2007, outside his newspaper's offices.
With a huge portrait of the ethnic Armenian journalist covering part of the building where he worked and candles lit on the street, the mourners observed a minute of silence at the exact time he was shot by Ogun Samast, who is described as a hardline nationalist from the Black Sea city of Trabzon.
"We are at the pavement where they tried to clean his blood with soap," Dink's widow, Rakel, said at the ceremony, reportedly attended by 10,000 people.
"You are here for justice today.
A scream for justice rises from your silence."
Samast -- who immediately confessed to the killing -- and 18 others, most of them also from Trabzon, are currently being tried in Istanbul.
Claiming that evidence has been destroyed and that authorities have refused to probe the suspected involvement of members of Turkish security forces in the murder plot, lawyers representing the Dink family have described the investigation as flawed.
"Unnecessary administrative decisions blocked judicial investigations of state employees that should have been carried out," the group quoted Bahri Bayram Belen, one of the lawyers, as saying.
"Since the initial investigation, certain enquiries … have not been appropriately conducted because the security forces did not participate."
Marking the first anniversary, Reporters Without Borders and Amnesty International urged Turkish authorities to bring all those involved in the case to justice.
They also repeated their call for the abolition of the controversial Article 301, which makes it a crime to insult "Turkishness" and has been used against scores of Turkish journalists, writers and intellectuals.
Dink was prosecuted on charges of "denigrating Turkishness" due to an article describing the killings of an estimated 1.5 million Armenians during World War I as "genocide", which is not the official Turkish position on the issue.
He was convicted and given a six-month suspended sentence in July 2006.
"The continuing suppression of freedom of expression in Turkey has created an atmosphere of deadly intolerance culminating in the killing of Hrant Dink," Amnesty International's researcher on Turkey Andrew Gardner said on Friday.
"In addition to implementing current legal reforms, urgent legislative reform must be adopted.
The authorities must seize the opportunity to advance the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms for all in the new constitution that is being drafted."
Turkish Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin told journalists Saturday that draft amendments to Article 301 would soon be submitted to parliament.
According to Reporters Without Borders, the proposed changes fall "well short of satisfying" its calls for the complete abolition of the controversial legislation, as "the proposed amendment offers no solution to the problem of the article's arbitrary application by judges."
