20/09/2007
(Wall Street Journal, FT, The Guardian, EurActiv - 20/09/07;
European Commission, AFP, Reuters, AP, BBC, International Herald Tribune, RFE/RL, Euobserver - 19/09/07)
European gas and electricity giants would be forced to break up under a package of measures the European Commission (EC) proposed on Wednesday (September 19th), in a bid to ensure more competition within the bloc's energy market.
"The commission is clear that the status quo cannot continue," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said at a news conference, announcing the adoption of the new legislative proposals.
"Without change, distortion of competition and fragmentation of the market will continue."
The proposed reforms, which require approval by the governments of the 27 EU-member states and the European Parliament, call for the separation of network operation of electricity and gas from supply and generation activities.
The big state-owned or private utilities would thus have to sell off their transmission networks.
Another option proposed by the EC would allow existing vertically integrated companies to retain network ownership -- provided that the assets are actually operated by a completely independent company or body.
This would guarantee that even smaller companies, including those involved in renewable energy production, will have access to the energy market, according to the commission.
The same "ownership unbundling" requirement would apply to companies from countries outside the 27-nation bloc, such as Russia, seeking to buy a controlling stake in gas pipelines or electricity power grids.
"In practice, third-country individuals and companies should not be able to acquire control over [European] transmission networks unless there is agreement between the [EC] and their country of origin," said Barroso.
"We need to place tough conditions on ownership of assets by non-European companies to make sure we all play by the same rules.
We should protect the internal market from noncompetitive behaviour coming from the outside."
Other measures the EC has proposed include facilitating cross-border energy trade, establishing more effective national regulators, promoting cross-border collaboration, and investment, and greater transparency.
Implementation of these measures is expected to ensure a real and effective choice of suppliers and to lower the prices of electricity and gas for consumers.
"We have moved a long way towards an internal energy market in the EU over the last 10 years," EU Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs said on Wednesday.
"It is now time to complete this process and ensure that the benefits of this market are real, effective and available to each and every person and company.
The EU now has to take the necessary steps to ensure that all its citizens can choose their own supplier and be sure that they are getting the best deal."
