20/09/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 20/09/07
Students, researchers, business people and journalists from Western Balkan nations will now be able to apply for, and obtain, visas for travel to the 27 EU member countries under an agreement signed on Tuesday (September 18th) by five Balkan countries. 
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia approved the agreements, which will go into effect on January 1st, 2008.
European Commission Vice President Franco Frattini, Portuguese Interior Minister Ruiz Carlos Pereira and the interior ministers of the Western Balkan countries signed the documents in Brussels.
"The signature of the agreements is an important political decision towards closer co-operation between the EU and the Western Balkan countries in the sensitive areas of migration and movement of persons. 
The smooth implementation of these agreements will enable the Commission to start a structured dialogue on a possible visa-free regime for the citizens of Western Balkan countries in the future," Frattini said during the ceremony.
Under the agreements, groups of citizens -- including business people, students and journalists -- will be able to obtain an EU visa for 35 euros, as opposed to the current 60 euros. 
Holders of diplomatic passports will be exempt from the visa obligation. 
The visa and readmission agreements will apply to 15 EU states in the so-called Schengen borderless travel area. 
That number is expected to grow to 24 at the end of the year -- but Britain, Ireland and Cyprus will remain outside the EU borderless travel area.
The proposal for the documents was approved by the European Council on November 13th, 2006 -- but with strong resistance from some countries, including Germany, the signing was delayed. 
Although many expect talks on eliminating the visa regime all together, due to this resistance, implementation of visa-free travel may take even longer.
The five states are charged under the agreements with taking back illegal immigrants who reach the EU through the Balkans. 
The outcome of this may have a large impact on implementation of visa-free travel, Frattini said. 
He also called for stricter border controls and the introduction of safe passports with biometric features.
"[The agreements] are very important for the people of the Western Balkans and help to improve people-to-people contacts between the citizens of the EU and the region. 
They are a further proof of the EU's commitment to the region's European perspective. 
Now we expect proper implementation of both agreements, so as to pave the way for a dialogue on visa-free travel and its conditions with each of the countries of the region," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said.
"The signature of the agreement is a signal for Macedonia's success and its dedication towards the Euro-Atlantic integration. 
We hope that this step will be followed by the full liberalisation of the visa regime," Macedonian Interior Minister Gordana Jankuloska said.
The effective implementation of the Visa Facilitation and Readmission Agreements will ensure better management of migration pressure and will make it possible to envision a structured dialogue along the path set out by the Thessaloniki agenda, towards eliminating visas for the Western Balkan countries.
