22/10/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 22/10/07
Under increasing public pressure, Turkey's political and military leaders held an emergency session Sunday (October 21st), chaired by President Abdullah Gul. 
The meeting was called after a deadly attack by Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) terrorists, which left at least 12 soldiers dead and 16 wounded.
The ambush, just 4km from the Iraqi border, sparked outrage across the country. 
Hundreds took to the streets, demanding military action against PKK bases in northern Iraq.
A statement issued following the emergency session said Turkey is not afraid of "paying the price" for victory over the PKK. 
"Although it respects Iraqi territorial integrity, Turkey will not tolerate that terrorism be aided and abetted," it said.
Later Sunday, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan held a telephone conversation with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. 
Erdogan told reporters that he agreed to Rice's request to delay any retaliatory strikes for "a few days", in exchange for speedy US action against the PKK.
Last week, parliament passed a motion authorising a cross-border operation. 
The military has already deployed as many as 60,000 troops, backed by tanks and attack helicopters. 
Military planes were seen landing at the airport of Diyarbakir following the deadly ambush.
On Sunday, the US administration issued a strong warning against PKK attacks, saying they "must stop now".
The problem must be "dealt with swiftly by the Iraqi government and Kurdish regional authorities", US National Security Council Press Secretary Gordon Johndroe said.
Sunday's ambush by the PKK was one of the deadliest attacks in recent years. 
The terrorist group also claims that it has captured ten Turkish soldiers and would hold them at the bases in northern Iraq. 
Turkish newspapers quote officials who confirm at least eight soldiers are missing.
"These recent attacks by the PKK are a provocation; Turks should be very careful in their response," International Strategic Research Institution Director Sedat Laciner warned. 
"They aim at pushing Turkey into a cross-border operation into northern Iraq and a wider conflict with the Kurdish groups."
According to Laciner, the PKK also seeks to rouse Turkish nationalists against the pro-Kurdish political party DTP, which won seats in parliament during the July elections.
"The PKK wants to provoke lynchings against the DTP and its members," he said. 
"Then the PKK will turn to the Kurds and say, 'look a political and democratic struggle is meaningless, the only way forward is by an armed struggle'."
Many experts also believe that the PKK is trying to use a new wave of violence to forestall any new initiative by the government on Kurdish issues. 
Gul visited the region in September, only days after his presidential election, to signal a new policy direction.
Tensions have already escalated between nationalist Turks and Kurds. 
On Sunday, in the eastern city of Erzurum, hundreds of Turkish nationalists were on the verge of taking their rally to predominantly Kurdish neighborhoods and a party office of the DTP.
In the western city of Bursa, a nationalist group damaged a DTP office. 
At the Malatya bus terminal, angry protestors wanted to lynch a group of PKK sympathisers, who were later arrested.
