18/12/2007
By Ahmet Gormez for Southeast European Times in Ankara – 18/12/07
At least 300 Turkish troops reportedly entered northern Iraq Tuesday (December 18th), two days after a large airstrike was carried out against Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) bases. 
Iraqi Kurdish officials said the troops penetrated to around 2km inside Iraqi territory.
Asked to confirm the reports, Turkish President Abdullah Gul said only that the military is doing "what is necessary" in order to halt terrorism, CNN Turk said. 
A Turkish military official quoted by Reuters said the troops took action after they spotted PKK militants across the border and determined that they were planning attacks.
On Sunday, dozens of aircraft carried out an attack against PKK positions in northern Iraq. 
The PKK said five of its militants were killed and two others injured, while Iraqi sources said the casualties included one female civilian.
The planes hit the "regions of Zap, Hakurk and Avasin as well as Qandil Mountain", the Turkish General Staff said on its website.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan praised the operation on Monday, saying it had been a success. 
"Our struggle [against the PKK] will continue inside and outside of Turkey," Erdogan said, thanking the pilots and military members who participated.
US Embassy spokeswoman Kathryn Schalow emphasized that "Turkey did not ask us for any go-ahead. 
This was Turkey's decision, and what they did was give us information beforehand." US officials said it was not up to Washington to authorise the move.
The United States had already agreed to share intelligence with Turkey during a meeting earlier this year between Erdogan and US President George W. 
Bush, Schalow added.
Turkish officials said the operation was strictly aimed at the PKK and not against civilians. 
"As it's been said since the beginning, operations only target the PKK terrorist organisation and the people living in the northern part of Iraq and the local groups who don't make any enemy efforts are not the targets," the Turkish military said in a statement.
However, in comments quoted by Reuters Wednesday, the UN refugee agency UNHCR said around 1,800 villagers fled their homes.
The aircraft used for the operation were from four military bases around the country and the military used tanker planes to give refueling support, according to reports. 
The Turkish military said it hit the areas with artillery fire after the air strikes and that helicopters conducted operations along the border.
The Iraqi Parliament condemned the bombings, saying they violated the country's sovereignty. 
Condemnation also came from Iraqi Kurdish leaders.
"These attacks hinder the political efforts exerted to find peaceful solution based on mutual respect," a spokesman for the Iraqi Kurdish Presidency said in a statement posted on the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan website.
The PKK has conducted terrorist attacks since 1984, causing more than 37,000 deaths in the process. 
After the capture of the group's leader, Abdullah Ocalan, in 1999, the terrorists began shifting their bases to areas outside Turkey, and mainly in northern Iraq. 
The Turkish military says up to 3,800 militants are currently based just across the border, and that up to 2,300 operate inside Turkey.
