18/12/2007
(Irish Times, Blic - 18/12/07; AP, AFP, DPA, AKI, VOA, BIRN, Beta, B92, Serbian Government - 17/12/07)
Both Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu will address the Security Council on Wednesday (December 19th) when the 15-nation body holds a closed-door session to discuss a report by international mediators on the last four months of negotiations between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials.
Departing for New York to attend the session on Sunday, Sejdiu told reporters he would seek the Security Council's backing for Kosovo independence.
Kostunica, on the other hand, wants to win the UN Security Council's support for the continuation of status talks. 
"We can talk, we are ready for compromise, but Serbia must remain whole," he said in a statement ahead of his departure.
Three days before the December 10th deadline for the talks, the EU-US-Russian troika said that this last-ditch effort to resolve the issue of Kosovo's final status had failed to produce an agreement.
Still technically part of Serbia, Kosovo has been an UN protectorate since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict in the province.
Viewing the status quo as no longer sustainable, the UN launched talks on Kosovo's future in February 2006. 
But the following 13 months of negotiations, led by former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, failed to bridge the gap between Belgrade and Pristina's positions on the core issue of status.
Kosovo Albanians, who account for 90% of the province's population of 2 million, have been pushing for full independence from Serbia, while Belgrade has been saying that all it can offer is broad autonomy.
With the prospects for a compromise proving slim, Kosovo's leaders warned they would declare independence unilaterally if the troika-led talks ended without an agreement.
In a statement issued at the end of a one-day summit in Brussels on Friday, EU leaders said the negotiation process on Kosovo's future was exhausted. 
Agreeing with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon that the status quo in Kosovo is untenable, they stressed the need to move forward towards a settlement.
While the EU leaders stopped short of endorsing independence for the province, most of the member states are expected to recognise an independent Kosovo even without the UN's approval.
Kostunica immediately denounced the EU summit's conclusions on Kosovo, describing them as "insulting".
In a statement posted on the Serbian government's official website on Friday, he said "the lack of additional talks and the support for violating UN Security Council Resolution 1244 by recognising Kosovo's unilaterally-declared independence" was unacceptable.
According to a report published Monday by the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network (BIRN), however, EU legal experts have drafted a confidential document arguing that Resolution 1244 neither precludes Kosovo's independence nor other states from recognising an independant Kosovo.
Furthermore, they maintain there is nothing to prevent the EU from sending a mission to replace UNMIK or KFOR from continuing its presence, the BIRN said.
