21/02/2008
(Reuters, DPA, AP, Balkan Insight, B92 - 20/02/08;
Balkan Insight -- 18/02/08 - 19/02/08;
Office of the High Representative - 18/02/08)
Kosovo's independence does not provide a reason for Republika Srspska (RS) to push for secession from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the entity's prime minister indicated in remarks published on Wednesday (February 20th).
But Milorad Dodik, who also heads the Bosnian Serbs' leading Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), would not rule out this as an option should the entity's status be challenged in some way.
Dodik said his party "will seek a referendum on independence if (the RS) status is questionable, which did not happen because of Kosovo's independence.
I think the independence of Kosovo only strengthened Republika Srpska," the DPA quoted him as saying in remarks published in Wednesday's edition of the Banja Luka daily Glas Srpske.
There are increasing calls by hard-line Bosnian Serb nationalists for RS to follow Kosovo's example.
Branislav Dukic, leader of the SPONA organisation, which is made up of several Bosnian Serb war veterans' groups and claims to represent 70% of the entity's population, has called on the RS parliament to proclaim self-determination.
Shortly after the Kosovo assembly adopted its declaration of independence Sunday, leaders of the Radical Party and the main opposition Serb Democratic Party called for RS to follow suit.
Dodik, who raised the issue of a possible independence referendum in the entity after Montenegrins voted to end their ties with Serbia in May 2006, has toned down his rhetoric in recent months.
In his interview, he accused parties discussing RS's secession of seeking political gains.
"I am not a man without emotions either, who wouldn't want many things immediately, but some of them are not realistic," Dodik told the Bosnian Serb daily.
"We have to work slowly, rationally, wisely.
We can do more harm than good from rushed moves."
He also indicated that his aim now is to strengthen RS's autonomy.
A Reuters report on Wednesday quoted a statement by his SNSD party that indicated it would resist Western calls for the RS to cede more of its powers to the BiH central government.
"The transfer of powers to Sarajevo has been halted," Dodik's party said, adding that it would continue to follow that course until it had "major constitutional and long-term effects".
Glas Srpske published the interview with the prime minister a day before members of the RS parliament were to discuss the Kosovo events at a special session Thursday.
According to the Belgrade-based B92, Dodik denied speculation that lawmakers would adopt a declaration saying that the RS should have the right to secede from BiH if Kosovo's independence is recognised by more more than half the UN Security Council member nations.
Dodik says parliamentary panels are drafting such a declaration, but "no such official document exists" at this time.
International officials repeatedly have warned that any attempts to artificially link RS's situation with that of Kosovo will be rejected.
"Republika Srpska does not have the right to secede from Bosnia;
at the same time no one can unilaterally abolish Republika Srpska," High Representative Miroslav Lajcak said recently.
