22/11/2007
(Telegraph, Blic - 22/11/07; Reuters, AP, Beta, B92, BIRN - 21/11/07)
The EU's representative in the international troika that has been mediating talks on Kosovo status voiced pessimism Wednesday (November 21st) that a deal will be reached by the time negotiations end on December 10th.
"Naturally, an agreement on the status would be ideal, but, unfortunately, this is something we cannot expect," Wolfgang Ischinger told reporters in Berlin, one day after the latest session of talks. 
He voiced hope, however, that Belgrade and Pristina would be able to at least reach a deal on their future co-operation before the talks end.
"Our aim in the troika, even if we didn't get a solution on Kosovo's status, was to get agreement on the relationship between Serbia and Kosovo, independent of how and when the status question was resolved," the German diplomat said.
While still technically part of Serbia, Kosovo has been a de facto UN protectorate since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict in the province.
After 14 months of largely fruitless talks, the former UN Special Envoy for the status process, Martti Ahtisaari, proposed granting Kosovo independence under international community supervision, with significant power-sharing requirements meant to protect ethnic Serbs and other minorities.
Kosovo's ethnic Albanian leadership accepted the plan, while Serbia rejected it. 
Belgrade argues that the most it can accept is "broad autonomy" for the province.
In July, Western nations decided to shelve a draft UN Security Council resolution on Kosovo, based on Ahtisaari's blueprint, in the face of a potential Russian veto. 
The six-nation Contact Group, including Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, then took over the process from the UN, establishing the troika format for the last-ditch effort to break the deadlock.
Several different options to resolve the status issue have been proposed over the past few months, but all have been rejected by one or both sides.
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin voiced hope Thursday that the troika's next meeting with the Serbian and Kosovo Albanian negotiators, in Baden, Austria, on November 26th, could still produce a deal.
If that does not happen, he said, the international community should move to ensure that Kosovo does not turn into a "black hole", generating violence in the region.
Extremist groups have resurfaced on both the Albanian and Serb sides, although the extent of the threat is not yet clear. 
On Wednesday, the so-called Guard of Tzar Lazar called on Serbia to "engage in a war for the defence of Kosovo", and said it would take matters into its own hands if authorities fail to do so. 
Officials in Belgrade, however, dismissed the threat, saying there is no information suggesting the group -- outlawed by UNMIK -- poses an actual security risk.
A member of an ethnic Albanian paramilitary group, also banned by UNMIK, said on Wednesday his organisation would resist any attempt by the Serb militants to cross into Kosovo.
"If they enter Kosovo we are ready to confront with them militarily," said Gafur Adilli, who claims to head the political wing of the Albanian National Army. 
"It would not be easy for us if Serbia, the government, would attack Kosovo, but these paramilitaries are no problem for us."
