20/02/2008
(Reuters, DPA, Washington Post, The New York Times, The Guardian, BBC, Blic - 20/02/08; AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, Deutsche Welle, Balkan Insight, Beta, B92 - 19/02/08)
Condemning the attacks on two border crossings in Kosovo's north Tuesday (February 19th), the top UN and NATO representatives in Europe's newest state have warned against any further provocations.
"Any violence is completely unacceptable and will not be tolerated," UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker said in a statement several hours after groups of Kosovo Serbs destroyed the Jarinje and Brnjak posts on the border with Serbia.
He said he expects all citizens "to exercise calm and respect UNMIK and KFOR, which will continue to diligently ensure a safe and secure environment."
Up to 3,000 Kosovo Serbs, some of them masked, were reportedly involved in the attacks on the two crossings, staged two days after Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia.
Using bulldozers and plastic explosives, the crowds first stormed the Jarinje border crossing in Lepopsavic, setting the buildings housing the customs and border police services ablaze.
The Brnjak post near Zubin Potok -- about 30km north of Mitrovica -- was also demolished and burnt down in the second attack a short time later. 
Kosovo police and UN customs officials serving there were forced to seek shelter in a nearby tunnel.
"It was very dangerous. 
The police had to withdraw and call for help from NATO peacekeepers," Kosovo Police Service (KPS) spokesman Veton Elshani said following the incidents at the border posts, manned by Kosovo and UNMIK police. 
"They expelled KPS and customs members from Jarinje and Brnjak posts. 
Premises and vehicles have been destroyed," he added, noting there were no injuries.
Serbian National Council for Northern Kosovo head Milan Ivanovic later told reporters that the protests were triggered by rumours that ethnic Albanian customs officers "were planning to take over the two border crossings and cut ties with Serbia".
Following the attacks, UNMIK said the two crossings would be closed for 24 hours. 
KFOR sent helicopters and armoured vehicles to evacuate UN officials and Kosovo police officers serving there, and then stepped up its presence in the area.
"Everyone should refrain from any provocative statement or actions," KFOR Commander Lieutenant General Xavier de Marnhac said in a statement. 
"KFOR will react firmly against any individual or groups tempted to undermine the safe and secure environment and the freedom of movement Kosovo-wide."
Colonel Bertrand Bonneau, a spokesman for the 16,000-strong NATO-led peacekeeping force, told the DPA that a "convoy of around 70 vehicles, including ten buses" had crossed into Kosovo from Serbia at the time of the attacks. 
The roads leading to the checkpoints were later closed.
While denying his country's involvement in the incidents, Serbia's Minister for Kosovo Slobodan Samardzic said the attacks were "legitimate".
"Today's action is in accordance with the general government policies," he told Serbia's private B92 television. 
"Belgrade has the intention to take over the customs in northern Kosovo. 
The customs points were intended to become part of [Kosovo's] state border and we are not going to let that happen."
