19/09/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina - 19/09/07
Kosovo plans to hold elections on November 17th, but it is unclear to what extent the province's Serbs will participate.
Officials in Belgrade have urged the community to boycott the vote, while some local Serb leaders argue otherwise.
"We cannot support the participation of Serbs in the elections," Serbian President Boris Tadic told reporters during a visit to Lisbon, saying it would be "counterproductive".
Serbia has been appealing to the international community for a postponement of the vote due to the ongoing status process.
But Oliver Ivanovic, a Kosovo Serb leader, told Southeast European Times that he believes Serbs should vote.
"I encourage our community to participate in the Kosovo elections, because there are no other alternatives," Ivanovic said.
At the same time, he acknowledged that many face strong pressure to stay away from the poll.
Many Kosovo Serbs work for Serbian institutions and are afraid of being penalised, Ivanovic said.
"Also, they are afraid of destroying the status process," he added.
"Up until now we have been represented by the Belgrade delegation, and how can we be part of Kosovo's institutions at the same time?"
Opinion within the community appears to be mixed.
An elderly Serb, Slobodan Markovic, said he would take part, but only if the vote is genuinely open to everyone.
"I will participate in the elections if they are for all," he told Southeast European Times.
His friend Dragan said he will not participate.
"No.
Why should I vote?
I have no interest in this," he said.'
Milica Lajic, however, said she would definitely vote.
"I will participate because I will not leave Kosovo.
This is my place and I will stay here," she said.
The president of Kosovo, Fatmir Sejdiu appealed to Kosovo's Serbs to come to the polls.
"These are elections for all citizens and everybody should have respect for these elections," he told Southeast European Times.
The chief of the EU's planning team in Kosovo, Casper Klynge, said Belgrade should encourage Serbs to participate.
"They should have their elected representatives because this is the only way for a better future," he said.
UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker stressed that elections should not interfere with the status process, adding "We all think that it is possible to reconcile the two processes."
