19/09/2007
(Zaman, Sabah - 19/09/07;
AP, Reuters, Euronews, VOA, NTV MSNBC, Xinhua, Cyprus News Agency, Athens News Agency - 18/09/07)
Turkish President Abdullah Gul called for a peaceful settlement to the Cyprus issue as he travelled to the divided island's Turkish-run north on Tuesday (September 18th), less than a month after becoming head of state.
It is his first foreign trip as president.
"We are determined to maintain our goodwill and our approach, which is in favour of resolution and reconciliation," he said.
"There are two realities on Cyprus, two democracies, two states, two languages, two religions," Gul said later at a joint news conference with Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat."One has to accept that a solution must be based on these realities."
Cyprus has been divided along ethnic lines since 1974, when Turkish troops arrived, in response to an Athens-backed Greek Cypriot coup.
Numerous international efforts to reach a solution have failed, including a reunification plan sponsored by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
Greek Cypriots rejected Annan's plan in a 2004 referendum, while Turkish Cypriots endorsed it.
The internationally recognised Republic of Cyprus in the south then joined the EU, representing the island as a whole.
A breakaway Turkish Cypriot state in the north, the TRNC, is recognised only by Ankara.
On Tuesday, Gul also renewed Ankara's call to the EU to lift the trade embargo on the Turkish Cypriot community, as it promised back in 2004.
"We are expecting the international community to keep up their promises and put an end to this unjust practice," he said, before leaving for Nicosia.
"We are expecting the international community to take a step on this issue."
The Cyprus issue has complicated Turkey's bid to join the EU.
The bloc wants Turkey to open its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels and planes, as part of the requirements under a customs protocol.
But Turkey has declined to do so until the EU eases the economic isolation of Turkish Cypriots.
The disagreement led Brussels to freeze eight chapters of its membership talks with Turkey.
"Turkey, Greece and the island of Cyprus can enter into co-operation if there is a comprehensive peace and the eastern Mediterranean region can become a very attractive region," the AP quoted Gul as saying Tuesday.
In addition to talks with Talat, Gul, who is accompanied by his wife, Hayrunnisa, met with other Turkish Cypriot officials and politicians and was scheduled to address the TRNC assembly Wednesday.
However, his visit prompted a sharp response from the Cypriot Foreign Ministry, which condemned it as "another illegal action by Turkey and a serious provocation which is against a member of the EU and, at large, against the EU itself and the international community in its entirety".
The Greek Foreign Ministry also condemned Gul's visit, describing it as an "unproductive move against the international legal order".
