20/02/2008
By Blerta Foniqi–Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina - 20/02/08
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana arrived in Pristina on Tuesday (February 19th), the first high-level political official to visit Kosovo since it declared independence.
He was there to reassure leaders that the EU is not divided on Kosova's independence.
Solana assured them that the EU is united in its decision to deploy a police and judicial mission to Kosovo.
The 1,800-member EU mission, called EULEX, was officially launched on Saturday and will be fully operational after 120 days.
"The EU is so united … that we are going to put people on the ground," Solana told Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci.
Solana also said that "the European Union does not recognise countries, the member states of the EU do, and they do it according to the national legislations".
As of Tuesday, a majority of EU nations had already said they would formally launch diplomatic ties with the continent's newest country.
Not all EU countries, however, support Kosovo's independence.
At a meeting of the EU foreign ministers in Brussels on Monday, the members drew up a statement about Kosovo that reflected the fact that Cyprus and Spain led a group of countries who are opposed to the recognition of unilateral moves.
This statement was endorsed by a large number of EU states.
However, Solana said the EU is open to all countries, including Kosovo.
He added "we share the happiness with Kosovo's people.
That energy now should be transformed in work".
Solana appealed to the people and the government "to transform their joy into constructive and positive energy to build Kosovo".
Tensions, however, are rising in the region due to the declaration of independence.
Thaci addressed the issue by saying the country is committed to being a state for all citizens and guaranteeing the rights of all minorities, especially Serbs.
He said that even the smallest incidents had been blown out of proportion by the media.
"Everything is under the control of security authorities."
Asked what the EU would do about the fact that Serbs in northern Kosovo do not accept EULEX, Solana replied the mission "had to do its job in the entire territory, not just in some parts".
Solana was accompanied by the future EULEX head, French General Yves de Kermabon, as well as EU envoy to Kosovo Pieter Feith.
