19/07/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times --19/07/07
Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) is widely expected to win a landslide victory in Sunday's (July 22nd) elections.
However, the party may not get enough votes to secure three-fourths of the 550 seats in Turkey's parliament – the amount needed to elect a new president.
According to the latest comprehensive poll by Verso, 38% of Turkey's voters said that they would vote for the AKP.
If past trends hold true, undecided voters could push that figure to 40% or above.
The main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) is expected to receive 23% of the vote.
The Nationalist Movement Party could also pass the 10% threshold required to enter parliament.
Polls show it with about 16%.
In order to bypass the 10% threshold, Turkey's largest Kurdish political grouping, the Democratic Society Party, is running all of its candidates as independents.
The successful candidates would then regroup under the party banner following the election.
The party hopes to win as many as 20 seats.
The Verso poll suggests parliament could have the following distribution:
325 seats for the AKP, 120 seats for the CHP-Democratic Left alliance, 70 seats for the MHP, and 35 seats going to independents – mainly ethnic Kurds.
Erhan Goksel, a political analyst and director of Verso, says the poll reveals significant trends.
To start with, he says, although the AKP is rooted in political Islam, its base of support is far broader.
"The AKP has succeeded in getting the support of lower income groups, particularly in suburbs and underdeveloped regions," Goksel says.
"Municipalities run by the AKP have initiated social policies in the last couple of years to help low income groups, providing them food, clothing and heating.
This has enormously increased support."
Voters following a strict Islamist ideology only account for around 10% of AKP's support, Goksel adds.
However, although the party's support is broad, it may not be rock-solid.
The Verso poll found that nearly a quarter of AKP voters said they would reconsider, if there were a serious alternative on the right.
Turkey's centrist parties enjoyed around 80% electoral support during the 1980s and 1990s.
It was the fragmentation of the centre-right that allowed the AKP to conquer two-thirds of the seats in parliament in 2002, even though it only received 34% of the vote.
This year, two centre right parties -- the Motherland Party of Turkey (ANAP) and the True Path Party (DYP) -- sought to form an alliance, but negotiations failed.
Both parties will probably stay below the 10% threshold and be left out of parliament.
The CHP, on the other hand, is expected to gain traction among urban voters and the social elite.
Although a centre-left party, it is likely to draw support from centre-right voters who believe secularism is under threat.
In recent months, hundreds of thousands of protestors have rallied in big cities in support of secularism and against the AKP.
Analysts say these protests have helped mobilize support for the CHP, which won 19% of the vote in 2002.
With nationalism on the rise, the MHP has emerged as the third largest party.
Attacks by the terrorist Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) have contributed to this trend, as has the debate over a cross border operation in northern Iraq.
The Verso survey, which was conducted between June 22nd and 30th, polled 8,811 respondents nationwide.
