17/08/2007
(ANA-MPA, Reuters, AP, DPA, BBC - 16/08/07;
Kathimerini - 14/08/07;
Angus Reid Global Monitor - 12/07/07)
Roughly six months before the end of his government's four-year mandate, Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis requested on Friday (August 17th) that early parliamentary elections be held on September 16th.
Ending weeks of speculation, government spokesman Theodoros Roussopoulos said on Thursday that the prime minister would make that request and ask for parliament's dissolution during a meeting with President Karolos Papoulias the following day.
"The government, fully responsibly, asks the Greek people to decide on the future of the country, renewing their trust and giving a second strong mandate for another four years," the spokesman said.
"Since 2004 the country has steadily moved ahead.
The reforms started and they are already bearing fruit.
A lot more needs to be done."
After more than a decade in opposition, Karamanlis' conservative New Democracy (ND) party came to power following the March 2004 parliamentary elections, in which it won a landslide victory over the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK).
ND won EU praise for reducing the budget deficit and implementing a series of needed economic and social reforms, including some painful ones.
But several scandals and a public perception that ND has not made good on election promises have dented the party's popularity at home.
Some also criticise the government for its response to numerous forest fires that hit the country this summer.
Recent polls have shown the ND in a virtual tie with PASOK, with its lead shrinking to a statistically insignificant 2 percentage points.
"Greeks have seen their rights reduced, their salaries reduced and their expectations crushed," Reuters quoted PASOK spokesman Petros Efthimiou as saying Thursday.
George Papandreou's Socialists, who have been accusing the conservatives of corruption and incompetence, have been pushing for early elections for months.
Papandreou said his party was ready for next month's test and appeared confident that it will win."I anticipate victory," he told reporters.
Government officials are promising further reforms if the ND wins next month again.
In a televised address Friday, Karamanlis cited the finalisation of pending legislative measures and constitutional changes as the main reasons for him to seek a second mandate.
"I adamantly believe that the citizens desire the continuation of the changes and reforms, with a new momentum and new speed," he said at the cabinet's last session, held before his meeting with Papoulias.
On Thursday, some analysts said snap elections must take place as soon as possible.
This, they argued, will give a new boost to the reform process, which has slowed in recent months amid speculation about the timing of the vote.
"I think the government feels it must open a new front of reforms, and this period of intense speculation on when the elections will be held has effectively brought things to stagnation," analyst John Loulis told the AP.
"The reforms can only acquire a dynamic through a fresh popular mandate.
(Karamanlis) feels strong, he believes that he can achieve a respectable controlling majority in parliament and is determined to clear the scene."
