21/11/2007
(Office of the High Representative, AP, DPA, CTK, Fena, B92 - 20/11/07;
AFP - 19/11/07)
High Representative Miroslav Lajcak urged acting Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Prime Minister Nikola Spiric on Tuesday (November 20th) to continue performing the duties his current mandate entails, so that the work of BIH institutions is not stalled.
Lajcak "expects all the institutions of BIH to continue to function" and wants Spiric to convene a cabinet session as soon as possible, a representative from his office told reporters.
The BiH Council of Ministers has not met since October 16th.
A number of critical bills must be endorsed by the central government before being submitted to parliament for approval, said the representative, Eldar Subasic.
It is also up to the government to endorse the release of funds needed for the December 9th presidential elections in Republika Srpska.
Spiric tendered his resignation on November 1st to protest Lajcak's decision to impose reforms aimed at streamlining the decision-making process in state institutions, including the central government.
The BiH tripartite presidency accepted his resignation on November 12th and launched talks on choosing a candidate for his post.
In the meantime, Spiric remains acting prime minister until a new cabinet is appointed.
"He still has the responsibility to provide for the functioning of the Council of Ministers," Lajcak's office said.
"Mr.
Spiric should turn up for work and do his job," a statement from the office quoted the international envoy as saying.
"Even if he disagrees with my decisions he is still democratically accountable to the people of BiH for the running of the country, until a replacement is elected.
A chair of the council of ministers who resigns, doesn't show up for work, and who then complains that the international community is running the country and ignoring him, is not only failing to do his job, but he is also betraying the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina!"
Lajcak has also warned that he will impose the measures described in his decision of October 19th, if politicians in BiH fail to implement them by December 1st.
Speaking during a visit to the Czech Republic, Spiric sought to downplay the current political crisis.
"I am an optimist," the DPA quoted him as saying.
"Once people in the country will understand that (the lack of) dialogue is the essential problem ...
the crisis in the country will pass."
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana sounded less optimistic Monday, voicing concern about the "deterioration of the political climate" in BiH following Spiric's resignation.
The situation in BiH was also discussed by the 27-nation bloc's foreign ministers during their meeting Monday in Brussels.
Expressing their full support for Lajcak, the EU member states' top diplomats urged politicians in BiH to "fully respect and quickly implement" the measures the High Representative put forward
