19/02/2008
By Artan Mustafa for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 19/02/08
One day after Kosovo's leaders made a unilateral declaration of independence, the United States formally recognised Europe's newest state.
Several key EU nations have also either extended recognition or announced their intention to do so.
US President George W. Bush, who was on a visit to Tanzania, said on Monday (February 18th) that a historic achievement had taken place.
"Kosovars are now independent," he said.
Later on Monday, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice issued a statement confirming that the United States formally recognises Kosovo as a sovereign and independent state.
"We congratulate the people of Kosovo on this historic occasion," Rice said.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy sent a letter to his Kosovo counterpart, Fatmir Sejdiu, saying that France recognised Kosovo's sovereignty.
Britain, France, Germany and Italy have also said they will recognise an independent Kosovo.
Sunday's vote by the Kosovo parliament was not the first time the province has declared itself independent.
A proclamation was also made in 1990, after the regime of Slobodan Milosevic curtailed the province's autonomy, but Albania was the only country to acknowledge it.
This time, the situation was markedly different.
The head of the US office in Pristina, Tina Kaidanow;
and her British and French counterparts -- David Blunt and Delphine Borione -- sent their credential letters to Sejdiu's office Monday afternoon, requesting diplomatic accreditation.
Representatives from Turkey and Albania then did the same.
The requests are welcome, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said.
"We will respect fully the Vienna Pact for diplomatic relations of 1961," he added.
Kosovo sent 192 letters to countries around the world Monday, after parliament's vote.
The first to extend recognition was Afghanistan, which said it supports the "determination" of Kosovo's people.
In the EU, 23 member states are expected to back the move, according to Thaci.
But four bloc countries -- Cyprus, Greece, Romania and Spain -- oppose it.
Spanish Foreign Minister Angel Moratinos, whose country has been battling a Basque separatist movement for decades, said Madrid does not consider Kosovo's declaration "in line with international law".
Romania is concerned that its Hungarian minority will demand more autonomy, while Cyprus -- supported by Greece -- worries that the example of Kosovo could spur international recognition of the breakaway Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
The staunchest international opponent of Kosovo has been Russia, which requested a UN Security Council meeting over the issue Monday and seeks an annulment of Pristina's decision.
China, meanwhile, voiced "grave concern" about the situation and sharply condemned Taiwan for extending recognition.
'Taiwan, as a part of China, has no right and qualification at all to make the so-called recognition," a Chinese foreign ministry spokesman said.
Countries that support Kosovo's independence argue that it is a unique case that does not set a precedent elsewhere.
