18/09/2007
(B92 - 18/09/07;
AP, Reuters, DPA, VOA, Beta, B92, The White House - 17/09/07)
Kosovo Albanian leaders said Monday (September 17th) that they plan to propose an agreement paving the way for good neighbourly relations with Serbia after their province becomes independent.
"This will relax our relations and develop good, friendly ties between two sovereign countries," Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu said at a press conference, following a meeting of Pristina's delegation to the internationally-sponsored talks with Belgrade on the province's future.
The team, headed by Sejdiu and including Prime Minister Agim Ceku and other top Kosovo Albanian politicians, is expected to table the treaty during a meeting in London Wednesday with the EU-US-Russian Troika.
The three diplomats, who have been mediating negotiations on behalf of the six-nation Contact Group, comprised of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, are first scheduled to meet with the Serbian representatives on Tuesday.
Belgrade's delegation is led by Serbia's Minister for Kosovo Slobodan Samardzic and Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic.
The meetings in London reportedly will focus on arrangements for face-to-face talks between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials, expected on September 28th in New York.
The negotiations, which must end by December 10th, have been deadlocked for months.
Neither side has shown any will to back off from its initial stance on the core issue of Kosovo's status.
The Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90% of the province's population of 2 million people, are demanding full independence from Serbia, which refuses to agree to anything more than broad autonomy.
With no compromise in sight, the Kosovo Albanian leaders reiterated their position Monday that independence is non-negotiable.
"We are going there [London] as a state ...
we want to talk about technical issues between two independent states and we want to discuss issues beyond independence," Ceku said.
The United States and several European countries have signaled their readiness to recognise an independent Kosovo even without a UN Security Council resolution.
Russia has been blocking efforts to push through a resolution based on a status plan drawn up by former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari, who recommended supervised independence for the province.
Speaking on Monday, Serbian President Boris Tadic said that the status settlement should not leave one side empty-handed.
He warned that his country would pursue all legal and diplomatic venues to prevent Kosovo from becoming independent.
"Serbia cannot have conditions imposed on itself that affect its sovereignty and integrity," he said after a meeting with Czech President Vaclav Klaus in Prague.
At the same time, he stressed the importance of a peaceful solution.
"We want to avoid any kind of violence.
A new war would be disastrous for all -- the Serbs, Albanians, the peoples of the Balkans, Europe, the United States and Russia."
Kosovo was also among the key issues during talks in Washington between Portuguese Prime Minister Jose Socrates, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, and US President George W. Bush.
The members of the 27-nation bloc are currently split on whether to recognise an independent Kosovo without the UN Security Council's approval.
Socrates said forging a unified European stand on the issue is a top priority for him.
"I guaranteed to the president that the first priority I have in my mind regarding Kosovo is to keep Europe united," he said.
