19/02/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --19/02/08
As the UN Security Council and EU foreign ministers met separately on Monday to discuss Kosovo's declaration of independence, Serbian leaders called for the move to be declared null and void.
Serbia will never recognise Kosovo's independence, President Boris Tadic said.
He warned the international community that "such a concession could be a dangerous precedent with unforeseeable consequences."
The Security Council continues to be split, with Russia and China opposing sovereignty for Kosovo and Western countries supporting it.
In the EU, all but a handful of countries back independence.
Belgrade, meanwhile, has already ordered the withdrawal of Serbian ambassadors from the United States, France and Turkey, pending the delivery of official notes of protest to the respective governments, and is expected to withdraw its ambassadors from other countries that recognise Kosovo's independence.
"The so-called Kosovo state will never be a member of the UN.
Serbia will use all diplomatic means at its disposal to block Kosovo's recognition," Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic vowed.
On Monday night, Serbia's parliament approved a resolution that annuls the act of unilateral independence made by Kosovo's parliament Sunday.
"Today we begin our long battle to fully bring back the entire province into Serbia's Constitutional and legal order," Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica told lawmakers.
"That is our goal and Serbia will achieve it.
If we cannot achieve it today, we will achieve it tomorrow, because Serbia must be free," he added.
Local press, however, commented that apart from confirming a high level of unity among parliamentary parties, the resolution will have no real impact on developments in Kosovo.
Separately, Serbian Trade Minister Predrag Bubalo said Belgrade will not introduce an economic embargo against Kosovo.
In his view, the declaration of independence by Kosovo Albanians will not have consequences for economic relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
"We cannot punish people living in Kosovo because of a decision on the part of citizens," Bubalo said.
On Monday, violent demonstrations over the independence declaration continued in several Serbian towns.
Rioters smashed McDonald's restaurants, threw stones at embassies of the countries that have recognised Kosovo, and attacked several supermarkets owned by Slovenian retailer Mercator.
Clashes with police left dozens of people injured.
Kostunica called on the public to hold peaceful protests, warning that the government will deal with violent demonstrations severely.
