18/09/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 18/09/07
Amid much controversy, the government of Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski submitted draft amendments to the election code earlier this month.
They would extend voting rights to Macedonians in the diaspora, estimated to number around 1 million, while increasing representation for small minorities in the country.
As Macedonia has a resident population of about 2 million, the revised code would drastically change the electoral landscape.
The number of MPs would increase from 120 to 133.
Three of the new seats would represent diaspora living in three districts abroad -- North-South America, Europe-Africa and Australia-Asia.
The others would be earmarked for various minorities.
Ethnic Turks would get four, the Roma and Serbs two each, and Bosniaks and Vlachs one each.
However, the plan has come under fire from the opposition, which warns that a key voting principle established under the Ohrid Framework Agreement would be violated.
The Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) says the ruling party has deviated from previous precedent, in which constitutional changes were adopted by consensus.
SDSM deputies are boycotting parliamentary sessions dedicated to the amendments, and threaten to abandon parliament altogether if the changes are adopted without them.
"The SDSM will not participate in the parliament's work on this matter, and if the election law is brought through such an illegitimate procedure, we will re-evaluate our participation in the parliament's work, as well as in the next elections," said party leader Radmila Sekerinska.
Meanwhile, the largest ethnic Albanian party, the Democratic Union of Integration (DUI), has submitted 4,100 amendments of its own and called for a debate on each.
The goal is to ensure a long-term delay in the process.
According to the opposition, the government proposal would undermine the so-called Badinter Principle, under which some types of laws require approval by a specific minimum of minority party MPs before they can be adopted.
The co-ordinator of the DUI Parliamentary Group, Rafiz Aliti, has called for the Gruevski administration to withdraw the draft election code so that an agreement acceptable to everyone can be reached.
"We haven't been consulted on anything," Aliti said.
In response, the government says it plans to adopt the amendments via a two-phase parliamentary procedure.
This, it says, should ensure the opportunity for a broad-based debate.
