17/01/2008
(BBC, DPA, VOA, Euronews, Blic - 17/01/08; Reuters, AP, AFP, Beta, B92, UN - 16/01/08)
The UN Security Council met on Wednesday (January 16th) to discuss Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's report on UNMIK's activities and developments in Kosovo during the last quarter of 2007. 
Failure to progress towards resolving the province's future status could jeopardise regional stability and UN achievements in Kosovo, the report warned.
"Moving forward with a process to determine Kosovo's future status should remain a high priority for the Security Council and for the international community," said the Secretary-General.. 
After 18 months of internationally sponsored talks between Belgrade and Pristina failed to produce an agreement, the leaders of Kosovo's 90% ethnic Albanian majority are now planning to adopt a unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia.
Serbian President Boris Tadic, whose country opposes the province's bid for statehood and is offering broad autonomy instead, urged the Security Council on Wednesday to prevent any such move. 
He also called for further negotiations towards a compromise acceptable to both sides.
Tadic also assured the 15-nation body that his country "will not resort to violence and war". 
But should violence break out in the province and if KFOR was unable to adequately protect the Kosovo Serbs, "we are ready… to help provide protection to the threatened population" with the agreement of competent international institutions, he added.
Welcoming Tadic's pledge that Serbia will refrain from violence, US Ambassador to the UN Zalmay Khalilzad also urged Belgrade to refrain from imposing "economic measures" on Kosovo, which reportedly could include cutting off the province's power supplies. 
He also cautioned the country against taking any steps that could mar its long-term relations with the United States and EU nations, most of which are expected to join Washington in recognising an independent Kosovo even without UN endorsement.
Russia, one of the five veto-wielding members of the Security Council, has been backing Serbia in its opposition to granting the province any form of statehood and has vowed to block any UN decision on Kosovo's future that is not acceptable to Belgrade. 
Russian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin insisted on Wednesday that the province's final status is a Security Council issue, not an EU one, and that member nations should prepare a roadmap towards a negotiated solution.
Churkin also warned that an independent Kosovo would never become a member of the UN or other international political organisations. 
"Going down the way of unilateral moves, Kosovo is not going to join the ranks of fully recognised members of the international community," he said.
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, who was only allowed to address the Council during a closed-door part of Wednesday's session, voiced the province's determination to proceed with declaring independence, telling reporters it is necessary for regional stability.
"Kosovo has established democratic and multiethnic institutions and is ready for a final decision," he said, pledging that it would become a "country of equal opportunities for all its citizens". 
He also said he would work for promoting a good relationship with Serbia.
