16/08/2007
(B92, Reuters, AP, RFE/RL, Xinhua, Serbian Government - 15/08/07; AKI, Xinhua - 14/08/07)
Serbian analysts warned on Wednesday (August 15th) that rhetoric attacking NATO could hurt the country's relations with the Alliance. 
Several senior government officials and politicians have made statements recently that accused the West of seeking to turn Kosovo into a "satellite state".
"I don't believe someone has completely lost their mind to tell NATO we are enemies now, " Belgrade-based B92 quoted Zoran Dragisic, one of Serbia's leading security analysts and university professor, as saying. 
"Being NATO's enemy is not the smartest thing to be."
On Sunday, two days after the launch of fresh Kosovo status talks, Serbian Interior Minister Dragan Jocic said "a project to create a NATO state" out of the province was the greatest obstacle to reaching a solution.
Education Minister Zoran Loncar, a member of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), made a similar remark Tuesday.
On Wednesday, a Serbian government statement quoted Minister for Kosovo Slobodan Samardzic as saying that "now when new negotiations are to begin, it is of key importance that NATO and the United States abandon the project of creating a satellite state in Kosovo."
He went further, describing this as the "real goal" of the NATO-led military operation in 1999, which forced Slobodan Milosevic's troops to pull out of Kosovo.
DSS spokesman Branislav Ristivojevic has warned that Serbia will no longer wish to build closer ties with the EU or NATO, if the West allows Kosovo to secede.
Such statements, from officials of a country that spent four years trying to join NATO's Partnership for Peace programme, cast doubt on Serbia's seriousness and stability, said Vladan Zivulovic, chairman of the Atlantic Alliance in Serbia.
"There is a strong faction both in the cabinet and the DSS that is clearly opposed to Euro-Atlantic integration and they make no effort to hide this," Zivulovic said. 
If the government has abandoned its Euro-Atlantic integration goal, it should say so, he added.
While NATO membership is not a prerequisite for admission into the EU, integration of neighbouring states has started with membership in the Alliance, according to analysts.
"It doesn't say anywhere NATO membership is a condition for becoming an EU state, but all those who have joined the Union were NATO members first," Dragisic said.
A recent survey suggests that more than two-thirds of Serbs support EU membership and an even greater number believe that their country should continue co-operating with the 27-nation bloc even if member states recognise Kosovo independence.
Western nations, including the United States, repeatedly have expressed support for former UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's proposal granting Kosovo internationally-supervised independence.
A draft UN Security Council resolution that would pave the way for the implementation of that plan was put on the shelf last month in the face of a potential Russian veto.
Further talks on Kosovo's future are now being conducted under the aegis of the six-nation Contact Group, comprising Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States. 
The negotiations, led by a EU-US-Russian troika, are to wrap up by December 10th.
Belgrade has rejected Ahtisaari's blueprint and insists that all it can agree to is broad autonomy for Kosovo, whose ethnic Albanian majority is pushing for full independence from Serbia. 
The Kosovo Albanians make up 90% of the province's population of 2 million people.
