18/02/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 18/02/08
Serbian officials dismissed Kosovo's independence declaration on Sunday (February 17th), saying Belgrade will never recognise a new state on its territory. 
Three top officials -- President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Serbian Radical Party member Tomislav Nikolic -- met and agreed to call an urgent parliamentary session to reject the move by lawmakers in Kosovo.
They also agreed to stage an official protest in Belgrade on Thursday. 
It will be organised by the government and parliamentary parties.
Tadic called on UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to annul the independence proclamation and disband Kosovo's parliament.
"We insist that the UN Security Council fully protect Serbia's sovereignty and territorial integrity, as foreseen by the UN Charter," he said in a letter to Ban. 
"We expect the Security Council to take urgent and efficient action, to ensure that all provisions of Resolution 1244 are being implemented."
On Monday, the Serbian president is expected to attend a Security Council session called by Russia over the issue.

In a televised address to the nation, meanwhile, Kostunica said his government would make every effort to counter Pristina's decision. 
He urged the international missions in Kosovo to protect local Serbs.
He also accused the United States and certain EU-member countries of encouraging the Kosovo Albanians to secede from Serbia and tearing the country apart.
Many Serbian ministers were in the Serb enclaves in Kosovo during the declaration, showing support for the 120,000 Serbs still living in the province. 
Minister for Kosovo and Metohija Slobodan Samardzic visited the northern part of the divided town of Mitrovica. 
He called on the Serbs to stay in their homes, and promised them that the Serbian government would "strengthen its presence" in Kosovo over the next few days.
Although the president, prime minister and all cabinet members urged Serbian citizens to remain calm, violent protests broke out in Belgrade and several Serbian towns. 
The most dramatic situation was in Belgrade, where rioters attacked the US, Slovenian and Albanian embassies. 
New demonstrations in the capital are scheduled for Monday.
Over the next few days, Belgrade is expected to take action against countries that recognise Kosovo's independence. 
The planned response remains a state secret, but media reports have suggested Serbia could withdraw ambassadors and even cut diplomatic ties altogether with some countries, while orchestrating an economic blockade of Kosovo.
Speaking Sunday evening, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said he had told diplomats that countries that recognise Kosovo's independence cannot count on having unchanged relations with Serbia in the future.
