16/08/2007
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 16/08/07
Twenty-four youth activists, representing eight European cities, gathered in Sarajevo in July for the first youth meeting of the Conference of the Union of Central and South-Eastern European Capitals.
The participants were young people involved in NGOs or local government in their communities.
They represented Athens, Belgrade, Podgorica, Sarajevo, Skopje, Tirana, Vienna and Zagreb.
Predrag Mitrovic, president of the organising committee, said the conference was so successful that "we have decided to meet very often, and we have put this in the conference declaration.
We intend to make a youth forum that will serve this purpose."
"Until now older people have had a lot to say about what young people need, but now, with mass conferences like these, we can receive input directly from them," said Milisav Popovic, adviser to the mayor of Podgorica.
The conference comes at a crucial time for youth in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
A recent UNDP study, "The Silent Voice", found that 63% of citizens under the age of 30 wish to leave the country, and more than half say they have no interest in youth policy issues.
Out of 3,500 people surveyed, 88% assessed the situation in BiH as "bad" or "very bad".
Despite such findings, Sarajevo's representative to the July conference struck a positive tone.
"Everything we have learned here, through exchanging our own experiences, will help us in our local communities," Tea Sipovic said.
"Most of us are representatives from various organisations and the knowledge we bring from here will help us a lot with our work in the future."
In his closing remarks, Mitrovic said he hoped that initiatives such as the youth conference would help encourage youth to become more involved.
"These young people have already been marked as active in their local communities and [were] invited here," he noted.
"However, we will keep working together ...
and if we keep being active then you will hear the true voice of young people in the region."
The decision to launch the event was made by the Union of Central and South Eastern European Capitals at its 10th annual conference last year.
The youth meeting was co-sponsored by the Commission for Youth Issues in BiH and the City of Sarajevo.
