18/02/2008
(AFP, AP, Bloomberg, DPA, Independent, The Times, The Washington Times, Euronews, CNA - 18/02/08; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, BBC, UPI, Telegraph, VOA, CNA, Cyprus Mail - 17/02/08)
Incumbent President Tassos Papadopoulos lost his chance of winning a second five-year term as he finished behind his two main opponents in the first round of Cyprus's presidential election Sunday (February 17th). 
The runoff on February 24th will pit conservative Ioannis Kassoulides against communist leader Demetris Christofias. 
Both have voiced support for the revival of talks to end the island's 34-year-old division.
More than half a million voters, including about 400 Turkish Cypriots, chose among the nine presidential candidates participating in the election in Cyprus's Greek-run south, where voting is mandatory.
Announcing the official results, Chief Returning Officer Lazaros Savvides said the turnout was 89.62%, about 1% lower than that in the 2003 presidential vote.
While polls suggested Papadopoulos led the pack, he ended up in third place Sunday with 31.8% of the vote. 
Kassoulides was first with 33.5%, followed by Christofias with 33.3%. 
Each of the other six candidates won less than 1%.
Many hold Papadopoulos, 74, responsible for the collapse of the latest UN-led effort to reunify the island in 2004. 
He publicly campaigned against the proposed settlement, which Greek Cypriots then rejected.
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots approved the reunification plan, only the internationally-recognised Greek Cypriot part of the island joined the EU on May 1st, 2004, representing the whole country.
Conceding defeat Sunday, Papadopoulos insisted that his "no" vote had "saved the Republic of Cyprus in April 2004".
Kassoulides, 59, a former foreign minister, is a leading member of the right-wing DISY party, but is running as an independent. 
After emerging as the front-runner Sunday, he urged voters to support him in the runoff, promising them a better future.
"All those who believe that Cyprus should become a modern European state, now is the time to join together," said Kassoulides, who supported the 2004 UN-sponsored peace plan. 
"Now is the time to overcome all that has divided the people on the Cyprus problem these past years."
Christofias, 61, pledged on Sunday to work with the Turkish Cypriots towards a mutually acceptable solution. 
"Next Sunday, we leave everything that divides us, we leave behind stalemate, we leave behind talk of the past and we forge a peaceful, happy future for all Cypriots without exception," said Christofias. 
"We will never accept a solution that will not meet the fundamental principles we have shaped all these years."
Both Kassoulides and Christofias are now hoping to get the backing of DIKO, the socialist party EDEK and the Greens. 
To win the runoff, a candidate must receive at least 50% plus one vote.
The outcome of Sunday's poll showed that "65% of Greek Cypriots voted for clear pro-solution candidates," said political analyst Hubert Faustmann, an associate professor at the University of Nicosia. 
"The Greek Cypriots are back at the negotiation table."
