18/10/2007
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 18/10/07
The funeral for Macedonian pop star Tose Proeski was held on Wednesday (October 17th), a government-declared day of mourning for the young star killed in a car accident Tuesday in Croatia.
Proeski, 26, was sleeping in the front passenger seat of his SUV during the early morning accident -- his driver Gjorgi Gjogjevski and manager Liljana Petrovic were also in the vehicle.
Investigators say Proeski's SUV was speeding and slammed into the back of a truck on the Belgrade-Zagreb highway, near Nova Gradiska in Croatia.
Proeski died on the scene, while the driver and manager suffered injuries.
Fans in Macedonia and across the region were shocked by his death.
Thousands gathered in Skopje to pay their respects to the singer, whose hits resonated across the region.
Proeski recorded his first album when he was 18.
He represented Macedonia in the 2004 Eurovision contest, the same year he was named a UNICEF Goodwill ambassador.
"We all couldn't help but love Tose Proeski," said Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski, expressing his condolences to the singer's family.
Proeski's remains were brought Tuesday night from Croatia by helicopter.
The state funeral, attended by thousands, including the president and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, was held on Wednesday.
"[Proeski] brought back values and hope to this country, with a path of success paved with strong will and love.
Tose died as he had lived -- with a dream for a better world," Gruevski said.
US Ambassador to Macedonia Gillian Milovanovic expressed deep condolences to "Tose's friends, family and the Macedonian people".
Proeski was buried at the cemetery in his hometown of Krusevo.
"We are mourning because we have lost our best, the most talented young man whose voice made Macedonia well known.
We have lost him at a time when we need more people like Tose and his grace.
Macedonia and the Balkans lost an angel," Archbishop Stefan, head of the country's Orthodox Church, said at Wednesday's service.
