17/09/2007
By Gabriela Preda for Southeast European Times - 17/09/07
The centre-right New Democracy party has won Sunday's (September 16th) elections in Greece, gaining a new mandate for the government of Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis. 
However, the party's majority will be sharply trimmed as a result of the vote, which saw a significant increase in support for smaller political formations.
With 41.8% of the vote, New Democracy grabs 152 of the 300 seats in parliament, down from 165. 
Its main rival, the left-wing PASOK, received 38.1% which equals 102 seats -- a loss of 15.
Karamanlis called the early elections in August, hoping to win a strong show of support from the voters for tough reforms aimed at streamlining the state bureaucracy. 
Instead, his government -- shaken recently by a securities fraud scandal and criticism over its response to the devastating wildfires of August -- will enjoy only a two-seat edge.
In a brief TV address Sunday night, Karamanlis nevertheless said he had received a "strong mandate for a new and dynamic beginning". 
He said he felt a "double responsibility" for making his government better and avoiding mistakes in the future.
For PASOK and its leader, George Papandreou, the results were a catastrophe. 
The party was unable to capitalise on anger over the fires, with many voters blaming earlier PASOK governments as well as the current ruling party. 
Papandreou, the son and grandson of former prime ministers, has suffered his second election defeat in four years and now faces pressure to step down.
Former Culture Minister Evangelos Venizelos and a former European Commissioner, Anna Diamantopoulou, are expected to mount challenges to his leadership at an upcoming party vote.
"PASOK fought a strong battle but it could not win. 
We all had responsibilities in this battle, myself above all," Papandreou said in his concession speech Sunday.
Small parties have seen their fortunes rise for the first time in recent history, after two decades dominated by the two main parties and the political dynasties of Karamanlis and Papandreou. 
The Communist Party gained 10 seats for a total of 22, winning 8.2% of the vote, while the Radical Left Coalition won 5% and 14 seats -- up from six in the last parliament.
The radical left has "recorded one of its best performances in its history since the return to democracy in 1974", Coalition leader Alekos Alavanos said, adding that the "fragile" Karamanlis government will face strong pressure.
Meanwhile, the far-right Popular Orthodox Rally (LAOS) party is entering parliament for the first time. 
With 3.8% of the vote, it gets 10 seats. 
"Greece belongs to the Greeks and our main objective is to make sure this doesn't change," said LAOS leader George Karatzaferis, whose party advocates immigration quotas and opposes Turkey's bid to join the EU.
The rise in support for smaller parties reflects frustration on the part of Greek voters, according to the daily Kathimerini. 
"A huge portion of the electorate had been feeling deeply dissatisfied by the recurrent defeat of expectations" by both New Democracy and PASOK, the newspaper wrote.
