17/09/2007
(B92, Blic - 17/09/07;
Reuters, DPA, International Herald Tribune, The New York Times, B92 - 16/09/07;
Beta, B92, Serbian Government - 15/09/07;
Balkan Investigative Reporting Network - 14/09/07)
NATO wants Serbia in its ranks, but the Balkan country is the one to decide whether it wants to join, the Alliance's spokesman said on Monday (September 17th) following conflicting messages from Belgrade.
"In (Secretary-General) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer's opinion, NATO cannot afford the luxury of leaving Serbia out of its circle, for it is a very important -- if not the most important -- country in the region," James Appathurai told the daily Vecernje Novosti.
"If Serbia wants to join NATO, that's fine with us, as we have the procedure and mechanisms to make that happen.
But if it doesn't want to be our member, that is fine as well," he added.
His comments came after Serbia's top leaders expressed opposing views about the country's ties with the 26-nation pact.
Speaking at a meeting of his Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said his party opposes the country ever joining the Alliance.
Serbia "should retain full military neutrality, and that its state and national interests require it not to join any military alliances," Kostunica said.
"There is no contradiction between joining Partnership for Peace (PfP) and declining to be a NATO member," he added.
The DSS has accused NATO members of preparing to recognise a unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo, and has praised Russia for opposing former UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's status plan, which would put the province on the road to statehood.
Serbian President Boris Tadic and his Democratic Party have criticised the anti-NATO rhetoric coming from their coalition partner.
"Serbia's strategic goal is for its army to be an active participant in Euro-Atlantic integration and the PfP, and to be honoured and respected among its friends and allies," the president said at an army ceremony Saturday in Belgrade.
Signalling a deepening of the rift between the DSS and DS, which along with the G17 Plus formed Serbia's new government in May, an official from Kostunica's party criticised Tadic's remarks.
"The president has no authority to make or carry out foreign policy (and he) is well aware of his constitutional position and capacities," DSS spokesman Branislav Ristivojevic said on Sunday.
Tadic is obliged "to respect official state policy, and the Serbian government has never decided that this state should join NATO", Ristivojevic added.
The criticism fueled speculation that clashes between the DP and DSS could lead to the government's collapse.
However, an official with Tadic's party downplayed the quarrel.
"The DS understands Ristivojevic's stance as his personal one and not as a stance that could be and should be interpreted as a stance of the state," DP spokeswoman Jelena Markovic said.
