15/08/2007
(Zaman, Independent, The Guardian - 15/08/07; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, BBC, FT, VOA, RFE/RL - 14/08/07)
Turkey's foreign minister said on Tuesday (August 14th) that he will abide by the constitution and the principles of secularism if he wins the presidential election.
"If I am elected, the constitution will be my guide," Abdullah Gul, 56, said less than 24 hours after the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) named him as its candidate for head of state. 
"Protection of secularism is one of my basic principles. 
Nobody should worry about this."
The AKP's decision late Monday to renominate Gul, whose first presidential bid failed in May, followed the party's landslide victory in the early parliamentary elections last month. 
It now has a comfortable 341-seat majority in the 550-member assembly.
Parliament is scheduled to hold the first round of voting for incumbent Ahmet Necdet Sezer's successor on August 20th, the second on August 24th, the third on August 28th and the fourth and final round on September 1st.
Under Turkish law, a presidential candidate needs to obtain two-thirds majority support in the first two ballots to win the post. 
Gul is widely expected to be elected in the third round, when a simple majority will suffice. 
The rules also set an attendance quorum of at least 367 deputies for the results of the voting sessions to be valid.
Gul's earlier bid collapsed amid a boycott by the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP). 
As a result of the boycott, the quorum was not met and the Constitutional Court declared the proceedings invalid.
With less than a week now until the start of the new election process, Gul appeared keen Tuesday to prevent a similar outcome. 
Shortly after presenting a formal petition for his candidacy to Parliament Speaker Koksal Toptan, he launched talks with opposition party leaders.
His first meeting was with Devlet Bahceli, the leader of the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP). 
Following a five year break, the party returned to parliament after the July 22nd snap elections. 
It came in third after the AKP and CHP, winning 70 seats.
Both the MHP and the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP), which has 22 seats, reportedly have decided to attend the first voting session on Monday.
If that happens, Gul can meet the quorum requirement even if the CHP's 99 deputies boycott it. 
Characterising the AKP as a threat to secularism in Turkey, the CHP opposes his bid for the presidency because of Gul's roots in political Islam. 
It has refused to meet with him.
The ruling party has shown "how determined they are to convert the modern Turkish state into a religion-based administration", said a senior CHP lawmaker, Onur Oymen.
On Tuesday, CHP deputy head Mustafa Ozyurek vowed that the party would boycott receptions and foreign trips if Gul wins the presidential election.
