16/01/2008
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 16/01/08
Local media reported on Wednesday (January 9th) that -- starting on February 1st -- Macedonia will introduce visa restrictions for citizens of more than 140 countries as part of the country's obligations as an EU aspirant.
The new regulations will require visitors to use the same procedures as when entering an EU country. 
The task of issuing visas will be transferred from border offices to diplomatic representative offices.
Macedonian officials also plan to require that visitors provide a guarantee letter or an invitation from the person or institution sponsoring them to verify the circumstances and the purpose of the planned visit.
"The goal is for the procedures to follow European standards. 
The elimination of visa issuing at the borders, except for in very urgent cases, is one of the main conditions of the EU to reduce the number of visas issued in border offices, which exceeded 75,000 last year," Skopje's Koha newspaper quoted Foreign Ministry spokesman Sasho Kokallanov as saying.
Many Albanian citizens use Macedonia as a transit country to reach Kosovo and tourists use it to reach Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey or other countries in the East. 
Most of these visitors will now need to obtain a transit visa through the Macedonian embassies. 
Students and professionals who want to study or attend courses in Macedonia will also have to follow the same procedure.
Media in Albania have criticised the move, calling it a disservice to tourists and businesspeople who frequently travel to Macedonia. 
Prec Zogaj, chairman of the Albanian parliament's foreign policy committee, says the restrictions are "a step back to an old regime".
An official press release from Albania's foreign ministry said the visa regime between Albania and Macedonia is still under negotiation. 
In fact, Zogaj also said Skopje and Tirana had launched talks in December to make sure that entry visas would continue to be issued at the border.
"We remain interested in retaining the present regime as we have much in common with Macedonia. 
We have the same aims regarding integration in NATO and the EU and it would be strange for Macedonia to act unilaterally when negotiations are under way," he said.
No visa regime will be introduced for the countries of the former Yugoslavia because some are already EU candidates and others have visa facilitation agreements with the Union.
Additionally, Kosovo residents will not need visas as long as they hold passports issued by UNMIK. 
However, if Kosovo becomes independent and issues its own passports, a new visa regime will be introduced for them, as well.
