15/01/2008
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 15/01/08
A bomb attack that killed six civilians -- including five teenage students -- in the centre of the mainly Kurdish-populated southeastern city of Diyarbakır on January 3rd was targeted at a military convoy. 
More than 60 people were injured in the blast.
Pro-Kurdish parliament member Aysel Tugluk -- once criticised by Turkish nationalists as being the mouthpiece of the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) -- strongly denounced the bomb attack, and called for a political and democratic solution to the Kurdish problem.
"We have the responsibility to put an end to this limitless violence," Tugluk wrote in an open letter, published by the Turkish newspapers. 
"We have political representation at the parliament; so we have a chance for a political solution. 
What is the meaning of a bomb attack, at the centre of the city, in such a sensitive political climate?"
Tugluk, a former co-chairperson of the Democratic Society Party (DTP), stressed that further violence would only eliminate the party from Turkey's political scene.
Late last year, the Turkish Constitutional Court filed a case to abolish the DTP for its alleged links with the PKK and its alleged policies against the unity and territorial integrity of the country. 
The DTP has consistently dismissed accusations that it is controlled by the PKK. 
However, the party has failed to condemn any violent attack by the group, and has refrained from describing the group as terrorist.
The bomb attack in Diyarbakir, however, has increased pressure on the party. 
Dozens of pro-Kurdish NGOs in Diyarbakır protested the attack last week.
Security forces have detained seven suspects, including PKK member Erdal Polat, who has confessed to his role in the bombing. 
Polat, who reportedly joined the group six years ago, said the attack was planned as a response to Turkey's recent operations against PKK bases in northern Iraq.
Since December 2007, the Turkish General Staff has confirmed three air strikes conducted with US intelligence assistance against PKK camps in northern Iraq.
On Thursday, the United States designated the Kurdistan Freedom Falcons (TAK), a group linked to PKK, as a terrorist group, subjecting it to US financial sanctions. 
According to the US State Department, TAK is responsible for multiple terrorist attacks in Turkey, resulting in several deaths
"With this designation, the United States reaffirms its commitment to fight terrorism in co-operation with its NATO ally, Turkey," State Department spokesman Tom Casey said.
