14/08/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European times in Ankara -- 14/08/07
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul is once again his party's candidate for president.
His renomination was announced on Monday (August 13th) after a cabinet session and a subsequent meeting of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP)'s central committee.
AKP Vice Chairman Edibe Sozen told reporters that Gul will visit opposition leaders Tuesday to try to bolster support for his bid.
He is then expected to announce his candidacy formally.
Gul was first put forward for the post in April, sparking Turkey's most serious political crisis in a decade and forcing the government to call early parliamentary elections.
The AKP won those elections handily, attracting more than 46% of the vote.
Political observers say the AKP believes voters have given it the mandate to renominate Gul.
Pressure from grassroots party members is also seen as a factor in the decision.
Secularists in Turkey are uncomfortable with the idea of Gul as president because of his political roots.
He is a former member of the now banned, Islamic-oriented Welfare Party, and his wife wears a headscarf -- a choice generally interpreted as a symbol of political Islam.
Critics have urged the ruling party to nominate a consensus candidate who does not have an Islamist background.
The main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) signaled on Monday that it will maintain its fierce stand against Gul's candidacy.
"Our opposition … has nothing to do with styles of dress," CHP leader Deniz Baykal said.
"Gul has problems with the founding ideas of the Turkish Republic.
He has displayed many examples in the past couple of years which oppose these basic principles of the Republic.
How can we let him determine as president the future appointments at the judiciary or university?"
In the Turkish parliamentary system, the government is responsible for defining and carrying out policies, but the head of state also has significant powers.
Every law and formal decision emerging from parliament goes to the president for approval, as do the appointments of key officials -- including generals, governors, ambassadors, police chiefs, ministry department heads and their deputies, and university rectors.
On Monday, AKP deputy Faruk Celik said Gul is the best candidate for president.
The criticisms against him are "unfair", he added.
Another senior party official, Murat Mercan, described Gul as a statesman with great experience.
"I believe he would be very successful," he said.
The official nomination period ends at the weekend.
The first round of voting is expected next Monday.
The second round is scheduled for August 24th, the third for August 28th and the final and fourth round for September 1st.
The AKP has 341 deputies in the 550-member parliament – more than enough to elect its candidate.
However, the rules require that at least 367 deputies be present at the voting sessions.
The far right Nationalist Movement Party confirmed on Monday that it will participate in the general session, thus ensuring the 367-member threshold is met.
The party, however, is planning to announce its own candidate, rather than supporting Gul.
