07/10/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/07/11
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci cites organised crime as the chief problem plaguing the Serb-dominated north, and vows to counter it and parallel structures operating there.
But, he says in an interview with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku, any solutions begin with talks between heads of state.
SETimes:
Can Kosovo enter into dialogue with Serbia on political issues?
If so, how, with what international mediation?
Hashim Thaci:
If the dialogue on political issues means the opportunity to discuss the political status of Kosovo, then the permanent answer is NO.
This is due to several years of dialogue and negotiations between Kosovo and Serbia with the mediation of the international factor on the political status, which ended in 2007 when we got the Comprehensive Plan for the Final Status of Kosovo proposed by the UN mediator, former [Finnish] President Ahtisaari.
As a consequence of this plan, and in co-ordination with the international community, Kosovo declared its independence and today operates as an independent and democratic state, internationally accepted by the most powerful states of the world.
SETimes:
In what format would Kosovo have talks with Serbia on political issues?
What level of representation would Kosovo have in such a case?
Thaci:
I threw out the possibility for a political dialogue on issues related to the status of Kosovo, its territorial integrity and its internal constitutional regulation.
We already have a process of dialogue, which I think is the appropriate mechanism to continue treating and solving the issues of common interest to both countries.
But if it is believed it is the time to conclude the dark chapter of Kosovo-Serbia relations, and if it asked for a symbolic meeting of the leaders of the two states, I would be able to contribute to the opening of a new chapter of peace and co-operation between the two states.
We, as state leaders, have an obligation to sit down and extend the hand of reconciliation to one another, for the sake of the common European future.
But such a meeting, under any circumstances, does not imply political dialogue on closed political issues.
Now is the time that the past be closed and that Kosovo and Serbia as two independent states move forward Euro-Atlantic integrations.
SETimes:
The situation in the north seems to be still without a final solution.
How do you see the final solution of this problem?
Thaci:
In the north, it is not about final solutions or elementary solutions.
The north of Kosovo can not be different from the south, east or west of Kosovo.
So, the north remains an integral part of the territorial integrity of Kosovo.
There is no dilemma on that.
The problem lies in the fact that in this part of our territory, organised crime is tolerated and the Serbian structures that are acting illegally in Kosovo with an unimpeded functioning, have repeatedly threatened and violated the state sovereignty of Kosovo.
Why was this allowed to happen for more than a decade?
The reasons are many but none of them are sustainable.
Therefore, the Kosovo government has undertaken concrete actions to end organised crime, smuggling, and to disband the illegal structures of Serbia operating in Kosovo.
This action of ours is not easy and requires a lot of work and time.
However, the right is on our side and we will win.
Furthermore, our responsible operations enjoy strong support from the entire international community because they are actions in the service of establishing the rule of law and order, the affirmation of the territorial integrity of our state.
SETimes:
How will you treat the problem with the local Serbs in the north?
You have stated that you have contacts with them.
Thaci:
We have to be very patient and have understanding of the doubts and the mixed feelings of the citizens of the Serb community living in northern Kosovo in relation to their approach towards our institutions.
This is about our citizens who have been deceived for 12 years by Serbia in various forms.
In most cases, they were threatened, intimidated and forced to work for the interests of Serbia and not for their interests.
For years, they have been unfairly deprived to look to the future, and instead, they were offered the dark perspective of organised crime, led by certain individuals at the expense of the majority.
From this, they have not gained anything.
They have only become poorer and their lives seem hopeless as long as they will not be freed from the organised crime.
And here enters precisely the crucial role of the Kosovo government.
We, every day more and more, are restricting the possibility that ordinary criminals further terrorise the population that lives there.
The circle of organised crime will become smaller and smaller because the willingness of the citizens for a normal life is increasing.
With the change of this situation, we will increase our investments in the north, and will create conditions for a normal life without fear.
When that happens, we will ensure that we establish the new municipality of northern Mitrovica, and organise free elections, not only for this new municipality, but for the existing municipalities in northern Kosovo as well.
Only the democratic representation of Serbs living in the north is the guarantee that they will be able to integrate into Kosovo institutions as their brothers living in other parts of Kosovo -- whether in the south, east or west.
SETimes:
What are the future steps of Kosovo authorities in the north?
Will you be part of the future actions or it has been totally left in the hands of KFOR and EULEX?
Thaci:
Kosovo is an independent and sovereign state and it is not nobody's land.
There is nothing special about the next steps to be undertaken by the government of Kosovo.
Our steps in the north are the same as steps which could have been taken by the US or any European state.
So, they are steps towards establishing law and order and normalisation of life for our citizens.
Normally, all our actions are co-ordinated with international factors that are present in Kosovo, EULEX and KFOR, as long as these missions continue to be present in the framework of their mandates.
Co-operation for us is a great advantage and in no way represents an obstacle.
Kosovo, as an independent and democratic state, has embraced the values of Western civilisation and we are proud that we have become part of the democratic world.
