16/10/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb –15/10/07
Prime Minister Ivo Sanader addressed the UN General Assembly on Monday evening, saying Croatia "feels hurt" by the UN tribunal's decision in the Vukovar Three case.
The comparatively light sentences were a "mockery of post-conflict justice", the prime minister said.
Judges at the Hague-based tribunal sentenced Mile Mrksic to 20 years in prison for his role in the massacre of hundreds of Croats after the fall of Vukovar to Yugoslav Army forces in 1991.
A second defendant, Veselin Sljivancanin, received five years for torture, but was cleared of the most serious charges against him.
A third, Miroslav Radic, was acquitted.
"We were shocked 16 years ago when the Vukovar tragedy happened," Sanader said.
"We were shocked again, 16 years later, when we heard the verdict in The Hague." He said Croatia seeks justice for all war crimes victims and wants to help UN diplomats gain a better understanding of what happened at Vukovar.
For most Croatians, Vukovar symbolizes the country's suffering during its war for independence from the former Yugoslavia.
The city was under siege for 87 days, and finally fell in November 1991.
The civilian population fled.
Yugoslav Army forces and Serb paramilitary units, however, seized hundreds at the local hospital and transported them to a nearby farm, where they were systematically executed.
Political analysts see Sanader's speech as having more domestic than international importance.
The General Assembly can do little about the UN court's verdict other than discuss it.
However, since the November 25th parliamentary elections in Croatia are fast approaching, Sanader's address may have been meant to rally voters at home.
The president of the UN tribunal, Fausto Pocar, has rejected claims that the sentences were unfair.
In a letter to the UN, he accused Croatia of applying pressure on the court.
The final verdict in the case will come after the appeals procedure, and Zagreb should not be trying to exert influence while that procedure gets under way, Pocar said.
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte, however, was sharply critical of the sentences.
"The prosecutor finds it incomprehensible that someone who is convicted for the torture of 200 people can receive only a sentence of five years," her spokesperson said, referring to Sljivancanin.
