16/07/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times - 16/07/07
Women activists in Turkey are disappointed with the electoral lists, which they say severely undermine prospects for better representation of women in the upcoming July 22nd parliamentary election. 
The under-representation of women continues to be a major problem in Turkey, despite a growing interest and participation of women in politics.
Women candidates are expected to get around 30 seats in the 550-member parliament in next week's elections – compared to the 24 seats they currently hold. 
Turkey ranks 127th in the world in terms of women in parliament.
In the past two months, women in Turkey participated in huge rallies in defence of secularism and against former Islamist Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul's presidential candidacy. 
Women activists and NGOs constitute one of the most dynamic and influential segments of Turkish society.
Now, women activists say that under-representation of women in parliament is a major concern, hindering other efforts to overcome gender disparities. 
Without ensuring better representation at the assembly, further progress cannot be achieved in putting an end to honour killings, violence against women and increasing participation and the role of women in all spheres of life.
The Association for the Education and Support of Women Candidates (Kader) launched a media campaign in March that asked, "Should we have a mustache to become part of the parliament?" The campaign received widespread support, and political parties promised to include more women candidates in their ranks.
"However, the finalised electoral lists are a big disappointment for us," said Hulya Gulbahar, a prominent women activist and the head of Kader. 
"The leaders of political parties, who had a final say on the lists are simply telling us nothing other than 'Yes, you should have a mustache to become a deputy' ".
Turkey's ruling Islamic-oriented Justice and Development Party (AKP) has included 62 women in its electorate lists, but only 12 are in positions for election. 
The main opposition, the Republican People's Party (CHP), included 55 women candidates on its lists, but only 13 are expected to be elected, according to Kader.
The Democratic Party, the third party expected to pass the 10% threshold in the general elections, has 55 women candidates with just eight placed in the first three positions.
Gulbahar said that, although there were some women activists among these candidates, the majority are personal friends or wives of party leaders. 
"The aim of putting these women on the lists is just for show. 
Political parties have avoided including members of women NGOs and women activists on their lists. 
Even if there would be 50 women deputies in the next parliament, their contribution to our efforts to eliminate gender disparities would still be limited," she said.
Gulbahar said the efforts will continue with a nationwide campaign to boost the inclusion of women in political party structures and local politics.
