13/08/2007
By Igor Jovanovic and Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times – 13/08/07
The EU representative of the so-called international troika, which is mediating the new round of talks between Belgrade and Pristina, said on Sunday (August 12th) that partitioning Kosovo may be part of the solution of the province's final status. 
The West and Russia previously ruled out any division of the province along ethnic lines fearing that it might encourage separatist movements elsewhere in the Balkans.
However, EU representative Wolfgang Ischinger told reporters that the troika would endorse any agreement between ethnic Albanians and Serbs, and would not rule out anything. 
"We are urging both sides to think outside the box. 
If both sides repeat their classic positions, there is little hope for compromise or bridge-building," Ischinger said.
The Contact Group's negotiating troika -- Ischinger, US representative Frank Wisner and Russian member Aleksandr Botsan-Kharchenko -- were in Belgrade and Pristina at the weekend. 
The three diplomats held talks with local leaders to decide how to proceed with the new round of negotiations, which will be run by the six-member Contact Group that includes US, Russian, German, French, British, and Italian representatives. 
Ischinger said that the negotiators plan to continue with the talks as soon as possible. 
The group's next meeting officials could take place by the end of the month.
After the Belgrade visit on Friday, Ischinger told Belgrade's TV B92 that the troika must submit its report to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon by December 10th. 
However, he did not say whether that meant the date will also mark the deadline for finalisation of the talks.
According to Wisner, the three learned from Serbians and Albanians their aims and platforms for future. 
"We have a sense of urgency. 
Peace is important and all of us are committed to it."
"We explained our mission …we are here to establish the road towards the status. 
We will accept [any solution] the sides agree on," Wisner said, adding that the troika was not in Pristina to make proposals.
"I hope that in coming months we will closely work and effectively will close this process," Botsan-Kharchenko said, calling for compromise between both sides.
Serbian President Boris Tadic said after the meeting that the new negotiations will open the way for a compromise acceptable to both sides, which, according to Belgrade officials, must be confirmed by the UN Security Council. 
Both the Serbs and the Russians feel that the new compromise cannot be based on former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan because it "has fallen through in the Security Council".
In March, after nearly a year of fruitless negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina, Ahtisaari presented the UN Security Council with the option of supervised independence for Kosovo, whose population is 90% Albanian. 
Pristina and the western countries accepted the plan, but it was rejected by Belgrade and Russia. 
Russia blocked the plan's adoption in the Security Council, after which the new talks were handed off to the Contact Group.
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu told the troika that independence, territorial integrity and Ahtisaari's package are non-negotiable. 
"Independence is the political will of Kosovo's people and it is not negotiable,'' the province's leaders said. 
''Kosovo's territorial integrity is untouchable and not negotiable.''
"The Kosovo delegation expressed their commitment to continue co-operation with the Troika to finish this mandate, which will have only 120 days," said Sejdiu, adding that Kosovo officials will demonstrate constructive co-operation in the talks.
