14/02/2008
(Reuters, AFP, DPA, AKI, BBC, VOA, Xinhua, Euobserver, B92, Slovenian EU Presidency - 13/02/08)
Recognising a unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo would be a "mistake", Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said in Slovenia on Wednesday (February 13th), reiterating Moscow's opposition to the province's secession from Serbia.
He made that statement following a meeting with top EU diplomats, including foreign policy chief Javier Solana, External Affairs Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner and Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, whose country currently holds the bloc's rotating presidency.
The talks at Brdo Castle outside Ljubljana focused on a new EU-Russian co-operation agreement and a number of other issues. 
While described by Rupel as "friendly and sincere", the discussions failed to bridge the gap between the positions of the two sides on the thorny question of Kosovo's future status.
Leaders of the province's 90% ethnic Albanian majority are widely expected to adopt a declaration of independence Sunday.
Backing Serbia in its opposition to that, Russia has blocked several Western-sponsored attempts at resolving the matter at the UN Security Council. 
Speaking ahead of the meeting, Ferrero-Waldner told reporters in Slovenia that the EU diplomats would try to convince Lavrov that Kosovo cannot remain in political limbo.
"The status quo (in Kosovo) cannot be maintained because we want stability in the area," she said. 
"We hope we will be able to convince Russia that the situation is unsustainable."
Lavrov's remarks after the meeting, however, made it clear that Russia would not budge from its long-held stance.
"Where our positions differ -- and differ fundamentally -- this is Kosovo, of course," he told reporters at a news conference. 
"Those differences have not been overcome, because they deal with fundamentals of international law."
On Thursday, the Security Council is holding an emergency meeting on Kosovo, called at Serbia and Russia's request. 
Lavrov said he did not "feel great optimism" about the results of the session.
The United States and the majority of EU member nations have signalled their readiness to recognise an independent Kosovo even a without UN endorsement. 
A handful of the Union's 27 members, however, remain opposed to such a move. 
Rupel indicated on Wednesday that it would be up to individual countries to decide whether and when to recognise Kosovo as a sovereign state.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said this week that his country would "annul all illegal acts in relation to a unilateral proclamation of this fake state". 
Belgrade has also been stepping up preparations to implement a set of -- yet publicly undisclosed -- retaliatory measures against Kosovo and countries that recognise its independence.
Although opposed to the province's expected secession, Moscow is not planning to follow suit by imposing sanctions against it or the EU, Lavrov indicated on Wednesday.
Kosovo is an European issue, a statement posted on the Slovenian EU presidency website cited Rupel as saying. 
An indirect confirmation of this, he said, was UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's statement earlier this year that he expected an enhanced EU engagement in the region.
Stressing that Kosovo is a unique case, Rupel also said that it should not encourage separatist movements in other parts of Europe to seek a similar solution.
