10/01/2005
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 10/01/05
It’s a picture that anyone who’s picked up a few books on the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has seen: a snapshot of the smiling, attractive young blonde woman named Suada Dilberovic, who was killed in Sarajevo on the day that fighting broke out in the city in 1992.
In this case, however, the picture of the young student is not part of a book about the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, but part of a project being undertaken by organisations in the three countries that were ravaged by the violence in the 1990s. 
The goal is to document what happened and thus try to come to terms with it.
"What we’re trying to do here is to show the fate of the victims, and you get a picture of the crime if you see a picture of the victim," said Mirsad Tokaca, the head of Sarajevo’s Research and Documentation Centre.
The Sarajevo centre has joined forces with Zagreb’s Centre for Research and Documentation and Belgrade’s Humanitarian Law Centre to create an enormous database that will include, among other things, the fates of victims and the stories of survivors. 
The project, called Documenta, is funded by the Norwegian government and the Soros Foundation, among others, and the project heads plan to sort the victims -- civilian and military -- by ethnicity and municipality, as well as to list cultural and religious buildings that were damaged or destroyed.
On a recent visit to the centre’s office in Sarajevo, a handful of young employees were patiently entering data into computers -- photographs, birth dates, death dates, the circumstances under which the person died. 
Tokaca said the information is gathered by either work in the field, or by already-existing documentation. 
Those involved with the project say it has to be done before the region can move on.
"There have been so many lies and so much manipulation. 
We don’t need any lies after this horrible war," Tokaca said. 
"If you don’t investigate crimes, they always remain an open question and a source for future clashes."
Vesna Terselic, of Zagreb’s Centre for Research and Documentation, agrees. 
Claims from people today that "their side" didn’t commit atrocities can be compared to similar claims that arose after World War II, she said, noting that people have argued for years over the number of Serbs, Jews and Roma killed at the Jasenovac camp run by the Nazi puppet regime in Croatia during WWII. 
Tito's Yugoslavia sought to bury the issue -- but that only provided extra fuel for the fire when ethnic warfare erupted during the 1990s, many historians say.
"We would really like these disputes to end so that we can actually start a discussion on what really happened," Terselic said. 
"[It will be helpful to] journalists, researchers and historians, and we hope that in the future there’ll be a common memory inside our countries, because for now we have divided memories."
Besides developing compatible databases on wartime events, the organisations involved are also monitoring war crimes trials in Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro, and offering direct support to victims and witnesses in those trials. 
Their fourth project, creating an oral history, is still being designed.
At some point, the databases will be available on the Internet, as well as in paper form. 
Project leaders are envisioning the database as one day being a good resource for prosecutors and defence attorneys in the region as more and more local courts try war crimes closer to home -- because the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is slated to close its doors in 2010.
Another possibility in the future is that Documenta could be a regional storehouse for ICTY after the tribunal shuts down. 
A great deal of material that was gathered for particular cases came from organisations in the region, said Terselic, so it would make sense that it be returned and made available for judges, prosecutors and other legal professionals, because completed ICTY cases are often relevant for procedures in the region.
"Where will the tribunal documentation go when tribunal closes in 2010 -- is it going to be buried somewhere in New York?" she said. 
"I think it’s important that the documentation is placed somewhere in this region and made available to people of this region -- it’s very precious documentation."
It will be up to the ICTY Registry to eventually decide what happens to the tribunal’s records. 
A spokesperson for tribunal head prosecutor Carla Del Ponte, however, said that the documentation centres for now could help debunk myths perpetuated by writers of dubious history books, writers who also ignore rulings handed down by the tribunal.
"Look at the textbooks on history from the different parts of the former Yugoslavia and then you will find an answer to the question of the need for those initiatives," said Florence Hartmann in an e-mail from The Hague. 
"Except for those NGOs trying to document the crimes and events that occurred during the war … many of the history textbooks are still conveying lies and denying established fact."
Tokaca said the project would work with any legal professional that needed the documentation, including BiH’s war crimes chamber, which is slated to start work in January.
"We’ll help them and co-operate with them like we’ve done with the tribunal," he said. 
"The tribunal, the higher Bosnian courts, the local courts -- these are the main sources of satisfaction for victims, and what we’re doing is to help the courts. 
The rule of law is the only means in which we can build a country."
Documenta is also the first time that locally-run civil society organisations in these countries have begun working together on such a large common project, Tokaca said, adding that he hoped this would be a turning point that would make these organisations a force to be reckoned with, a force that politicians would have to take seriously.
"Institutions of civil society are very weak in all of this region," he said. 
"Civil society is not an abstraction -- you need to have these institutions to have a strong influence on nationalism and on the nationalist-chauvinist (political) parties that are in power."
