11/12/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 11/12/07
Despite warnings last week from the EU, Croatian fishermen on Friday (December 7th) insisted that the country proceed with the controversial fishing zone in the Adriatic Sea.
The zone, which will cover 57,000 square kilometres, will protect stock in the sea, which Croatian fishermen say is being depleted by Italy's larger fishing fleet.
A law passed by the Croatian parliament years ago that establishes a protected fishery and ecological zone in the Adriatic Sea is expected to be implemented on January 1st 2008.
Last week, EU Enlargement commissioner Olli Rehn warned Croatia that the agreement -- which is in violation of an agreement with Italy and Slovenia -- would affect Croatia's chances of joining the Union.
EU foreign ministers meeting in Brussels this week reiterated their concerns about it.
Rehn reminded Croatian leaders that the agreement was a condition for granting Croatia candidate status.
He called the dispute "a very serious issue that would have negative ramifications on the EU accession negotiations" if not resolved.
Although the law has been postponed numerous times since its 2004 passage, it will now be automatically implemented because the new parliament -- which has yet to be formed -- will not be in session by the implementation date.
No political body has authority to step in and halt implementation of the law.
The HSS-HSLS coalition, a centrist political union whose election votes will be decisive when the new government is formed, strongly defends the protected fishery and ecological zone.
Any party that chooses to form a government with the coalition -- as no party received the majority of the votes --will have to take the group's views on the subject into consideration.
Italy and Slovenia oppose the protected fishery area because their ships could not exploit the richer, Croatian part of the Adriatic Sea anymore without special permission.
This would mean significant financial damage for their fleet.
Croatia can apply a fishing zone on non-EU members, but their part in the fishing quotas is minor.
