13/09/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 13/09/07
Serbia's president and prime minister were on the road this week, pressing Serbia's stance on Kosovo and other issues. 
While Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica travelled to Brussels to meet with EU officials, President Boris Tadic was in Portugal, which currently holds the rotating EU presidency.
Kostunica, who held talks with European Commission head Jose Manuel Barroso and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, said he wants the EU to help prevent Kosovo from being separated from Serbia without a decision by the UN Security Council. 
The status issue must be resolved within the international legal framework, he said.
Serbia takes the threat of Kosovo making a unilateral declaration of independence very seriously, the prime minister said. 
"We hope that this will be prevented, which is why we are in Brussels," he added.
He denied a report in a Pristina-based, Albanian language daily, Koha Ditore, which suggested that Serbian officials, in discussions with their international counterparts, had floated the idea of partitioning the province. 
This is "simply a lie", Kostunica said. 
"Serbia has never thought about a division. 
Serbia is against a division of Serbia and therefore against a division of Kosovo."
He also dismissed the possibility that Serbia could give up Kosovo for the sake of quicker EU integration. 
"Serbia is not considering any kind of trade, because Kosovo cannot be traded. 
That is our principled position," he said.
Kostunica also offered a bleak view of conditions in the province, saying minorities there have no freedom of movement and that the refugee returns process has ground to a halt. 
He said Belgrade would not recommend that local Serbs vote in the November 17th local and parliamentary elections there.
EU officials responded by urging both sides to play a constructive role in the latest set of negotiations, being spearheaded by the EU-Russia-US "troika".
"We truly believe that palpable progress can be made over the next few months, so we invite both sides to demonstrate flexibility," Barroso said.
In Lisbon, Tadic concurred that Belgrade would not encourage Kosovo Serbs to vote in the November elections. 
Indeed, he added, it is inappropriate for the vote to be held while the status talks are in progress. 
"Serbia is calling for the postponement of these elections because of the ongoing negotiations," he said.
The EU's Solana disagreed. 
Speaking in Brussels, he said it would be better for Kosovo Serbs to participate.
