13/09/2007
(The Guardian - 13/09/07;
Fena, Javno.hr - 12/09/07;
AFP, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network - 11/09/07;
Xinhua - 10/09/07)
New talks on police reform kicked off in Sarajevo on Wednesday (September 12th).
They come amid warnings that Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) will see its progress towards EU accession derailed unless an agreement is reached by the end of the month.
The country wrapped up its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU in December.
However, Brussels has said the accord will only be signed once the current stalemate over police reform has been overcome.
If BiH politicians fail to reach a compromise within the next three weeks, "the international community will have to react", High Representative Miroslav Lajcak told the British daily The Guardian on Wednesday.
"There will be no business as usual.
We won't beat around the bush.
We'll name names."
Lajcak recently floated a compromise proposal, but it was immediately rejected by leaders of key Bosniak and Bosnian Serb parties.
The new talks, involving representatives of the eight main political parties, focus on the technical aspects of Lajcak's plan.
Haris Silajdzic, who heads the Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina, argues that it does not go far enough and would reward the Bosnian Serbs.
Silajdzic is a proponent of abolishing Republika Srpska (RS) and unifying BiH under a strong central administration.
RS Prime Minister Miroslav Dodik, who heads the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats, rejected the plan as "completely unacceptable," arguing it provided no grounds for a compromise and was "unconstitutional".
Others claim Lajcak's proposal, which has not been publicised yet, is not in line with principles set out by the European Commission (EC) for police restructuring in BiH, where each of the two entities -- RS and the Federation of BiH -- has its own police force.
The EU wants all legislative and budgetary competencies for all police matters to be vested at the state level.
It says there should be no political interference in the operational work of police and that police zones must be established on the basis of professional criteria, rather than on ethnicity.
"Diametrically opposed and incompatible views of the main leaders are crowding out moderate positions, which makes it difficult to reach agreement on the key issues," Lajcak said on Tuesday.
Top EU officials have rallied behind Lajcak, dismissing comments that his plan violates the three EC principles.
They are urging BiH politicians to show greater maturity.
Failure to reach an agreement will not only mean a delay in signing the SAA, but will push BiH's European perspective "further down the road", EU security chief Javier Solana said after talks with Lajcak on Monday.
Lajcak, who also serves as the EU special representative in BiH, has broad authority under the so-called Bonn Powers, including the right to sack elected officials.
He has warned that BiH will face dire consequences if the country's EU bid is derailed.
"There will be stagnation, isolation, and -- I would not even exclude -- destabilisation," The Guardian quoted Lajcak as saying on Wednesday.
