14/11/2007
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 14/11/07
The 47th International MESS theatre festival in Sarajevo ended on November 1st, after nine days of events featuring 19 plays, three concerts and three workshops.
More then 130 members of the press and theatre critics from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the region and Western Europe attended the festival, along with more than 500 attendees.
This year's standout play, which received the Jury's Golden Laurel Wreath Award for best overall performance, was the Greek tragedy "Oresteia" performed by the Deutsches Theater Berlin and directed by Michael Thalheimer, who was named the best director of the festival.
"The audience in Sarajevo is hungry for good theatre, and they really concentrated. 
You can sense it by the quality of the silence. 
I enjoyed it [the festival] very much," theatre director Eugenio Barba said. 
His cast from the Odin Teatret was awarded the Golden Laurel Wreath award for group achievement in the play "Andersen's Dream".
Festival director Dino Mustafic rated the event "the best of the best".
"We are always growing, and this festival is about integration and togetherness, and so is the audience," he explained.
He said the festival must not "fall victim to irresponsible and uncivilised" culture policies in BiH. 
"In the last couple of days we heard many times two words -- isolation and integration," Mustafic said, referring to the choice the country faces in light of the current political upheaval.
"Artists and citizens of this country have already decided that we want integration," he continued. 
He noted that the participation of so many international theatre companies reflects the readiness of BiH artists to integrate with the rest of the world.
The second event highlighting Sarajevo's cultural scene was the 11th Sarajevo Jazz Fest. 
The five-day festival closed on November 5th, after hosting performers from more than ten countries.
Festival Director Edin Zubcevic said he was happy with the success and growth of the festival. 
"We do everything in our power to fulfil and justify the great expectation that we are faced with now that the festival has been so successful."
Preparations are also under way for the 24th International Festival Sarajevo Winter 2008. 
This year's theme will be "Barricades Without Borders -- A New (Brave) World". 
The event, scheduled to take place from February 7th to March 21st, has been heralded as a traditional meeting place for artists and citizens from around the world.
