12/02/2008
(AP, Tanjug, Blic, B92 - 12/02/08; AFP, AP, DPA, AKI, Balkan Insight, Beta, B92, Serbian government - 11/02/08)
Young Serbs protested in Belgrade on Monday (February 11th) against Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's decision to block the signing of a co-operation agreement with the EU.
The demonstration, co-ordinated by several youth and student organisations, came amid a deepening political crisis in Serbia. 
On Thursday, the prime minister cancelled a regular cabinet session to prevent the EU deal from being approved.
According to reports, up to 2,000 people, most of them university students, joined Monday's rally, dubbed "No Alternative to Europe". 
They carried blue balloons and EU flags as they walked from the Faculty of Philosophy to the government building in the centre of Belgrade. 
Some of the protesters carried banners reading "Down with Kostunica, the new Milosevic".
They demanded an end to the current institutional deadlock and the immediate signing of the co-operation agreement with the EU, which focuses on trade, visa relaxation and educational exchanges.
They also urged authorities to arrest the remaining war crimes fugitives sought by the UN tribunal in The Hague. 
The EU has made the arrests a condition for finalising a Stablisation and Association Agreement with Serbia. 
The co-operation deal rejected by Kostunica had been offered as an interim step.
After failing to meet with any senior cabinet official, the students left their demands at the government's reception desk and dispersed, promising further protests if their requests are not met.
News agencies quoted participants as saying Serbia's EU accession process should not be allowed to come to a halt, regardless of what happens to Kosovo.
The leaders of the province's 90% ethnic Albanian majority are widely expected to adopt a declaration of independence, or of their intent to do so, on Sunday.
Kostunica and the majority of Serbian politicians, including pro-European President Boris Tadic and his Democratic Party (DS), are staunchly opposed to any such move, insisting that Kosovo is an integral part of Serbia and must remain part of its territory.
The two leaders and Parliament Speaker Oliver Dulic met on Monday to discuss Belgrade's response to the looming independence declaration.
