14/11/2007
(Blic - 14/11/07;
AP, AKI, UNMIK Local Media Monitoring, Beta, B92, BIRN - 13/11/07)
With less than a month until the ongoing negotiations to determine Kosovo's final status are scheduled to end, an outlawed ethnic Albanian paramilitary group appears to be growing in numbers, according to reports Tuesday (November 13th).
Created in 2001, the Albanian National Army (ANA) has reportedly grown into a 12,000-strong force, whose alleged goal is uniting all ethnic Albanian lands in the Balkans.
A report by the Kosovo daily Express said on Tuesday the group is "growing rapidly" in number.
ANA, which has claimed responsibility for a number of attacks in the region during the past few years, was declared a terrorist organisation by UNMIK in 2003 and is not allowed to operate in Kosovo.
Despite this, members of the group are patrolling towns in the province's north, along the border with Serbia proper, the AP reported on Tuesday.
Members claimed the move was aimed at preventing a potential Serb incursion, particularly by the Guard of Czar Lazar paramilitary formation.
That group -- also branded as a terrorist organisation by UNMIK -- threatened to respond to a possible declaration of independence by Kosovo with attacks against international authorities and local institutions.
An ethnic Albanian paramilitary commander in the Drenica region, identified as Preka, said the ANA was determined to resist such attacks.
"We shall defend this land to the last soldier," Preka said in an AP interview late Sunday, following a ceremony for 20 new recruits.
Preka is said to lead a group of between 40 and 50 paramilitaries.
ANA, he said, is not a terrorist organisation and is not planning to create problems for UNMIK and KFOR.
"We are in our land… but they (the Serb paramilitaries) want to come here," the AP quoted him as saying.
"Our enemies are Serbia and the Guard of Czar Lazar."
While legally still part of Serbia, Kosovo has been a de facto UN protectorate since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict in the province.
Its 90% ethnic Albanian majority is pushing for full independence from Serbia, while Belgrade insists that all it can grant Kosovo is broad autonomy.
The Kosovo Albanians have threatened to declare independence on or shortly after December 10th, when the ongoing, internationally-mediated negotiations on final status are due to end.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica reiterated on Tuesday that his country is determined to keep Kosovo within its borders and would appeal any decision to grant it independence.
Meanwhile, Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac said that the Serbian Army would respond "at the speed of lightning" to any attempts to stir violence in the country's south.
He added, "We will not hesitate a moment if anyone in southern Serbia attempts to cause instability."
