12/09/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 12/09/07
French President Nicolas Sarkozy has reiterated his opposition to EU membership for Turkey, but says he will not block the country's ongoing accession talks with the bloc.
"My position on Turkey has not changed.
I am against Turkey's full membership, and I have also told this to Turkish Prime Minister [Recep Tayyip] Erdogan," Sarkozy said, following a meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
"My suggestion is now focusing on 30 policy chapters in Turkey's talks with the EU, which will lead us to a special partnership."
The French president added that he opposed opening the remaining five key policy chapters, which he says are based on assumption of full membership.
Sarkozy repeatedly said during his election campaign that he was adamantly opposed to Turkey's entry into the bloc.
He argued that Turkey is not a European country and would weaken a politically strong Europe.
However, he has since given conditional support to the accession talks.
One of his demands is that a committee of 10 to 12 "wise men" be established to consider Europe's future and the bloc's final borders.
The committee would present its findings before the 2009 European elections.
During Monday's talks, Merkel backed the idea of such a committee, but stressed that the focus should not be "exclusively" on Turkey.
Like Sarkozy, Merkel is personally against full membership for Turkey and has urged a "special partnership" as an alternative.
However, her coalition partner, the Social Democrats, are in favour of Turkey joining the EU.
Merkel has said she will respect past agreements with Turkey, and will support open-ended EU accession talks with the country.
EU leaders decided to open accession talks with Turkey in 2004, with a full membership perspective, before Merkel took office.
The process has suffered setbacks since then, however, and Turkey has so far successfully concluded only one of the 35 negotiation chapters with the EU.
In December 2006, Brussels froze the opening of eight chapters because of a Cyprus-related impasse.
France's opposition to opening five key policy chapters could make it extremely difficult for Turkey to make major progress in its bid.
In June, the European Commission suggested opening the chapter on economic and monetary union, saying Turkey is well-prepared in this area.
But France stood in the way, arguing that to discuss monetary union implies that Turkey will one day join the Eurozone.
Other chapters blocked by France cover agricultural subsidies and regional aid -- the EU's two biggest spending programmes -- as well as European citizenship rights for Turks and the country's place in institutions such as the European Parliament.
Turkey's new foreign minister and chief EU negotiator insists that Ankara will continue with reforms in preparation for the day when the bloc is ready to admit his country.
"Regardless of what chapters are opened, regardless of what chapters are closed, we will integrate our legislation as soon as possible and we will wait," Ali Babacan said.
The government has already adopted an ambitious domestic reform programme aimed at equipping the country to meet EU standards in most areas by 2013, regardless of what happens in the accession process.
