05/12/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 05/12/11
Petrit Selimi spoke with SETimes about Kosovo's foreign policy and its relations both with regional neighbours and the EU.
He says that improving Kosovo's image and persuading more countries to recognise its independence are twin goals.
SETimes:
What are Kosovo's current foreign policy objectives?
Petrit Selimi:
Kosovo's principle foreign policy objectives are memberships in the EU and NATO, as well as the UN.
This is a long-term process that involved integrated strategy of all stakeholders in foreign policy in Kosovo.
To achieve this, we work in several directions.
Firstly, with the involvement of Deputy Prime Minister Behgjet Pacolli, we continue advocating for the formal recognition of Kosovo, and this year we have had an increase in recognitions, almost a doubling.
Secondly, we try to address general prejudices or concerns surrounding Kosovo's statehood by non-recognisers, by employing tools of public diplomacy where no direct contact is yet possible.
Thirdly, we engage fully with the international community, especially the EU and the US, to make Kosovo a part of the web of diplomatic interactions.
The EU integration process, visa liberalisation as well as technical dialogue with Serbia are main features of the Euro-Atlantic integration processes.
SETimes:
During the summer, Kosovo was recognised by several new countries -- mainly in Africa.
What is Kosovo doing to get more recognition, and when do you expect the recognition phase to end?
What is the new strategy on global recognition?
Selimi:
Kosovo has been recognised by 13 countries so far in 2011 and has a bigger number of bilateral recognitions than Montenegro.
That being said, Montenegro didn't have to chase recognitions, as it is a member of the UN.
Kosovo will continue to advocate successfully for an ever-greater number of recognitions, but life doesn't consist of diplomatic verbal notes of recognition.
One must work hard to deliver economic reforms, enforce the rule of law, sustain diversity of opinion and ethnicity or religion, as well as establish a myriad of diplomatic ties that constitute a foreign service.
Kosovo is a state, de facto and de jure.
The principle dispute on recognition is with Serbia, which has to learn to live with the new reality peacefully and in a good, neighbourly atmosphere.
Kosovo has achieved remarkable progress in the three years since independence, with continuously high GDP growth, increased foreign direct investments and a very secure financial sector, being the least indebted country in Europe.
Society has also progressed -- any visitor can testify to this -- Pristina becoming a vibrant Balkan capital.
These things matter.
SETimes:
What is the foreign ministry doing to improve Kosovo's global image?
What programmes and projects have been established in the strategic communications arena with outside countries to assist in the image campaign?
Selimi:
Kosovo has inherited an image problem from the 20 years of the Milosevic dictatorship and the political status quo and the unbalanced migration.
The Kosovo government must continue to reform itself, deliver to citizens and continue to be a factor of peace.
No magic tricks are possible as some cultural prejudices will be inevitable, however unfortunate, in the present media landscape in Europe.
The ministry of foreign affairs (MFA) has approved a holistic approach to increase the overall reaction on all fronts, with all people of goodwill, and the possibility to help Kosovo.
In November, we [supported] two major conferences [involving] more than 100 different ministers, experts, MPs, and activists from the entire world.
We have also worked with several publications to develop tailor-made message dissemination.
There are certainly even more projects in the pipeline with top world foreign policy and cultural institutions such as European Council of Foreign Relations, the British Council, Chatham House.
For the first time ever, this year we have also attracted donor support for ideas that will help Kosovo on its path to improve the overall image.
SETimes:
Why has Kosovo not appointed ambassadors in Albania, Slovenia and Montenegro?
What is Kosovo's policy objective in the Balkans?
Selimi:
The appointment of ambassadors is a complex process that involves both several institutions within the state as well as the hosting countries.
Kosovo has brotherly relations with Albania, and in Slovenia, has a reliable and good partner;
the lack of ambassadors has not prevented the strengthening of ties with both countries.
Ties with Montenegro have also strengthened.
The new Kosovo law recognises Montenegrins as a minority and following necessary budgetary procedures in both countries, embassies will be open;
the political goodwill is already there.
Kosovo is dedicated to the Balkans due to family ties across the borders, friendships and large diaspora.
We also appreciate the role former Yugoslav republics have played in opposing Milosevic and supporting Kosovo's independence.
SETimes:
What will Kosovo gain from dialogue with Serbia regarding regional co-operation?
Will Kosovo be able to be part of regional initiatives?
Selimi:
Dialogue will be the only means of communication for Kosovo as it is striving to gain EU candidacy.
At every stage of our integration process we will have to dialogue and compromise with all 27 members of the EU.
We also must dialogue with Serbia, especially because we are right on principles and have nothing to lose at a table with the EU and Americans on the side.
Reciprocal recognition of diplomas, ID cards, license plates, energy and roaming agreements -- these are all direct gains for citizens from the dialogue.
The issue of Kosovo's equal participation in regional forums is also a fundamental condition for Serbia to fulfill according to the EU progress report, so we expect for the dialogue to resume so we can finally enter into the new stage of our relations as bordering states.
SETimes:
Will the next generation of appointed diplomats be political appointees and former political figures, or professional career diplomats?
Selimi:
Ambassadors will be selected on the merits and the role they can play in the countries they are based.
Kosovo has few, if any, career diplomats, so we must expand horizons to find the most adequate solutions.
I'm sure good proposals for ambassadors will be advanced to the president.
SETimes:
How would you describe Kosovo's current relationship with the EU, and how do you think the EU would answer the same question?
Selimi:
Kosovo is dedicated to its path to the EU.
This year has been, in a way, a cornerstone year since all institutions, from readmission officers in the tiny municipalities to the government ministers, have worked always having in mind the EU agenda and the Progress Report, and I believe more of this will come.
Kosovo will start the visa dialogue and will enter into a trade relationship with the EU.
For the rest, it's a question of the five non-recognisers, an issue related integrally to our success on other fronts, as I explained earlier.
SETimes:
What impact will the unrest in northern Kosovo have on relations with Belgrade?
Will Kosovo engage in dialogue with the Serbs living in northern Kosovo, regardless of Belgrade's direct involvement?
Selimi:
Unfortunately, a part of the Serbian government was hostile to Kosovo before and after the unrest.
Kosovo was within its rights to implement reciprocity measures or general law in all its territory, and Prime Minister [Hashim]Thaci took a correct decision to establish a presence of Kosovo police and customs at the two northern border posts, as they are at all other border gates with all neighbours.
Even if one refuses to recognise Kosovo, one cannot refuse the principle that Kosovo is a single legal and customs zone, as defined so by UN resolutions and UN Security Council decisions.
That being said, one can see that the government is engaged both in dialogue with Serbia under the auspices of the EU to implement measures that will normalise the relationship between two countries, as well as dialogue with Kosovo Serbs on implementation of Ahtisaari, which is the best path for going forward in closing the final chapters of relations between the two countries.
SETimes:
Is Kosovo ready to join NATO?
Will the lack of widespread state recognition preclude it from being considered as a NATO candidate?
Selimi:
Kosovo is still making the very first steps towards Euro Atlantic integration, in a very long road that will need reform.
NATO is in Kosovo, and in a way, Kosovo is thus integrated into the NATO security infrastructure, but formal steps [await us] in the months and years ahead.
We have noted progress in making a modern and dynamic Kosovo Security Force, and this will help us achieve the strategic objectives.
SETimes:
What relations do you have now with the Romanian government, and how do you consider its position towards Kosovo?
Selimi:
Romania is one of the five EU non-recognisers.
This year we have intensified our contacts with various sectors in Romanian public life, from civil society and media, to politicians and diplomats.
In the month of October alone, we had several visits by Romanian journalists, senators and opinion-makers.
We respect the opinions of the EU governments, but we also respectfully try to explain the position of the Kosovo government.
In three out of five non-recognisers, there will be elections in the near future and that could be another opportunity to advance our agenda.
Inevitably though, the vast majority of EU [members] that have recognised Kosovo will have to talk in earnest with the minority to consolidate the joint policy …, as the only way that will benefit both Serbia and Kosovo in their separate EU integration processes.
This can only be done in permanent dialogue among all stakeholders.
