10/01/2008
By Artan Mustafa for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/01/08
More than two months after elections were held, Kosovo has a new government.
Parliament gave its approval Wednesday (January 9th) to Hashim Thaci as the province's new prime minister.
His Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) has teamed up with the former ruling party, the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), in a bid to give Kosovo unified leadership as it seeks independence this year.
Critics, however, warn that the PDK and LDK -- bitter rivals for years -- may not be able to get along, and some say Thaci has made a costly mistake by failing to include other opposition parties.
Kosovo has the poorest economy in Europe and is characterised by high levels of political tension as well as corruption.
Thaci has pledged to regain citizens' trust in leadership and to boost economic hopes.
"We are at the most important crossroads in our history as a country," he said upon receiving parliament's endorsement.
"We are in preparations that at the beginning of this year will turn Kosovo into an independent state, a democratic country for all its citizens." Signaling his commitment to a multiethnic future for Kosovo, he also spoke in Serbian.
Thaci's PDK won 35% of the vote in the November 17th election, marking his first triumph at the polls since the Kosovo conflict.
The 39-year-old ex-guerrilla leader was chief of the Kosovar negotiating team at the Rambouillet and Paris Conferences in 1999.
He now becomes the fourth prime minister of Kosovo.
His government has 15 ministries.
The PDK heads seven and the LDK five, while two went to Serb parties and one to non-Serb minority representatives.
On the same day it approved Thaci's government, parliament also gave incumbent President Fatmir Sejdiu -- who leads the LDK -- a new five-year mandate.
Coalition talks between the two parties were tough.
They even caused a rift within the LDK, with many of its leaders requesting to stay in the opposition.
Problems were compounded when Thaci demanded that none of the former ministers be represented in the new government.
Some LDK deputies remain angry at their leader, Sejdiu.
They demonstrated this at Wednesday's parliament session by not voting in favour of his new mandate.
Political analysts say the Thaci cabinet looks capable.
"Based on educational level and civic background, this government looks fine.
But we have to wait and see if it will come forward with good governance," said Berat Buzhala, editor of the Daily Express.
Some opposition leaders, however, say the PDK-LDK coalition is fragile and likely to be dogged by internal disputes.
"If you [PDK and LDK] had come together earlier, the war would have had fewer victims and would have ended earlier, and independence would have come sooner," charged the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo's Naim Maloku, who mounted an unsuccessful challenge against Sejdiu for the presidency.
Nexhat Daci, the leader of another opposition party -- the Democratic League of Dardania -- is confident that the opposition will play a significant role.
"In numerical terms, the governing coalition is strong.
But relations are fragile and when the time for big decisions comes, the opposition will have its say," he predicted.
