12/09/2007
(Sofia Echo, Sega - 12/09/07; DPA, BTA, Sofia news Agency, Focus News Agency, Mediapool, Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs - 11/09/07; The Times of India - 10/09/07)
Further delays in the Kosovo status process could jeopardise peace in the Balkans, Bulgaria has warned, calling for concerted international efforts to end the current deadlock.
"The Kosovo issue remains the main challenge to regional stability in the Balkans," Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivailo Kalfin said Tuesday (September 11th) at an international conference in Sofia on security in Southeast Europe.
His words echoed the remarks made by Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev in an interview for The Times of India, published on Monday.
"The lack of clarity regarding the future status hampers the socio-economic development of Kosovo and puts at risk the peace and stability of the whole region," the Bulgarian leader said ahead of his official visit to India this week. 
"Any prolongation of the Kosovo status settlement can be harmful not only to the Western Balkans region but to the EU as well."
Speaking at the Sofia forum on Tuesday, Kalfin urged the international community to better co-ordinate its efforts and to push Belgrade and Pristina to quickly reach a compromise "through mutual concessions". 
However, he added, a solution should not simply be imposed on the two sides if they do not agree on it.
Bulgaria has previously expressed support for former UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's status plan, which calls for internationally supervised independence. 
Seeking full independence from Serbia, Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority has accepted the blueprint. 
Belgrade has flatly rejected it, saying all it can agree to is broad autonomy.
Officials in Sofia fear that a unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo, a decision to partition the province along ethnic lines, or moves towards its unification with another state could trigger violence and sow instability.
Should such developments occur, or should the current political limbo continue, riots similar to the ones in March 2004 could erupt, the head of Bulgaria's intelligence agency warned participants at the forum.
The continuing processes of disintegration in the former Yugoslavia, often accompanied by extremism and nationalism, the existing paramilitary formations and organised crime constitute the main threats to stability in Southeast Europe, General Kircho Kirov said.
The penetration and promotion of radical Islam in the region in recent years also pose a major security risk, he added. 
He said it was quite likely that sleeper terrorist cells have formed in the Balkans, including in Bulgaria.
Meanwhile, Kalfin stressed the key role Euro-Atlantic integration and regional co-operation play in ensuring peace and stability in the Balkans.
Albania, Croatia and Macedonia can count on Bulgaria's support and assistance in their efforts to join the EU and NATO, the minister said. 
He added that Serbia's European future should not be tied directly to the solution to the Kosovo issue and that Belgrade should be allowed to move quickly along its integration path.
