10/12/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 10/12/07
Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan and his Greek counterpart, Dora Bakoyannis, met in Athens on December 4th for talks that resulted in agreements on multiple military measures between the two countries.
Turkey and Greece agreed to establish a Joint Operations Unit to ensure participation in peace support operations under NATO, a Joint Land Force Unit to participate in the NATO Response Force -- a coherent, high readiness, joint, multinational force package, as well as a Joint Turkish-Hellenic Civilian Standby Disaster Response Unit.
The military measures also include high-level visits between members of the Greek and Turkish armed forces, as well as between the commanders of the heavily militarised zones along Greece's northeastern border with Turkey.
Babacan was very optimistic about further developing political, economic and security relations between the two countries. 
"Five new confidence-building measures -- [in addition to] the 19 previous measures -- are evidence of our joint political will to further strengthen our ties," Babacan said, adding, "The recently agreed on measures will bring a new dimension to our bilateral relations."
Bakoyannis highlighted the visit as "symbolising a new period in bilateral relations", and said that the newly elected governments in both countries will work harder to improve ties. 
She also expressed support for Turkey's EU membership.
An official visit to Turkey by Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis is expected to take place "very soon", likely in late January.
Although Turkey and Greece are traditional rivals, political relations have drastically improved in recent years, despite ongoing disagreement about airspace and territorial waters. 
The two NATO allies stopped just short of going to war in 1987 and 1996 over oil and gas exploration and a sovereignty dispute involving two tiny, barren islets in the Aegean Sea. 
Turkey's EU accession process, which started in 1999, has positively affected Turkish-Greek rapprochement.
Ankara and Athens have held 36 rounds of exploratory talks since 2002 to overcome their disagreements about airspace and territorial waters in the Aegean. 
Since 1999, the two countries have agreed on various confidence-building measures -- from minor steps in political and cultural dialogue to the recently agreed upon military co-operation.
In 2006, the two countries decided to establish a direct telephone line between the military chiefs of staff, a hotline between the operational headquarters of the two countries' air forces and a month's extension of a moratorium on military exercises in the Aegean.
The military chiefs of the two countries have also expressed a willingness to further develop dialogue and avoid tensions. 
Last year, Turkish Chief of General Staff General Yasar Buyukanit visited Greece, laying the groundwork for the proposed confidence-building measures.
Both countries' chiefs of general staff met again during the First Balkan Countries Chiefs of Staff Regional Conference in Thessaloniki in April. 
Additionally, joint exercises between Military Disaster Response Units of the two countries were conducted in Turkey in recent weeks.
