12/10/2007
(AFP, DPA, Fena, BIRN, Office of the High Representative - 11/10/07)
High Representative Miroslav Lajcak voiced pessimism Thursday (October 11th) that Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) will be able to sign its pre-accession treaty with the EU by the end of this year, given the continuing failure to agree on police reforms.
"We do not have an agreement," the top international envoy in the Balkan nation said after a new round of talks among the country's political leaders. 
"We do not have hope and we do not have a chance for this country to move toward Europe."
The EU has set Monday as a deadline for reaching an agreement. 
Otherwise, finalization of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) -- considered a major first step towards eventual membership -- will be delayed by at least another year.
Lajcak, who also serves as EU Special Representative in BiH, is scheduled to travel to Brussels on Monday to report to the bloc's foreign ministers on the situation. 
The EU's top diplomats are expected to issue a statement after the meeting.
The EU has long made it clear that it will not sign the SAA treaty until BiH's leaders agree on restructuring their country's police forces in line with European standards. 
Brussels wants police budgetary and legislative matters to be determined at the state level, an end to political interference in policing, and establishment of policing regions based on professional criteria, rather than ethnic considerations.
Currently, BiH's two entities -- Republika Srpska (RS) and the Federation of BiH -- have their own police forces, operating under different interior ministers.
Bosnian Serb leaders and their Bosniak counterparts have been sharply at odds. 
The Bosnian Serbs oppose proposals to allow local policing areas to cross inter-entity boundary lines, claiming this could lead to the abolition of RS. 
Bosniak leaders, meanwhile, have reacted against efforts to accommodate the Bosnian Serb stance.
Seeking to break the deadlock, Lajcak proposed a new police reform plan in late August, but the leaders of the two most influential Bosniak parties, Haris Silajdzic of the Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina (SBiH) and Sulejman Tihic of the Party for Democratic Action (SDA), rejected it right away. 
RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik followed suit immediately.
On September 28th -- two days before the previous EU-set deadline for an agreement on police reform -- Silajdzic and Dodik came up with a new joint proposal. 
But it failed to win support from the other six main parties involved in the police reform negotiations supported it, and the EU said it did not meet its three key principles.
Politicians were then given until October 15th to reach a compromise and remove the last obstacle for the signing of the SAA.
On Thursday, Lajcak said he had received another police reform proposal from the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina (HDZ-BH) and the Croatian Democratic Union 1990 (HDZ 1990).
Welcoming the initiative, the high representative said he had sent the proposed plan to the relevant Brussels institutions to verify its compliance with the EU principles. 
"Our first impression of the paper is positive. 
It seems to contain sufficient detail," said Lajcak. 
He noted, however, that the proposed deal must be backed by the needed "majority of relevant political parties in BiH".
None of the police reform proposals made over the past few months have been publicised and it was not clear if the HDZ-BH--HDZ 1990 one was discussed during the talks on Thursday.
