09/01/2008
(Blic - 09/01/08; AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, BBC, Deutsche Welle, Beta, B92 - 08/01/08)
Slovenia, new holder of the EU presidency, said on Tuesday (January 8th) that it wants Serbia's pre-accession accord with the 27-nation bloc finalised within weeks, but admitted that not all member states support the idea.
Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), which is seen as a major first step towards eventual membership in the Union, was initialed in November. 
EU officials then said that the country should show full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for the pact to be approved.
The Hague-based tribunal is still seeking the arrest and handover of four remaining war crimes indictees, including former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. 
While Karadzic's whereabouts are unknown, Mladic is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia.
"I am one of those who believe that the SAA should be signed as soon as possible, possibly by the end of this month, but some of our colleagues have to be persuaded that this is a good idea," Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel told reporters in Ljubljana on Tuesday.
Speaking after a meeting with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn later in the day, he said a special task force would be created to help speed up Serbia's accession to the EU. 
The group would include representatives from Slovenia and France -- which will assume the six-month rotating EU presidency on July 1st -- as well as other EU officials.
Speaking after talks Tuesday with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana in Brussels, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic voiced hope that the SAA will be signed on January 28th, when the bloc's top diplomats are due to hold their next meeting.
Some EU nations, such as Belgium and the Netherlands, have indicated their reluctance to allow Serbia to move forward on its accession path until the ICTY-sought fugitives, particularly Mladic, have been handed over to the tribunal.
Following his talks with Belgian Foreign Minister Karel De Gucht, Jeremic said Belgium would consider again its position on Serbia's SAA, ahead of that EU foreign ministers' meeting on January 28th. 
Signing the SAA requires the unanimous support of all member nations.
Last week, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica warned the EU that it "must choose" whether it will sign the SAA with Serbia or send a judicial and police mission to Kosovo.
While there has been no official EU reaction to Kostunica's statement, Rupel described that notion as a "false dilemma". 
He also reminded Belgrade that "it's not the EU that is endeavouring for Serbia to enter the EU," but that Serbia was the one seeking entry.
"I don't think there is a trade-off between the resolution of Kosovo's status and the integration of Serbia into the EU," Rupel stressed.
