10/07/2007
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 10/07/07
Dominic von Habsburg, a New York architect and son of the late Romanian princess Ileana, officially put the family castle -- known as Bran Castle -- on the market on July 2nd. 
Baytree Capital, a US-based investment company will represent the family in the sale. 
Though no fixed price was given, Baytree Capital CEO Michael Gardner told the New York Times that the sale price is expected reach over 99m euros, and will be sold to a buyer who "will respect the property and its history".
Romanian Minister of Culture and Religious Affairs Adrian Iorgulescu said that the castle will remain a Romanian tourist landmark. 
She said that according to the 2006 terms under which the castle was returned, the Romanian government has the first right to purchase the castle.
"I cannot say whether the government is interested in buying Bran Castle, but when Dominic von Habsburg notifies me, I will send a team of experts to evaluate the castle and establish the purchase price. 
If we don’t reach an agreement, then von Habsburg is free to sell it to anyone else," Iorgulescu said.
The castle was confiscated in 1948 by the former communist regime. 
In May 2006, Bran Castle was returned to von Habsburg and his two sisters -- Elisabeth Sandhofer and Maria-Magdalena Holzhausen -- who both reside in Austria. 
Under the term of the return, the family pledged to keep the castle open to the public as a museum until 2009. 
Von Habsburg, 69, last year offered to sell the castle to local authorities for 60m euros, but the offer was rejected.
A Romanian parliamentary sub-commission questioned the legality of last year's return of the castle to the family. 
According the their report, which will be submitted to the Chamber of Deputies in September, the return of the Bran Castle encroached on the legal and constitutional provisions regarding the right to ownership and inheritance, and calls for the measure to be annulled.
"When it comes to property confiscated by the communists, I, as a prime minister, don't have any problems with returning it," Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu said last month.
Iorgulescu said the transaction was approved by the Justice Ministry and a national agency for returning confiscated assets. 
"We are convinced that the property restitution was done correctly," he said.
Von Habsburg lived in the castle as a child when it was owned by his grandmother, Romania's Queen Marie, until 1948. 
The castle was then turned into a museum, and is now Romania's greatest tourist attraction, visited by almost 450,000 tourists annually.
The castle, built to stem the Ottoman invasion, is linked to the Wallachian prince Vlad Tepes, better known as Vlad the Impaler, who inspired Bram Stoker's 1897 novel ''Dracula", and who reportedly spent a night at the castle in the 15th century.
