10/09/2007
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 10/09/07
The Montenegrin government has unveiled a strategy aimed at reducing the country's dependence on energy imports and make fuller use of hydropower potential. 
The authorities call for investing 1.8 billion euros in a variety of projects between now and 2025.
The largest investments would be for the construction of new hydropower plants and energy networks. 
According to government experts, Montenegro currently uses only 17% of its hydropower potential, while importing one third of its energy.
Around 434m euros would be spent on building small hydropower facilities on the Moraca and Komarnica rivers. 
The plan also includes the revitalisation of a thermal power plant in Pljevlja, in northern Montenegro.
"With two hydro plants on the Moraca River by 2013, Montenegro could become an energy exporter," says Miodrag Canovic, deputy minister for economic development.
Due to lack of revenue, he said, the state will need to find strategic partners for new power plant construction.
"International tenders will be launched ... 
we will see which model is the best, and whether [the state] will have a share in ownership. 
Now all we know is that we don't have enough energy. 
If we obtain electricity, prices will be reduced," Canovic said.
If the plants are not owned by the state, they will be subject to rules requiring them to sell electricity only to Montenegro residents for a certain period of time, he added. 
Canovic expects a tender for the first five small hydro plants -- Rijeka Crnojevica, Rijeka Musovica, Podgor, Savnik and Lijeva Rijeka -- to be launched next September.
While the government insists on the need for new facilities, environmental activists disagree. 
They say not enough is being done to conserve energy.
Improved energy savings should come first, the environmental groups argue. 
Only after that should authorities consider building new plants, and even then the environmental impact should be calculated.
According to the government, however, Montenegro is in the process of improving environmental protection by bringing the country into line with EU standards. 
The economic development ministry says it expects the country's largest energy consumers -- the aluminium factory in Podgorica, the steel factory in Niksic, and the state railway -- to reduce consumption by 20% due to new technologies.
