10/09/2007
(The New Anatolian - 10/09/07; AFP - 09/09/07; Reuters - 08/09/07)
Days after its approval, Turkey's new government has signaled its intent to push ahead with EU-required democratic reforms.
"We have a very clear intention to change things in Turkey -- to make Turkish democracy a first-class democracy, make Turkey a truly democratic country where the rule of law works, where people exercise their freedoms, and where fundamental rights are respected," Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan said at an informal EU summit in Portugal on Saturday (September 8th).
Babacan had a private meeting with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, who urged Turkey to put reforms back on track.
"I don't only hope but I expect the government will immediately relaunch the reform process, especially as regards freedom of expression and religious freedom so that they can ... 
prove that they are making serious progress," Rehn told reporters.
He commended Turkey for emerging smoothly from a political crisis that pitted the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), which has roots in political Islam, against the country's secular elite and the military.
Military and secular opposition to the AKP's candidate for president forced early elections on July 22nd, which the ruling party won handily, taking 47% of the vote. 
With a strong new mandate, the party again tapped Abdullah Gul, who was foreign minister at the time, for the presidency.
He then approved Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's new cabinet, which won a vote of confidence in the 550-seat legislature on September 5th.
Babacan, who stepped in to fill the post vacated by Gul, became foreign minister only weeks before the European Commission (EC) is due to publish its annual report on Turkey's accession progress in November.
In its report last year, the EC voiced concern about lingering weaknesses in some areas, including freedom of expression. 
Turkey has repeatedly been urged to change or scrap altogether the controversial Article 301 in its penal code, under which scores of intellectuals have been prosecuted for "insulting Turkishness".
Many expect the report to be critical, due to a slowdown in reforms this year.
"I don't want to talk about a specific article of a specific law right now, but we are now working on a new constitutional framework which is going to be in line with the Copenhagen criteria," Babacan said, referring to the political criteria EU candidate countries must meet to join the bloc.
According to him, the aim of reforms is to ensure a better environment for people in Turkey, rather than to ensure an "excellent" EC report.
