12/11/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 12/11/07
Last week, the US Mission in Kosovo and the OSCE published a report on witness security and protection in Kosovo. 
It found the situation remains inadequate.
"Protecting witnesses from threats or intimidation has been and remains one of the greatest challenges for justice authorities in Kosovo," said OSCE Chief of Mission Tim Guldiman. 
"Despite a legal framework and increased measures for concealing the identity of witnesses in court proceedings, the number of witnesses willing to testify in court is still very limited," he said.
"Incidents of witness intimidation are recorded regularly," Guldiman said.
According to the report, improving witness protection in Kosovo will require new legislation, providing the statutory basis for a comprehensive witness protection programme -- including relocation of witnesses and their relatives, if necessary. 
Adequate funding is needed for the institutional structures that would implement such a comprehensive programme, it said.
All staff should be adequately trained in the key areas of witness security for which they are responsible, the report said. 
"Whenever possible, such training opportunities should be co-ordinated with other witness protection professionals in the region," it added.
"Without effective means to protect witnesses, whether they are victims or co-operating defendants, Kosovo cannot hope to make any significant progress in prosecuting organised crime or other serious offences," Guldiman told reporters.
Similar comments came from Sarah Lum, representing the US office in Pristina. 
"I hope this report will help Kosovo's institutions improve witness security and protection," she said.
The experience of many countries has shown that an effective fight against organised crime depends on criminals who are willing to co-operate with law enforcement officials and testify against co-conspirators, the US Mission and OSCE said. 
Such co-operation is impossible if prosecutors and law enforcement officials are unable to provide sufficient protection.
