08/08/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 08/08/07
Turkey and Iraq agreed on Tuesday (August 7th) to co-operate against the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) in northern Iraq.
"We signed a memorandum of understanding to end the PKK presence in Iraq," Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said at a joint press conference with his visiting Iraqi counterpart, Nouri al-Maliki.
"We agreed on the fight against terrorist organisations, including the PKK."
Maliki said that Iraq "will not allow the presence of these organisations on its soil.
We sincerely hope for co-operation in the field of security."
But the document fell short of Ankara's expectations.
Turkish leaders sought a comprehensive anti-terror accord that includes a number of concrete steps, such as exchanging intelligence, cutting off financial and logistical support to the PKK, blocking its media activities and allowing extradition of captured terrorists.
Maliki, however, said it was not within his power to commit Baghdad to such an agreement without first putting it before parliament and his cabinet.
Turkish leaders now expect the comprehensive accord to be signed in the next two months.
A senior Iraqi delegation would visit Ankara to complete the process.
Tuesday's memorandum makes it less likely that Turkey will launch a cross-border operation into northern Iraq in the coming weeks, analysts say.
The document describes the PKK as a terrorist organisation.
This is perceived as a positive step by Ankara, since some Iraqi officials have been reluctant to describe the group as terrorist.
Turkish diplomats said Maliki's visit marks a "new opening" in co-operation in the fight against terrorism and the PKK.
However, they say, much depends on the process in the coming weeks and implementation of the agreed-on measures.
Around 3,300 PKK militants are holed up in camps in mountainous northern Iraq, using the region to launch terror attacks in Turkey, officials in Ankara say.
Iraqi Kurdish leaders, who enjoy autonomy in northern Iraq, have objected to the idea of an Iraqi military operation against PKK camps.
The Turkish military charges that the forces of Massud Barzani, president of the Kurdish regional government, are providing the PKK with logistical support and even ammunition.
Around 80 Turkish soldiers have died this year as a result of PKK attacks.
The group, which advocates an independent Kurdistan that would include parts of Turkey, has been waging an armed struggle since 1984, claiming more than 37,000 lives in the process.
Turkey recently reinforced its troop presence along the Iraqi border, and the military says it is waiting for government orders.
Any operation would have to be approved by parliament.
