08/01/2008
(Euobserver, B92, Blic - 08/01/08;
AFP, DPA, UPI, RFE/RL, B92 - 07/01/08)
While he appeared to have no doubts about Kosovo's eventual independence, Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa told reporters in Ljubljana on Monday (January 7th) -- a week after his country assumed the rotating EU presidency -- that it remains unclear how exactly the province's status will be determined.
Viewing a settlement to the Kosovo status issue as essential to regional stability, Slovenia has voiced hope that the matter will be resolved before France replaces it at the helm of the 27-nation bloc on July 1st.
In December, 18 months of internationally sponsored talks between Kosovo Albanian and Serbian representatives came to an end, with the two sides still far apart.
While Kosovo's 90% ethnic Albanian majority wants full independence, Belgrade insists all it can offer is broad autonomy.
Jansa said that the policy of former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic's regime towards the Kosovo Albanians "was to exclude them, to treat them as second-class citizens".
"It's not possible after all this" to force Kosovo Albanians to live under Serbian rule, he said, adding that it would be better for the two sides to start building new relations.
With the status process deadlocked and with Russia threatening to block any UN decision on Kosovo that is unacceptable to Belgrade, leaders in Pristina are widely expected to adopt a unilateral declaration of independence after the February 3rd runoff in Serbia's presidential election.
No settlement exists that will satisfy both Belgrade and Pristina, Jansa said, citing his own experience.
The EU, which has expressed its determination to play a leading role in resolving the current Balkan crisis, was now "looking for the second-best solution", he said.
Kosovo is unlikely to become fully independent right away, however, Jansa added.
Referring to the 1,800-strong justice and police mission the EU plans to deploy to Kosovo, Jansa noted that such a European mission would not be sent to a "totally independent country, [a] sovereign country".
