10/10/2007
(AFP, Reuters, FT, BIRN, B92, Serbian Government - 09/10/07)
A high-profile delegation from the Russian oil and gas monopoly Gazprom was in Belgrade on Tuesday (October 9th) to discuss co-operation in the energy sector. 
The group was led by the company's chief executive, Alexei Miller.
During talks with Serbian President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, the Russians expressed interest in the privatisation of the Balkan country's oil and electricity monopolies, Naftne Industrije Srbije (NIS) and Elektroprivreda Srbije (EPS).
According to a Reuters report, Gazprom would consider bidding for NIS only as part of a package deal that also would allow it to use Serbian territory for the construction of a stretch of the South Stream natural gas pipeline and to build new gas storage facilities.
"The deadlines for making a decision on the projects and timeframe for their realisation are parallel, so they should be seen as one complex project," Belgrade-based B92 quoted Gazprom as saying after the talks.
Serbia first announced its plans to privatise NIS back in 2005, but made little progress in that direction until May of this year, when its new government said it would sell the company by the end of 2007. 
However, the ruling coalition is still split over whether to offer a 25% stake in the monopoly for about $300m, as initially planned, or a majority stake for a better price.
During Tuesday's talks, the Gazprom officials reportedly urged Serbia to offer majority stakes in both NIS and EPS.
Other companies likely to participate in the eventual tender for NIS, which has the biggest retail network in the country, include another Russian company, Lukoil, Romania's Rompetrol, Austria's OMV and Greece's Hellenic Petroleum.
Serbia regards its possible inclusion in the South Stream pipeline, designed to carry 20 billion cubic metres of Russian natural gas to Italy per year, as an issue of huge strategic importance.
In December, Serbian officials and Gazexport chief Aleksandr Medvedev signed a memorandum of understanding on the construction of the 400km Serbian stretch of the pipeline, which will run from the country's border with Bulgaria to the one with Croatia.
Securing a role in the 1 billion euro project "would provide a stable supply of power sources to the Serbian market and industry," the Serbian government said in a statement Tuesday. 
"Prime Minister Kostunica stressed that the energy field had a decisive role in the economic development of the country and that it is in the interests of Serbia to establish strategic co-operation with Gazprom."
There is wide speculation in Serbia that the government is welcoming Russian investors in exchange for Moscow's staunch support on the Kosovo issue. 
Russia has blocked attempts to pass a UN resolution based on a plan for supervised independence, and continues to insist that any deal on Kosovo must have the approval of Serbia.
Serbian officials have denied any link, insisting that bidders from all countries are welcome.
Since the fall of the Slobodan Milosevic regime in October 2000, Russian investments in Serbia have reached approximately $400m. 
Local companies that have been bought by Russians in recent years include Serbia's petrol-pump chain, Beopetrol, its biggest tourist agency, Putnik, and industrial engineering company Termoelektro.
Russia's state-owned airline, Aeroflot, is considering buying Serbia's JAT air carrier, while Oleg Deripaska, the owner of the Basic Element metals company, is said to be interested in the sale of Serbia's RTB Bor copper mine and smelter complex.
