07/01/2008
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 07/01/08
A legendary C-47 Dakota troop transport aircraft that flew in the WWII D-Day landing is in the process of being restored after being donated by Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to France.
After a meeting late last year with French President Nicolas Sarkozy in Paris, BiH's Presidency Chairman Zeljko Komsic visited the World War II museum at Merville in Normandy, which will became the permanent home of the airplane.
Last month, the Dakota was loaded in parts on three trailers that arrived at a hangar in Carpiquet on December 5th. 
The restoration will take six months and thousands of hours of work by a team of aviation enthusiasts.
"For us, this plane is an old veteran from the landing in 1944 and we were really afraid she could be put on a scrap heap. 
But we will never forget that she was in BiH all these years," a member of the team, Béatrice Guillaume, said.
The plane was built in the Douglas factory in Long Beach, California, in January 1944. 
It became part of the US Army 9th Air Force and took part in Allied offensives, notably in parachute drops in Normandy in June 1944 and in Arnhem, Holland, the following September.
It was hit several times by enemy fire; at least once the plane and its crew were nearly lost.
At the end of the war, it was sold to a Czechoslovakian airline, where it was refitted for civilian use and became the pride of the fleet. 
Repurchased by the French Air Force in 1960, it was sold again in 1973 to the Yugoslav Air Force -- its last operator.
After the plane finished its flying service, it was put on display at Rajlovac military base near Sarajevo. 
French aviation enthusiasts learned about its existence after the 1990s conflict in BiH.
With the assistance of French authorities, they obtained approval from the BiH presidency to take the plane to France, for restoration. 
Once that is complete, the plane will be transported 25km to Merville. 
The wings, fuselage and engines will be fitted on the memorial site in May to be ready for the landings' ceremonies at the beginning of June.
