05/09/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 05/09/11
With the arrest of Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, Serbia has overcome one of the key obstacles to EU accession.
But the path ahead may be more complex than some Serbs had hoped.
Other conditions must still be met, including the swift adoption of several reform laws.
Moreover, some EU leaders – in particular, German Chancellor Angela Merkel – have linked Serbia's EU hopes to progress in bilateral talks with Kosovo, and on resolving the impasse in Kosovo's north.
Meanwhile, a recent poll by the government's European Integration Office shows a four-point drop in the number of citizens who say they would back EU accession in a referendum.
Six months ago, the percentage stood at 57%.
Now it is 53%.
Belgrade still has its sights set on receiving a thumbs-up on October 12th, when the European Commission will issue its assessment of Serbia's readiness to become a formal candidate for membership.
SETimes spoke with Milica Delevic, head of the European Integration Office, about the overall prospects.
SETimes:
Are you satisfied with the support citizens are showing Serbia's European integration process, and are you worried about the decline?
Milica Delevic:
People are no longer so idealistic in their views on the EU, but the high level of support shows that they rationally understand it is both in the interest of Serbia and their own interest as citizens of this country to keep Serbia moving in that direction.
At the moment that is a high level of support.
It is very important that the support for the reforms we are carrying out is greater than the support for EU membership.
Eighty-five percent of the citizens think the reforms should be implemented for our own sake, rather than for the sake of the EU, whereas six months ago that kind of support was at 73%.
I would tell the citizens that it is important for Serbia to continue down the European integration path, as that guarantees the realisation of reforms they want to see.
SETimes:
The recognition of Kosovo as a potential condition for Serbia's EU accession is often discussed in European and Serbian political circles.
What is the truth?
Delevic:
Serbia is guided by the conditions that have been defined and specified through the stabilisation and enlargement process, and they are the implementation of human and minority rights, the democratic principles of the rule of law, a functional market economy and the application of the legal heritage of the EU.
As part of the first criterion, special focus is on the necessity of regional co-operation and the fulfillment of obligations stemming from signed international agreements.
Kosovo is not formally mentioned as a condition, but it may appear as something that defines the political climate important for the unraveling of processes, both in Serbia and the EU.
There is no consensus within the EU on Kosovo being a state, but there is a clear stand that everyone, including Kosovo, should be involved in regional co-operation and association with the EU.
SETimes:
One delicate issue on the Serbian political scene is whether membership in NATO is a condition for EU membership.
How do you regard the issue?
Delevic:
The majority of EU member states are members of NATO, but some are not and maintain their neutrality pretty jealously.
It is important that Serbia understands the difference between being a non-member that is ready to take responsibility for regional and global security and has constructive relations with NATO, and being a non-member with a hostile attitude towards the Alliance.
Those are two completely different things and the latter could obstruct the country's accession to the EU.
SETimes:
Serbia is hoping to receive a positive response from the EC on October 12th and thereby gain candidate status.
How much work does Serbia actually have to do in order to achieve that?
Delevic:
Serbia has plenty more to do, and I believe a lot will be done until the unveiling of the European Commission's opinion on whether Serbia should become a candidate country, which will take place on October 12th.
One should not perceive the obtaining of candidate status as a magic wand that will change everything.
It is an assessment of our progress at the given moment in certain reform processes we are carrying out;
it will be a time by which certain laws are adopted and when the Commission will assess the implementation of certain laws.
That will not be the end and one should not expect Serbia to become a fully orderly country at that moment.
For us, the most important thing now is to invest maximum effort in making the anticipated assessment by the EC as positive as possible.
That assessment will then influence the decision of the EU ministers, heads of state and governments on December 9th.
SETimes:
How much has the arrest of Ratko Mladic facilitated Serbia's European integration?
Delevic:
It has changed the political climate;
an important formal condition has been met.
I do not view that as something that is important in the context of European integration, rather as something that is important for establishing responsibility for the serious crimes that were committed.
That arrest is something that demonstrates our reaction to international obligations, confirms our commitment to the rule of law and solidifies the faith that no crime can go unpunished, as well as that regional reconciliation and stability are priority goals.
SETimes:
The Netherlands was the most fervent advocate of the blockade of Serbia's European integration until the arrest of Mladic.
However, even after his arrest it still has not ratified the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between Serbia and the EU.
In your opinion, what kind of message does that send?
Delevic:
I expect the Netherlands will ratify this document as well.
I am convinced that much has been done and that the Dutch members of parliament will recognise that.
But the Netherlands is not the only country preventing the agreement from coming into force -- there are still many countries yet to ratify the agreement.
SETimes:
Many doubt that, due to the major crisis and turmoil within the EU, Serbia will be included in the next wave of enlargement and become an EU member.
What is your response?
Delevic:
The enlargement is now marked by the economic crisis and difficulties in the internal political situations in the member states and that will certainly affect the enlargement dynamic, but I do not think that this crisis, which is serious and requires a lot of time for resolving, is jeopardising the existence of the EU and awareness of the Union's strategic interest in accepting Western Balkan countries as new members.
