09/07/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 09/07/07
UNMIK Police Commissioner Richard Monk said last week that rubber bullets would no longer be used by the UN mission's police officers.
The ban follows an incident on February 10th, when two Albanians from the Vetendosje group were killed by UN peacekeepers firing rubber bullets.
"Police should avoid using force as much as possible when [they] face danger," Monk said on July 3rd, while announcing the new protocol.
The Romanian officers involved in the February incident will not face charges, and were withdrawn from the mission by their government, sparking criticism from the province's government.
"The government shares the concern of Kosovo's citizens regarding the departure of Romanian police from UNMIK, but it feels powerless to do anything," Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Çeku's spokesperson said.
According to Monk, the Romanian government must decide what action to take.
"But I still believe it will take some time for the Romanian police unit to gain the credibility it had before this event."
A UN probe into the fatalities concluded that Romanian police serving with the UN mission were responsible for the "unnecessary and avoidable" deaths when they fired the Italian-made rubber bullets at close range.
The bullets were manufactured in 1991 and had a shelf life of three years.
A police report said they had "probably hardened" with age.
The fatalities prompted the resignations of Kosovo's interior minister and the UN police commissioner in the province.
Monk took over the position in early March.
Despite the investigation findings, the ban could put UNMIK police in a tricky situation.
UN efforts to curb violence and lawlessness through voluntary gun collection programmes have not been successful.
In one such programme last year, only 1,200 weapons were turned in, most old or unserviceable.
The paradox will now exist that the international police force meant to be safeguarding the police is unarmed, while fanatical and paramilitary elements are holding onto their weapons.
During the riots in March 2004, "5,000-6,000 rioters were lined up with rows of Molotov cocktails prepared beforehand.
[They had] AK-47's, heavy machine guns, hand grenades, pistols, hunting rifles, farm tools, knives, rocks, you name it.
We were ordered not to fire," one UNMIK soldier told the local press.
"The ground commander thought that we could deter the mob with our presence alone."
Questioned on what will happen if the countries that have contingents in Kosovo will not remove the rubber bullets from their police armament, Monk said that "It may be an issue for their country, whether they remove them, but I have the authority to ban their use or their carriage.
These weapons will not be used in Kosovo."
Monk said that he is sure that the EU will back his stance on the issue.
"Many of the recommendations I made [are] standardised within the EU."
