09/07/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 09/07/07
More than 100,000 people in eastern Macedonia will see clean water for drinking, bathing and irrigation in 2010.
In three years, when the construction of the Zletovica Hydro-System is complete, the water problems of populations in Stip, Probistip, Kratovo, Sveti Nikole, Lozovo and Karbinci will be solved, according to the government.
The hydro-system will be constructed in three phases.
The first will entail the construction of a 75m-high "Knezevo" dam on the Zletovica River, and a water supply system -- consisting of a water supply pipeline and purification stations -- for several municipalities.
The artificial lake in the Osogovski Mountains, created by the dam, will contain 23.5 million cubic meters of water.
An irrigation system for 3,100 hectares of arable land in Probistip will be constructed in the second phase.
Experts say this is an important part of the investment project because higher agricultural yields will be produced.
The third part of the system includes the construction of hydropower plants that are expected to produce 56 million kilowatts of electricity annually.
Zletovica General Director Stojan Milanov said he expects construction to be completed on schedule.
The 150m-euro construction -- financed by the Japanese government, international banks and the Macedonian government -- will create jobs and provide work for domestic construction companies.
This is a lucrative undertaking, one of the largest investments in the past years.
A consortium of Macedonian construction companies Granit and Beton won the bidding for the project, and will head it up.
Locals say they could hardly wait for the construction to be completed.
"We have mostly used water from wells, but it is contaminated by a local mine because wastewater was dumped in the river and then in the wells," a Probistip resident said.
East Macedonia has been an unjustifiably neglected region in the past years, Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said at the groundbreaking ceremony on June 13th.
The government, through these and other measures, wants to create even regional development.
"This project is just one from the line of measures in educational, economic and infrastructural plans which the government implements in this part of the state," Gruevski said.
The idea for such a hydro-system was proposed about 50 years ago.
The first design was made 20 years ago, but stalled over a lack of funding.
