07/01/2008
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/01/08
In 2008, Macedonia will continue to boost its fight against corruption -- as requested by NATO -- in order to press forward on the road to its Euro-Atlantic accession.
One of the country's highest profile anti-corruption efforts is a continuing police operation code-named "Snake's Eye", which resulted in the arrest of 68 toll operators whom prosecutors say made an estimated 5m euros in illegal profits in five months.
Sixty of the former employees of Makedonija Pat -- the company responsible for maintenance of Macedonia's road network -- were convicted of felonies. 
Two additional suspects remain at large.
The operation began in April 2007 as part of Macedonia's effort to combat corruption. 
The arrests occurred after undercover police officers collected evidence by posing as taxi and truck drivers while covertly taping toll operators, their supervisors and controllers as the officers passed through toll gates.
In some cases, toll operators made arrangements with drivers and lifted the gate for half the amount of the toll, which they kept for themselves. 
At booths where cameras were installed, toll operators gave drivers a blank piece of paper to simulate giving a bill.
The interior ministry estimates the operators collected about 5m euros from toll booths in Skopje, Tetovo, Gostivar and Veles based on electronic records of the flow of vehicles during the five-month timeframe.
The scheme was so profitable that toll collectors bribed Makedonija Pat supervisors to be assigned to lucrative toll booths. 
The amounts paid for such favours were between 3,000 and 15,000 euros, depending on the profitability of the booth.
Snake's Eye has been the most extensive and longest-running operation involving the most officers to date in Macedonia and will continue, Interior Minister Gordana Jankulovska said.
Additionally, the Public Revenues Office will start to investigate the origin of property of the arrested operators.
This is the second such operation aimed at combating so-called small corruption, which -- despite the name -- makes sizable profits. 
The first operation took place in February when police arrested about 30 border crossing officials who charged small amounts -- 5 to 10 euros -- for goods trafficking or easy entrance to or exit from the country. 
Most were sentenced to several years in prison.
The European Commission November 2007 report "EC: Macedonia with Substantial Economic Advancement" praised the government's anti-corruption efforts. 
"Progress was made in anti-corruption policy and measures. 
The legal and institutional framework was strengthened and strong political commitment yielded some results. 
There were court decisions in a number of high profile cases, including those of a former deputy minister, a former customs director, judges, lawyers, notaries, and police officers," the report said.
Additionally, Macedonia moved up 20 positions to 84th in Transparency International's ranking of corruption level perceptions for 2007.
