08/02/2008
(NATO, Reuters, DPA, Xinhua - 07/02/08;
Reuters, Balkan Insight - 06/02/08)
UN Security Council Resolution 1244 has been and will remain the legal basis for KFOR's presence in Kosovo, NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said on Thursday (February 7th) in Vilnius.
He and the defence ministers of the Alliance's 26 member states gathered in the Lithuanian capital for a two-day meeting focusing on the pact's operations in Afghanistan and Kosovo, which is expected to declare independence from Serbia within weeks.
KFOR currently has about 15,900 troops from 24 NATO and 10 non-NATO nations -- Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Finland, Georgia, Ireland, Morocco, Sweden, Switzerland and Ukraine.
Representatives of those countries also participated in the session on Kosovo, as the Alliance ministers agreed unanimously on the need for their peacekeepers to remain on the ground as long as needed.
As 18 months of internationally-sponsored talks on Kosovo's future status failed to produce an agreement between Belgrade and Pristina, the leaders of the province's 90% ethnic Albanian majority said they would declare independence unilaterally.
Serbia and the Kosovo Serbs have expressed their strong opposition to any such move, prompting fears about potential new outbursts of violence in the Balkans.
De Hoop Scheffer offered reassurances Thursday that NATO peacekeepers would continue to to maintain security in the region.
"All participants showed their commitment to KFOR to protect the majority and the minority, all Kosovo citizens without exception, and create a climate of security and stability in the difficult times in this region," he said following the first day of talks in Vilnius.
In remarks last month, French Lieutenant General Xavier de Marnhac, who took over as KFOR commander at the end of August, downplayed the risks of any serious trouble following Kosovo's independence declaration.
"KFOR does not expect any problems in Kosovo," Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty quoted him as saying in a report on January 25th.
In remarks for Bloomberg news agency several days later, he agreed that there could be a short-term "burst of fever".
He added, however, that this would die down quickly "because it is not sustainable".
The United States and the majority of EU member nations have signalled their readiness to recognise Kosovo's independence even without UN endorsement, despite Russia and Serbia's opposition to such a move.
De Hoop Scheffer said on Thursday that NATO's responsibilities in Kosovo would not end with the solution of the status issue, indicating that the Alliance would have a role in providing training to a future Kosovo security force.
"There is a role for NATO ...
NATO certainly will have responsibilities after we have status for Kosovo," Reuters quoted him as saying.
KFOR will also work in co-operation with the 1,800-strong justice and police mission that the EU is expected to launch soon to stabilise the region following Kosovo's declaration of independence.
