09/10/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 09/10/07
France and Turkey agreed on Friday (October 5th) to continue dialogue on the sensitive topic of EU accession.
Visiting Ankara, French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner said his country will not block Turkey's negotiations with the bloc.
"Our relations had cooled a bit.
I hope they will warm up in the coming days," Kouchner said on Friday.
"EU negotiations would lead to closer bonds between Turkey and EU, even though we disagree on the ultimate goal of these talks.
Everything is open-ended today."
Kouchner added that French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who has repeatedly voiced his opposition to EU membership for Turkey, has eased his stance.
Sarkozy has suggested focusing on 30 of the 35 chapters in the accession talks, leading to a special partnership.
Diplomatic sources say the US administration, which strongly favours Turkey's EU membership process, was a key factor influencing Sarkozy's turnaround.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan, who met with Kouchner, said Turkey seeks the fulfillment of European promises and does not want to be dragged into discussions about the future of the EU.
"We share a desire to improve our ties in every field ...
I see our talks today as the beginning of a new impetus in bilateral relations," Babacan said.
According to Kouchner, France is also interested in joining key energy projects related to Turkey.
Ankara has opposed the participation of Gaz de France (GDF) in the Nabucco pipeline project, which will facilitate the transport of natural gas from the Middle East and Central Asia to the EU via Turkey and the Balkans.
The pipeline will help reduce dependence on Russian gas.
Turkey's opposition stems in part from a controversial law adopted by the French National Assembly last year.
The law made it a crime to question whether the mass killings of Armenians in Ottoman Turkey during and after World War I constituted genocide.
The French foreign minister, however, maintains that the law "is not a threat to further development of relations between the two countries in all fields".
Kouchner also met with President Abdullah Gul and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan before wrapping up his visit late Friday.
"We have differences, but we have more in common.
We have to speak more and more sincerely.
This visit is the first of a series of visits and meetings between Turkey and France," Kouchner said.
