07/12/2007
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/12/07
After visiting Athens on Wednesday (December 5th) and Skopje earlier in the week, UN special envoy Matthew Nimetz said the two sides in the Macedonia name dispute have agreed to meet again after the holiday season.
"We will hold new talks in Skopje and if these talks do not end successfully, we will hold talks in Athens, as well," Nimetz said. 
His goal is to bring the positions of the two sides closer in the next few months.
Greece objects to the constitutional name of its neighbour, the Republic of Macedonia, because it views the name as distorting history and implying territorial claims on the northern Greek province of Macedonia. 
Athens has warned it could block Skopje's accession to NATO and the EU if the issue is not settled.
During Nimetz's meeting with Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis, the two agreed that negotiations should be accelerated. 
Bakoyannis, meanwhile, called on Macedonia to show more flexibility.
Monday's meeting in Skopje was described as "essential and constructive". 
Nimetz was there to gauge reactions to the framework proposal he put forward last month in New York.
"The issue is not an easy one, however there is a wish to solve it," the envoy said, adding that he sees great interest in making strides to resolve it. 
Talks could intensify in the coming months, he said.
Macedonian negotiator Nikola Dimitrov said the talks with Nimetz were constructive. 
However, he added, his side expressed objections to some parts of the framework proposal.
President Branko Crvenkovski, Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki and Dimitrov met immediately before Nimetz's arrival in Skopje.
In a statement after the meeting, the officials reiterated their commitment to resolve the dispute. 
At the same time, they reiterated Skopje's support for a "double name formula" previously proposed by Nimetz. 
Under this proposal, the country would use one name for dealings with Greece, and its constitutional name with the rest of the world.
