07/08/2007
(AP, Reuters, RFE/RL, HINA, Focus News Agency, B92, Beta, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network, Serbian government - 06/08/07; VOA - 05/08/07)
Days before the Contact Group is expected to initiate a new round of talks on Kosovo's future status, statements by senior officials in Belgrade and Pristina on Monday (August 6th) showed little hope for a breakthrough.
In his weekly radio broadcast, Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku said the new talks are not the beginning of a new process, but simply an "unnecessary delay". 
Expressing confidence that Kosovo will soon gain independence, he vowed that Pristina would not budge on the issue.
According to the co-ordinator of Kosovo's negotiating team, Blerim Shala, Pristina's platform for the talks consists of three points -- Kosovo independence will not be subject to negotiation, Kosovo borders will remain unchanged and there cannot be any changes to former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's status plan, which calls for supervised independence.
"These are the three positions that have been stated," Shala said on Sunday. 
"They will not change."
Serbia rejects independence for Kosovo. 
Belgrade officials have said they could offer wide-ranging autonomy, including the right to diplomatic representation and membership in international financial institutions, but could not accept outright independence.
Serbia's stance has been supported by Russia, a member of the UN Security Council. 
Last month, the threat of a Russian veto forced the West to shelve the latest draft of a UN Security Council resolution based on Ahtisaari's plan.
According to the daily Vecernje novosti, Serbia has drawn up six conditions for its participation in the new status talks. 
Belgrade says the negotiations should concern the province's status, should be direct, should not be limited by a deadline, should not be aimed at a predetermined result, should not be based on the Ahtisaari plan and should be held under Security Council auspices.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said Monday that the new round of talks is an opportunity for compromise. 
A status solution should "satisfy both the essential interests of Serbia and the essential interests of the Albanian national minority in the province".
The 120-day talks are expected to begin after a meeting this week of political directors from the six nations in the Contact Group -- Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States. 
The three envoys tasked by the group with mediating the talks on its behalf will attend the discussions, scheduled to be held in London on Thursday.
The troika -- US envoy for Kosovo Frank Wisner, Russia's Alexander Botsan-Kharchenko and Germany's Wolfgang Ischinger, representing the EU -- is then expected to travel to Belgrade and Pristina.
Thirteen months of earlier talks, headed by Ahtisaari, failed to bridge the rift between the two sides, and many analysts doubt the new talks will be any more productive. 
"The way things look at the moment, it's difficult to see any basis for compromise between such rigid and entrenched positions," Judy Batt of the Paris-based Institute for Security Studies told Reuters. 
"I'm afraid that after 120 days we won't have moved a step further from where we are now."
Stephen Szabo, of the German Marshall Fund, said Serbia has yet to adjust to the consequences of Slobodan Milosevic's policies in Kosovo.
"The problem with Serbia, right now, is that they've lost a good part of their territory and they will have to learn to live with this," Voice of America quoted Szabo as saying. 
"They will have to realise that this has been lost through a reckless, genocidal type of policy and that they will have to come to terms with that."
