09/11/2007
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens - 11/09/07
The need to resolve the longstanding dispute over the name "Macedonia" has become increasingly urgent because of the upcoming NATO summit in Bucharest in April 2008.
The Republic of Macedonia hopes to receive a membership invitation at the summit, but Greece has warned it will block such a move if the dispute has not been resolved.
During a visit to London earlier this week, Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis told a group at the London School of Economics that no partnership relations, including military alliances, can exist until an agreement is reached.
Greek Prime Minister Kostas Karamanlis has little room to manoeuvre.
The most recent elections left his government in a weaker position, and even if a deal is reached, there is a risk that parliament might not ratify it.
Karamanlis's New Democracy (ND) party now has only a slim majority in parliament -- 152 out of 300 seats.
A few ND deputies have openly criticised major decisions taken by the government concerning domestic issues.
For the main opposition party, PASOK, the situation is even more volatile.
In the wake of its recent election defeat, the party faces one of the worst internal crises in its history, with current leader George Papandreou fighting to keep his job.
Neither party can afford to alienate voters.
And polls show that around two-thirds of Greeks object to any name for its northern neighbour that includes the word "Macedonia", according to the Athens News.
From the left, Papandreou is accusing Karamanlis and ND of sitting by helplessly while an "avalanche of states" recognise the name Republic of Macedonia.
ND's inability to handle the issue has encouraged Skopje to take a hard line, he charges.
To the left of PASOK, the Synaspismos coalition and the Communist Party have both backed the idea of a composite name.
On the far right, however, the nationalist LAOS party -- which entered parliament for the first time -- opposes any concessions.
Karamanlis and his government might be more amenable to a compromise if the party's grip on power were less tenuous.
With some already talking of early elections, the party could potentially win a larger majority, giving it the mandate needed to push through a solution.
Until then, however, Greece's complex political scene represents yet another obstacle to the diplomatic process.
