09/10/2007
(Euronews, Telegraph, The Times, The Guardian, Independent - 09/10/07; AFP, AP, DPA, Reuters, BBC, VOA, The Scotsman - 08/10/07)
In an unprecedented move, Interpol asked the media and public across the world on Monday (October 8th) to help it identify a man seen in scores of images posted on the internet. 
The pictures show him sexually abusing boys as young as six.
"For years images of this man sexually abusing children have been circulating on the internet," Interpol Secretary-General Ronald K. 
Noble was quoted as saying in a statement, posted on the organisation's website. 
"We have tried all other means to identify and to bring him to justice, but we are now convinced that without the public's help, this sexual predator could continue to rape and sexually abuse young children."
The 186-nation international police organisation, based in Lyon, France, also posted four reconstructed photos of the suspected paedophile. 
They show a white man, apparently in his 30s or early 40s, with a high brow and receding, uncombed dark hair. 
In one of the pictures he is smiling, in another he wears glasses, and in a third he is seen in profile.
Using digital technology, experts from Germany's Bundeskriminalamt and Interpol's Trafficking in Human Beings were able to unscramble a photo that used a swirling effect to disguise the man's features.
He is said to have distinguishing marks on his body that would help law enforcement authorities confirm his identity, if caught.
German police reportedly first spotted pictures of him about three years ago. 
Interpol said about 200 images, showing the abuse of 12 different young boys, have been found on the internet thus far. 
After analysing the photos, investigators concluded that they were taken in Vietnam and Cambodia, possibly in 2002 and 2003. 
Because of the link to the two Asian countries, the search for the yet unidentified individual has been codenamed Vico. 
His nationality is not known.
"We have very good reason to believe that he travels the world in order to sexually abuse and exploit vulnerable children and as an 186-member country police organisation, Interpol is uniquely positioned to co-ordinate this global effort to identify and bring him to justice," Noble said.
Kristin Kvigne, assistant director of Interpol's Trafficking in Human Beings unit, cautioned people who recognise the suspect against taking any direct action themselves. 
Instead, she said, they should contact the police or the Interpol office in their country.
Concerns that the man could face humiliation or violence as a result of revealing his identity were outweighed by the desire to protect other children, media reports quoted Anders Persson, a Swedish police officer, as saying. 
Persson oversees the database of images of child abuse at the Interpol human trafficking unit.
Later in the day, Interpol officials appeared optimistic that their efforts to identify the paedophile will prove successful this time around, given the prompt "overwhelming" response to their appeal.
"We have already [received] hundreds of responses from the public globally as to who this person could be," Kvigne told BBC World television. 
"We feel that with the press, the media coverage that this case has been given, we have a very good chance of finding out who he is."
According to the AP, the organisation received about 200 messages in just over 12 hours after turning to the public for assistance.
