06/12/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 06/12/07
The results of Kosovo's assembly elections are now official. 
Following the recommendations of the Central Election Commission (CEC) Secretariat, UNMIK head Joachim Ruecker certified them on Wednesday (December 5th).
The Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) was the winner. 
With 34.3% of the vote, it will have 37 members in the assembly, followed by the Democratic League of Kosovo, which won 22.6% and will be represented by 25 members. 
A third party, Kosovo New Alliance, won 12.3% and will have 13 seats.
"I am pleased that the electoral process is moving forward in a peaceful atmosphere which shows the maturity of the Kosovo people and the political parties," Ruecker said.
The vote took place on November 17th. 
At the same time, the electorate chose municipal assembly members and, for the first time, directly chose a mayor for each of Kosovo's 30 municipalities. 
Mayoral run-off elections will be held on December 8th, at the recommendation of the CEC Secretariat.
PDK leader Hashim Thaci is expected to become Kosovo's new prime minister, succeeding incumbent Agim Ceku. 
Thaci said his party is committed to establishing a stable government. 
Coalition talks are being held with President Fatmir Sejdiu, who heads the League for a Democratic Kosovo, and with leaders of other Albanian and Serb political forces, he said.
"After these consultations, I will decide with whom I will do the coalition," Thaci said.
Kosovo Serbs staged a near-total boycott of the vote. 
At a debate held at the Media Centre in the Serb enclave of Caglavica, community leaders said pressure from Belgrade was the main factor. 
Authorities in Serbia had warned the Kosovo Serbs that they would stop receiving their salaries and pensions if they participated, said Slavisa Petkovic, chairman of the Serb Democratic Party.
Deputy PDK leader Hajredin Kuci urged Serbs to rejoin the political institutions. 
"Kosovo's government will be multiethnic," he pledged.
On Wednesday, UNMIK announced that it was extending the mandates of the five heads of Serb-dominated municipalities in Kosovo. 
Ruecker said the move was necessary to ensure adequate representation of the Serb community.
The municipal chiefs will retain their jobs for another six months, despite the election boycott.
