06/12/2007
By Vlatko Vukotić for Southeast European Times – 06/12/07
Presidential elections will be held Republika Srpska (RS) on Sunday (December 9th) to elect a successor to Milan Jelic, who died in September of a heart attack. 
Ten candidates have entered the race. 
Although no pre-election polls have been held, it is expected that one of the candidates from three leading parties will win the position.
Analysts think elections will mainly be a test of support for Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, who has confronted the international community several times during the last few months. 
His party, the Alliance of the Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), has nominated the leader of the RS Academy of Sciences and Arts, Rajko Kuzmanovic, to represent their party.
Two other parties chose candidates with significant political experience. 
The opposition Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) nominated parliament member Ognjen Tadic, and the Party of Democratic Progress (PDP) appointed its leader, Mladen Ivanic.
All three candidates support the present status of RS inside BiH, and they support the Dayton Accords. 
Analysts think that age is the greatest problem for Kuzmanovic, who is in his eighties. 
But some also argue that the SDS candidate, Tadic, is too young to be elected president.
Ivanic has the most substantial political track record. 
He has already been prime minister of RS as well as BIH's foreign minister. 
However, a BiH court recently charged him with abuse of office. 
He allegedly financed his pre-election campaign through the public company RS Forests.
By law, there can be no run-off in this election. 
Even if the winner is only one vote ahead, he will become president. 
The RS presidency is mostly a figurehead position. 
However, no law can be passed until the president signs it.
This election marks the first time that the president will be elected directly by the people instead of by parliament. 
In BiH's other entity, the Federation of BiH, the entity president is still chosen by lawmakers.
The two vice-presidents, Adil Osmanovic and Davor Cordas -- who were elected by Bosniaks and Croats -- are waiting to find out whether they will keep their jobs. 
The Electoral Commission could not end their mandates when President Jelic died, so a decision will have to come after the election.
Until the new president can assume his responsibilities, emergency decisions and actions are being taken by the president of the parliament, Igor Radojicic. 
Parliament voted last month to give him temporary presidential responsibilities, to avoid a legislative log jam.
