07/11/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 07/11/11
SETimes: What is the purpose of the barricades in the north? 
Who stands behind them?
Sabine Freizer: Belgrade has to shoulder some of the responsibility for the barricades. 
No high-level government official has gone out and asked people to stop constructing them. 
This would, of course, be very difficult in the current Serbian domestic environment. 
And most of the Serb population of the north seems to support the barricades. 
We are not talking about a small number of criminals who are organising and running all this.
For people living in the north, EULEX, KFOR, and the Kosovo government customs operation is not just about the rule of law, it is highly political.
They see this as an operation against their entire way of life: their Belgrade-supported salaries, pensions, services. 
Belgrade provides 200m euros a year to the north. 
How can Pristina replicate that overnight? 
They will resist because they see no other option. 
For many, the only alternative is to leave.
SETimes: The dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade has been on hold. 
What do you expect will happen with it?
Freizer: I don't expect much from the technical dialogue. 
It was supposed to start a year ago and in that time it has only led to agreements on a handful of small technical issues like recognition of university diplomas.
The [recent operations by the Kosovo police, KFOR and EULEX] show that developments on the ground are quickly overtaking the place of the technical talks. 
It will be very difficult now for these talks to catch up.
SETimes: Politicians in Pristina have begun to consider a political dialogue publicly. 
While Belgrade seems to have the will for that, will the international community be ready for a possible political dialogue or a second Dayton?
Freizer: We should not compare the situation in Kosovo today with Bosnia in 1995 and call this a second Dayton. 
Dayton occurred in a very special environment when there was an aggressive NATO bombing campaign going on, a huge number of UN troops deployed, and it was much easier to impose solutions.
Today, the international community cannot impose much in the region. 
Kosovo and Serbia have to decide on their own to sit down and enter a political dialogue. 
Both Pristina and Belgrade have voiced some interest in this. 
I think that it is the best way to reduce tensions on the ground and find a sustainable solution to the conflict that persists between Kosovo and Serbia in northern Kosovo.
The question is when to start these talks. 
There will be elections in 2012 in Serbia and Kosovo. 
It will be a tough time for the leadership in either country to make tough compromises, but there cannot be much more delay, as the security situation is getting worse on the ground.
The international community has been somewhat resistant to support such a dialogue. 
In August 2010, the International Crisis Group wrote a report called Kosovo and Serbia: after the ICJ Opinion calling for such a dialogue, and many told us that it was too early. 
But international opinion is beginning to change, and consider how to mediate such talks, rather than whether to have them or not.
SETimes: Is the Athisaari proposal an option for the north, or should some other model be found, such as autonomy or partition?
Freizer: The Ahtisaari proposal is an excellent plan -- the fruit of long hours of work by some of the world's best constitutional experts. 
It offers a large amount of rights to Kosovo Serbs. 
The problem is not in the proposal itself but in how it has been politicised. 
It will now be very difficult for Serbs to accept it and for Pristina to offer much more.
On the one hand, in a discussion between Serbia and Kosovo all options should be allowed on the table. 
If Serbia wants to offer partition, let it do that and see the Kosovo government and international reaction face to face.
If the Kosovo government wants immediate implementation of its sovereignty over the north, we can already guess Serbia's reaction. 
The two may want to discuss mutually agreed modifications of their borders or land swaps. 
But as we also said in August last year, the best option would be slightly more autonomy for the north than what was granted in the Ahtisaari plan.
The sides will also need to focus on how to actually implement any deal on the north. 
Obviously, the kind of actions taken on July 25th by the Kosovo government or on July 16th are not the best way to go. 
They are destabilising and seen as threatening by Kosovo Serbs. 
Kosovo and Serbia need to agree on how to gradually implement their agreement.
