06/02/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 06/02/08
Just two days after the presidential election and the victory of pro-Western incumbent Boris Tadic, the Serbian government has entered its deepest political crisis so far.
The ruling coalition partners -- Tadic's Democratic Party (DP) and the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), led by Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica -- cannot agree on whether to sign an interim political agreement the EU has offered Serbia.
Brussels intends it to serve as a basis for co-operation until Serbia meets the conditions for signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA).
The deal was due to be signed Thursday (February 7th), but has now been delayed amid strong opposition from Kostunica.
The prime minister believes the document should not be signed at a time when the EU is gearing up to send a mission to Kosovo without Belgrade's consent.
"The EU's proposal to sign a political agreement with Serbia, while simultaneously sending a mission to tear our country apart, is a deception aimed at having Serbia actually signing its consent to the independence of Kosovo, thus becoming the first state to indirectly recognise that independence," Kostunica said.
Tadic and the DP disagree, saying the agreement makes no mention of Kosovo's status.
It simply provides Serbia benefits and envisions greater political co-operation, in order to "accelerate Serbia's progress towards the EU, including gaining membership candidate status," said Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic, a close ally of Tadic's.
The deal could theoretically be signed despite Kostunica's opposition.
The DP holds a majority in the cabinet and can outvote Kostunica's ministers.
However, that could spell an end to the governing coalition, already shaken by Kostunica's refusal to back Tadic in the presidential runoff against Tomislav Nikolic.
Velimir Ilic, whose New Serbia party is in an alliance with Kostunica's DSS, has threatened an early general election if the outvoting occurs.
"The parliament will annul all documents signed against its will.
We should not fear new elections, and there is the possibility of a different majority being formed in the parliament even without elections," he said.
The DP does not have enough strength in parliament to overcome opposition there.
The largest single parliamentary party -- the Serbian Radical Party -- is against the deal, as is the Socialist Party of Serbia.
On Wednesday, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said the signing had been put off.
Brussels is ready to go ahead with it, Rehn said, but the ball is in Serbia's court.
He criticised Kostunica, saying the prime minister has evidently not heard the message Serbian voters delivered in Sunday's presidential election, when they chose Tadic over Nikolic.
During a phone conversation with Tadic on Tuesday, EU security chief Javier Solana said it was up to Belgrade to reach a consensus.
