06/02/2008
(AFP - 06/02/08;
Reuters, B92, Fena, Dtt-net - 05/02/08;
Balkan Insight, Office of the High Representative - 04/02/08)
Politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) were urged on Tuesday (February 5th) to respect their commitments on police reform and avoid a postponement in the signing of a major pact with the EU.
"It is unacceptable that politicians who had signed something and gave assurances to EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn are no longer doing it," Doris Pack, head of the European Parliament's (EP) Committee for Southeast Europe, said in Sarajevo.
Her remarks came three days after Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (SDA) leader Sulejman Tihic withdrew his support for an EU-required police reform agreement reached late last year.
After more than two years of futile attempts to forge a deal, Tihic and the leaders of the other five main parties in BiH signed a declaration in Mostar in late October, pledging to implement police restructuring activities in line with the Union's principles.
About a month later, they adopted an action plan in a bid to unblock the process.
It should eventually lead to the unification of the country's ethnically divided police forces and eliminate political interference in policing.
The breakthrough cleared the way for the initialing of BiH's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU during Rehn's visit to Sarajevo on December 4th.
The commissioner, however, stressed that the accord -- considered a major first step towards eventual membership in the Union -- would only be finalised once concrete police restructuring measures were implemented.
Tihic's pullout came just days before the February 15th deadline for submission of several drafts on police reform.
"If the process is delayed, the signing of the SAA will be delayed as well.
There is no doubt about that," European Commission's official responsible for BiH, Dirk Lange, was quoted as saying in a report by Belgrade-based B92.
Tihic's decision prompted strong criticism from other international officials, as well as from Bosnian politicians.
Accusing the SDA leader of pushing BiH "backwards", High Representative Miroslav Lajcak warned on Sunday that such behaviour could derail the country's progress towards EU accession.
"I think the chance the SAA may be signed by the end of the Slovenian EU presidency [on June 30th] has now definitely failed," the Slovak diplomat said.
"If local authorities continue with such behaviour, the international community will have to take action."
Lajcak agreed with Bosnian Serb politicians who linked Tihic's backtracking on the police reform agreement to an ongoing row between the SDA and the Party for BiH (SBiH), the other main Bosniak party within the Federation of BiH's ruling coalition.
"Petty political interests are important for Tihic and I believe that we will soon discover what this is all about," the top international envoy in BiH said.
Bosnian Serb Party of Democratic Progress leader Mladen Ivanic has suggested that the required police reform drafts could be passed even without SDA support.
That, however, could bring to an end the SDA-SBiH coalition and trigger fresh elections, a Balkan Insight report quoted him as saying in remarks published in Banja Luka-based daily Nezavisne Novine on Monday.
