08/10/2007
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 08/10/07
Macedonia should speed up reforms and fully investigate a recent outbreak of violence in parliament, EU officials told President Branko Crvenkovski during his three-day official visit to Brussels last week.
Accompanied by Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki, the president met with EU Enlargement Commissioner Ollie Rehn and EU security chief Javier Solana.
"EU Commissioner Rehn pointed out in which areas we are lagging behind, and I assured him that Macedonia has capacity and political will to accelerate the pace of the reforms," Crvenkovski said.
"It's our ambition to start negotiations for membership in 2008 and I believe we have a national consensus on that issue."
He said he informed Rehn about the reforms Macedonia has made and the improved business climate that has resulted from a series of measures taken by the government.
Rehn, meanwhile, stressed the need for improved political dialogue, as well as for pushing ahead with reforms in the police, administration and judiciary and mounting a stronger fight against corruption.
Last month's incidents at parliament should be resolved without any delay, he added.
Fighting broke out among MPS from rival ethnic Albanian parties during a parliamentary session on September 25th.
Journalists covering the story were roughed up first by bodyguards working for the Democratic Union of Integration party, and later by Macedonian police.
In his meeting with Crvenkovski, Solana said Macedonia must ensure such occurrences are isolated.
Every political party should be focusing on the country's EU agenda, he said.
While in Brussels, the Macedonian president also met with NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, who echoed the messages of his EU colleagues.
The NATO chief acknowledged that major steps in defence reform have been made and that the decentralisation process is under way.
However, he said, some sources of tension still must be overcome.
It is of exceptional importance that the country becomes a NATO member, de Hoop Scheffer said.
"But to do that, a mature political culture should be established," he added, welcoming the establishment of a special commission that will investigate last month's parliamentary brawl.
Macedonia will "do its best" to make swift progress, Crvenkovski told him.
He reiterated the Macedonian Army's readiness to continue to contribute to peace missions in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iraq and Lebanon.
The president also said he will visit Macedonian soldiers deployed in Kabul in the coming days.
