08/10/2007
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 08/10/07
After a dramatic secret ballot, a no confidence motion against Romania's government failed last Wednesday (October 3rd), 12 votes short of victory.
Although the government received support from only 152 lawmakers, the motion -- initiated by the opposition Social Democrats (PSD) -- could not muster the 232 votes needed for adoption.
"There was a single winner today, Romania," Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu said, after the outcome was announced.
"Too many times, Romania has suffered because of political conflicts.
The old way of doing politics, based on self-interest and petty intrigues, has to disappear."
Tariceanu's cabinet has increasingly become a lame-duck government since the expulsion of President Traian Basescu's Democratic Party earlier this year.
Together, the ruling National Liberal Party (NLP) and its junior partner, the Hungarian Union, enjoy the support of only 20% of lawmakers.
Decisions on important issues such as the government's reconfiguration have failed because of inadequate parliamentary support.
A crucial vote on Romania's budget is rapidly approaching.
In the future, the cabinet may be forced to resort to face-to-face negotiations with individual opposition lawmakers -- as it did to defeat the no-confidence motion -- or make extensive use of emergency ordinances.
Both tactics have proved controversial.
The government already has used an emergency ordinance to modify the law on ministerial responsibility, prompting criticism from Basescu, magistrates' associations and EU politicians.
The ordinance dismissed the current Presidential Commission, which examines anticorruption prosecutors' requests to investigate members of the government.
Within 30 days, a new commission formed by judges will be established.
Justice Minister Teodor Chiuariu said the move would depoliticise the process.
Basescu was "upset because he lost the toy with which he suspended Liberal ministers", he added.
Basescu, however, noted that the commission had been scheduled to examine anticorruption prosecutors' requests concerning former and current ministers, including Chiuariu.
The justice minister is in "a flagrant conflict of interest, working out an emergency ordinance that blocks his own file and the files of his cabinet colleagues", the president said.
The move been criticised by lawmakers from the European People's Party, the largest transnational group in the European Parliament.
German MEP Markus Ferber asked the European Commission (EC) to activate its justice safeguard clause on Romania and refuse to recognise Romanian court rulings within the EU.
An EC spokesman, meanwhile, said the emergency ordinance might impact the EC's evaluation of Romania's anticorruption efforts.
Shaky as Tariceanu's government is, it has survived in part because of an internal political fight within the PSD.
Up to 27 lawmakers from the main opposition party defected during the secret ballot.
It was an embarrassing situation for Mircea Geoana, whose leadership has been openly questioned by the PSD's post-Communist old guard.
Geoana blamed the motion's failure on "the cowardliness of some PSD lawmakers".
Four have since been expelled.
Nevertheless, the PSD leadership stopped short of punishing the party's founding father and honorary president, Ion Iliescu.
He was the main opponent of the no-confidence motion, arguing that it would give Basescu the opportunity either to appoint a prime minister to his liking, or organise early elections that would not favour the Social Democrats.
According to opinion polls, the PSD now has only about half the support it received during the last general elections in 2004.
Many analysts say that the current cabinet continues to survive because many MPs simply do not want an early end to their mandates.
Meanwhile, Tariceanu has again proved himself adept at survival.
The biggest winner right now, however, may be political inertia.
