06/12/2007
(Bloomberg, Nine O'clock, Hotnews.ro - 06/12/07;
FT, Rompres, The Daily Telegraph, 10 Downing Street, Romanian government - 05/12/07)
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu paid a one-day visit to London on Wednesday (December 5th) to discuss issues of bilateral concern with his British counterpart, Gordon Brown, including restrictions imposed on migrant workers from his country.
Ahead of Bulgaria and Romania's entry into the EU on January 1st, the British government announced a set of measures restricting access of workers from the two Balkan nations to its labour market for a one-year period, which was then extended by another 12 months in October.
During talks with Brown, Tariceanu called for an easing of the restrictions, saying EU citizens have a right to equal treatment, particularly a right to free movement and labour.
"It is an issue of principle," the Romanian prime minister told the Financial Times before his visit.
"By achieving this, I do not want to ensure that Romanians flood the labour market in England."
Romania has one of the lowest unemployment rates in Europe and is already experiencing a shortage of half a million workers.
"Before we joined the EU, unemployment was under 5%.
Now it's under 4%," Tariceanu told Bloomberg news agency in an interview Wednesday.
While expressing his appreciation for the Romanian workers' "extraordinary contribution" to the British economy, Brown made it clear that the restrictions will remain in place.
He insisted that his country's policy is in line with EU principles.
The talks focused on the December 14th meeting of the leaders of the 27 member states in Brussels and on formulating a co-ordinated EU approach to the "challenge" of globalisation, Brown's office said in a statement.
Issues of international concern, such as Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan were also on the prime ministers' agenda, as well as ways to enhance bilateral political and economic co-operation.
Describing relations between the two countries as "stronger than ever," Brown said he and Tariceanu have agreed to organise a bilateral investor's conference in a bid to help boost trade and investment.
British investments in the Romanian economy currently exceed 5 billion euros, with more than 3,200 British companies operating in key sectors, including telecommunications, information technology, financial services, and water and environmental protection.
During his visit to London, Tariceanu also had a working lunch with a group of 30 top executives of major British companies interested in investing in Romania.
He briefed them about the legislative and administrative measures Bucharest has taken to improve the business climate and boost the competitiveness of the national economy.
The Romanian leader also met with representatives of the parliamentary Britain-Romania friendship group, members of the House of Commons' home affairs committee and government officials.
During the talks at Westminster, the seat of the British Parliament, Tariceanu again called on British authorities to ease the restrictions on migrant workers from Romania.
