05/12/2007
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 05/12/07
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has taken the most important step so far on its EU accession path. 
At a ceremony Tuesday (December 4th), acting Prime Minister Nikola Spiric and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn initialed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement -- a prelude to signing the deal.
"Sincere fulfillment of this agreement will enable BiH to become a candidate for EU membership very soon," Rehn said.
BiH has fulfilled the technical conditions and also made satisfactory progress in achieving the political conditions, he added.
The move marks a dramatic turnaround after weeks of political crisis, sparked by lack of agreement on EU-required police reforms and a controversy over High Representative Miroslav Lajcak's decision to change voting rules. 
Many said the country was facing its worst impasse since the signing of the Dayton Accords. 
The situation prompted warnings not only from EU leaders but UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon.
In just a matter of days, however, BiH political leaders were able to hash out a compromise. 
The Council of Ministers has agreed to support an action plan for police reform, stipulating the establishment of a directorate for police co-ordination and several police institutions.
The end of the political crisis paves the way for Spiric -- who resigned last month but still serves in a caretaker capacity -- to again take up his post. 
The leading Bosnian Serb parties are to appoint a candidate for prime minister by the end of this week, and they have already indicated they will choose him.
BiH will press ahead with meeting conditions required to sign the SAA, Spiric said. 
"There will be multiple gains because the EU will have a new area of stability and prosperity in the Balkans," he said. 
"On the other hand, citizens from the countries of the Western Balkans will get the security associated with the EU, as well as other benefits that citizens of a united Europe enjoy."
Lajcak expressed satisfaction with recent developments.
"We are aware of BiH's progress towards the EU, and even though the initialising of the SAA sounds somewhat technical, it is a symbolic evidence of this country's progress," he said.
Once the SAA is actually signed, it will go before the parliaments of all 27 member countries for ratification. 
After that, the EU will assess BiH's readiness for official candidate status.
