06/09/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 06/09/07
Albania has become the first country to eliminate its chemical weapons, Prime Minister Sali Berisha announced on Saturday (September 1st).
He met with US Senator Richard Lugar and former US Senator Sam Nunn, who established the Nunn-Lugar Co-operative Threat Reduction Programme two years ago, and thanked the senators for helping Albania achieve this goal.
"By destroying the arsenal, Albania is fully disconnected now from its terrible and dark past of militarisation, which occurred during the communist system," Berisha told the politicians.
With $50m in aid from the programme, Albania finished destroying about 16 tonnes of chemical weapons in July.
Inspectors from the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) verified the procedure.
Lugar and Nunn thanked Albania for its co-operation in the programme, and its contribution to global security.
They gave Berisha a medal, reportedly manufactured from US and Russian nuclear missiles that were scrapped under the programme.
"The work in Albania demonstrates that we can and must be prepared with money and expertise to extend the Nunn-Lugar concept wherever it can be usefully applied," Lugar said."We can and must be prepared to address similar risks in the Middle East, Asia, and anyplace else where supplies of weapons of mass destruction may be located," he added.
"Albania today feels healthier due to the de-activation of chemical agents, thanks to the assistance of your programme," President Bamir Topi said.
He expressed hope that the programme will continue in other areas of the world.
In August 2004, Lugar visited a chemical arms storage depot in Albania and discussed ways to improve storage measures as well as the plan for their destruction.
Switzerland, Italy and Greece also helped destroy the chemicals, which were secretly brought into the country during the Cold War.
Albania's communist regime collapsed in 1990, but the weapons were never publicly declared until five years ago.
The Nunn-Lugar programme is credited with de-activating or destroying 6,982 nuclear warheads, 653 intercontinental ballistic missiles, 906 nuclear air-to-surface missiles, 613 submarine-launched missiles, 30 nuclear submarines and other parts of the former Soviet Union's nuclear programme.
The Chemical Weapons Convention came into force in 1997.
Since that time, the OPCW says that about one-third of the declared stockpiles -- amounting to 71,000 metric tonnes of chemical agents -- have been destroyed.
The United States and Russia control the vast majority of chemical weapons -- which, according to the OPCW -- are scheduled to be destroyed by 2012.
Other countries known or suspected of having stockpiles include China, Egypt, France, India, Iran, Israel, Libya, Pakistan and Syria.
