05/12/2007
(Monitor - 04/12/07; Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Vseki Den, GERB - 03/12/07)
The Citizens for Bulgaria's European Development (GERB) called for a deal Monday (December 3rd) that could serve as a basis for a broad centre-right governing coalition after the next parliamentary elections.
The party, led by Sofia Mayor Boyko Borisov, said it was inviting the four organisations that are members of the European People's Party (EPP) -- the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), Democrats for a Strong Bulgaria (DSB), the Union of Free Democrats and the Bulgarian Agrarian National Union -- as well as the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation (VMRO) to talks on a co-operation agreement.
Established a year ago, GERB has emerged as the most popular party in Bulgaria. 
It won the most votes in recent local government elections and in the election for members of the European Parliament (EP) earlier this year.
A recent survey by Sofia-based Alpha Research suggests support for the party has increased by nearly 4% since September, climbing to 26% in November. 
The Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), the leading member of the current three-way ruling coalition, was second with slightly over 18% support, while the most popular of the parties in Bulgaria's fragmented right-wing spectre, the UDF, garnered only 1.9%.
GERB said on Monday it would invite the five other rightist formations to sign a declaration on future co-operation during this week's two-day visit to Sofia by top EPP officials, including President Wilfried Martens.
GERB, whose representatives in the EP have already been admitted as individual members of the largest transnational political party in Europe, is hoping to join the organisation soon.
A declaration GERB issued on its first anniversary Monday called for a new "rightist project" and a modern style in politics, committed to fighting corruption and to ensuring law and order for all citizens and at all levels of governance.
"GERB considers its achievements so far the success of the rightist movement in Bulgaria," the statement said.
The proposed agreement would serve as a guarantee to the EPP that none of the parties that sign it would join any coalitions with organisations that are not a part of the right-wing spectrum, said Borisov, whose party is calling for early parliamentary elections in spring.
The UDF and DSB did not appear enthusiastic about GERB's proposal, but said that they would discuss the idea soon. 
Some reports suggested that the UDF was more likely to consider a step in that direction if the proposed deal rested on concrete programme documents.
Only representatives of the Agrarian party appeared willing to join the proposed initiative.
