05/12/2007
(Independent, Blic - 05/12/07;
Reuters, AFP, VOA, RFE/RL, Beta, B92, BIRN, Serbian Government - 04/12/07)
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said on Tuesday (December 4th) that his ministry and other institutions have drafted an action plan that outlines measures to be taken if Kosovo declares independence.
The government is still discussing the "top secret" document, he told lawmakers, voicing hope that Serbia would never have to implement the proposed steps, which range from "very soft to very hard" with "seven levels of reaction" in between.
The lightest measure, Jeremic explained, was "doing nothing", while the harshest would be to sever diplomatic relations with countries that recognise any unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo.
At a conference in Brussels, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic confirmed that Belgrade is considering its options.
However, Serbia will "not use force in any circumstances", Belgrade-based news agency Beta quoted him as saying.
Both officials reiterated their country's call for the continuation of negotiations to determine Kosovo's final status until the two sides reach a compromise.
Belgrade and Pristina remain as far apart on the status question as they were at the start of the negotiations process in February 2006.
Kosovo's 90% ethnic Albanian majority insists on independence, while Serbia says all it can offer is broad autonomy within its borders.
The Kosovo Albanians have been warning they could make a unilateral declaration of independence soon after December 10th, when the international troika that mediated the most recent round of talks is due to submit its report to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon.
In recent days, however, Pristina has signalled that it will not make such a move without co-ordinating it first with the EU and the United States.
Outgoing Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku said he did not expect that to happen before mid-January.
"We are not talking about a unilateral declaration of independence, but a co-ordinated declaration of independence," the AFP quoted him as saying on Tuesday.
Jeremic, who meets with British Foreign Secretary David Miliband in London on Wednesday before heading to New York for talks with Ban and UN Security Council ambassadors, said Serbia would face strong pressure over Kosovo in the coming weeks.
"Serbia is in a very difficult situation, which is why we need energetic and modern measures when it comes to our relationship with the international community," he told reporters Tuesday.
