06/09/2007
(DPA, FT, BBC, The Guardian - 06/09/07;
DPA, Reuters, AFP, Bloomberg, International Herald Tribune, BBC, VOA, AKI - 05/09/07)
Germany said on Wednesday (September 5th) that it has foiled a major terrorist plot by arresting three members of a group linked to al-Qaeda.
They were allegedly preparing to launch "massive" bombing attacks against US military and civilian targets in the country.
The suspects -- two German converts to Islam and a Turkish national -- were held in the small town of Oberschledorn, in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia, shortly after midday on Tuesday, Chief Federal Prosecutor Monika Harms said at a news conference in Karlsruhe.
The three, identified by police as Daniel S., Fritz G. and Aden Y., were all in their twenties.
They belonged to the Islamic Jihad Union, a shadowy group rooted in Uzbekistan and linked to al-Qaeda, and are said to have received training at camps in Pakistan last year.
The group allegedly had stockpiled military detonators and about 730kg of hydrogen peroxide, which would have allowed them to produce bombs with an explosive power of 550kg of TNT.
"This amount would have been enough to cause damage on a greater scale than in London and Madrid," Joerg Ziercke, head of the Federal Criminal Office, told reporters.
More than 190 people were killed in the March 2004 terrorist attacks in Madrid.
The July 2005 suicide bombings in London left 52 people dead.
While it appeared that the group had not chosen specific targets yet, German authorities believe that the plan was to use car bombs for maximum carnage.
The suspects also were reportedly planning attacks on other locations frequented by Americans, such as discos, bars and transport sites, Harms said.
"The main motivation of the group in Germany was hatred of American citizens,'' Ziercke said.
The suspects, who were under surveillance for more than six months, gathered two days before their arrest, apparently to start preparing for the attacks.
About 300 officers were involved in the monitoring of the men, Ziercke said.
According to reports Thursday, authorities are trying to track down ten other people, including Germans, Turks and persons of other nationalities.
Describing the operation as one of the largest of this type ever conducted in Germany, Ziercke noted on Wednesday that there had been international co-operation throughout, and thanked US authorities in particular.
The security services prevented "one of the worst terror acts ever planned in Germany", Harms said.
"We've said repeatedly for months that Germany is in the sights of Islamist terrorism and that we have to be vigilant.''
In April, the US embassy in Berlin issued a warning that security at diplomatic posts and military installations was being stepped up and urged Americans in Germany to be on the alert.
"The message was partially in response to the threats from this group," the DPA quoted a US official, speaking on condition of anonymity, as saying Wednesday.
Gordon Johndroe, a spokesman for the White House National Security Council, said that US President George W. Bush, who is attending an economic summit of Asian-Pacific nations in Sydney, had been briefed on the arrests.
"He's pleased a potential attack was thwarted and appreciates the work of the German authorities and the co-operation by international law enforcement," he said.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel praised the authorities involved in the operation for their "great success" and for having averted a "terrible'' attack.
"When it comes to fighting terror, international co-operation is of crucial importance,'' Bloomberg news agency quoted her as telling reporters in Berlin on Wednesday.
"The lesson from this is the danger is not just abstract, it's real.''
