05/09/2007
(Zaman - 05/09/07;
Reuters, Zaman, Turkish Daily News - 04/09/07;
AP - 03/09/07;
The New York Times - 02/09/07;
Zaman - 30/08/07)
By the end of this year, Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) will be ready to present a new "civilian constitution", intended to replace the one adopted two years after the 1980 military coup.
Simpler and shorter than the existing one, the new constitution will broaden personal freedoms, while clipping the powers of the president and the army, and will help remove some obstacles on the country's path towards EU membership, according to a report in the Turkish daily Zaman on Wednesday (September 5th).
Stressing the importance of freedom of expression, Brussels has repeatedly urged Turkey to change or annul the controversial Article 301 in its penal code, which has led to a number of trials against prominent intellectuals, accused of "insulting Turkishness".
Among those who have faced prosecution are Orhan Pamuk, winner of the 2006 Nobel Prize for Literature, and Hrant Dink, a prominent Turkish-Armenian journalist, who was killed earlier this year.
According to Zaman, the constitution the AKP plans to propose will provide that international treaties and conventions Turkey has signed will have supremacy over national legislation.
This will allow local courts to ask the Constitutional Court to annul national legislation contradicting such international agreements, the daily explained.
The draft also envisions changes that will affect the Constitutional Court itself.
The number of its members will grow from 11 to 17, of which nine will be appointed by parliament and eight by the president, who currently appoints all judges on the court.
The constitutional draft would also grant the president immunity, but would take away from him "the leadership of the National Security Council," according to a senior AKP official.
Meanwhile, the parliamentary immunity currently enjoyed by Turkish lawmakers will be curbed.
The army is also likely to see some of its powers cut, in line with EU standards.
According to Reuters, the head of the armed forces would no longer report to the prime minister directly, but to the defence minister.
Announcing the completion of work on the first draft, AKP deputy leader Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat told reporters on Monday that talks on the document within the party would be "concluded next week".
"After the second round, a draft will be ready to introduce to our people, universities, political parties, media, and nongovernmental organisations for further discussions and contributions," he said.
"A special website will be a platform for interactive discussions on the new constitution."
He expected the public debate on the new charter to last for more than three months, after which all views and proposals will be considered before the final version is prepared.
Other parties can submit their own proposals, said Firat.
"But whichever draft is approved by parliament is the one we will take to a referendum to ask the people to approve," he said, denying reports that the AKP is planning to include clauses in the constitution to lift the ban on wearing the Muslim headscarf in universities.
