02/01/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 02/01/12
In an exclusive interview with SETimes Kosovo Finance Minister Bedri Hamza paints a promising picture of the Kosovo budget and financial prospects.
SETimes:
How stable is the financial situation in Kosovo?
Bedri Hamza:
It is stable -- all leading indicators of the financial sector are positive.
As far as budget revenues go, we have a good performance, while expenditure is being implemented as planned.
Kosovo Central Bank indicators show a steady and stable financial sector.
The IMF mission visit in November confirmed the [Kosovo] financial stability in a statement, confirming positive macroeconomic trends and policies.
Under the specific quantitative targets category for the period ending in September 2011, we managed to keep the minimal threshold banking, the primary fiscal balance, and the limit of the primary spending.
Satisfactory revenue performance continued till the end of October.
A realisation of the budget revenue plan is about 84%, and we are optimistic that the planned budget revenues for this year will be carried in bulk by 100%.
In 2010, the SEKN (Electronic Interbank Clearing System) had a significant increase in volume and payment transactions.
About 3.9m transactions worth a total of 4.66 billion euros were made through this system in a year.
The budget deficit this year is about 2.7% of GDP;
the level of public debt is low, reaching 5.4% of GDP.
SETimes:
How is Kosovo surviving the global economic and financial crisis?
Hamza:
The global economic crisis, so far, has not had a direct impact on the country.
Given the dire economic situation and financial resources in some EU countries, it could've impacted Kosovo, especially in reduced remittances.
The trend of the first six months of this year shows that there was no decline [of remittances];
the increase has been about 1.2% higher than the same period of last year.
In general, Kosovo has remained largely unaffected by the fiscal turbulences in the eurozone due to its limited integration in the global financial markets.
The banking system is stable, with a healthy liquidity and adequate capital reserves.
SETimes:
Kosovo uses the euro as its official currency.
How does this influence Kosovo, finances in light of the eurozone problems?
Hamza:
It is known that Kosovo, not having its own currency, has no genuine monetary policy and this fact is obviously a challenge for economic and financial development.
The circumstances in which Kosovo has accepted the euro as its official currency are known, and in this regard, we are now a 'euronised' state.
It is not easy economically, but having the euro as the official currency also has a positive side, because the euro is a strong and stable currency, which is positively reflected in the country.
SETimes:
Have you planned protective measures against the economic and financial world crisis to prevent Kosovo being heavily affected by it?
Hamza:
Because of the great connectivity to the global economy, we consider a possible impact on Kosovo too.
We worked on the deposits law, which has been approved and is operational.
This is the Deposit Insurance Fund, which we consider an important step for the country.
Work was done with the IMF and the Kosovo Central Bank in defining the funds for emergency assistance in financial liquidity, which will serve to ensure the stability of the banking sector.
SETimes:
The opposition reacted strongly to the new Kosovo budget and its distribution in different sectors.
How stable is this budget financially?
Hamza:
The draft is sent to the assembly for approval and it is normal to have discussions and various proposals by the opposition.
We support all constructive ideas and proposals about the draft law.
The finance ministry has been working intensely on the budget draft from April, following all legal procedures and priorities of the government.
The draft budget for 2012 is completely sustainable financially, because it is balanced and reflects the real income sources and adequate planning of expenses.
The opposition's budget critics do not stand, because it is divided according to priorities.
On the basis of these formulas that are based on the population number, geographic size, and other elements, a general grant is allocated, which includes 10% of total revenues.
The specific grant for education is prepared based on the number of pupils and these data are provided by the education ministry, while the one for health is prepared based on health data indicators from the health ministry.
SETimes:
What mechanisms are in place to manage and control financial expenses?
Hamza:
The general management and financial control of expenditures is regulated by the budget law provisions and the law on the management of public finances and responsibilities.
Independent budget organisations are managing their budgets and have legal responsibility to do so.
Of course, there are special institutions that deal with this issue at the Auditor General's Office.
I suggest focus on the mandate and responsibilities of the finance ministry, whose strategy is based on a constant commitment to fiscal discipline management in order to preserve fiscal sustainability, ensure liquidity, and meet the structural reforms that will result in increasing competitiveness and overall economic development, an economic development that so far has been consistent, which is also certified by international organisations in Kosovo.
SETimes:
What is the loss to the Kosovo budget from not collecting taxes in the north?
Hamza:
Any deviation from the tax payment creates premises for evasion in the budget.
The country's budget suffered a loss from tax evasion created in the north which is estimated to be around 40m euros annually.
After July 25th and after customs officers were sent to [crossing] points 1 and 31, smuggling of goods in this part of the country considerably declined, and so has tax evasion.
Kosovo finances are suffering losses from the situation in the north also because of a lack of a fully functional Kosovo tax administration [in the north].
SETimes:
Are there plans to open a stock exchange in Kosovo?
Hamza:
The finance ministry in collaboration with other institutions is working on capital markets.
Much work is done on the legal framework and some results are showing.
A pilot project, for example, will start early next year.
