04/04/2005
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times -- 04/04/05
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's government has now been in office for one year.
Consisting of the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), G17 Plus, New Serbia and the Serbian Renewal Movement, the ruling coalition also depends on MPs from Slobodan Milosevic's Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) in order to form a parliamentary majority.
Because the government needs the silent support of the SPS, which vehemently opposes co-operation with The Hague, disagreements in parliament have centered around the UN war crimes tribunal -- and this issue, in turn, has opened up divisions among the coalition members.
Initially, few people believed that the coalition government would survive for more than one month, given the challenges it faced.
With SPS backing, however, it has managed to adopt a budget and undertake a cabinet reshuffle.
Furthermore, no attempt has yet been made to topple it.
In the view of many analysts, the government's unexpected survival is in part due to an absence of political action by the opposition.
That doesn't mean, however, an absence of criticism.
Former Prime Zoran Zivkovic, who currently heads an NGO called Milenijum, describes 2004 as a "lost year for Serbia".
The government "lacks the desire and the democratic and intellectual capacity for reforming Serbia", he charges, adding that it did not receive a mandate from voters during last cycle of elections.
His party colleague, Belgrade mayor Nenad Bogdanovic, says the administration has been characterised by poor policymaking and division of tasks.
"Simply put, it is not possible to entrust particular institutions to party representatives," Bogdanovic says.
"We are deeply convinced, and ultimately we act in this way elsewhere -- that mutual control is very important.
Now you literally have entire parts of institutions that belong to a single political party, and that naturally turns into something quite different.
Then general managers of public enterprises end up being appointed in this way, where literally, even building superintendents are appointed from the same political party." According to Radio B92 commentator Milan Culibrik, some view the government as a "holding company of sorts, where each minister is a prime minister in miniature".
Little progress has been seen in two areas which Kostunica cited as priority:
the Kosovo issue and adoption of a new constitution.
In the case of Kosovo, suggests political analyst Slobodan Antonic, the government is caught between two untenable positions.
"The first one is for Kosovo to be a part of Serbia, but this is not a realistic demand, while the other is to give up Kosovo, which is something that the government cannot state openly," Antonic says.
"However, it suits the government that the public at large, particularly the political establishment, lacks a clear position on what should be done with Kosovo, with the government floating comfortably between the various positions, which it will continue to do so, until further notice."
As for the constitution, Kostunica has followed the example set by previous post-Milosevic governments -- that is, pledging action and then continually deferring it.
During the election, the DSS said a new constitution would be adopted by June 2004.
The authorities then extended this deadline, and then put it off indefinitely.
The drafts prepared by the government and the Democratic Party await further consideration, but the political will appears to be missing.
Numerous differences have emerged among partners in the ruling coalition, and some parties have even spoken openly about withdrawing.
The majority of such statements have come from G17 Plus and its vice president, Miroljub Labus, who has announced his resignation no fewer than seven times.
The voluntary surrenders of ex-general Vladimir Lazarevic and several officers of the Republika Srpska Army have, on each occasion, given Labus and his party reason for a change of heart.
The government has also weathered a series of scandals, the most serious of which concerned former Education Minister Ljiljana Colic.
Despite such problems, however, Kostunica has succeeded in one area where his predecessors have failed.
In contrast to previous governments, his administration has avoided problems with the adoption of legislation tabled in parliament, including adoption of the annual budget.
How long can Kostunica hold on?
Analysts are reluctant to offer a prognosis.
According to Radio B92's Culibrk, anything is possible.
"This government could last the full four years," he says.
"It is a fact that certain surveys and opinion polls indicate that no Serbian government has enjoyed smaller voter support.
At the same time, though, it seems to me that no government is more stable than this one, given that in one year no initiative for toppling the government has been followed through.
Doesn’t this appear slightly absurd?"
"What I think will be its biggest hurdle, and that is where the government will pass the litmus test of good governance, will be the announced restructuring of public enterprises," Culibrik says
