05/02/2008
(Euronews, Blic, Rompres - 05/02/08;
AFP, AP, BBC, RTE, DPA, Euobserver, CNA, Balkan Insight, Beta, B92 - 04/02/08)
EU nations adopted a document Monday (February 4th), endorsing the deployment of a long-planned justice and police mission to stabilise Kosovo after it declares independence from Serbia.
The decision, taken a day after Serbian President Boris Tadic's re-election, was not the final step in the process, however, because a launch date has yet to be announced.
The Joint Action Plan on what is to become the 27-nation bloc's largest civilian crisis management operation to date was approved through a "written procedure" following a meeting of EU diplomats in Brussels.
The document, which is expected to be published in the Union's official gazette on Friday, deals with the financial aspects and legal basis of the mission, to be called EULEX.
"Ninety percent of the preparatory work has been done," the Brussels-based online news service EUobserver quoted an EU diplomat as saying, following the adoption of the action plan Monday.
He described it as "an important step" in the process of launching the mission.
The final go-ahead for the mission is expected to be given later this month, when EU ministers are to decide on the start date.
The bloc plans to send around 1,800 police officers, prosecutors and judges to replace UNMIK as the international security presence in Kosovo.
"After this document, we only need one more [the Operational Plan], which should be adopted at the foreign ministerial level, most likely at the next meeting on February 18th," an EU source explained on Monday.
Media reports suggested the deployment of EU personnel would begin one day after the approval of the Operational Plan and would have to be completed within 120 days.
The launch of the mission is widely expected to precede the unilateral declaration of independence that the Kosovo assembly is likely to adopt by early March.
Most EU nations are expected to recognise an independent Kosovo even without UN approval.
Cyprus -- one of the few member states opposed to such a move -- was the only country that did not sign the action plan Monday.
Still, it did not block the document, resorting instead to a provision in the Lisbon Treaty that allowed it abstain from the vote.
Romania has also made it clear that it will not recognise a unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo.
Nevertheless, it has expressed support for the EU civilian mission and is considering contributing 175 policemen and gendarmes to EULEX.
The EU mission, which will work alongside more than 7,000 local police officers and 17,000 KFOR peacekeepers, is expected to remain in Kosovo for five to ten years and will cost an estimated 200m euros during the first 12 to 16 months of its operation.
It will reportedly be headed by Dutch diplomat Peter Feith, who will serve as the EU special representative in Kosovo.
Citing sources in Brussels, a report Monday by Balkan Insight said EU experts have found a legal basis for EULEX within UN Security Council Resolution 1244.
The Belgrade-based daily Blic indicated that the mission could be launched following a written invitation by Kosovo's provisional institutions for the EU to assume UNMIK's responsibilities.
