03/01/2008
(AFP, Javno.hr, Xinhua - 02/01/08;
UPI, AKI, UN News Centre - 31/12/07;
AP - 30/12/07;
ICTY - 29/12/07;
AFP - 27/12/07)
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader accepted on Wednesday (January 2nd) the resignation of Interior Minister Ivica Kirin following his involvement in a scandal that prompted the UN war crimes tribunal to terminate the provisional release of one of its indictees.
Kirin tendered his resignation on December 29th, a week after taking part in a wild-boar hunting trip with former special police commander General Mladen Markac, who surrendered to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in 2004 and was freed later that year to await trial at home.
A joint indictment charges him and two other former generals -- Ante Gotovina and Ivan Cermak -- with responsibility for a host of crimes, including the killings of at least 150 Serbs during the Croatian forces' August 1995 Operation Storm to regain control over the Krajina region.
After the appearance of front-page pictures in Croatian papers, showing Kirin, Markac and other officials standing over a dead wild boar, the ICTY issued an order on December 28th, asking Croatian authorities to immediately arrest and transfer Markac back to The Hague.
It said the suspect's participation in the hunting trip in the Bilogora Mountain violated the conditions of his provisional release, under which he was not allowed to leave his Zagreb home without permission.
Markac was sent back to his cell at the UN tribunal's Scheveningen detention centre on December 30th.
"This should have not happened," Croatian President Stipe Mesic told journalists as the scandal broke out.
"The Hague-based court has its rules and all those who are entitled to provisional release know the rules that they have to act upon."
Kirin, whose ministry was responsible for ensuring that Markac would not breach the conditions of his release, expressed his "regrets and apology" for the incident in his resignation letter.
Sanader officially dismissed him Wednesday and issued a resolution assigning State Secretary Ivica Buconjic to handle Kirin's post until a new minister is named.
He also offered assurances regarding Croatia's commitment to full co-operation with the ICTY, citing the government's prompt action to arrest and send Markac back to The Hague as a proof.
"I do not accept judgments made of this government to the effect that it has lost its credibility with regards to co-operation with the tribunal," the AFP quoted Sanader as telling reporters Wednesday.
"The government has proved that it respects...
its constitutional requirement to co-operate.
The minister has paid the price for inexperience," he added of Kirin's departure from office."
According to Croatian media reports, however, the incident has considerably diminished the country's chances to obtain a provisional release for Gotovina, which they now see as "next to nil".
