03/01/2008
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times – 03/01/08
On Sunday (January 6th), former drug addicts from more than 20 countries will hold an encore performance of a nativity play they presented on Christmas Eve for thousands of pilgrims from around the world who gathered at the shrine of the Virgin Mary in Medjugorje, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The former addicts, who are members of the Cenacolo community, will perform on Sunday in honour of the day Christians call the Epiphany, when the infant Jesus was presented to the Magi, or three wise men.
The Cenacolo Community Centre in southern BiH is run by Italian Catholic Sister Elvira Petrozzi.
She has held nativity scene performances for millions who have made the pilgrimage to Medjugorje since 1981 -- when the Virgin Mary reportedly appeared there to six local children.
''Performing the nativity scene behind the Saint James Church in Medjugorje is not just a religious act, but proof that our battle against dependence on drugs can succeed,'' said a Croatian member of the community, Petar Muzar.
He has been a member for three-and-a-half years.
"Taking part in the nativity scene proves that I am on the right path to forget about my previous life and my bad experience with drugs."
Muzar said that working with other Cenacolo community members from countries such as Italy, the United States, Serbia, Panama, Slovakia, Slovenia, Great Britain, Poland, Hungary and Hong Kong, is evidence that their ability to concentrate was back and that they would be able to lead normal lives after leaving the community.
''People stay in the community for three-and-a-half to five years and then they're ready to start a new life without drugs.
Here we learn how to live our lives, how to stop using drugs,'' Muzar explained.
Despite the fact that they are performing the nativity, religious differences are accepted in the community.
''We have Muslims and Orthodox people in the community, which is primarily made up of Catholics.
But we don't make a distinction between people of various religions,'' said Muzar.
''We have done the nativity play for years, but every year we have new members who are searching for hope.
Also, there are pilgrims or local people who need our message,'' Italian Marco Zappella said.
He and his wife, Cinzia, have lived in the community for 17 years -- since they recovered from drug abuse.
They have built a house inside the community where they live with their four children.
''I'm not sure how the audience sees it, but scenes of people with lives that had been destroyed performing a positive performance, definitely can move people.
I hope the audience brings home a positive message from the play.
From our perspective, a good performance of our play means a victory for us -- a victory for which some of us were waiting for years,'' said Muzar.
