06/07/2007
By Ahmet Gormez for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 06/07/07
Turkey's Constitutional Court sided with the government on Thursday (July 5th), ruling that a referendum should be held on constitutional amendments that would allow the people -- rather than Parliament -- to elect the country's president.
Six of the court's 11 members voted against the appeal.
“There will be a referendum," court deputy head Hasim Kilic told the crowd of journalists waiting in front of the building.
The vote is likely to be held on October 21st.
The legislation was adopted by the ruling Justice and Development party (AKP) when its candidate for president, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, failed to get the required two-thirds majority in parliament.
In addition to establishing a popular vote for president, it reduces the head of state's mandate from seven years to five years and sets a two-term limit.
Parliament's term is cut from five years to four.
Incumbent President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, a staunch secularist who has often clashed with the AKP, vetoed the legislation, but it was again approved by parliament.
The president, together with the main opposition Republican People's Party, then appealed an appeal with the Constitutional Court.
The ruling comes just two weeks before the July 22nd general elections.
For months, Turkey's secular establishment and the AKP, which has its roots in Islam, have been waging a bitter political battle.
Secularists have called a series of protests, drawing millions.
During these so-called "Republic meetings", participants carried Turkish flags and rallied against the AKP, shouting "Turkey is secular and will remain so".
The Constitutional Court is considered a key part of the secular establishment, leaving many surprised by the ruling.
Some media reports suggest it is a sign that the battle between secularists and the AKP is over, at least for now.
Turks will now decide whether they want to choose their head of state, or if they prefer that the elected members of parliament do so.
Still uncertain is when this country of 70 million will actually get a new president.
By law, parliament members elected on July 22nd should elect a president within 30 days.
But the referendum on a popular vote for president will not be held until late October.
