04/07/2011
By Blerta Foniqi Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 04/07/11
Talks between Kosovo and Serbia, aimed at improving the quality of life for Serbs in northern Kosovo, began back in March with the EU serving as mediator.
The head of Pristina's delegation, Deputy Prime Minister Edita Tahiri discussed the dialogue recently with SETimes contributor Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi.
SETimes: So far, there are no concrete results in the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. 
Is it realistic to expect any agreement in the near future?
Edita Tahiri: We are very close to agreement on some issues ... 
the issue of free movement and establishing reciprocity in free trade. 
There was an asymmetry in trade relations, where Serbia has managed to export here, but Kosovo has not managed to export to Serbia.
We also have opened the topic of recognition of diplomas and university education and cultural heritage issues, damages from war (requests for repairs and compensation), the return of archaeological artifacts, ethnological and documentation. 
Also, we've opened the issue of missing persons in order to [determine] the fate of all.
Part of the discussion also deals with regional co-operation and removing obstacles.
Our goal as a government to use constructive engagement in dialogue to contribute to a good neighbour policy and regional co-operation, which are the basic criteria of Copenhagen. 
In achieving these criteria we meet European standards.
SETimes: What does the agreement on freedom of movement foresee? 
Is Serbia willing to accept car plates and Kosovo issued documents?
Tahiri: So far, Serbian citizens and their vehicles have been able to come freely in Kosovo, but our citizens could not travel or drive in Serbia. 
So according to the [proposed] agreement, each principle [will be reciprocal].
We are dealing with mutual recognition of travel documents and documents of vehicles. 
We have proposed that free movement becomes [the norm]. 
…We already have applied free movement [in] Albania and Macedonia, and now we are working for the application of movement with the identity cards to Montenegro.
SETimes: What concessions is the Kosovo side allowing in this dialogue?
Tahiri: Kosovo has made concessions for the past ten or 11 years, and now we want to establish order. 
The fact that we have allowed the free movement of citizens of Serbia in Kosovo, but they have not allowed the movement of our citizens in Serbia, has been a concession for the past ten years. 
Well, now it's time to put reciprocity for the benefit of citizens.
SETimes: And Serbia agrees?
Tahiri: As Kosovo has aspirations for EU integration, Serbia has the same aspirations. 
If the Serbian side wants the EU path, it must meet EU standards. 
The issues we are discussing are based on European principles, and each party is obliged to meet them to [complete] the road to EU integration.
SETimes: What is the stance taken by your counterparts on topics like electricity, for example? 
The Serbian Power Corporation has been interfering in the north, issuing and collecting bills.
Tahiri: We have proposed a plan that [would stop] this -- Serbian consumers would receive electricity from the Kosovo Electricity Corporation, but would not pay, or would pay Serbia. 
[Under the plan], Serbian customers would perform civic duties for the services they receive.
The agreement also includes the cessation of illegal intervention in Kosovo Serb operations and termination of transmission lines operating in Kosovo without compensation. 
The agreement will allow the normalisation of co-operation between the two states on the energy plan.
The [goal] is to eliminate the barriers to current interventions by Serbia in Kosovo and create an agreement in the spirit of the Treaty of Athens.
SETimes: You have stated that you not going never to discuss the northern part of the country, but most of the issues you're discussing with Belgrade are somehow connected to that part of Kosovo.
Tahiri: I believe the citizens of Kosovo -- including that part of the Serbian community which is reluctant to integrate into Kosovo institutions – will not live with the illusion that they can be supported by parallel structures. 
The period is starting in which people in the northern part will begin to understand the new reality.
This is technical dialogue, and we have the full support of the EU and the US. 
All major world centres have made it clear to Serbia that the issue of Kosovo status and boundaries are static.
