04/02/2008
By Manola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 04/02/08
Albania's institutions and politicians say they are determined to "take all measures, adopt any law, and pay any cost" to ensure the success of reforms that NATO has mandated as a condition for joining the Alliance.
"NATO and European integration are the two major goals for Albanians in this century," Prime Minister Sali Berisha has said.
"Through them, Albania hopes to join the nations with whom they share the common values of democracy, rule of law and free market economy."
"Faith in the Alliance … is the main reason Albania is striving to join NATO," Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu said at a send-off ceremony for the second Albanian contingent to the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission in Afghanistan.
According to Glori Husi, national co-ordinator for NATO integration, the Alliance has made it clear that the determining factors in receiving an invitation will be the country's performance and its ability to prove the irreversibility of the reform process.
"In the last two years, Albania successfully overcame three important tests," he said, pointing to the 2005 parliamentary elections, the 2007 local elections and the election of the president.
"We are seeing positive results in the war against organised crime," Husi said.
"More than 851 members of 202 criminal groups have been arrested and another 191 have been extradited from foreign countries.
Albania is no longer a source or transit route for human trafficking or the preferred route for heroin and cocaine trafficking."
Albania has also significantly reformed its army, turning an overwhelmed, outdated army of 31,000 into a contemporary, professional, well-equipped and well-trained force of 16,000 that is prepared to assist in NATO-led operations.
International partners have commended the country's contribution to NATO's peacekeeping operations and to the war on terrorism, as well as its good neighbourhood policy in the region.
Despite the successes, NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer has warned that the three members of the Membership Action Plan -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- all have "work to do".
Speaking on January 11th, during a visit to Romania, he said the reforms that Albania has to meet mostly concern the judiciary and electoral system.
In mid-January, Albania's major political groups expressed unity and readiness to move forward with NATO-related reforms.
Parliament passed a resolution calling on all parliamentary parties to commit all their resources to support the judicial and electoral reforms.
Planned improvements to elections include the creation of an electronic registry and the implementation of biometric ID cards.
All major Albanian political parties and post-communist governments have maintained good relations with the Alliance and support entry into it.
Polls show that as many as 94% of Albanians back joining NATO.
Many in the country see NATO membership as likely to improve the inflow of Foreign Direct Investment, as has been the case with other former eastern bloc countries that have joined NATO.
