03/08/2007
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times – 03/08/07
More than 5,000 people attended last week's burial of 147 people killed during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
The remains, discovered in mass graves near the northern city of Prijedor, were identified by forensic experts.
The 147 are believed to be victims from the three most notorious death camps in BiH: Omarska, Trnopolje and Keraterm.
"Most of them died in the Omarska camp," Jasmin Odobasic, a forensic expert who led the exhumation team, said. 
According to him, one of the victims was a Bosnian Catholic Croat, while the rest were Bosnian Muslims.
More than 3,500 Muslims and Croats from Prijedor are estimated to have died in the conflict, though only 2,000 have been found and laid to rest.
Several high ranking BiH officials were present at the July 28th ceremony, including Human Rights and Refugee Minister Safet Halilovic, former BiH presidency member Sulejman Tihic and Institute on Missing Persons from BiH Director Amor Masovic.
The head imam in Prijedor, Merzuk Hadzirusidovic, presided over the ceremony. 
He asked the crowd to remain "calm and honourable" during the proceedings, and called the day "sacred". 
His speech was followed by a moment of silence.
"It's horrible to have a funeral for so many people, killed only because they were Muslims. 
What happened here will never be forgotten," Harisa Trto told AFP at the ceremony. 
His brothers, Nizret and Emir, were among those being buried.
"These common burials are extremely important, as they show the horrible magnitude of crimes committed during the war, but also because they teach us never to forget the past and learn from it," said Faruk Hrncic -- a witness for the prosecution in the case against Zeljko Mejakic, who is currently being tried for crimes committed at the Omarska camp.
The Republika Srpska police department provided security during the service. 
Following the ceremony in the Prijedor stadium, the bodies were taken to 12 different cemeteries in the area, at the wishes of their families.
"Only one thing can help reconciliation and prosperity in this part of BiH, and that is the truth," Hrncic said. 
"We all must know what happened and learn to accept it. 
I am not just talking about one side; all sides need to look at themselves and wash away those that have committed crimes. 
This will prove that we have grown as a community and help us find a better future."
