05/10/2007
(Blic - 05/10/07; DPA, AKI, B92 - 04/10/07; AFP, DPA, Makfax - 03/10/07; SENSE - 25/07/07)
The wife of former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic has again called on her husband to turn himself in, the Sarajevo weekly Slobodna Bosna reported on Thursday (October 4th).
The family wants "all this to end, that he surrenders or be arrested," Ljiljana Zelen-Karadzic said in an interview. 
"Everything is in his hands and in the hands of those people searching for him," she added. 
Her comments came more than two years after a similar appeal in July 2005.
Karadzic, along with his military commander Ratko Mladic, have been indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
Both face genocide charges in connection with the Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo.
Karadzic has been on the run since 1996, but the Serbian and Republika Srpska authorities maintain they are unaware of his whereabouts.
In her interview with Slobodna Bosna, Zelen-Karadzic also claimed she had no idea where her husband was, "or whether he's alive".
Her last contact with him, she said, dated back to 2002. 
There was no word from him even when his mother died in May 2005, or when his son, Sasa, was detained, "or when our youngest grandchild underwent complicated hip surgery", she said.
Although her husband did not respond to her first public appeal, she is again calling on him to surrender because the family wants "the hell" they have been going through over the past decade to end, Zelen-Karadzic said.
Seeking to capture the top fugitive, NATO and EUFOR troops have conducted numerous raids at the Karadzic family home in the town of Pale, a former Bosnian Serb stronghold about 20km southeast of Sarajevo, and at the homes and offices of their children.
"We just want Radovan to surrender and get this thing over with," Zelen-Karadzic said.
Karadzic appears to have "disappeared from the radar screen", although new books and poetry written by him continue to be published in Serbia, chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte said in June.
EU officials have said full co-operation with the ICTY remains a condition for the accession progress of Balkan countries hoping to join the bloc. 
They will decide whether to finalise a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia after del Ponte delivers a report later this month on Belgrade's relations with the UN tribunal.
Besides Karadzic and Mladic, two other tribunal indictees remain on the run: wartime Croatian Serb leader Goran Hadzic and former Bosnian Serb police commander Stojan Zupljanin.
In a report Friday, the Belgrade daily Blic said both Hadzic and Zupljanin could easily be arrested and sent to The Hague. 
Their non-extradition is a tactical move by the Serbian authorities, it said.
With many EU member nations viewing the Kosovo issue as a difficult enough issue for Serbia, Belgrade hopes that it can get the SAA sealed without arresting any of the remaining fugitives sought by the tribunal, the paper suggested.
