04/02/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 04/02/08
Serbian President Boris Tadic has beaten back a strong challenge from ultranationalist Tomislav Nikolic to win a second mandate.
According to preliminary results from the country's election commission, Tadic took 50.57% of the vote in Sunday's (February 3rd) run-off.
Nikolic won 47.7%.
Turnout was over 67% -- the highest figure recorded in a presidential election since the toppling of Slobodan Milosevic in September 2000.
Although the president's role is mostly symbolic, the race had been widely heralded as a referendum on Serbia's future course.
The victory by Tadic could give new political momentum to his Democratic Party (DP) and even lead to a realignment of political forces in Serbia.
The DP's coalition partner, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DPS) declined to back Tadic in the run-off, so the future of the coalition may be uncertain.
Speaking to supporters in Belgrade, Tadic vowed to keep Serbia on track towards EU accession, despite the looming issue of Kosovo independence.
"We won this election and I congratulate all citizens that we showed Europe what our potential really is,'' he said, adding that now is "not a time for a celebration, but a time for work".
"The main thing after the election is to unite Serbia, and for all of us to work together on improving the citizens' lives," the president said.
Addressing Kosovo Serbs, he vowed that Belgrade "will not abandon them".
Nikolic has conceded defeat and indicated that his Serbian Radical Party -- still led by UN war crimes indictee Vojislav Seselj -- will not challenge the results.
He thanked his supporters "for realising that Serbia needs change".
While vowing that the Radicals would continue to be a strong opposition, he said his party would support all political structures that sought to keep Kosovo within Serbia's borders.
Tadic's victory brought congratulations from Slovenia, the current holder of the EU presidency.
Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa said the result "should be seen as a reflection of the desire and resolve of the country's democratic forces for Serbia to accelerate its progress towards the goal that is EU membership".
Political analyst Slobodan Antonic believes the Serbian government will probably remain stable for the time being, despite the apparent fracture during the presidential campaign.
Prime Minister Kostunica had asked Tadic to pledge not to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU if Brussels sends a mission to Kosovo without UN approval.
Tadic rejected this condition, and Kostunica subsequently did not back him during the runoff.
However, Antonic said, the coalition will probably be able to sustain itself.
Given the urgency of the Kosovo issue, with leaders in Pristina vowing to declare independence this month, anyone striving to bring down the government would be perceived as irresponsible, he said.
Former Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic, however, believes it would be politically honourable for Kostunica to resign.
"If the prime minister truly wants what is best for Serbia, the only good move he could make would be to resign and open the way for appointing of a new cabinet in the parliament," Svilanovic said.
However, Kostunica's party could potentially form a parliamentary majority with the Radicals.
For this reason, many doubt Tadic's Democrats will want to provoke the fall of a government in which DP has a majority of ministries.
