04/10/2007
By Georgi Mitev-Šantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 04/10/07
The privatisation of Serbia's JAT Airlines has been subject of domestic and international curiosity for months. 
The airline, the national carrier of Serbia, is 100% owned by the government. 
A privatisation tender is expected to be called by the end of the year.
The government, however, is split over the sale. 
Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic has come forward and said part of the airline should remain in the hands of the state. 
But other ministers want the government to be rid of the company altogether, and the sooner the better.
A consortium -- led by US bank Rothschild -- was appointed last month as privatisation adviser. 
The group is under a 1m-euro contract to counsel the government on the best way to conduct the sale.
Official interest in the airline has been expressed thus far by Russia's Aeroflot, while Air India is interested in establishing a joint venture company with the Belgrade headquarters. 
However, the possibility of the Russians entering the Balkan market has raised eyebrows at the European Commission, which is worried about giving a company from outside the EU an entry point into the bloc.
Under the Open Skies Agreement, all European airlines will receive equal treatment in signatory states, starting next year. 
Serbia has signed the agreement, but has yet to ratify it. 
If Aeroflot were to buy JAT, and Serbia were to ratify the accord, the Russian company could freely fly across Europe and be protected on home territory.
Some commentators have even suggested Serbia is trying to set up the JAT sale to the Russians as payback for Moscow's support on the Kosovo status issue. 
Djelic, however, has dismissed these claims.
What is certain for now is that JAT will be the first, and possibly only, state company to undergo privatisation next year. 
Any postponement will only make things worse for the firm, because under the Open Skies Agreement the market will soon be flooded with new, low-cost competitors such as Ryanair and Wizz Air.
The Serbian airline will not be easy to sell. 
Its assets are valued at 150m euros, although this figure jumps to 400m euros if the reserved landing time slots at international airports are factored in. 
JAT's debt with the London Club of Creditors has been assumed by the state. 
However, it is still burdened with an antiquated airfleet -- 16 planes with an average age of 20 years -- and an unrealised contract with Airbus. 
In 1998, JAT ordered eight A320 planes and made a down payment of $24.5m. 
Those planes are simply too large for the airline's needs today.
The company is ready for privatisation. 
Restructuring is complete, and all activities outside of the core activity -- such as catering, hotels, plane maintenance and land operations -- have been separated into various companies that have been taken over by the state. 
But the sale comes at a difficult time for the airline industry, with many companies on the market and not enough interested customers.
