04/10/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 04/10/07
A week after judges at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) delivered their verdict in the Vukovar case, protests are still being organised in Croatia. 
Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, arguing that the sentences should have been much stiffer, has said his country will lodge a protest with the UN Security Council.
The sentences were handed down on September 27th. 
Former Serb commander Mile Mrksic received 20 years in prison, while his subordinate Veselin Sljivancanin got five years for aiding the crime. 
A third defendant, Miroslav Radic, was acquitted.
"For me, this is a defeat of the whole idea of The Hague tribunal, which was established by UN countries," Sanader said. 
"The whole world witnessed the Vukovar tragedy and the killing of civilians assassinated after the fighting. 
For civilian victims, these three men were meant to be held responsible."
Sanader plans to speak to the UN on October 15th, when the ICTY's work will be under discussion. 
His efforts to seek stiffer sentences are being supported by all parliamentary parties and the general public.
On November 1991, around 190 men were taken by Serbian forces to a farm outside Vukovar and killed. 
The massacre followed an 87-day siege of the city. 
An initial indictment against Radic and Sljivancanin was issued in 1995. 
Mrksic has been in the tribunal's custody since 2002 and Sljivancanin was transferred to The Hague a year later.
"After failing to protect us in 1991, the international community has let us down again," the Mothers of Vukovar group said in a press statement, announcing they will hold non-stop protests until the verdict is changed.
The Hague judges ruled that Mrksic had not actually ordered the massacre, although his actions enabledYugoslav Army troops and paramilitary soldiers to carry out the killings. 
Five counts of crimes against humanity were dropped because the victims, who had sought shelter in Vukovar's hospital, were combatants rather than civilians, the judges said.
UN chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte has joined the Croatian government in criticising the sentences as too lenient. 
Prosecutors had sought life sentences for all three defendants.
According to legal experts, the sentence narrows Croatia's chances of winning its case against Serbia at the International Court of Justice, as the case was based significantly on the Vukovar murders.
