03/08/2007
(MIA, AP, AKI, Xinhua, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network - 02/08/07;
DPA, AP, MIA, Makfax - 01/08/07)
A Macedonian parliamentary committee stripped former Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski of his immunity from prosecution early Thursday (August 2nd), hours after he was charged with involvement in a disputed arms deal that allegedly cost the national budget 3m euros.
Six of the nine members of the committee, which handles issues relating to the rules of procedure and deputies' mandates, voted in favour of lifting Buckovski's immunity, chairwoman Svetlana Jakimovska told reporters after a tense, several-hour meeting.
On Wednesday, the country's financial police charged Buckovski with abuse of office and embezzlement of budget funds.
Investigators say he was involved in the illegal procurement of spare parts for T-55 tanks from Macedonia's MZT FOP metal company in late 2001, when serving as defence minister.
The judge, who asked parliament to lift Buckovski's immunity, described him as a prime suspect in the investigation.
On Tuesday, retired General Metodi Stamboliski, a former Macedonian Army chief of staff, was arrested in connection with the same case.
He reportedly ordered four times more spare parts than the army needed.
On Wednesday, criminal charges were also brought against MZT FOP manager Mitre Petkovski.
He has been taken into custody under a 30-day detention order.
Together, Petkovski and Buckovski allegedly pocketed defence ministry funds meant for the metal company.
Those allegedly involved in the case, including two other defence ministry officials, are accused of "generating substantial material gain for themselves by damaging the state budget by 3m euros", the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network (BIRN) reported, citing the charge sheet.
Buckovski, formerly leader of the main opposition Social Democratic Alliance of Macedonia (SDSM), was on vacation in Greece when the charges against him were announced.
He returned home for the parliamentary committee's session late Wednesday.
The SDSM members of the body claimed that Jakimovska put the motion to lift Buckovski's immunity to a vote before the session had ended, ignoring their demand for a debate on the matter.
"The decision was completely not legitimate as the session was not concluded, there was no decision approved, and the deputies present were deprived of their legitimate right to debate the issue," the BIRN report quoted Igor Ivanovski of the SDSM as saying Thursday.
"We have audio and video evidence that the session was not concluded, a decision was not made and the discussion was not over."
The SDSM has also threatened to seek legal action against some members of the committee.
It is also planning to file a petition that Buckovski's immunity be immediately put to the debate at a special session of parliament.
This is unlikely, the Macedonian Radio and Television (MRT) reported on Friday.
Buckovski, meanwhile, says he is the target of a "political witchhunt" designed to prevent him from going to the UN tribunal in The Hague in late August to testify as a key defence witness in the war crimes trial of former interior minister Ljube Boskovski.
He also said his role in the arms procurement deal was investigated in 2002, when the Public Prosecutor's Office rejected charges filed against him.
The parliamentary committee's decision clears the way for Buckovski's arrest.
According to the MRT, however, this is unlikely, as he has promised full co-operation in the probe.
