03/10/2007
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka - 03/10/07
Milan Jelic, the president of Republika Srpska (RS), died of a heart attack Sunday (September 30th) while watching a football match in his hometown of Modrica. 
He was brought to the hospital in Doboj with no vital signs, and attempts to save his life were in vain.
He had had serious heart problems in the past, and underwent surgery in Houston a few years ago. 
At the time, doctors advised him to stay away from stressful activities, including politics.
Jelic was elected president a year ago, as the candidate of the ruling Social Democrats. 
Prior to that, he had served as economy minister. 
He was actively involved in sports his whole life, and at the time of his death was head of the RS and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) football associations.
The RS government has declared three days of mourning. 
Thousands of citizens paid their final respects and signed the mourning book in Banja Luka. 
On Wednesday, he was buried at the Modrica city cemetery in the presence of senior state and entity officials, the president and prime minister of Serbia, and diplomats.
Jelic spent his short mandate in the shadow of his party colleague, RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik. 
He fought for respecting the Dayton Peace Accords, opposed reducing the power of entities in favour of the state, and any police reform that would lead to abolishing the RS police.
The presidency in RS is mostly a ceremonial position. 
Nevertheless, it has significance because presidents are elected directly by the people. 
By law, voters must choose a successor to Jelic by the end of the year.
In the meantime, however, RS authorities face a serious problem. 
Neither the constitution nor any other law stipulates who should perform a deceased president's duties. 
Under the constitution, laws adopted by parliament must be officially promulgated by the head of state before they can be implemented. 
Thus, parliamentary work is at a standstill.
On Monday, the entity's assembly held an urgent session and decided that Jelic's duties should be taken over temporarily by the president of parliament, Igor Radojicic. 
However, the move must be endorsed by the BiH Parliamentary Assembly, because the national interests of all three constitutive nations are potentially affected.
Bosniak delegates have already said they might oppose the plan on constitutional grounds. 
They argue that Jelic's duties should be performed by one of the RS vice presidents, who were elected to represent Bosniaks and Croats. 
As a result, the political impasse could continue until elections are held and voters have their say.
