03/09/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 03/09/07
The newly re-elected Justice and Development Party (AKP) has pledged to push ahead with further political and economic reforms meant to speed up Turkey's bid to join the EU.
"Our government views Turkey's EU accession process not only as integration into Europe, but also as a transformation process that will further develop our political, economic, social and legal standards, " Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said Friday (August 31st) during a speech to parliament, unveiling his government's five year programme.
Turkey's alliance with the United States, its NATO membership and its eventual accession to the EU were all complementary elements of the same overall target, the prime minster said. 
He also discussed his government's policy of seeking closer relations with Russia and other key states. 
"The relations developed with the important actors of Eurasia, such as Russia, China, India and Japan, are not an alternative to the established relationships that Turkey has with the United States and the EU," he said.
Erdogan's presentation followed four months of political tension between the AKP-led government and the military over the choice of Turkey's next president. 
A close ally of Erdogan, former Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, took up the post last week. 
The largest secular opposition party boycotted the parliamentary vote on Gul's candidacy, and the military reiterated its uneasiness while signaling that it would respect the outcome.
The AKP has its roots in political Islam, and counts key members of now-banned Islamist parties among its ranks. 
However, it claims now to be a centre-right party, along the lines of Christian Democratic parties in Europe. 
In his five-year programme, Erdogan refrained from including any controversial religious issues. 
Instead, he promised further economic development and improved human rights standards.
"The Republic of Turkey is a democratic, secular and social state with rule of law. 
These constitutional clauses are non-amendable and they constitute the basic values of our Republic," Erdogan said.
He also promised to draft a new constitution that will "protect individual rights in the most efficient manner and bring basic rights and freedoms in line with universal standards." The government will seek the broadest consensus possible for the new civilian constitution, he added.
Press reports suggest the new draft constitution will uphold the ban on wearing headscarves at universities, while allowing military officials fired because of Islamist connections to appeal. 
Possible new wording on civil-military relations would further limit the political influence of the military.
The government's five-year programme will be debated by parliament this week, with a vote of confidence held on Wednesday.
