04/12/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times
The latest round of talks on Kosovo's future is effectively over, and no agreement was reached, a troika of international mediators said this week.
"We … regret that the two sides were not able to agree on a settlement on Kosovo's status," the EU's representative in the group, Wolfgang Ischinger, said in Belgrade Monday (December 3rd).
"Our work ends with a report that we are finalising.
That of course doesn't mean that the negotiations on Kosovo could not be explored in other form or elsewhere," he said.
He and the two other troika members visited Belgrade and Pristina to present their report to the two sides in the talks, prior to submitting it to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon on December 10th.
They said their report would contain details of the positions expressed by Belgrade and Pristina during 120 days of negotiations.
It will not make any proposals for status, but will note that the two sides could not agree.
The troika appears split over the next potential step in the status process.
US envoy Frank Wisner said that once the report is submitted, it would now be up to individual governments to "take over" the Kosovo issue.
But Russian representative Alexander Botsan-Kharchenko insisted that any decision must be made by the UN Security Council.
As in previous rounds of the status process, the two sides remain fundamentally at odds over the future of Kosovo.
The Kosovo Albanians insist they will not settle for anything short of independence, while the Serbs continue to offer various forms of "broad autonomy".
Serbian Minister for Kosovo Slobodan Samardzic and Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic both suggested more talks could be in store.
"We believe that the negotiations do not end with the troika's report.
It is a very important phase and what has been said from the very beginning is that this phase was much more successful than the first one run by [former UN envoy] Martti Ahtisaari," Samardzic said.
Jeremic, meanwhile, warned against any unilateral moves by Kosovo leaders, who have been warning independence could be declared unilaterally if no international agreement is reached.
"Any kind of change of status and international status in Kosovo must be secured by a decision from the UN," the Serbian foreign minister said.
Kosovo leaders, however, have ruled out more talks, saying they consider the negotiations process to be over.
President Fatmir Sejdiu reiterated that independence is the only acceptable solution.
"We think that Ahtisaari's project will be implemented," he said, referring to the plan proposed earlier this year by the former envoy.
It calls for "supervised independence" under the guidance of the international community.
Kosovo's goal is to become a modern and democratic state for both the majority and minority communities, Sejdiu said.
In other news, NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer stressed that KFOR is ready to protect the Serbian minority in Kosovo.
At a joint press conference with Croatian President Stipe Mesic, he said the coming weeks will be a sensitive time.
The Kosovo status issue cannot be solved by violence, he said.
Mesic, meanwhile, urged Kosovo's Serbs to become actively involved in Kosovo politics.
He called on Belgrade to clear the way for their participation.
