02/07/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 02/07/07
During an official visit to Pristina on Friday (June 29th), NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer urged Kosovo Albanians to show "patience" in their quest for independence.
He also called on Serbia, and its ally Russia, to be more compliant in the situation.
"There should be no doubt that people who might think that there is a solution for the problem through violence will be confronted by a stern and determined KFOR," de Hoop Scheffer said, following a meeting with Kosovo leaders.
On Saturday, hundreds of Kosovo Albanians turned out in downtown Pristina, calling for immediate independence.
However, unlike the protest earlier this year, the group remained peaceful.
Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Çeku said he was worried about a loss of credibility in the international process due to continued delay.
Complaining of a "crisis of trust", Kosovo leaders have threatened to declare independence -- a move that could split the EU and undermine its plan to take over supervision of Kosovo from the UN.
De Hoop Scheffer said former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's comprehensive proposal provides a balanced resolution.
Speaking to the Kosovo Unity Team, he said that while the process is being debated by the Security Council, nobody should impose another solution.
The NATO chief also called on Moscow and Belgrade to be more flexible in the search for a permanent status for the region.
Russia has threatened to veto UN plans for the internationally supervised independence for Kosovo.
"NATO is in a favour of fast process … we call on Russian and Belgrade's flexibility," de Hoop Scheffer said.
Kosovo leaders are watching an ongoing meeting between US President George W. Bush and Russian President Vladimir Putin for signs of a deal.
However, the NATO chief said the international community is "facing difficulties" in trying to overcome Russia's opposition to the UN plan.
De Hoop Scheffer travelled to Kosovo after addressing a security forum in Ohrid, Macedonia, organised by the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council.
At the meeting, he said developments in the Balkans and Euro-Atlantic integration will slow if there is no resolution in the status of Kosovo.
"It is not in the NATO duties to have alternatives for political solution, but we offer the secure situation through KFOR," he said.
De Hoop Scheffer also met with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, UNMIK head Joachim Reucker and KFOR Commander Roland Kather.
