02/07/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 02/07/07
The 2nd Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) summit was held last week in Ohrid, Macedonia, where the topics of Afghanistan, Kosovo, the future of the Balkans and energy security topped the agenda.
Delegates from all 49-member countries of the Council attended the summit and participated in six panel sessions on the topics.
The possibility that the three Adriatic Group countries -- Croatia, Macedonia and Albania -- will get invitations for NATO membership at the Alliance's summit in Bucharest next year was also discussed at the forum, held on Thursday (June 28th) and Friday.
The Kosovo panel backed the idea that the Kosovo solution has to result in better security for the region.
Most speakers supported former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan for the province.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic reiterated the position that Ahtisaari's plan is not acceptable -- but said the country's new government is willing to talk with Pristina and the international community with the goal of finding a compromise.
"There is a fair, firm and comprehensive basis for a Security Council decision, based on the Ahtisaari proposals.
NATO and its partners are active and will stay active in KFOR to guarantee security and stability in Kosovo.
It is important for all to exercise restraint and calm, and I think we should prevent unnecessary delays in trying to find a solution for the status of Kosovo," NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said.
On the topic of NATO enlargement, de Hoop Scheffer was clear that the three countries will be assessed individually.
"I am pleased with the progress made by the so-called 'Adriatic Three' through the Membership Action Plan," he said.
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said the three countries will provide results and fulfil reforms.
"I am convinced that in ten months, Macedonia together with Croatia and Albania, will receive the deserved invitation."
A meeting of the signatories of the Adriatic Charter was held a day before the forum.
US Ambassador to NATO Victoria Nuland confirmed US support for Macedonia, Albania and Croatia becoming members as soon as possible.
However, she stressed, the three countries had a lot to do in the next ten months.
In assessing regional security, de Hoop Scheffer said the broad picture is positive.
"Extremism has been pushed back to the fringes of political life in most of the region.
But we must remain vigilant -- the voices of democracy and freedom in Southeastern Europe have an obligation to continue to speak out," the NATO chief said.
"The Euro-Atlantic perspective has been crucial.
We need to move away from the 'winner takes all' mentality in politics, to strengthen the rule of law, build good neighbourly relations, and generate economic growth."
On the topic of Afghanistan, participants said much progress had been made, but they highlighted the need for a comprehensive approach, and the need to build the capacity of the Afghan authorities to deliver security, good governance and development.
The third panel was dominated by the thesis that energy security in the world depends on the situation in the Middle East, and NATO must ensure protection of the infrastructure.
De Hoop Scheffer said that guarding pipelines and sea lanes with military forces is vital to securing the energy supplies of member nations.
He stressed that the Alliance must become involved in the situation, a proposal that some nations have been reluctant to embrace.
"I'm firmly convinced that NATO has a role to play in this field," de Hoop Scheffer said.
"The security of our energy supplies is really a question to interest for us all."
