02/10/2007
(Office of the High Representative, AFP, AP, International Herald Tribune - 01/10/07;
DPA, Reuters - 28/09/07)
A police reform deal reached late last week by the Bosniak and Serb leaders, Haris Silajdzic and Milorad Dodik, fell short of EU requirements, High Representative Miroslav Lajcak said Monday (October 1st).
"Unfortunately, what has been achieved is not enough to continue the Stabilisation and Association Process with the European Union," Lajcak told reporters Monday.
Describing it as an encouraging step, however, he said politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) would be given a few more days to reach a compromise that will help the Balkan country move forward on its EU integration path.
He praised Dodik and Silajdzic, who have often clashed in the past, for taking the future of the country seriously and for their decision to seek a solution.
"It is encouraging that they have narrowed their positions on this key issue," Lajcak said.
"The document, however, leaves some key questions unresolved.
I have asked both party leaders for clarification on these points."
"We agreed that, in light of encouraging developments, the European Commission could wait a few more days -- but only a few days," he added.
"We, the European Union and the international community, expect BiH leaders to do their best to come to an agreement as soon as possible -- an agreement that will meet the European requirements and will have the necessary political support."
Silajdzic and Dodik announced their deal Friday.
They had been among the first to reject a police reform plan drawn up by Lajcak in August.
The country's eight main political parties held weeks of talks on that plan, but were unable to reach common ground.
Neither the High Representative's plan nor the Silajdzic-Dodik protocol has been made public.
However, Dodik has said Friday's deal would preserve the Republika Srpska (RS) police force, while integrating it into state structures.
"For me, the most important thing is that RS institutions remain and that the RS police do not come under question," he said.
Silajdzic, however, told an emergency meeting of his Party for Bosnia that the future of the RS police had not been determined in the protocol, and would have to be discussed later.
He said the accord reached with Dodik envisions a multiethnic police force, with the ethnic balance based on the 1991 census.
In a statement Tuesday, a spokesman for Lajcak's office said the protocol contains "imprecision".
"There are certain parts of the document that have not been completely defined," Oleg Milisic said.
Currently, each of the two entities in BiH has its own police force, operating under its own interior minister.
The EU has laid down three key principles for overhauling the system.
It wants a single force established, with all budgetary and legislative matters handled at the state level.
In addition, there must be no political interference in policing, and policing regions must be determined by technical criteria, rather than ethnic considerations.
The main goal is to create a functional, multiethnic and professional police force, capable of ensuring the safety of the citizens across the country.
Besides providing huge cost savings, the reforms would also facilitate better co-ordination in the fight against trafficking and organised crime -- all areas of particular concern for the EU.
The current system aids criminals by enabling them to flee across inter-entity borders, critics say.
Lajcak has been striving to reconcile the EU principles with the Bosnian Serbs' insistence on retaining their police in some form.
But his efforts have stirred opposition from Bosniak politicians, who say too many concessions are being made to RS.
Only the two main Croatian parties -- the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Croatian Democratic Union 1990 -- and the second-largest Bosniak party, the Party for Democratic Action, have supported Lajcak's proposal.
Goran Trajkov  contributed to this report.
