01/08/2007
(AKI, Beta, Economy.co.yu, Serbian government, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network - 31/07/07)
The one-year break in Serbia's rapprochement talks with the EU has not soured Serbs' attitude towards their country's bid to join the 27-nation bloc, a senior official said on Tuesday (July 31st), citing the results of a new, government-sponsored poll.
In the survey, conducted by Belgrade-based Strategic Marketing polling agency last month, 69.3% of the 1,050 respondents expressed support for Serbia's EU membership aspirations, down from 69.9% in September 2006.
Brussels suspended talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Belgrade in May 2006, citing its lack of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The process resumed in June, following the extradition to The Hague of Bosnian Serb fugitive Zdravko Tolimir, and subsequent comments by chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte praising Serbia's renewed co-operation.
The EU has warned, however, that the SAA talks will be concluded only after all four remaining fugitives sought by the ICTY -- including former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic -- are arrested.
Presenting the poll results at a press conference Tuesday in Belgrade, Serbia's EU Integration Office Chief Tanja Miscevic noted that 46% of the public have a positive attitude towards the Union, up 6% from last year, while only 20% have a negative view.
Public opposition to the country's co-operation with The Hague tribunal has dropped by 3% and now stands at 54%, she noted.
Around 45% of the respondents said they believed the EU was imposing conditions on Serbia and was asking it to give up on Kosovo to join the bloc, Miscevic said.
Some 31% thought that Kosovo and Serbia's Euro-Atlantic integration are "two allegedly separate processes, but that the province has emerged as a condition for joining the EU", she said.
Only 24% saw EU accession and resolving the Kosovo status issue as completely separate processes.
According to the poll, 71% of Serbs believe Belgrade should continue co-operating with the EU in the event it recognises Kosovo independence, while 29% would support severing diplomatic ties with the bloc, Belgrade-based news agency Beta reported.
Nearly 50% of those surveyed attributed the difficulties in Serbia's accession process to a "policy of attaching conditions and blackmail" allegedly used by the EU.
According to 20% of the respondents, the problems were due to Serbia's failure to fulfil its international obligations, while about 14% blamed them on the "inability of domestic politicians" and 9.5% on the mentality of the Serbian people.
Some 7% of the respondents linked the difficulties on Serbia's path to EU integration to the sweeping reforms that it needs to implement.
As for expectations about EU membership, 54% of participants viewed it as a road to a better future for the young, while for 45% it meant more employment opportunities.
More than half of these surveyed feared that EU membership and enlargement would have a negative impact on Serbian farmers, while 47% were more concerned about the high cost of the process and 44% about the loss of national culture and identity.
