03/12/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 03/12/07
While disagreeing on the future status of Kosovo, Serbia and Turkey have pledged to work together in preventing instability in Southeastern Europe.
Serbian President Boris Tadic visited the Turkish capital for high-level talks one day after the final round of internationally-mediated talks on Kosovo's future.
He warned Kosovo not to unilaterally declare independence.
"Unilateral moves will prompt a response.
This will not lead us to peace," Tadic said following a meeting with Turkish counterpart Abdullah Gul.
At the same time, however, Tadic stressed his commitment to a peaceful resolution of the issue.
"Serbia does not want war," he said, saying his country favoured "continuing negotiations on Kosovo ...
in a calm, patient and secure manner".
Gul, meanwhile, called for maintaining stability in the Balkans and urged both sides to consider the long-term European perspective.
"I believe all the countries in the region will finally be together under the roof of the EU.
All of the Balkans -- Serbia, Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina -- will join the EU," Gül said.
"I believe all these countries, with such a bright future, can solve their problems through dialogue."
He also called on Serbia to refrain from using force or violence if Kosovo unilaterally declares independence.
NATO member Turkey supports the plan for internationally supervised independence for Kosovo put forward by former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari.
The country makes a large contribution to KFOR, maintaining around 800 soldiers.
Turkey's relations with Serbia were strained during the years of conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the two countries renewed relations after the 2000 removal of former Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic's regime.
"The countries are looking to the future and are determined to improve relations in all fields," Gul said after Thursday's meeting.
He reiterated Ankara's strong support for Serbia's integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions and the quick finalisation of a free trade agreement.
Tadic said Belgrade is ready to move ahead to avoid rekindling old prejudices.
"[President Gul] and I are friends.
And we believe we can contribute to a stronger relationship between our countries, with proper political messages," Tadic said in Ankara.
He also expressed support for Turkey's EU membership process.
"Europe will not be complete without Turkey and without Serbia."
