03/12/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 03/12/07
The Croatian government is preparing a new legislative package that would encourage women to have more babies.
The new financial measure is expected to be introduced at the beginning of next year.
The legislation will provide mothers with better financial aid from the government, to allow them to stay at home during the baby's first year.
Currently, mothers in Croatia receive the lowest amount of financial aid of all of the countries in the region.
They do not receive their full salary while on maternity leave.
Under the existing law, mothers whose salaries are higher than the national average receive up to 600 euros a month for the first six months of their leave.
After that, the amount is cut in half.
Traditionally, women in Croatia stayed at home during their child's first year, but more now return to work after six months.
This is likely due to the decreased aid.
According to the new government plan, women will receive their full salary while on maternity leave for at least the first six months.
In the second six months, the amount will not be less than 70% of their salary.
Croatia desperately needs newborns -- the country's death rate exceeds the birth rate.
There are 9.63 births per 1,000 people annually, and the death rate is 11.57 per 1,000 people.
Improving the national demography has long been a top priority for Croatian governments, but so far all efforts have failed.
Women tend to have smaller families, with one or, at most, two children.
Families with three or more children are very unusual, especially in larger towns.
However, Croatia is not the only country facing this crisis.
Belgium, Bulgaria, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, San Marino (an independent enclave in central Italy with a population less than 30,000), Spain and Sweden have all developed official policies to promote childbirth due to low birth rates.
In Serbia last month, the firing of a pregnant woman sparked public outrage.
The woman, who was head of the municipality of Knic, 140km south of Belgrade, was voted out of her job by councillors.
Serbian Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic called the firing a "violation of human rights and the right to work".
"The decision is unacceptable, a shame for a democratic society and for Serbia, which says it wants to be integrated into Europe," Women Network member Ana Bukva said.
