02/01/2008
(Reuters, VOA, Independent - 01/01/08; Reuters, AP - 31/12/07)
Continued uncertainty over Kosovo's future could jeopardise regional stability and UN achievements on the ground, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon warned in a report to the Security Council on Monday (December 31st).
"Expectations in Kosovo remain high that a solution to Kosovo's future status must be found rapidly," the AP quoted the UN chief as saying in his report. 
"As such, the status quo is not likely to be sustainable. 
Should the impasse continue, events on the ground could take on a momentum of their own, putting at serious risk the achievements and legacy of the United Nations in Kosovo."
The report, covering developments in the province between September 1st and December 15th, follows the end of 18 months of internationally mediated talks, in which Belgrade and Pristina failed to reach an agreement on the province's final status.
Technically still part of Serbia, Kosovo has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict. 
During the negotiations, the two sides remained entrenched in their positions, with leaders from Pristina pushing for independence and the Belgrade officials offering broad autonomy.
In the absence of a deal, Kosovo's 90% ethnic Albanian majority is widely expected to adopt a unilateral declaration of independence within the next couple of months.
Nine days after the end of a last-ditch effort to resolve the issue, the Security Council held a closed-door session on Kosovo on December 19th, but failed to agree on next steps in the process of determining its final status. 
The 15 member nations remained divided in their stances.
Viewing the negotiation process as exhausted, Western countries have signalled their readiness to recognise Kosovo independence even without UN endorsement, while Russia, which backs Serbia, insists on the continuation of talks until a compromise is found.
"Uncertainty and a loss of forward dynamic in the future status process could create a risk of instability, both in Kosovo and in the wider region, as well as a potential risk to the safety of UN staff," Ban also warned, urging the Kosovo Albanians and Serbs to refrain from violence.
If Moscow continues to block a Security Council decision on Kosovo, the EU is expected to take over within the coming months and push for implementation of former UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan, granting the province internationally supervised independence.
"A solution for the Kosovo status is firstly a European question," a report Monday by Belgrade-based B92 quoted German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier as saying. 
He also warned that lasting uncertainty could sow instability in the Balkans. 
"We want to achieve in the Western Balkans what we have achieved in the rest of the European Union -- peace, stability and prosperity."
"The European Union's growing institutional commitment to Kosovo is important, as is its continuing provision of a European perspective to Kosovo," Ban said in his report.
He saw as encouraging the fact that the November 17th elections in Kosovo "were conducted in a free and fair manner and in accordance with international standards" and "an indication of the maturity of Kosovo's provisional institutions".
But he also noted the "disappointingly very low" Kosovo Serb voter turnout, which only slightly exceeded that in the 2004 elections. 
In both cases, Belgrade urged Kosovo Serbs to boycott the votes.
