01/10/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi in Pristina – 01/10/07
Kosovo Albanian and Serbian representatives held direct talks at the EU mission in New York on Friday (September 28th). 
The two sides made a joint declaration committing themselves to engaging seriously in the negotiations and refraining from any actions that would threaten the security situation. 
They also agreed to continue their talks in Brussels on October 14th.
On the key points concerning Kosovo's future, however, the differences remain stark. 
Pristina insists that independence is non-negotiable, while the Serbian delegation says the most it can offer is a high degree of autonomy.
"Once again we presented our proposal for essential autonomy, not bringing Serbia’s territorial integrity and sovereignty in question, and raised issues with the Albanian side, which wanted to talk relations between two sovereign states," Tadic said. 
"That proposal is unacceptable for Serbia."
By contrast, the Kosovo Albanian negotiators came ready to propose a "good neighbour" treaty once the province becomes independent. 
They repeated their warning that Kosovo's parliament would declare independence unilaterally if no deal is reached by December 10th.
As the Kosovo team returned home over the weekend, President Fatmir Sejdiu said there were some "new initiatives" on the table that could lead to the status process being wrapped up prior to that date. 
However, he declined to be more specific.
The only acceptable relationship between Serbia and Kosovo is that of two neighbouring states, Sejdiu said. 
"With our good neighbour treaty, we are trying to connect these relationships … Kosovo is a special case and must have [special] treatment."
Political leaders of the Kosovo Serb community suggested some parts of the talks had gone in their favour. 
According to Serb Ticket for Kosovo and Metohija leader Oliver Ivanovic and the head of the Serb National Council for Northern Kosovo, Milan Ivanovic, the Albanian side had been told it could not count on a unilateral solution.
They also said Belgrade was given a chance to present its proposal for fully integrating Albanians into the Serbian political and legal system. 
The Albanian side, they added, was given a chance to explain why they found this unacceptable.
Friday's meeting was headed by the three international representatives acting on behalf of the Contact Group -- the EU's Wolfgang Ischinger, Alexandr Botsan-Kharchenko of Russia, and the US envoy, Frank Wisner.
Wisner said the Contact Group insists on the responsibility of both sides. 
It is up to Belgrade and Pristina to find common ground, he added.
The Russian envoy said his personal impression was that Belgrade and Pristina wanted to keep negotiating. 
"I do not wish to be overly optimistic, and there are no signs that an agreement is near, but there are indications that both sides are interested in the continuation of direct talks," Botsan-Kharchenko said.
Asked whether some solution could be found by December 10th, EU representative Ischinger replied, “Why are you being impatient? 
Why can’t you wait for December 10th?"
"We got into these talks seriously, spent time to discuss details with both sides, and both sides at the meeting demonstrated that they wanted this process to continue. 
That is a good sign," he added.
