01/10/2007
By Mario Iribarnic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 28/09/07
The political scene in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is in an uproar over the police reform deal reached Friday (September 28th) by the Bosniak and Serb leaders, Haris Silajdzic and Milorad Dodik.
While Dodik appears to enjoy solid support from Bosnian Serbs, Silajdzic is coming under fire from other politicians, as well as from groups representing war victims.
The two leaders came to an agreement just two days before an end-of-the-month deadline set by the EU.
Brussels considers police reform in BiH a key requirement, and had warned that the country could not sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement this year if a deal were not reached.
High Representative Miroslav Lajcak has threatened to use his far-ranging Bonn Powers if the political stalemate in BiH continues.
Many in BiH believe Dodik and Silajdzic found common ground Friday because they were worried about possible sanctions against them.
Within the Federation of BiH, Silajdzic faces strong criticism.
Social Democrat head Zlatko Lagumdzija demanded to know why Silajdzic rejected a police reform deal put forward by Lajcak only to make more serious compromises.
"Lajcak's plan is much better than this protocol," Lagumdzija said.
"[The protocol] says police forces will be established in accordance with the latest population index, and since we have ethnically cleansed territories, it is clear what that means.
We will regret every single day that we did not accept the international community's proposal."
The most serious sign of dissension came from the Party for Democratic Action (SDA), which accused Silajdzic of "betraying Bosnia for his own interests".
Party head Sulejman Tihic, who had rejected Lajcak's proposal together with Silajdzic, said the new deal is much worse.
"I didn't participate in creating this protocol.
It says that local police forces cannot cross entity borders.
This is just one thing among others that is unacceptable for us," Tihic said.
War victims' associations, which until now had largely backed Silajdzic, are outraged.
"We, the family members of victims, feel insulted by the act of the Bosniak representative, who decided to sign an agreement which legalises ethnic cleansing and genocide," said Association of Mothers of Srebrenica President Hatidza Mehmedovic at a protest meeting.
"Silajdzic signed onto the preservation of an institution which the International Court of Justice has held legally responsible for Srebrenica."
Silajdzic has rejected the criticism, insisting "this is our last chance to catch up to the train going to the EU".
Dodik, meanwhile, repeated his earlier statements.
"For me, the most important thing is that Republika Srpska's institutions remain and that the RS police does not come under question.
It can be integrated into police structures in [BiH] but not cancelled."
Croat political leaders, who last week signed a declaration affirming the "sovereignty of the internationally recognised BiH state", have declined to comment on the Dodik-Silajdzic protocol, saying they will wait for the Office of the High Representative's (OHR) reaction.
So far, the OHR has only said there are "some unclear points" in the protocol.
It urged people to "refrain from interpreting the document, as only the European Commission can give an opinion on whether this agreement is in line with the three [EU-set] principles for police reform.
