29/05/2008
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 29/05/08
The new mayor of Belgrade is Aleksandar Vucic, one of the leaders of the Serbian Radical Party (SRS). 
Local representatives of the SRS and of two blocs led by the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) and Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) signed a coalition deal Wednesday (May 28th).
Vucic said that he wants to work in the most democratic manner, telling Belgrade residents that the new coalition will focus on their interests. 
"Our key issues ... 
are improving infrastructure and fighting corruption and crime. 
We expect investments of around 2 billion euros."
Asked whether he would fulfil his campaign promises, Vucic replied, "Belgrade will be like Manhattan. 
You can't believe what we are planning to do in our first 15 days of government." The media described the tripartite signing as "high noon" in Belgrade.
Hot weather did not keep Radical supporters away. 
Most wore blue T-shirts with slogans like "Kosovo is the heart of Serbia" and "Stop yellow, go blue!"
The Belgrade deal makes it clear that the pro-European bloc is finding it tough to form a governing coalition with Socialists on the national level. 
Pro-European bloc leaders Mladjan Dinkic of G17 and Bojan Pajtic of the Democratic Party (DS) have said they seek co-operation with the Socialists on all levels -- national, provincial and municipal.
Cedomir Jovanovic, president of the Liberal Democratic Party, is concerned by the new developments. 
"Belgrade is the capital of European Serbia," he said. 
"Democratic changes started in Belgrade, and this city can't be given over to the Radicals, just because of higher prices for other coalitions."
Other officials from the bloc led by President Boris Tadic think it is still possible for Belgrade residents to have a pro-European government. 
"A coalition deal among Radicals, Socialists and Populists is just one step in forming a city government. 
That is how we view today's agreement," said DS spokeswoman Jelena Trivan.
Many Democrats in Serbia remember Vucic as the minister of information who cracked down on independent media in 1998-1999.
The SRS, DSS, NS (New Serbia) and SPS also reached agreement on forming another municipal government, that of Leskovac, South Serbia.
