27/05/2008
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Split – 27/05/08
On June 1st, the Croatian parliament will revive a previous bill that allows most drivers to test 0.05% or below for blood alcohol content (BAC) without penalty. 
During the last four years, traffic laws mandated a 0.0% BAC. 
The public in general, and the tourist industry and winegrowers in particular, welcome the change.
The new law, however, will not apply to all. 
Professional drivers, as well as motorists under 24, must still abide by the 0.0% BAC.
Lawmakers adopted the stricter limit in 2004 to curb a rise in car accidents, caused largely by reckless young drivers leaving nightclubs. 
Motorists under the age of 24 represent 11% of the total in Croatia but cause 20% of crashes and 30% of accidents involving alcohol.
But zero tolerance had some unintended repercussions. 
Priests, for example, were unable to drive legally after celebrating Mass. 
The tourism, wine and beer industries all lobbied against the 2004 bill and called for a return to the 0.05% BAC. 
Their efforts have now paid off.
Parliament supports the legislative turnaround. 
"Road safety won't be compromised by the new law, statistics have confirmed in the last four years," says Marijana Petir, an MP from the Croatian Peasants' Party (HSS).
''I also lobbied and am glad that we [the winegrowers] managed to point out the inconsistency: the government managed to subsidise new vineyards and ban wine tasting at the same time. 
I always opted for a balanced solution,'' says Ivo Skaramuca, a prominent wine producer from Peljesac.
With the new 0.05% BAC, Croatia will match regional neighbours, while some EU countries allow a higher alcohol level for drivers.
"I do not support drinking and driving, but I call for a balance. 
If a person can have a glass of good wine and still drive safely, why should there be a ban on the wine?'' said Skaramuca.
He went on to explain that enjoyment of wine was as deeply embedded in Croatia's traditions as in those of other Mediterranean countries. 
Croatia's new alcohol bill also will benefit the 11 million foreign tourists who visit the country every year. 
The government's decision is taking effect at an opportune time -- just before the start of summer.
