26/09/2008
(AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, Bloomberg, BBC, DW, Euobserver, European Voice, French EU Presidency - 25/09/08;
EurActiv, Euobserver - 24/09/08;
EurActiv - 18/09/08)
EU interior ministers agreed on Thursday (September 25th) on a European Pact on Immigration and Asylum, laying out a set of common guidelines on managing the influx of workers from non-member states.
They also gave their principled backing to the introduction of a blue card regimen for skilled professionals from outside the 27-nation bloc.
The main goals of the pact, which EU leaders are expected to formally approve at a two-day summit beginning on October 15th, are to strengthen the controls on illegal migration, promote legal migration and develop a common asylum policy.
"Freedom of movement throughout the EU is one of the founding pillars of the community and can't be put into question,'' EU Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs Jacques Barrot said
The envisioned measures seek to "avoid the two obvious potential pitfalls:
the creation of a European fortress and the total opening up to illegal immigration", said French Immigration Minister Brice Hortefeux, chairman of Thursday's meeting.
The document focuses on five areas, including legal and illegal migration, border controls, asylum policies and co-operation with countries of origin and of transit of immigrants.
The pact stresses that the bloc "does not have the resources to decently receive all the migrants hoping to find a better life" within its borders.
The non-binding document calls on member states to avoid offering mass amnesties to illegal immigrants, while urging them to provide better conditions for highly skilled migrants.
EU nations reportedly will be able to manage the influx of legal immigration on the basis of their own needs and ability to welcome people.
The envisioned measures also provide for restricting illegal immigration and removing undocumented foreigners.
The ministers additionally supported in principle the introduction of a blue card regimen, modelled on the US green card system, designed to attract specific types of foreign professionals and address shortages of skilled workers.
After 18 months of working in one EU state, an immigrant holding such a permit would be able to work in another member state but would have to apply for a new blue card there within a month of his or her arrival.
The ministers agreed that member states should offer applicants from non-EU countries salaries 1.5 times the average salary in the host nation, "with exemptions for a certain number of job categories that could see this lowered to 1.2 times," Hortefeux said.
Some of the bloc's new members objected, however, to the regimen entering into force before labour restrictions imposed by some of the old member states end in 2011.
"Our citizens cannot be in a worse situation than non-EU states," Ivan Langer, the Czech interior minister, told reporters.
"We are EU members, and we want the same labour rights for every EU citizen."
Austria, Belgium, Germany and Denmark continue to protect their markets from workers coming from the former communist countries that have joined the EU since 2004.
The pact also calls on member states to develop a common policy on asylum, which observers do not expect to come into force before 2012.
