31/03/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 31/03/08
More than 12 years after the end of its inter-ethnic conflict, almost 4% of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) remains peppered with landmines, endangering the lives of 900,000 people living nearby, said Prime Minister Nikola Spiric, launching a new mine-clearing campaign earlier this month.
He said 480 people were killed and almost 1,140 injured by landmines since the fighting ended.
A fifth of the dead were under the age of 18, and 39 were trained experts, or sappers.
Additionally, 50 sappers have been injured.
During one week in March, six sappers lost their lives.
The first died on March 17th near Doboj.
The following day, two were killed and one suffered injuries in a field near Sprecani.
A few days later, three others -- two policemen and a civilian guard member – were killed near Gorazde.
Although the general threat posed by landmines has been significantly reduced, it will be a long time before BiH can claim to be mine-free.
The more optimistic experts say it will take at least ten years to clear the mines and about 40.9m euros per year to fund the effort.
Others warn it could take decades.
Unmarked minefields are a major problem.
In addition, natural phenomena such as landslides and soil erosion can cause the location of mines to shift, creating "walking mines", as people term them.
BiH boasts impressive natural scenery and the potential to become a magnet for tourists.
But the landmine problem is an obstacle.
Outdoor activities such as camping and hiking are limited by the danger.
The former Yugoslav National Army (JNA) was the fourth strongest military force in Europe.
It produced several types of anti-personnel and anti-tank mines.
During the conflicts on the territory of the former Yugoslavia, all parties acquired these dangerous weapons by plundering JNA military depots.
As the conflict progressed, the parties also smuggled in various types of mines from various manufacturers.
Much mine-clearing work has taken place already.
Several firms have taken part, backed by large donations of both money and equipment from several countries.
Nevertheless, BiH remains a high-risk country.
Many of the victims have been children.
Others include loggers, farmers and hunters.
Animals have also tripped mines alongside roads and hunting associations routinely report game being injured by landmines.
Prior to the deaths in March, sappers assigned to the area near Doboj had found and removed 122 landmines.
Efforts have since been suspended.
The European Commission estimates that 67,000 mines and about 650,000 unexploded devices still affect 10,000 localities.
A new Mine Action Plan has been adopted for 2009, but its implementation will require continued involvement by the international community.
