26/05/2008
(Blic, Nine o'clock, Zaman, Daily Telegraph, The Guardian, The New York Times - 26/05/08; AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, International Herald Tribune, B92 - 25/05/08; Official Website of the Eurovision Song Contest)
Following up on its victory last year, Serbia made headlines again this year with its successful organisation of the 2008 Eurovision Song Contest. 
The competition closed late Saturday (May 24th) with a victory for Russian singer Dima Bilan. 
It was Russia's first-ever title in the pan-European musical competition's 53-year history.
Belgrade once more found itself at the heart of Europe, even as its EU prospects remained clouded by outstanding war crimes issues and the political aftermath of Kosovo independence. 
Local headlines quoted by the Deutsche Press Agentur spoke of a "new winning spirit", a "European glow" and a chance to top the world news for positive reasons.
In Russia, meanwhile, mass euphoria took hold, with Muscovites celebrating into the night and the nation's top leaders hailing "another triumph". 
The Eurovision win follows international victories in basketball, ice hockey and football, and the Russian leadership has not been slow to capitalize on the political symbolism.
"This is not only a personal success for Dima Bilan … [but] for all of Russia," Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said in a published telegram addressed to the singer.
Bilan, 26, was representing his country in the competition for the second time in three years. 
He won the contest with his rock ballad "Believe", performed to the accompaniment of Hungarian violinist Edvin Marton on a Stradivarius.
The two were joined on the stage by Russian Olympic gold figure skating medalist Evgeni Plushenko, who pirouetted on artificial ice.
Bilan collected a total of 272 points from viewers, who voted by telephone and text message. 
Ukraine's Ani Lorak won the second place with 230 points for her "Shady Lady", followed by Greek-American pop singer Kalomira, who won 218 points for her "Secret Combination" and the third place for Greece.
Under the competition's rules, viewers can only vote for performers from countries other than their own. 
The highest marks a competitor can get are 12, ten and eight.
Seven countries -- the former Soviet republics of Armenia, Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Ukraine, as well as Israel -- awarded Bilan maximum points, and five others, including Serbia, gave him ten points.
Through his victory Russia won the right to host the 54th annual Eurovision contest next year for the first time since its first edition in Lugano, Switzerland, in 1956.
Up to 20,000 journalists, fans and guests from across Europe reportedly flocked to the Serbian capital last week to watch performers from a record 43 competing countries try to secure a place among 25 finalists.
Twenty countries made it through the first and second semi-finals, held on May 20th and 22nd. 
Five other nations -- host Serbia, as well as Britain, France, Germany and Spain, the musical extravaganza's four biggest sponsors -- were automatically secured a place among the contest's finalists without having to compete in the preliminary rounds.
