23/05/2008
(Budapest Business Journal - 23/05/08;
AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, CTK, Deutsche Welle - 22/05/08)
Joining other advocates of a resurgence of nuclear power, European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso argued on Thursday (May 22nd) that it could be instrumental to the EU's fight against climate change.
"Nuclear energy can make a major contribution to this battle," the EC president said at the start of a European Nuclear Energy Forum conference.
Increasingly concerned by global warming, the 27-nation bloc seeks a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20% by 2020, compared to 1990 levels.
Atomic energy's supporters insist its greater use could help achieve that goal, as it creates little carbon dioxide.
Soaring oil prices and EU nations' increasing dependence on hydrocarbon imports also are prompting calls for a diversification of the bloc's energy supplies.
Barroso stressed on Thursday that nuclear power is not only a low-carbon energy source but also the cheapest and less vulnerable to price changes than fossil fuels.
"Nuclear energy also helps to enhance the EU's security of energy supplies, and it increases diversification of our energy sources and reduces our dependence on imported gas," the EC president said at the forum, attended also by the Czech and Slovak prime ministers, Mirek Topolanek and Robert Fico, and senior energy officials from around the EU.
The EU, where 15 of the member nations currently have nuclear power, remains split on the issue.
Germany, which closed its reactors after the Chernobyl accident in April 1986, and Austria are the most anti-nuclear EU nations.
The Czech prime minister spoke in favour of a nuclear power revival, warning, "It really is five minutes to midnight."
His Slovak counterpart also views nuclear power as essential to Europe's energy security.
"It is clear to all of us that without nuclear we are unable to ensure energy security in Europe," Fico said on Thursday.
Before joining the EU, Slovakia agreed to shut down two Soviet-era reactors by 2009.
Fico said that the "reckless decision" would force "Slovakia ...
to import 20% of its electricity needs".
The only possible solution would be a "new agreement" with the EU.
Lithuania and Bulgaria, which made similar commitments before joining the bloc, also are urging the EU to reconsider.
Bulgaria once had six operating nuclear reactors but closed four of them.
The former energy exporter is now planning a new nuclear power station about 250km northeast of Sofia.
