23/05/2008
Analysis by Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 23/05/08
Although Serbia's political parties are still in negotiations on who will form the new government after the parliamentary elections earlier this month, Belgrade economists say that the coalition gathered around the pro-European Democratic Party (DS), led by Serbian President Boris Tadic, would be much more likely to garner the trust of foreign investors.
Economists also say that, for the sake of European integration, a DS-based government would attack the problem of inflation and would preserve the country's economic stability.
The future government depends on the coalition around the Socialist Party of Serbia, which won 20 seats in the May 11th election. 
The Socialists launched negotiations with the Radicals and the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), but those plans collapsed. 
Some of the leaders in the Socialist coalition now want to break off talks with the DSS and initiate negotiations with the DS.
The DSS and the Radicals claim they will annul the SAA, because they say that through the agreement, Serbia indirectly recognised Kosovo's declaration of independence on February 17th.
Belgrade economist Sasa Djogovic told <i>Southeast European Times</i> that if the Serbian Radical Party and the Socialist coalition organise the new government, foreign investors will be cautious until they see how Belgrade handles relations with the EU.
However, if the DS and the Socialists govern, investors would not hold back because "the officials whose policy they are familiar with and with whom they have been co-operating since 2000 would be in power", Djogovic said.
Economist Jurij Bajec says Serbia "needs a government that will enable direct foreign investment sufficient to ensure a 7% annual GDP growth rate in the coming period".
"Something like that requires the annual inflow of 3 billion euros worth of direct foreign investment and 2 billion euros in favourable loans with long grace periods," Bajec said. 
He added that such an inflow of foreign investment could be achieved only by a pro-European government that "understands that the EU is Serbia's chief economic partner".
"A pro-European government that would adopt European standards would guarantee security and stability, not only for investors from Europe but from all over the world, Russia, China and India," Bajec said.
Some, however, believe differently. 
Economist Jovan Dusanic said that foreign interests have invested in Serbia mostly through the privatisation of companies, with a small number of greenfield investments.
Regardless of who forms the new government, it will not be difficult to attract foreign investment through the sale of major entities, such as the oil industry and the power company, Dusanic wrote in a special supplement published by the Belgrade daily Politika.
He uses the examples of Russia and China -- saying that in the case of greenfield investments, what matters is not who is in power and what the country's international reputation is, but what conditions the country offers to investors.
