22/09/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb –22/09/08
In their biggest anticorruption sting ever, Croatian police have detained and questioned more than 100 people connected to a bribery scandal at Zagreb University. 
Among those detained are 21 university professors from the economy, law and transportation departments. 
The raid reportedly followed more than a year of preparations, during which secret agents posed as students and authorities conducted surveillance of teachers suspected of corrupt activities.
Among them was Desa Mlikotin Tomic, an economics professor who also chairs parliament's committee tasked with preventing and resolving conflicts of interest. 
She was sent home after her interrogation, but it is unclear if she will keep her post.
The police action strikes at the heart of what many say is a common practice of paying teachers in exchange for academic privileges. 
According to media reports, corrupt teachers charge as much as 9,000 euros to register unqualified students, then as much as 2,000 euros to give them passing marks on exams.
Academic bribery, the reports say, has become a well-developed business with its own rules and procedures. 
For example, students do not approach professors directly but have to work through an intermediary.
"Those who are rich do not have to worry; those who are poor, they have to study!" a professor was reportedly caught saying. 
Officials in the university departments involved in the scandal have promised that all bad diplomas will be annulled.
One of Croatia's most controversial figures, retired General Vladimir Zagorec, may be affected. 
The former associate of Franjo Tudjman received a diploma in traffic engineering from Zagreb University's Transport Department, successfully passing four exams and submitting his final thesis in a week's time. 
Now his diploma will be investigated in detail along with thousands of others.
The operation so far enjoys widespread public support. 
Only the conservative Vecernji List criticised it. 
The paper claimed authorities are simply staging a show for the benefit of officials in Brussels, who are currently preparing a new progress report for Croatia. 
The report is due in November.
