22/09/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 22/09/08
The UN mediator in the name dispute between Greece and Macedonia, Matthew Nimetz, has put forward a new set of proposals.
They include eight versions of the names "Upper Macedonia" and "North Macedonia".
He has asked both sides to look at his ideas seriously, and said they are a good basis for a future agreement.
"I have presented some revised ideas in front of both delegations and asked the negotiators to take them as framework for solution of the dispute," Nimetz said after meeting with negotiators Nikola Dimitrov, Martin Protoger and Adamantios Vasilakis in New York.
"I am trying to avoid a concrete name proposal.
I think that in this package there are elements for a fair and constructive solution, but it is obvious that both sides have to tell me whether something from the proposal can be helpful."
"I think that the ideas that I have proposed fulfill the needs of both sides.
That is my opinion when I present ideas, but both sides would have to find their standpoints," he said.
He confirmed that the issues of Macedonian nationality, the Macedonian language and use of the adjective "Macedonian" were raised in the talks.
Comments from the Greek and Macedonian representatives, however, suggest the two sides remain far apart.
According to Vasilakis, the Greek negotiator, Athens will only accept a name that will be used internationally.
But Dimitrov and Protoger, representing the Macedonian side, say Skopje continues to back a "dual formula".
That is, the country's constitutional name --Republic of Macedonia -- would be used internationally, while a special name would be used for bilateral relations with Greece.
On the nationality question, Vasilakis said Greece could accept "Slavo-macedonian".
The neighbouring language, he said, could be referred to as "Makedonski", but only using the Latin alphabet.
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski has sought to broaden the scope of talks to include not only the nationality and language issues, but also the rights of ethnic Macedonians in Greece.
Following a letter from Gruevski to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon about the issue, Ban requested an official explanation from Greece.
The UN expert for minority questions, Gay McDougal, met with Pavle Voskopoulos, head of the ethnic Macedonian interest group "Rainbow".
The meeting took place on the Macedonian side of the border, since some Rainbow members are barred from entering Greece.
Athens strongly disputes that an "ethnic Macedonian" minority exists in Greece and has opposed moves to make the issue part of the name talks.
