22/05/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo– 22/05/08
Fourteen years after the 1992-1995 conflict, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is still a complex country, a state with two entities -- Republika Srpska and Federation of BiH -- and three constitutive ethnic groups -- Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats, and Bosnian Serbs.
On its path to EU integration, BiH recently completed police reform -- a major requirement for signing the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU. 
Signing is expected next month. 
Some analysts say, once that occurs, BiH will face even bigger challenges -- among them, constitutional reform.
On Wednesday (May 21st), High Representative to BiH Miroslav Lajcak lectured on constitutional reform at the School for Advanced and International Studies at Johns Hopkins University in Washington. 
He described the issues BiH has confronted recently and the challenges it will face in the days ahead.
"Significant progress has been made over the past several months in BiH. 
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement will soon be signed, and the country is making progress towards full membership in NATO," Lajcak said. 
However, he also noted that while the majority of its constitutive nations have accepted BiH as their homeland, major differences remain among them in terms of the country's past, present and future.
Bosnian Serbs condition their loyalty to BiH by acceptance of RS as a legitimate and permanent entity, while Bosnian Muslims oppose this, demanding a united country. 
Bosnian Croats, as the third constitutive nation, are trying to better position themselves in this situation.
Nationalism, Lajcak said, "is used by all sides to hide the simple fact that politicians regularly fail, and often even fail to try to deliver concrete benefits for their citizens". 
As a result, he said, the country's effort to complete its post-war recovery and move into the next stage of its evolution -- the road to Europe -- has been delayed for too long.
However, Lajcak said, "nationalism still wins votes". 
He lamented the fact that "a decade and a half after the war, the vast majority of BiH politicians continue to view almost every issue through a nationalist prism."
More than 70% of voters want their leaders to take the country into the EU. 
Lajcak expressed hope that the politicians will be able to agree on constitutional changes required for the country to reach this goal, as "EU integration addresses fundamental issues of BiH statehood."
"The incentive of eventual EU membership and the enormous resources that accompany EU integration have combined to address many of the challenges posed by the country's particular historical problems," he said, adding that the path to the EU is the best mechanism for the preservation of BiH.
