22/05/2008
(AP, DPA, Balkan Insight, Sofia Echo, SNA, BTA, Dnevnik, ANA-MPA, Beta, B92, MIA, Makfax, Turkish Press, Bulgarian Government - 21/05/08)
Leaders of the countries in the South East Europe Co-operation Process (SEECP) signed a joint declaration at the end of a summit in Bulgaria's Black Sea town of Pomorie on Wednesday (May 21st), pledging to further develop regional co-operation.
They also affirmed the 11 nations' commitment to work together on the road to regional Euro-Atlantic integration.
"To me, it is of extreme importance that we managed to come up with a joint text … and send a clear message about the political will of all countries in the region to develop the co-operation process," aid Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergei Stanishev, chairman of Wednesday's meeting.
The summit, which marked the end of Bulgaria's year-long term at the helm, was attended also by presidents Branko Crvenkovski of Macedonia, Boris Tadic of Serbia and Vladimir Voronin of Moldova -- whose country will chair the loose grouping over the next 12 months. 
Greece and Montenegro were represented by their prime ministers, Costas Karamanlis and Milo Djukanovic. 
The other members of the organisation, established at Bulgaria's initiative in 1996, are Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Romania and Turkey.
Taking over the SEECP chairmanship, the Moldovan president said EU integration is the top priority for his country.
"The SEECP is an effective instrument for our countries to promote a single policy to settle regional challenges and problems," Bulgaria's English-language daily Sofia Echo quoted Voronin as saying.
The official agenda included the adoption of a report on Bulgaria's chairmanship of the SEECP and of the 2008-2009 working programme of the Regional Co-operation Council (RCC), whose Secretary-General, Hido Biscevic, also attended the meeting.
Opening the summit, Stanishev urged countries in the region to make sure their different views on Kosovo's independence do not prevent achieving the region's common goals for the future.
On Tuesday, there was a meeting of member nations' foreign ministers. 
Serbia's Vuk Jeremic blocked the adoption of a ministerial declaration that mentioned Kosovo "in a context that might imply it is an independent country in the region".
The Serbian delegation later criticised the Bulgarian chairmanship for giving the floor to Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hiseni, insisting that only UNMIK could speak on behalf of the former Serbian province. 
Tadic and Jeremic walked out of the meeting after UNMIK political director Jolyon Naegele allowed Hiseni to address the forum.
Jeremic has reportedly sent a letter to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, demanding that the UNMIK official be sanctioned for violating the organisation's instructions.
"The UN's explicit instruction is that UNMIK representatives are not authorised to give the right to speak to representatives of the interim Pristina institutions," Jeremic told Belgrade-based B92. 
"Naegele violated that direct instruction. 
We filed a formal protest and we expect disciplinary action to be taken against him for this."
