30/07/2008
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 30/07/08
Turkey sent warplanes Tuesday (July 29th) to attack Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) terrorists hiding out in northern Iraq.
The move came after a pair of bombings Sunday that killed 17 people in Istanbul.
In a statement, the Turkish General Staff said warplanes destroyed a cave used as a shelter by terrorists in the Qandil Mountains, killing around 40 PKK militants inside and outside the cave.
Another target in the Zab region was hit the same day.
A PKK spokesman in the region, however, contradicted Turkey's account, telling international news agencies that none of its members died during the strike.
On Monday, Turkish General Staff Chief General Yasar Buyukanit vowed that those responsible for the Istanbul bombings -- the deadliest attack against civilians in years -- would be held to account for their acts.
Turkish officials said their investigation was focusing on the PKK and related groups.
The PKK denies involvement.
Its successor organisation, Kongra-Gel, issued a statement condemning violence against civilians and claiming that the "Kurdistan freedom movement" played no role in the bombings.
Two years ago, however, a PKK-linked group known as the Kurdistan Freedom Falcons took responsibility for attacks on civilians in Istanbul and Antalya.
The pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP) also issued a condemnation.
Its co-chairman, Emine Ayna, claimed that a shadowy group called Ergenekon was behind the blasts.
Eighty-eight suspects, including retired army officers, Mafiosi, academics and politicians, are under arrest for allegedly founding Ergenekon with the aim of carrying out political assassinations and creating a "deep state" within Turkey.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan once again denounced the attacks during a public address in the city of Sakarya on Tuesday but did not name any particular organisation.
"Terror has no religion, no nation, whether it comes from right or from left," he said.
"We should be united as a nation to eradicate terror from the soil of our country," he added.
Turkey's main opposition leader, Deniz Baykal, has called for a silent, nationwide demonstration to condemn terror, similar to those held in Spain in 2004.
But Akın Ozceri, a former diplomat and expert on Spain, says such a mass demonstration would have little significance unless the political parties in Turkey can sit down and agree on a broad plan to eliminate the terrorist threat.
Despite calls for national unity against terrorism, the prime minister and the main opposition leader remain at odds because of ongoing political tensions.
Erdogan and Baykal were both in an airport's VIP section on Monday, but they did not converse.
"The distance between them was only 10m.
Was it that difficult for each of them to take five steps forward and shake hands?" wrote Erturgul Ozkok, editor-in-chief of Hurriyet.
"That is the most desperate thing we need today."
