28/08/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 28/08/08
In an emergency, a phone call can mean life or death, and the last thing you want is to have to fumble for the right number.
In the past, Croats had to memorise three separate numbers -- 92 for police, 93 for the fire brigade and 94 for medical personnel -- and it was easy to confuse them.
But the situation has changed.
This year, authorities introduced 112 as a single number covering all emergency services and also established a centralised emergency call centre.
By dialing 112, members of the public can reach any type of rescue service -- ambulance crews, firefighters, alpine rescuers, even veterinarians.
First launched in Split a few years ago on a pilot basis, the service now extends to the whole country.
By adopting it, Croatia took another step towards meeting EU standards, as 112 is the official, bloc-wide emergency number.
All member states must have the number in operation, and the European Commission monitors compliance.
Knowing what digits to dial is essential not only for residents, but for tourists too.
Crowds of visitors arrive each year, and there are always incidents.
In July, for instance, two young scuba divers -- a Czech and a Slovenian -- fatally overestimated their diving capacity.
The same month, two men died of heart attacks at a Dalmatian sea resort, and a surfer drowned days earlier.
Hikers intent on exploring the stunning Croatian landscape sometimes get lost or venture into hazardous terrain.
Luckily, most of the mishaps experienced by visitors are not so severe.
More typical problems include losing track of a family member or friend, being robbed, or encountering a hazardous situation such as a gas leak or polluted water.
But even for less serious cases, summoning the right help quickly is essential.
Officials have sought to alert visitors to the 112 service by means of a public campaign.
They have distributed posters and leaflets to hotels, resorts, bungalows and private room services.
"In case you notice anything strange or someone you know is missing, please react immediately," they say.
