29/07/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 29/07/08
The 1912 Stockholm Games were the last time Serbia participated in the Olympics as an independent state.
Afterward, as a part of several state alliances, Serbian athletes competed in the Olympics under different national names.
This year in Beijing, for the first time in 96 years, they will compete under the Serbian flag again.
In Beijing, 91 athletes will represent Serbia.
Although the country has a tradition of high achievement in team sports -- notably basketball, water polo and handball -- this year Serbia's highest expectations are for individual sports.
The nation is looking to female tennis players Ana Ivanovic and Jelena Jankovic, who have top worldwide rankings.
In men's tennis, Novak Djokovic ranks third in the world.
Nenad Zimonjic is number one in doubles and won at Wimbledon earlier this month.
Many expect him to win gold in Beijing.
Serbian swimmers also have a good chance of winning medals.
Milorad Cavic holds the current European record for the 100m crawl.
In team sports, much is expected from the water polo team, which recently lost to Montenegro in the European Championship finals.
The players pledged to make up for that defeat in Beijing.
Male and female volleyball teams also stand a good chance of winning medals.
The men's team surprised many by taking second place in the World League late this month.
The female players will arrive in Beijing as European silver medalists.
Serbian President Boris Tadic handed the national flag to the athletes when seeing them off.
The flag-bearer in the opening ceremony will be Jasna Sekaric, considered the top member of the Serbian delegation because she already has five Olympic medals in shooting.
"I am very proud and happy to carry the flag, and I think that we are all happy to compete under the Serbian flag after 96 years," Sekaric said.
"I wish you a safe trip and I want you to do what you can at the Olympic Games, because whatever you do will be enough," Tadic told the athletes.
