21/05/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 21/05/08
The EU, the European Commission and other international community organisations have condemned the campaign-related incidents in Macedonia in the run-up to the June 1st elections.
In the latest incident, shots were fired early Sunday (May 18th) at the office of the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), an ethnic Albanian party, in Tetovo.
Sunday's events are not the first since campaigning officially began on May 11th.
Last week, there was an assassination attempt against DUI leader Ali Ahmeti.
Two men fired at his vehicle during his visit to Bogovinje.
According to local press reports, exchanges of gunfire, shots at houses and shops of party members and attempts to obstruct political rallies are almost daily occurances.
If the violence continues, the country risks losing its invitation from the EU to open accession talks.
Macedonia is already in a tricky situation internationally with the rejection of its NATO bid last month.
"Fair and democratic elections are the precondition for our Euro-Atlantic perspectives," President Branko Crvenkovski said before the start of the electoral campaign.
"Irregular elections would a step back from our goal -- EU and NATO."
The international community unanimously condemns the violence.
"These incidents are a reason for concern," EU Ambassador to Macedonia Ervan Fuere said.
"The elections are a test for Macedonia.
We expect better, not worse elections than in 2006," he said.
"There is no place for violence in the election campaign," the Slovenian government, who currently holds the rotating EU presidency, said in a statement.
Slovenia urged Macedonian authorities to investigate the incidents and punish those responsible.
The US Embassy in Macedonia also expressed serious concern over the incidents.
The June elections were scheduled after parliament dissolved on April 11th.
Social Democrats (SDSM) and one of the ruling parties, New Social Democrats (NSDP), boycotted the assembly dismissal.
The biggest ruling party VMRO-DPMNE, however, and the two ethnic Albanian parties, ruling DPA and opposition DUI, supported early elections.
VMRO-DPMNE leader Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski has a huge following in the country.
Many expect him to win his post again with the support of an absolute majority in parliament.
But among the ethnic Albanian parties the situation is different.
Both the DPA and the DUI have equal chances of winning the Albanian votes, with a slight advantage for DPA and its leader, Menduh Tachi.
The International Institute for Middle-East and Balkan Studies (IFIMES) in Ljubljana, Slovenia, one of the most prestigious in the region, conducted a poll from April 14th to 18th.
The results suggest that the new government will be again formed by the ruling ethnic Macedonian and Albanian parties VMRO-DPMNE and DPA.
According to the IFIMES poll, Gruevski is the most popular politician with 44% of votes.
Radmila Sekerinska, leader of the biggest opposition party SDSM, was supported by 18% of votes, followed by NSDP leader Tito Petkovski with 9%.
Among the Albanian leaders, Tachi of the DPA received 14% and DUI leader Ahmeti received 12% of votes.
