20/05/2008
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Mostar -- 20/05/08
A group of young people have taken the initiative to improve the quality of life in a once ethnically divided and war-torn city of Mostar, southern Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
They founded Futura -- an association that will address difficult issues in various areas such as the media, education, economy, human rights and EU integration.
Many question whether a group of young people really can change life in BiH's post-conflict era amid an economic crisis and existing ethnic and religious differences among the Bosnian Muslims, Croats, Serbs and others.
''Yes!'' says association head Marin Bago.
''We are convinced that we can improve the quality of life in Mostar and in other parts of the country.
Any input from the society is welcome.
We need to take into consideration that BiH is still a divided country when it come to media, education and the justice system."
Bago and his team say the consequences of the 1990s conflict still haunt the country's struggling economy, but he thinks that he and his team can make a difference.
''At Futura we'll try to provoke people to think about the key problems in BiH society.
We'll focus on absurd situations through public polls, TV programmes, documentaries, media campaigns and through debates on different topics.''
Futura will focus first on media development and schools.
''We are sure that without developing the media and the educational system there will be no bright future for Mostar or for BiH," Bago said.
Members of Futura worry that BiH is not yet ready to accept new EU laws.
''We find that the country lacks a clear and defined economic strategy, and without a defined economic strategy we cannot have solid educational system.
The BiH Constitution should be a result of an agreement among different ethnic minorities in BiH,'' Bago told the Southeast European Times.
He appears pleased too with the response to Futura.
''Our talks with the representatives of various institutions and NGOs left us with an impression that we've convinced them that our initiatives are positive and necessary.
Addressing problems that we want to solve will require much enthusiasm from NGOs and citizens, too."
