31/10/2008
(Javno.hr, B92 - 31/10/08;
Reuters, AP, BBC, The Economist, Javno.hr, B92, Makfax - 30/10/08)
Police arrested ten people for suspected involvement in the assassination of prominent Croatian journalist Ivo Pukanic, a senior police official told reporters in Zagreb on Thursday (October 30th).
A special police force in an operation late Wednesday grabbed them, police spokesman Krunoslav Borovec said, describing the suspects -- eight Croats and two Serbian citizens -- as "dangerous members of a criminal milieu".
One of the Croats arrested Wednesday is Robert Matanic, a prominent gang figure who served 18 months in a Serbian jail for illegal arms possession and eight months in a Bulgarian prison for involvement in mafia killings in Sofia.
Police also arrested his girlfriend, as well as Luka Matanic (his cousin) and Amir Mafalani.
Both allegedly were involved in the Sofia murders.
The two Serbian nationals are Svetozar Djurovic, known as "the Cardinal", and Milenko Kuzmanovic.
Djurovic, 54, is purportedly a former associate of Sreten Jocic, aka Joca Amsterdam, often referred to as the "cocaine king of Europe".
The detentions came six days after Pukanic, co-owner and editor-in-chief of the Croatian political weekly Nacional, died in a car bombing in downtown Zagreb on October 23rd, along with the newspaper's marketing director, Niko Franjic.
Their deaths followed the October 6th murder of Ivana Hodak, the 26-year-old daughter of a prominent Croatian lawyer.
In response to the apparent escalation of violence, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader declared an all-out war on organised crime.
Besides making numerous arrests, authorities launched a new police unit tasked with fighting organised crime and corruption and stepped up co-operation with police in other countries in the region.
The latest measures announced on Wednesday envision the establishment of special fast-track courts to deal with organised crime, as well as improvements in the country's witness protection programmes.
"The situation is serious, and there is no time to lose," Simonovic told parliament.
"Organised crime has spread so much that it is threatening our citizens' security and our European ambitions."
Reports following talks between Croatian chief of police Vladimir Faber and his Serbian counterpart, Milorad Veljovic, indicated on Thursday that the two countries are considering teaming up in the fight against organised crime.
"We have agreed to establish joint teams for fighting organised crime and will communicate on a daily basis," Veljovic said.
"This (Pukanic's murder) is proof that there is excellent co-operation among criminal groups and that all police forces must stand up to it."
