20/05/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 20/05/08
Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik and German President Horst Koehler issued formal complaints in early April to their Croatian counterparts, Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic and President Stipe Mesic, over the enormous bureaucratic obstacles that their business communities face in Croatia.
The two official protests are especially worrisome because Austria and Germany are the biggest foreign investors in the country. 
During a meeting with Jandrokovic in March, Plassnik reportedly spent most of the session detailing the bureaucracy and corruption encountered by Austrian businesspeople in Croatia.
He promised that the government would improve the situation by actively fighting corruption and untangling complicated bureaucracy, as hundreds of Austrian and German companies have dealings in all Croatian industrial sectors.
During an official visit to Croatia last month, the first by a German president since the Balkan country gained independence, Koehler praised the political relations between the two nations but also addressed economic problems.
"The economy is what we need to focus on in the future. 
I believe that Croatian institutions will continue to make efforts for a change, so that the problems can be solved," said Koehler. 
Austrian and German officials refused to identify specific companies or business executives who complained of hardships in Croatia.
However, Koehler did say, "German businessmen want guarantees of the rule of law, a decrease in the amount of irrelevant paperwork around a simple decision and more market competitiveness in Croatia. 
These are the priorities that need immediate attention."
"We will do all it takes to implement the reforms and gain [EU] membership," Mesic said, after meeting with his German counterpart.
EU officials are aware of disenchantment among Austrian and German business executives and are watching closely watching Zagreb's response. 
As Croatia aims to join the EU by 2010, the bloc likely will expect a serious effort against corruption and a perceived lack of corporate transparency.
