20/06/2008
(AP, Reuters, Cyprus Mail - 19/06/08; AFP, AP, DPA, CNA, UN News Centre - 18/06/08; Cyprus Mail, Zaman, Anadolu Agency – 19/06/08; Hurriyet - 17/06/08, 20/06/08; AP, AFP, EU - 16/06/08; European Commission - 10/04/08)
EU foreign ministers approved measures to ease trade between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities this week, seeking to help end Cyprus's 34-year-old division.
A statement issued after the ministers' meeting in Luxembourg said they sought, by amending rules applying to trade and travel across the island's "green line", to enhance its "trade and economic integration".
The European Commission (EC) proposed the changes to the Green Line Regulation of April 2004 about two months ago. 
Three key measures included a general lifting of duties on agricultural products from the Turkish Cypriot north if they are being traded in the Greek-controlled south.
Another measure permits the introduction of goods from the Turkish Cypriot north into the Greek Cypriot south for up to six months.
Furthermore, individuals can now carry 260 euros' worth of merchandise, rather than 135 euros' worth, in their luggage when crossing the line -- an increase meant to help Turkish Cypriot shopkeepers.
EU foreign ministers voiced hope that the new measures would "contribute to the favourable climate on the island, facilitate crossings of persons across the line, and support the ongoing" peace process.
Ethnic lines have divided Cyprus since 1974, when Turkish troops occupied the island's north to quash a brief Athens-backed coup to unite it with Greece.
A UN-sponsored reunification initiative failed overwhelmingly among Greek Cypriot voters in April 2004. 
While the majority of Turkish Cypriots supported the plan, eventually only the internationally recognised Greek-run part of the island joined the EU in May 2004. 
Only Ankara recognises the economically isolated Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
Hopes for reunification revived in March, when the newly elected president of Cyprus, Demetris Christofias, and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat agreed to start preparations for the launch of new UN-sponsored peace talks.
A total of 13 working groups and technical committees began in April to lay the groundwork for talks.
Christofias and Talat met on May 23rd to review progress. 
It then became clear that the groups focusing on thorny issues like property rights, security and power-sharing arrangements would need more time. 
The leaders of the communities will meet again in June and July to assess whether the negotiation process can start soon.
However, on June 19th in Brussels, Christofias voiced displeasure with the role of Turkey, saying that Turkish Cypriot negotiators were seeking Ankara's approval of every decision. 
He also called for a withdrawal of up to half of Turkey's troops from northern Cyprus.
Wrapping up a two-day visit on Wednesday, UN Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe voiced confidence about eventually reaching a peace agreement. 
"I think that we will get involved in substantive talks in the not-too-distant future," he said in Nicosia.
