29/10/2008
(Javno.hr -- 27/10/08 - 29/10/08; Reuters, B92, Deutsche Welle, The Sofia Echo - 28/10/08; AFP, AP, Reuters - 27/10/08)
Croatian authorities Tuesday (October 28th) arrested scores of people as part of their stepped-up efforts to fight organised crime, following a string of gangland-style killings, including of some high-profile figures.
Ivo Pukanic, owner and editor-in-chief of Croatia's leading political weekly, Nacional, died on Thursday in a car bomb explosion in downtown Zagreb. 
Nacional's marketing director, Niko Franjic, also died in the bombing, which occurred less than three weeks after a gunman killed Ivana Hodak, the daughter of a prominent lawyer, in broad daylight near a downtown Zagreb police station. 
President Stipe Mesic, a close friend, attended Pukanic's funeral on Monday.
Prime Minister Ivo Sanader replaced his interior and justice ministers and the head of the national police following Hodak's murder. 
He "declared war" on "organised crime and terror" after Pukanic's assassination, vowing to mobilise the country's best experts to hunt down the culprits behind unsolved high-profile murders.
"Several dozen people have been brought in for questioning," police spokesman Krunoslav Borovec said on Tuesday, confirming that the arrests were not related to last week's car bombing alone.
Citing unofficial sources, local media reported that those taken into custody thus far include members of elite military and police units who had received special training.
Police spokeswoman Aleksandra Ljuba said police made arrests in connection with the Pukanic case in Zagreb, Vukovar and Rijeka.
An additional 250 policemen have gone to Zagreb as part of the crackdown on organised crime. 
Some observers compare it to the large-scale operation launched in Serbia following then-Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic's assassination in 2003.
A new police unit especially assigned to fight organised crime, which the media dubbed "Croatia's FBI", began operations Monday. 
The fledgling Police National Office for Suppressing Corruption and Organised Crime, headed by Tihomir Kralj, will lead complex police investigations and operations in close co-operation with other relevant law enforcement and administrative bodies.
In recent days, Croatian authorities reportedly have stepped up co-operation with police in other countries in the region, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia.
Fighting organised crime and corruption is a key requirement for countries seeking to join the EU. 
Croatia hopes to wrap up its accession negotiations next year and enter the bloc as its 28th member in 2011.
Many in Europe have come to believe the EU erred in admitting Bulgaria and Romania before they accomplished the required reforms. 
Citing the two Balkan nations as an example, an article in the International Herald Tribune suggested on Monday that the European Commission is likely to "take a sterner look" at EU hopefuls, including Croatia, to ensure this does not happen again.
