19/06/2008
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 19/06/08
Belgrade successfully hosted the 2008 Eurovision Song Contest last month, benefiting commercially and economically and attracting tourism to Serbia.
Organising the contest cost Serbia 21m euros. 
National radio and television (RTS) spent 8.5m euros, while the state gave RTS more than 10m euros to purchase high-definition equipment. 
The city of Belgrade alone invested 2m euros.
During the event, between 11,000 and 15,000 tourists visited Belgrade and brought about 10m euros in direct income. 
Tourist visits brought an estimated 15m euros overall to Serbia, said 2008 Eurovision Serbian media executive producer Sandra Susa.
"We were careful with every single euro ... 
RTS spent 8.5m euros, but Serbia profited with more than 1 billion euros. 
... 
During their ten-day stay in Belgrade, [journalists] enjoyed our city and perceived the Serbs as a friendly and open people who know how to live," said RTS head Aleksandar Tijanic after the event. 
The final financial report for the event, however, will be released the next month.
Media experts agreed that the advertising for Belgrade outweighed any revenues from the event. 
"It is great to have that kind of advertisement when millions are watching you and when you have organised the event so well. 
Finally, we have done something on a grand scale," one editor for a Belgrade paper told Southeast European Times.
Worldwide media reports praised Belgrade's efforts.
"The 2008 Eurovision song contest in Belgrade will be remembered as a magnificent show," wrote ITAR-TASS. 
"Serbs used their chance to change their image in the world, from the one they had under Milosevic, to present Serbia as a normal country," said CNN. 
"Serbia and Belgrade proved that they are a part of Europe," reported BBC.
Most of the 3,500 journalists covering the song contest agreed that the organisation was excellent. 
Many expressed fascination with Belgrade Arena, where the contest occurred and where the stage symbolises the confluence of Belgrade's two rivers, the Sava and the Danube.
