25/04/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje--25/04/08
The Annual Report of the Ombudsman for 2007 in Macedonia says the office received 4,068 complaints in all.
Ombudsman Ixhet Memeti ruled that no violations were found in 2,476 cases but that human rights violations occurred in another 913 cases.
Memeti says Macedonia still lacks a defined framework for anti-discrimination laws, now in the works for three years.
He also points out that attaining a fair representation of ethnic minorities and protecting their rights in state-run enterprises remain difficult.
"Last year the ombudsman's office received complaints mostly of lengthy trials.
Out of the total number of complaints, 824 addressed the judiciary, 365 were related to employment and 347 were related to police treatment," said Memeti.
"Unfortunately, the reporting year shows that Macedonia still has an unreformed, ineffective public administration and inefficient and sluggish judiciary.
The police force frequently oversteps its authority, while the prisons lack acceptable conditions and adequate health care for inmates," he added.
He noted that the public prosecutor accepted three criminal complaints submitted by the ombudsman against police officers who overstepped their powers.
Moreover, privatisation in Macedonia has not met expectations, nor have social services, as exemplified by insufficient laws against child abuse.
In the 2007 ombudsman's report, Memeti emphasises the need for consistent compliance by the agencies over which his office has competence.
"Completing the reform of public administration in Macedonia is of high importance when it comes to the judiciary and decision-making of the European Court for Human Rights," he concludes.
This year, Macedonia's office of the ombudsman is celebrating its 10th anniversary.
Although the 1991 constitution established the office, it started operating only in 1997 and submitted its first report in 1998.
The 2001 constitutional amendments authorise the ombudsman to oversee the fair representation of ethnic minorities in the workplace, as well as conferring other duties and responsibilities on the position.
Memeti, a former justice minister, succeeded Branko Naumovski, the first ombudsman, in 2005.
