28/10/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 28/10/08
Kosovo will have its own security force by the middle of June 2009, authorities said on Friday (October 24th) as they announced an end to the current Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC). 
Disbandment of the KPC "will be completed on December 10th 2008, while the Kosovo Security Force (KSF) will be created by the middle of June 2009," KSF head Fehmi Mujota said after a meeting with parliament's Commission for Security.
He confirmed that Pristina and NATO are co-ordinating the transition. 
Preparations are already under way, including the acquisition of uniforms.
The new, lightly armed force will be primarily responsible for crisis response, ordnance disposal and civil protection. 
KFOR will monitor its operations.
"Creation of the KSF is going as we planned," said Mujota. 
He added authorities would select personnel through a competitive process. 
The current KPC has over 5,000 members, but its successor will only be half that size.
According to Rrustem Mustafa, head of the parliamentary commission, the government is planning some form of "institutional support" for members of the outgoing KPC. 
Their fate is a matter of some concern, since many will not find positions in the much smaller KSF. 
In all, the force will have 2,500 active troops and 800 reserves.
Unemployment in Kosovo is the highest in Europe, approximately 40%.
Kosovo has already received international assurances of help with the transition process. 
On Monday, German Defence Minister Franz Josef Jung announced that his country will allocate 7m euros towards setting up the KSF.
During a visit to Pristina, Jung also pledged that Germany would assist Kosovo's economic development.
In general, launching the KSF is viewed not only as key to the establishment of sovereignty, but as vital to the new country's hopes of integration.
"Our first KSF units are going to be very well prepared and will meet NATO standards," said Naim Maloku, a member of parliament.
The transition comes amid efforts to strengthen EULEX, the EU's mission in Kosovo, which has been taking over responsibilities from UNMIK. 
Last week, the United States agreed to participate in EULEX, marking the first time US staff will be part of an EU-run mission.
On Monday, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said EULEX would be deployed fully by December.
