28/10/2008
(Reuters, AP, AFP, Xinhua, NATO - 27/10/08; Fena - 26/10/08)
NATO and EU leaders voiced concern Monday (October 27th) about the heated rhetoric that has been inflaming the political climate in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), urging its politicians to focus on stabilising the country instead.
"There is certainly concern about the political rhetoric we are hearing," NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said at a press conference with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana.
Speaking after the North Atlantic Council met with the EU's Political and Security Committee at NATO headquarters in Brussels, he said the situation in BiH had been on the conference agenda.
De Hoop Scheffer told reporters he would be sending his deputy, Claudio Bisogniero, to Sarajevo soon.
Tension has been mounting in the Balkan nation since the October 2006 general elections and the ascent to power of two influential politicians with conflicting visions.
The Dayton Peace Accords split the country into two fairly autonomous entities -- the Federation of BiH, shared by Bosniaks and Croats, and the Serb-run Republika Srpska (RS) -- under a weak central government.
Favouring a more centralised state, Haris Silajdzic, leader of the Party for BiH and the Bosniak member of the country's tripartite presidency since 2006, has been pushing to abolish RS.
Under RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, who heads the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), though, Bosnian Serbs have been threatening to call a referendum on independence should BiH try to change RS's current status or abolish it altogether.
Echoing de Hoop Scheffer's remarks, Solana also expressed concern about the war of words in BiH, warning it could jeopardise the country's Euro-Atlantic integration prospects.
Such "rhetoric cannot contribute to the objective of getting Bosnia and Herzegovina more engaged with the European Union and therefore also with the Euro-Atlantic institutions through NATO," Solana said. 
"I want to send that clear message to the leaders that it's necessary that they keep on working together ... 
that will be the only way in which they can join the institution that they claim they want to join."
BiH signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU in June, making its first major step on the path to eventual membership in the 27-nation bloc.
The BiH House of Representatives last week approved the SAA for ratification.
Welcoming that move, High Representative Miroslav Lajcak urged the House of Peoples and the BiH presidency to finalise the ratification process as soon as possible.
"Integrating BiH into Euro-Atlantic structures provides stability, prosperity and guarantees of security for all citizens," he said in a statement Thursday.
The European Commission will publish its annual report on BiH's accession progress next week.
