24/04/2008
(Euronews, SNA - 24/04/08;
Bloomberg, EUobserver, Balkan Insight, Makfax, European Parliament - 23/04/08)
The European Parliament (EP) adopted a report Wednesday (April 23rd) urging the EU to start membership negotiations with Macedonia before the end of this year if the country meets preconditions.
Macedonia has been awaiting a start date for accession talks since December 2005, when it joined the Union's list of candidate countries, including Croatia and Turkey.
Welcoming Macedonia's "significant progress" since then, the EP's 2007 Progress Report on Macedonia called on it to implement EU-required reforms, including a list of eight benchmarks it received recently.
The document, approved by a 601-52 vote in the 785-seat EU legislature Wednesday, voiced hope that meeting that criteria "will lead to opening of the accession negotiations before the end of 2008".
The members of the EP (MEP) urged the bloc's leaders to consider giving a green light to Macedonia's entry talks during their June summit.
They stressed that Macedonia's 17-year-long name dispute with Greece should not impede its accession.
Greece refuses to recognise its northern neighbour by its constitutional name, Republic of Macedonia, viewing it as a potential territorial claim on its own province of Macedonia.
Athens continues to call the Balkan country the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM).
While the two countries have stepped up efforts towards a solution in recent months, they rejected a number of proposals for compromise advanced by the UN mediator of their talks, Matthew Nimetz.
Earlier this month, Greece blocked an invitation for Macedonia to join NATO.
Athens has also threatened to keep Macedonia from moving closer to EU membership until the name dispute is resolved.
EU lawmakers "call on both sides to seize the opportunity to resume negotiations immediately … and to reach a compromise solution," Wednesday's report said.
The MEPs further urged Macedonia's ruling coalition to ensure fair and democratic June 1st parliamentary elections.
They voiced hope that the vote will not impede Skopje's preparations for starting membership talks with the EU.
The report welcomed the progress made by the Macedonian authorities in implementing the 2001 Ohrid Framework Agreement, which addresses inter-ethnic relations in the country, but deplored "continuing discrimination against the Roma community".
Stressing good neighbourly relations, MEPs urged authorities to comply with EU requests on "countering the resurgence of 'hate speech', particularly in the media, against neighbouring states".
The EP report welcomed Macedonia's "constructive position" on Kosovo's status and its active trade co-operation with Europe's newest state.
MEPs also called for steps to address the issue of the Macedonian-Kosovo border, in line with former UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's proposal.
