25/03/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 25/03/08
Croatia, Hungary and Bulgaria last week became the first of Serbia's neighbours to recognise Kosovo's independence. 
Croatia and Hungary announced their recognition on Wednesday (March 19th) while Bulgaria followed suit the next day.
Although more than 30 countries -- most of whom are EU members -- have now recognised Kosovo, these are the first in Southeast Europe to do so. 
The reaction from Belgrade was even stronger than in previous cases.
Hungary and Bulgaria are EU members, while Croatia is a candidate for membership.
Serbia immediately expressed its displeasure and recalled its ambassadors.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic told Croatian National Television he is "deeply disappointed with this decision", adding that relations "will face a new, difficult phase".
"The states that recognise Kosovo cannot have good relations with Serbia," he added.
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said at a press conference that he hopes Croatia and Serbia can continue to have good ties. 
In making its decision, Croatia followed the policy of most EU countries, he said.
Croatian officials say they will not initiate formal diplomatic relations with Kosovo until the youngest country in Europe inaugurates its constitution.
Croatia, Hungary and Bulgaria decided to extend recognition simultaneously in hope of forestalling a strong backlash in Serbia. 
Correspondents in Belgrade report that police protection of the Croatian, Bulgarian and Hungarian embassies in the city is more apparent than before. 
Croatian firms have expressed worry that their operations could be affected.
Meanwhile, officials in Budapest fear there could be tensions between Serbs and the approximately 300,000 ethnic Hungarians living in the province of Vojvodina.
According to Jeremic, two foreign ministers -- whose identities or countries he would not reveal -- called him to apologise, saying their countries "had to recognise Kosovo because they could not handle the pressure anymore". 
After the quote appeared in the Croatian daily Vecernji list, Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic immediately said he had no contacts with his Serbian counterpart.
Sanader has faced domestic turmoil over the decision to recognise Kosovo. 
His coalition partner, the Serbian Democratic Independent Party (SDSS), opposed it, and Deputy Prime Minister Slobodan Uzelac, an SDSS member, resigned.
"We understand his decision," Sanader said, "but I hope that the coalition will overcome this situation and continue forward as there is a lot of work to be done. 
We want Serbia to know that we support it on its path to the EU."
