16/05/2008
(HotNews.ro - 16/05/08; HINA, ANA-MPA, AP - 15/05/08; International Institute for Management Development, Reuters, Sofia Echo, SNA, Center for the Study of Democracy - 14/05/08)
Bulgaria and Croatia were the only two among the five Southeast European (SEE) countries included in an annual competitiveness survey released on Thursday (May 15th) to improve their rankings.
The 2008 Competitiveness Yearbook, published by the International Institute for Management Development (IMD), a leading Swiss-based business school, showed Croatia rose four notches to rank 49th among 55 national economies.
"Croatia is among the 50 most competitive countries in the world, and this improvement of our position is a realistic portrayal by the competitiveness evaluation," the HINA news agency quoted the head of the country's National Council for Competitiveness, Darko Marinac, as saying on Thursday.
He warned, however, that, despite the country's obvious progress, there is no room for complacency, as all EU members, including Bulgaria and Romania, still lead Croatia.
"This is the company we have to compare ourselves with if we want to be an equal EU member in two years' time," said Marinac, stressing the need for further reforms in a number of areas, such as reducing unemployment, further developing the market and strengthening the management sector.
The IMD surveyed countries' global competitiveness according to 331 criteria grouped into four main factors: economic performance, government efficiency, business efficiency and infrastructure.
The United States topped the IMD's competitiveness rankings for the 15th year in a row. 
The other top-five finishers are Singapore, Hong Kong, Switzerland and Luxembourg.
Bulgaria, which features in the IMD competitiveness scale for the third successive year, ranked best among the five SEE countries, which include Greece, Romania and Turkey besides Croatia. 
It moved up five places to 39th, between Hungary (38th) and the Philippines (40th).
In terms of the four main factors determining the countries' rankings, Bulgaria scored best in government efficiency, moving up nine places in one year to 29th. 
Its worst showing was in business efficiency. 
Although Bulgaria moved up six places to 48th on this specific factor, the report finds it still deficient in some areas, such as implementing ethical corporate practices and ensuring that senior managers have generally significant international experience.
Among the other SEE countries, Turkey retained 48th place, while Romania slipped one spot to 45th.
Greece, however, fell six places to 42nd. 
Its worst showing was in government efficiency, in which it toppled 16 places to 46th, according to ANA-MPA, the Greek state news agency. 
It did best in infrastructure, placing 35th, down one spot from last year.
Slovenia and Poland made the most progress, rising eight places each to 32nd and 44th, respectively.
Venezuela held last place for the third year in a row, trailing Ukraine (54th) and South Africa (53rd).
