27/10/2008
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 27/10/08
The Filantropia Maternity Hospital, founded in 1883 as a charity hospital, is now the most modern medical institution in Romania after an investment exceeding 3m euros and eight years of renovations and repairs.
It now has 195 beds and a modern surgery wing that can accommodate 1,600 operations a year.
The facility also contains an Intensive Care Unit (ICU) that can treat 15 patients suffering from complications.
The ICU of the neonatology department now possesses state-of-the-art technology that allows medical treatment of exceptionally premature babies.
Moreover, the hospital has a modern sterilisation unit and antistatic and antiseptic materials that reduce the risk of nosocomial infection.
The common wards consist of up to three beds, but there are five special wards that offer the patients hotel-like comfort.
The surgery wing and the caesarean birth ward have air conditioning and air-purifying machinery, modern cleaning and anesthetic appliances and specials beds for a gynaecology clinic.
A novelty for a public hospital in Romania is the information technology (IT) system, the Centralised Medical System, which allows doctors and patients to access the latter's medical records and facilitates communication with similar institutions.
Filantropia also houses a parents' school, the only one in Bucharest, which educates expectant couples and counsels pregnant women against abandoning their children.
The ministry of health, the government of Bucharest's District 1, private companies and NGOs provided assistance for the renovation of the hospital.
Money for the medical equipment came through a World Bank programme with funds supplied by the ministry of health.
The investment eventually reached 3.2m euros.
"We now have the resources needed to turn the health system into one performing to European standards," said Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu at the inauguration of the hospital.
"Consolidating and renovating a hospital are an extraordinary effort, mainly when we deal with a historical building ...
and we wanted to respect the architectural legacy of each unit," said Professor Gheorghe Peltecu, administrator of the hospital.
More often than not considered a nest of bribery by the public, the Romanian medical system is struggling to attain European standards.
The declining number of experienced doctors and nurses -- many pursue higher salaries abroad -- the lack of effective managers to run the hospitals, a backlog of deferred investment and the absence of a coherent national strategy all conspire to hamstring improvement of the system.
Earlier this year, in a survey of 30 countries' healthcare systems conducted by the Health Consumer Powerhouse, Romania's ranked 26th in quality.
