21/08/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 21/08/08
The United Nations mission will not completely leave Kosovo, according to the chief of UNMIK, Lamberto Zannier, on Wednesday (August 20th). 
"We can certainly strengthen certain programmes in areas where UNMIK may be ... 
less present because of its own reconfiguration. 
But this is always in the context where UNMIK will retain a presence in the field. 
We will retain offices in Pec, Gracanica and Strpce, and obviously we will be present in Mitrovica," said Zannier at a press conference in Pristina.
He noted, "The reconfiguration of UNMIK is something on which we've been spending much time. 
... 
[It] will not result in us abandoning anybody."
Otherwise, Zannier dismissed earlier remarks by Serbia's Minister for Kosovo, Goran Bogdanovic, about establishing a special police force for Kosovo Serbs. 
Zannier emphasised that he has never thought or said that a special Serb force will exist within the Kosovo police.
"I never mentioned to anybody separate chains of command" for Kosovo Serb police officers, Zannier said on Wednesday in Pristina. 
"I think that it is important for Kosovo, it is important for the communities, to have ... 
[functional] community policing that is multiethnic, that reflects also the ethnic proportions on the ground." He added a vacation outside Kosovo had prevented him from denying inaccurate media reports of his views sooner.
He added that restoration of customs enforcement on the border in northern Kosovo is another area he wishes to discuss. 
"We really hadn't started talking about this issue with Belgrade. 
Even though it is my conviction to have fully functioning customs ... 
it will be very important to have the co-operation of Belgrade on that," he said.
"It is my view that Belgrade has an interest in stopping smuggling in that area, in [ensuring] proper controls," Zannier continued.
He explained he wants to avoid exercising his authority in a destabilising manner. 
"I want to avoid situations where ... 
I create a problem rather than solving one. 
So I want to talk to all of those who may have a role in facilitating the implementation of this decision, prepare for it and then move forward," he said.
