27/10/2008
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 27/10/08
A stage presentation called "Six Stories from the Balkans" enabled artists from Kosovo, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia to celebrate the cultural diversity of the Balkans and show their commitment to human rights.
Among the performers at the Pristina National Theatre during its week-long run were Serbian actor Igor Borojevic and Kosovo actor Ernest Zymberi.
The event was part of a broad range of activities in Kosovo marking the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, along with Poverty Eradication Week (October 17th through 24th) and Poverty Eradication Day (October 17th).
Fighting poverty and improving living standards were recurrent themes during the month, which also saw Kosovo's parliament adopt the Millennium Declaration.
The bill affirms Kosovo's commitment to meeting a set of UN development benchmarks known as the Millennium Development Goals.
These include eradicating extreme poverty and hunger, achieving universal primary education, reducing child mortality, ensuring gender equality and women's rights, fighting epidemic diseases, and fostering a sustainable environment.
"Let's work never to let this intention fall off the agenda or be forgotten by anyone," President Fatmir Sejdiu told parliament after it adopted the legislation on October 17th.
For Kosovo's people, fighting poverty is not just a noble cause but an urgent necessity.
The fledgling state suffers from mass unemployment, and much of its population lives far below the standards enjoyed elsewhere in Europe.
The commemorations this month focused a spotlight on this problem and raised the ante for Kosovo's leaders, who are under pressure to show they are taking concrete action.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci told lawmakers that authorities are working to create more opportunities.
"In particular, we will make constant efforts to alleviate in the extreme poverty caused by a long period of delays in development, systemic failings and mismanagement.
We are building responsible and effective governance across the country," he said.
The World Bank and the Statistical Office of Kosovo reported last year a poverty rate of approximately 45%, an even greater matter of concern since more than half of Kosovo citizens are below age 24.
Such a young population is exceptionally vulnerable to disruptions of education and nutrition that can impair adult lives.
In addition, the population has tripled over the past 50 years, the highest growth rate in Europe.
