19/09/2008
(AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, International Herald Tribune, VOA, OSCE - 18/09/08; OSCE - 19/08/08)
The OSCE decided on Thursday (September 18th) to suspend further talks on sending additional observers to Georgia, citing Russia's opposition to the deployment of monitors to South Ossetia as the main obstacle to an agreement.
"We have reached no consensus on the observers despite one month of negotiations," Antti Turunen of Finland, whose country currently chairs the 56-nation security organisation, told reporters. 
"There is no point in continuing negotiations in Vienna at this stage."
Turunen, who chairs the OSCE's decision-making permanent council this year, also said that as all diplomatic means for reaching a compromise had been exhausted, the parties would now seek further instructions from their national governments.
The matter "is elevated to the political level and needs to be dealt with in capitals", OSCE spokesman Martin Nesirky said.
On August 19th, members of Europe's largest security organisation decided to increase the number of OSCE military monitoring officers in Georgia by up to 100. 
Twenty unarmed officers immediately headed to areas adjacent to South Ossetia to oversee the August 12th cease-fire between Moscow and Tbilisi.
Under last month's decision, deployment of the rest of the additional OSCE monitors would be subject to a new resolution on the mandate of the officers, which would also apply to the 20-member group already in Georgia.
Russia says that only the eight OSCE military monitors who were operating in Georgia prior to the outbreak of its five-day conflict with Russia on August 7th could re-enter South Ossetia.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov reportedly claimed that the OSCE plan to send additional monitors to the region was an attempt to undo South Ossetia's independence, which only Russia and Nicaragua recognise.
Voicing regret over the suspension of the talks, Russia's envoy to the OSCE, Anvar Azimov, said on Thursday his country was "ready to continue the dialogue". 
He also insisted that "independent South Ossetia" should join the discussion of the mandate of the international monitors.
Paata Gaprindashvili, Georgia's OSCE representative, also called for further negotiations. 
According to him, Russia was refusing to let the monitors into South Ossetia because it wants Georgia's breakaway region to be treated as an independent state.
An anonymous Western diplomat told Reuters there could be another possible reason for Moscow's opposition, an effort to hide "quite serious ethnic cleansing against Georgians" in South Ossetia.
Also Thursday, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice warned Russia that it was on a "one-way path to isolation and irrelevance" and urged the West to stand up to "bullying" by Moscow.
