23/04/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/04/08
The UN Security Council on Monday (April 21st) reviewed a report by UNMIK on Kosovo.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, travelling in Africa, missed the session, at which Serbian President Boris Tadic and Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci offered different views of the situation.
Presenting the report was UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker, who denied speculation that he will resign.
"I will continue to carry out UNMIK's mandate," he said, adding that his mission "will not allow violence, parallel institutions or disrespect for UNMIK".
Ruecker also noted changes in the field and the formation of Kosovo institutions.
He observed that parliament passed a constitution -- according to which UNMIK will transfer authority to local institutions as of mid-June.
That is why, as Ruecker put it, UNMIK should "adapt" to the new circumstances.
He added that allowing Serbia to hold local elections in Kosovo on May 11th, which Pristina opposes, would not improve Serb-Albanian relations.
Serbian President Boris Tadic, however, insisted on holding those elections and on ensuring "that citizens everywhere in Kosovo, where they acknowledge the Republic of Serbia as their state, can democratically elect their municipal and parliamentary representatives".
He also criticised UNMIK for failing to react more strongly to Kosovo's declaration of independence and for allowing the implementation of former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's
Kosovo plan, even though the Security Council never adopted it.
He added that Serbia opposes the planned takeover of UNMIK's role by the EU mission EULEX because the Union did not obtain the Security Council's permission.
"The UN Security Council is the only institution that can make a legally valid decision," Tadic said.
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci addressed the meeting too.
He told the Council that Kosovo will fully comply with the Ahtisaari plan, particularly regarding minorities' rights.
Thaci also said that problems remained after independence, such as unemployment and the need for foreign investment.
"Kosovo's independence was controversial, primarily due to strong resistance from … Serbia.
We continue to offer Belgrade a hand … because there is an urgent need for co-operation at various levels," he said.
The US and British ambassadors to the UN afterwards urged Serbia to rethink holding elections in Kosovo.
"Russia and Serbia keep refusing to accept the reality of Kosovo's independence," British Ambassador John Sawyers said.
Russian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, however, contended that "the Serbs have every right to conduct their parliamentary and municipal elections when they see fit."
US Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad said that such elections in Kosovo would have an "illegitimate" outcome.
