15/05/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 15/05/08
As Macedonia seeks visa liberalisation from the EU, it is cracking down on human trafficking.
On May 8th, the country received an EU list of requirements such as "integrated border management" that it must meet before its citizens can travel without visas to EU states starting in 2009.
On April 20th, police arrested seven people from Skopje allegedly complicit in smuggling illegal immigrants to western countries over the past ten years.
They followed the group for a year and made arrests in Skopje.
Besnik Gudjufi, Menduh Adjami and Enes Kamberov are its suspected organisers.
The other detainees were Isuf Ramadani, brothers Semi Brahimi and Naser Brahimi, and Lejla Baftijar.
"The criminal group was organising a chain for human trafficking to western countries," Interior Minister Gordana Jankulovska said.
She credited infiltrators with collecting "evidence and documentation of smuggling of nine people from Kosovo".
The group was sending people from Kosovo to Germany, Sweden, France and Switzerland via Alexander the Great Airport.
Clients who had Serbian or UNMIK-issued Kosovo travel documents received forged visas, plane tickets to their desired countries and accommodation.
According to the ministry of the interior, the Meni police operation started last year with inquiries and infiltration.
After instituting these measures, police caught two emigrants sent by this group on August 11th 2007, finding them on a Skopje-Geneva flight.
Authorities captured another five would-be emigrants who were flying from Skopje to Paris one month later.
During the smuggling ring's ten to 15 years of existence, thousands of its customers passed through the airport, reaping the smugglers millions of euros.
Three members of the ring whom police could not find received prison sentences in absentia.
For this investigation to succeed, Macedonian police had to co-operate closely with authorities in the immigrants' destination countries.
The international investigation revealed Westerners closely connected with the Skopje group also participated in the smuggling.
Last year, police caught 176 illegal immigrants and arrested 91 people suspected of human trafficking.
Among the immigrants were 79 Albanians, 46 Chinese, 28 Kosovo residents, ten Georgians, six Macedonians, five Turks, and two Moldovans.
The 91 suspected smugglers included 85 Macedonians, two Albanians, two Swedes, one Moldovan and one Turk.
The interior minister says that the number of cases of human trafficking solved by the police in 2007 grew 46% compared to the number in 2006.
