18/09/2008
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 18/09/08
Berat, a south-central Albanian city, recently made UNESCO's World Heritage List as an example of co-existence of religions and cultures.
The decision was an extension of the 2005 World Heritage Committee decision concerning the southern town of Gjirokastra.
According to the World Heritage Committee, Berat and Gjirokastra bear witness to the wealth and diversity of Balkan architectural heritage.
Their way of life shows the influence of Islam during the Ottoman period but additionally demonstrates the preservation of Orthodox Christian traditions, particularly at Berat.
Most of Berat was built in the 13th century, though its origins date back to the third century BC.
The famous Kala area includes many Byzantine objects.
Many wall paintings and icons date back to the 13th century.
The town has also several mosques built during the Ottoman period.
The committee considered the state of preservation of both cities and efforts to restore objects.
According to the ministry of culture, workers have rehabilitated 22 objects and will complete rehabilitation of 27 others this year.
The UN agency expects a report in February 2009 on the removal of "illegal developments or inappropriate construction" threatening the historic property.
The report will also include proposals for archaeological excavations, improvement of firefighting arrangements, and the delivery of medium-term plans for the development of tourism facility capacities.
UNESCO is now supporting the protection of four Albanian cultural monuments.
The Amphitheatre of Butrint made the list in 1992, while Gjirokastra and a traditional form of music called iso-polyphony, both qualified in 2005.
Butrint, in southern Albania, defined by experts as a microcosm of Mediterranean history, won nomination as "an exceptional testimony to a long-lasting, and almost disappeared society and life-style".
In 2005 UNESCO withdrew it from the List of World Heritage in Danger after approving Albania's measures to protect the site from development pressures.
Gjirokastra, also called Town of the Stones, is "a unique testimony to a cultural tradition of life developed in the XIV-XIX centuries", according to the 2005 decision.
The town's solid stone buildings stand in parallel lines, a layout that can be found in the entire Balkan area.
Iso-polyphony was proclaimed in November 2005 a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity, thus also receiving protection by UNESCO.
All four monuments perform the essential task of delivering the country's values and culture around the globe, as well as testifying to its antiquity.
