16/06/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/06/08
Kosovo's first constitution became effective on Sunday (June 15th), 119 days after Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia.
The constitution defines Kosovo as a sovereign parliamentary republic and an indivisible democracy.
Kosovo shall have no territorial claims against and shall seek no union with any state or part of any state, the document says.
"The enactment today of the constitution marks the completion of the cycle of building the state," President Fatmir Sejdiu said at a ceremony in Pristina on Sunday.
"The constitution is the main compass ...
for our path."
"All institutions in Kosovo from today will function in accordance with our constitution.
This will be beyond doubt," said Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, calling on all citizens and institutions to help implement the document.
"With this constitution we have achieved our obligations as a state," said Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi.
"Without the implementation of the constitution on the whole territory of Kosovo, we cannot speak of absolute independence."
The adoption of the constitution represents the second historic moment for Kosovo after the proclamation of independence from Serbia on February 17th.
Forty-three UN member states recognise Kosovo's independence, but Serbia rejects its secession as illegitimate and wants more negotiations on its status.
Even as the constitution was receiving praise, tensions simmered.
The question still remains over which international body will take the reins there.
Although the new EU mission, EULEX, was to begin operations Sunday, obstacles have kept it from doing so.
EU envoy to Kosovo Pieter Feith said he is confident that the Union will deploy its police mission by October and that the UN will remain in Kosovo during this transition period.
However, he warned that much depends on co-operation from Serbia.
Serbia and Russia insist that the EU mission is illegal because the Security Council has yet to approve it.
Furthermore, "Serbia does not accept the proclamation of Kosovo's constitution as a legal fact," said Serbian President Boris Tadic.
.
Serbia regards Kosovo as a southern province and is defending its own territorial integrity by diplomatic means, not by force, Tadic said, calling the new charter "a political event with ...
harmful consequences".
Serbia's opposition to the EULEX mission leaves the UN in charge of functions such as policing and the EU struggling to deploy police officers, judges and customs officers whose housing remains occupied by UN staff members.
"We now have a situation with one lame-duck authority and its successor unable to take over," said the International Crisis Group's Kosovo project director, Alex Anderson.
"This risks unraveling key institutions like the police and judiciary and undermining a fragile democracy."
In Mitrovica meanwhile, Serbian Minister for Kosovo Slobodan Samardzic said Kosovo Serbs will establish a separate parliament in two weeks, in defiance of the new constitution.
