19/08/2008
(AFP, VOA, Beta, New Kosova Report, B92, Serbian Government - 18/08/08;
FT - 17/08/08;
UN News Centre - 15/08/08)
UNMIK signed an agreement Monday (August 18th) to transfer part of its property in Kosovo to the incoming EU rule-of-law mission, EULEX, which observers expect to be fully in place within the next few months.
"The technical agreement gives UNMIK ...
the green light for transferring assets to us," such as office space, vehicles and other equipment, Karin Limdal, deputy head of EULEX's press and public information office, told AFP.
UNMIK signed the pact three days after UN headquarters in New York approved the move.
Last month, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon decided to move forward with reshaping UNMIK, as envisioned in his plan following Kosovo's declaration of independence on February 17th.
As part of the changes Ban proposed earlier this year, UNMIK will shrink significantly over the next few months.
"To some extent the downsizing is a reality brought about by the fact that the UN is no longer performing the role that it is used to ...
we have to adjust to that reality," UNMIK principal deputy head Nicholas Haysom said in Pristina on Friday.
Implementing the plan is expected to cause a 70% personnel reduction, as the mission relinquishes more of its duties to local institutions.
This process will eliminate many components and offices.
EULEX head Yves de Kermabon said in early July that he expected all mission staff to be fully deployed and ready to work by the end of autumn, as the UN's decision to reconfigure UNMIK would remove some of the problems hindering the buildup.
EU member states decided to launch EULEX -- the largest civilian mission ever under the 27-nation bloc's European Security and Defence Policy -- a day before Kosovo declared independence from Serbia.
It will assist the government in Pristina in the rule of law, specifically in the police, judiciary and customs sectors.
Eventually, EULEX will have a total staff of around 3,000 (1,900 international and 1,100 local) and a budget of 205m euros for the first 16 months of its operation.
Kosovo enjoys diplomatic recognition by 45 countries so far, including 20 of the EU's 27 member nations.
Serbia and Russia remain fiercely opposed to its independence, however.
They say implementing the reconfiguration plan without the UN Security Council or Belgrade's approval violates Resolution 1244.
Serbia's ministry for Kosovo said in a statement Monday that the transfer was an "illegal act".
Promising his country's "most energetic support" to Belgrade on this matter, Russian Ambassador to Serbia Aleksandr Konuzin said Moscow would demand an explanation from Ban.
