23/10/2008
(Euobserver - 23/10/08; Guardian, Reuters, AP, AFP, B92 - 22/10/08)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) could fall apart, former senior US and British diplomats Richard Holbrooke and Paddy Ashdown warned on Wednesday (October 22nd). 
They urged the West to take immediate action to prevent a new Balkan crisis.
"Today the country is in real danger of collapse," they wrote in a joint article appearing in London's Guardian and Sarajevo's Dnevni Avaz. 
"Resolve and trans-atlantic unity are needed if we are not to sleepwalk into another crisis."
A former US assistant secretary of state for European and Canadian affairs, Holbrooke was the chief architect of the Dayton Peace Accord, which ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH. 
Ashdown served as the international community's high representative in BiH from 2002 to 2006.
The Dayton Accord created BiH as a sovereign state made up of two largely autonomous entities -- the Federation of BiH, shared by the country's Bosniaks and Croats, and the Serb-run Republika Srpska (RS) -- bound by a weak central government.
Tension has been mounting in the country since the October 2006 general elections. 
That year, Haris Silajdzic, the leader of the Party for BiH, won the Bosniak seat in the country's tripartite presidency. 
Meanwhile, his rival, Milorad Dodik, head of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), became RS prime minister.
Incumbent High Representative Miroslav Lajcak has criticised both politicians in recent months for inflammatory rhetoric that he says only weakens state institutions and deepens ethnic animosity.
It appeared that Dodik's long-term goal was to create the conditions for RS to secede "if the opportunity arises", Holbrooke and Ashdown said. 
They believe the SNSD leader's actions ("fuelled by Russian ... 
petrodollars") over the past two years have reversed much of BiH's postwar progress towards becoming a functioning state.
"Both men are violating [Dayton's] basic principle: a federal system within a single state," the pair said. 
"As a result, the suspicion and fear that began the war in 1992 has been reinvigorated."
Blaming the current situation on a "distracted international community", they said the EU should strengthen its influence and the incoming US administration should become more engaged.
"The EU has weakened not only its own influence in the country but also the Office of the High Representative (OHR) and the international military presence," Holbrooke and Ashdown wrote.
They also urged the West to rebuff Moscow's attempts to close down the OHR prematurely.
BiH's decline is still reversible, the two diplomats noted. 
In addition to a renewal of US and EU commitment to the country's survival as a state, the international community should also keep an effective troop presence on the ground and begin strengthening its long-term approach.
