23/10/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 23/10/08
With the start of the new school year, more than 600,000 pupils went back to their classrooms.
Over 43,000 new students began their academic journey, meeting their teachers and proudly carrying their new book bags.
However, the little faces were not that cheerful when they came back home.
To put it simply, kids say their school bags are too heavy.
Textbooks, notebooks and materials are now required in quantities that test even the toughest child's strength.
And that's not even including the lunchbox.
Even in the early grades, children study up to ten different subjects and the average school bag weighs around 7kg.
Textbooks are provided for free and delivered to pupils on the first day of school.
Some of the youngest pupils had to phone their parents to come pick them up because the books proved too heavy to carry.
Parents were irate.
The authorities, they said, had pledged such problems would not occur.
Many families are also up in arms over the increasing amounts they must spend on materials – notebooks, gym equipment, pens and pencils, and uniforms.
On average, the bill comes to about 200 euros.
Education Minister Dragan Primorac says the school system is improving each year, and he promised to work hard to reduce the physical load.
Compulsory elementary school in Croatia lasts eight years.
The school system has undergone a number of different reforms since the country gained independence in 1991.
Primorac, serving his second term, is in charge of a five-year development plan that has the ambitious goal of creating a "knowledge-based society".
"Changes have been initiated on all the levels of the educational system.
The basic objective is to improve the quality of and advance the educational system on all levels," Primorac says.
Under the new Croatian National Educational Standard (CNES), schools are supposed to abandon out-of-date curricula and introduce modern teaching methods.
Among other things, observers had expected a reduction in the quantity and bulk of textbooks.
Parents gripe that, for all the hue and cry, the CNES has not made much difference.
The government, meanwhile, urges patience.
Authorities say that by 2010, when the reform ends, parents and children alike will be happy with the outcome.
