21/10/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 21/10/08
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has not conducted a national census since 1991, prior to the conflict that ravaged the country. 
The lack of up-to-date population statistics is proving to be yet another divisive issue.
Bosniak politicians say they are against any new census that would legitimise ethnic cleansing and the flight of Muslims from Republika Srpska (RS). 
According to Sefik Dzaferovic, a member of parliament representing the Party of Democratic Action, it is important not to give legal recognition to the "Serbian, Croatian and Montenegrin aggressions against BiH".
Their Bosnian Serb counterparts, meanwhile, oppose a census that would leave out questions about ethnic or religious identity. 
Such an endeavour, they argue, would shore up a "Bosnian" national identity at the expense of Serbs.
"We would be the only country in Europe to count people and horses in the same way," BiH Council of Ministers Chairman Nikola Spiric, a Serb, said in a recent interview.
The debate calls to mind not only the 1992-1995 conflict but also the larger backdrop of violence that has periodically scarred BiH's history.
While the atrocities of the 1990s introduced the term "ethnic cleansing" to the world's vocabulary, this was not the first time that expulsions and exterminations altered the country's demographics. 
Just ask two communities that have almost completely vanished from BiH: the Germans and the Jews.
In past centuries, the tapestry of Bosnian life included as many as 12,000 Bosnian Jews and 23,000 German speakers. 
So numerous were the Jews in Sarajevo -- 10,500 strong -- that they called the capital Little Jerusalem. 
The generally urban Jews were active in trade, while the more rural Germans excelled in mining and metalsmithing.
The Jews traced their residence back to their expulsion by the Spanish Inquisition from the Iberian Peninsula, while the Germans settled in medieval times to serve BiH's rulers and noble families. 
Another large community, the Muslims, moved to Turkey when the Austro-Hungarian Empire ousted the Ottoman Empire from Bosnia in 1878.
The Nazi occupation during World War II destroyed this centuries-old mix of peoples forever. 
Only 1,237 Sarajevo Jews survived the Holocaust. 
Germans, collectively tainted by those who served in the SS and Gestapo, experienced harsh reprisals after the war. 
Only a few of them stayed. 
Others fled the prospect of imprisonment or execution.
With the communist era's emphasis on assimilation, the vestigial German and Jewish communities dwindled even further through intermarriage or emigration.
Yet with those minorities now only a historical memory, they live on in Bosnian music. 
Sarajevans have made an old Sephardic song, "When I set foot for Bembasa" ("Kad ja podjoh na Bembasu"), their own. 
Another song, "She looked a little strange" ("Izgledala je malo cudno"), is ordinary Bosnian rock and roll. 
However, Davor Ebner, the lead singer of the band currently performing it, claims that only now does he feel free to admit his Austrian ancestry in BiH.
