19/03/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 19/03/08
Lawmakers in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have rejected a negative report on two police reform laws, issued last week by a parliamentary panel, the joint defence and security committee. 
Meeting on Tuesday (March 18th), the MPs decided to give the committee a 48-hour deadline to voice a new opinion.
MPs from all the ruling coalition parties except one -- the Party of Democratic Action (PDA) -- voted against the committee report.
The top international envoy in BiH, High Representative Miroslav Lajcak, praised parliament's decision. 
He said it provides a clear signal that lawmakers want the opportunity to adopt police reform legislation, which is a remaining major condition for signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU.
He also urged the defence and security committee to allow parliament to hold a direct debate and vote on the police reform package.
"The European future of BiH's citizens -- regardless of where they live, their age, gender or ethnicity -- is in the hands of the 12 members of parliament's joint defence and security committee. 
It is their responsibility to decide whether BiH's citizens will take a critical step towards membership of the EU and sign the SAA," he said.
Public support for integration into the EU runs as high as 70%, the envoy added.
The defence and security committee rejected the two key bills on March 12th. 
One was a draft law on the directorate for the co-ordination of police bodies, and the other concerned independent and supervisory bodies of police structures.
The committee also rejected all 93 amendment proposals that had been filed concerning the draft laws.
Lajcak strongly criticised the rejections, saying the committee was squandering valuable time. 
"Every day wasted is a day further away from signing the SAA," he said."The stance that parliamentary parties adopt in this matter will decide on the possibility of the European perspective for BiH and its citizens."
BiH Prime Minister Nikola Spiric also urged the main political parties not to reject the laws. 
"Their adoption means we will sign the SAA," he said.
"We, the members of the Council of Ministers, had dilemmas, but we decided that what matters most is to sign the agreement with the EU. 
Please keep the laws on track, for the sake of the European future of the country," Spiric added
