21/10/2008
(AFP, Euobserver, MIA, Makfax - 20/10/08)
Macedonia has to step up its efforts in implementing EU-required reforms to win a starting date for its membership talks with the Union, the 27-nation bloc's enlargement chief indicated on Monday (October 20th), ahead of a critical EC assessment of the country's accession progress.
"We will make our evaluation on November 5th, but for the moment, I believe it will be difficult to recommend opening accession negotiations" with Skopje, Olli Rehn told AFP.
In March, the EC set out eight benchmarks that Macedonia must meet to begin membership talks it has awaited since it won official EU candidate status in December 2005.
The targets include properly implementing all commitments the country has made under its Stabilisation and Association Agreement and ensuring better dialogue among political parties. 
The EU has also called for "implementation of the law on police and anti-corruption legislation, reform of the judiciary and public administration, as well as measures in employment policy and for enhancing the business environment".
Rehn cited free and fair elections as a ninth benchmark in September, after violence and reports of intimidation marred June parliamentary elections. 
He stressed that Macedonia must also address lingering shortcomings observed in other elections.
"For the moment, it seems to me that the eight conditions have not been met, nor has the ninth; that is, the elections," the AFP quoted Rehn as saying Monday.
He urged Macedonia "to improve its judicial and administrative reforms" and to take the needed steps to prove it can conduct elections in line with "all international and European norms".
Rehn cited Macedonia's 17-year name dispute with Greece as another major hurdle on its path towards EU membership.
Greece refuses to recognise its northern neighbour by its constitutional name, Republic of Macedonia, considering it a springboard for potential territorial claims on its own province of Macedonia.
In April, Greece blocked a NATO invitation for Macedonia to join the 26-nation Alliance and has warned that it will also scuttle any further EU integration for Skopje pending resolution of the name issue.
Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister for European Affairs Ivica Bocevski said on Monday that he expects the process of EU integration to "resume more intensively" after the EC report early next month.
According to a report by Macedonia's MIA news agency, Bocevski and his Montenegrin counterpart, Gordana Gjurovic, issued a joint statement after talks in Podgorica the same day, urging Brussels to set clear guidelines for the Western Balkan countries' EU integration.
