14/08/2008
(AFP - 14/08/08;
AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, BBC, VOA, FT - 13/08/08)
The EU said on Wednesday (August 13th) it was ready to send monitors to Georgia's breakaway region of South Ossetia to observe the implementation of a cease-fire signed by Moscow and Tbilisi less than 24 hours earlier.
"The EU must be ready to ...
support all efforts, including those of the United Nations and the OSCE, for a lasting and peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Georgia," EU foreign ministers stated after an emergency meeting in Brussels.
The six-point deal brokered by French President Nicolas Sarkozy, whose country currently holds the six-month rotating EU presidency, provides that Russia and Georgia must end hostilities and provide free access to humanitarian aid.
In addition, Georgian forces must withdraw to their usual bases and the Russians to their pre-conflict positions.
The deal envisions international talks on security and stability in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, the other Georgian breakaway region.
The frozen conflict flared up last week when Georgia moved combat forces into South Ossetia, which broke away from Tbilisi's control in 1992 and has Moscow's backing.
Russia struck back massively, also bombing Georgia proper, well beyond South Ossetia's borders.
Denouncing Russian actions, British Foreign Secretary David Miliband said the sight of Russian tanks on Georgian territory and the Russian blockade of Georgia's Black Sea port of Poti "are a chilling reminder of times that ...
we had hoped had gone by".
The observers the EU plans to send to South Ossetia would supplement the 200 OSCE monitors already on the ground.
Finnish Foreign Minister Alexander Stubb, the OSCE's chairman this year, said he had proposed dispatching another 100 monitors.
French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, who presided over Wednesday's meeting, voiced optimism that Russia would not oppose an EU observer mission.
He noted, however, that any EU peacekeeping mission would require the approval of the UN Security Council, where Russia has veto power.
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said he would discuss the possibility of a peacekeeping operation at the EU foreign ministers' next meeting in Avignon, France, on September 5th and 6th.
Several Eastern European member nations are calling for a freeze in relations with Moscow in retaliation for its actions in Georgia.
"Of course, some consequences must result from the aggression," said Lithuanian Foreign Minister Petras Vaitiekunas.
Germany, however, warned against isolating Russia and returning to the past.
The crisis will be the subject of a NATO foreign ministers' emergency meeting next Tuesday.
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice requested the meeting "as an opportunity to consult ...
about the implications of the Russian military actions in Georgia", the US mission to NATO said on Wednesday.
Meanwhile, the leaders of NATO members Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland and non-NATO member Ukraine urged the 26-nation Alliance to enroll Georgia in the NATO Membership Action Plan to prevent future attacks by Russia.
