20/10/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 20/10/08
Serbian President Boris Tadic said last week that Belgrade authorities and the EU might reach an agreement on deployment of the EULEX mission to Kosovo and have that agreement undergo verification by the UN Security Council.
Tadic's statement infuriated the Serbian opposition, while EU officials welcomed it.
Belgrade had until now vehemently rejected the arrival of the EU mission in Kosovo, which declared independence on February 17th.
"We are working on [the deployment of EULEX] with all international forums, with the UN Security Council and the EU, as well as with Russian and US representatives, i.e., with all those vitally important for the future of Kosovo within Serbia," Tadic said to the Belgrade daily Vecernje Novosti last week.
The president also said that Belgrade will accept the EU mission on three conditions:
that its presence in Kosovo obtain the approval of the Security Council;
that it be a status-neutral mission;
and that it not implement the plan proposed by Martti Ahtisaari, which the Security Council was unable to adopt because of opposition from Serbia and Russia.
Tadic's statement met strong resistance from the Serbian opposition, particularly former Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, who defined state policy on Kosovo during his term in office.
Tadic's announcement was "a stab in the back of the defence of Kosovo", said Kostunica, adding the Ahtisaari plan envisioned EULEX's existence and the mission would inevitably implement the plan for Kosovo's independence.
On the other hand, European officials hailed Tadic's declaration.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said that it was important for the EU to see Serbia's "constructive approach" to the deployment of EULEX in Kosovo, since such an approach was fundamental to regional stability and the rule of law in Kosovo.
"That is why it is important that we all, including the Serbian government, work towards making the deployment of EULEX to Kosovo successful," Rehn said.
On Friday, EULEX Commander Yves de Kermabon said the EU and Serbia are "not very far" from an agreement on EULEX deployment.
He expressed hope EULEX will deploy throughout Kosovo by the end of the winter.
EU Special Envoy to Kosovo Pieter Feith expressed hope a Kosovo-wide deployment would become possible in the coming weeks.
Feith said EULEX would benefit everyone in Kosovo, especially the Serb minority.
Since Kosovo's declaration of independence, UNMIK has been shrinking.
The mission will transfer some of its capacities to EULEX, which is due to have about 2,000 members.
EULEX has not arrived in Serb-populated regions yet, because Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs refuse to accept the mission for the time being.
UNMIK remains active in the Serb enclaves.
