20/10/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 20/10/08
At the beginning of November, the European Commission (EC) will publish a new progress report on Croatia. 
It will assess whether the country has progressed in implementing EU standards and whether a positive attitude on integration prevails.
Croatian officials say this EU report could have great significance for the country's ambitious plan to join the bloc by 2010. 
It is expected to signal whether Brussels concurs with Zagreb on the timeline or instead sees the need to implement more reforms.
Prime Minister Ivo Sanader has not spoken in detail about his expectations, reserving comment until after he reads the report. 
He did, however, say that he expects Brussels to recognise his country's achievements in reform. 
The Croatian negotiating team is doing a good job and lawmakers are fast-tracking a new legal structure, Sanader explained.
The prime minister's comments came during a stay in Ireland, where he met with Irish counterpart Brian Cowen. 
Sanader was in Dublin to find out how the Irish rejection of the Lisbon Treaty would influence Croatia's integration process. 
He returned to Zagreb expressing optimism, while also acknowledging that the next EC report would determine the broader framework for further integration steps.
During a bilateral meeting with Sanader in September, EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said the Commission intends to publish the exact deadlines for ending negotiations and to list clear requirements. 
Croatia has so far opened negotiations in 21 chapters out of 33 that must be processed and closed by the accession date.
However, three major problems -- corruption, the debt-ridden shipyards and the flawed public procurement system -- require resolution as soon as possible. 
Otherwise, Croatia's hopes of quick EU entry might vanish into thin air.
Out of the three, the top priority is fighting corruption. 
So far, judicial reform has been the weakest link in the reform process. 
Croatian authorities have begun to address judicial corruption, but their actions have yet to impact the troubled courts.
Secondly, Croatia has to restructure its giant shipyards, a process that requires tough decisions and is likely to generate considerable pain. 
Though chronically in the red, they employ so many people that layoffs could trigger social unrest.
Finally, Croatia's public procurement system lacks transparency and offers many opportunities for corruption. 
The relevant negotiation chapter remains unopened so far.
