18/03/2008
(Cyprus Mail, Zaman - 18/03/08; Reuters, AP, CNA, UN News Centre - 17/03/08)
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon voiced hope on Monday (March 17th) that the new political situation in Cyprus will provide an impetus for new efforts towards ending the Mediterranean island's 34 year long division.
"I think the international community should seize the momentum, and window of opportunity, when Mr. 
(Demetris) Christofias, the new Cyprus president was elected, and is committed to resolution of this issue," he told reporters in New York after his monthly working luncheon with UN Security Council members.
Cyprus has been split between a Turkish Cypriot-run zone in the north and a larger, Greek Cypriot-controlled zone in the south since 1974, when Turkish troops invaded the island following a brief, Athens-backed coup that aimed to unite it with Greece.
The latest effort to end the division failed in 2004, when the Greek Cypriots rejected a reunification plan proposed by then-UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan. 
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots accepted the plan, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the island joined the EU in May 2004, as the country's sole authority.
Ban said that during his recent visit to Senegal he met with Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat, who assured him that he is willing to engage in new peace talks with the Greek Cypriot leadership.
"In that regard, I have decided to dispatch Under Secretary General (for Political Affairs) Lynn Pascoe to lead an assessment team to engage in dialogue with all the stakeholders there," Ban said. 
"We hope that we will be able to see improvement and make some breakthrough in this long-pending issue in Europe."
Ban gave no dates for that trip. 
According to a report in the Turkish daily Zaman on Tuesday, however, Pascoe is due to visit Cyprus, Greece and Turkey at the end of this month. 
After that, he will report to the UN on the level of commitment on the part of the Greek and Turkish Cypriots to resolving the issue.
Ban's announcement came ahead of crucial direct talks between Christofias and Talat, which will be held under UN auspices in Nicosia on Friday. 
It will be their first meeting since the leader of the communist AKEL party won the Greek Cypriot presidential election on February 24th, replacing Tassos Papadopoulos -- a staunch opponent of the Annan plan.
The two leaders are widely expected to announce a largely symbolic deal on the reopening of the Ledra Street crossing, the main commercial road in Nicosia and a major symbol of the island's division. 
More importantly, the meeting is likely to shed light on prospects for a solution, as Christofias and Talat are expected to outline their positions for any future negotiations.
Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister Marcos Kyprianou voiced "cautious optimism" Monday about the results of the upcoming meeting.
His concerns appear to be linked to statements from the Turkish Cypriot leadership, who want any new negotiations to be based on the Annan plan.
Christofias, on the other hand, believes that the agreement Papadopoulos and Talat signed on July 8th 2006, but never implemented, should serve as a basis for future talks.
