18/03/2008
By Jonilda Koci and Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 18/03/08
The death toll rose to 17 on Tuesday (March 18th), in the wake of a series of blasts Saturday at army munitions depot in Gerdec.
The explosions spanned 14 hours and were felt 20km away in Tirana.
A national day of mourning was announced on Tuesday and Albania's defence minister has resigned.
The depot stocked obsolete Chinese and Soviet munitions earmarked for destruction.
About 300 people were injured in the powerful blasts.
More than 300 houses were destroyed and more than 2,000 homes and businesses were damaged.
Approximately 110 workers, including untrained women and children, were working at the base on the munitions destruction.
It is not clear yet how many of them may have survived.
Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu said in an interview with the Financial Times last week that more than 100,000 tonnes of outdated ordinance had to be dismantled as a condition for Albania to join NATO.
The country hopes to receive an invitation next month.
Since the disaster, the opposition has urged both Mediu and Prime Minister Sali Berisha to resign.
Mediu did so on Monday.
"Based on what happened and bearing my personal responsibility, I announce that I have handed in my resignation," he said, expressing his sadness for the "loss of innocent life".
Berisha said Mediu's resignation was "an act of political responsibility", and rejected calls for his own resignation, accusing opponents of trying to exploit the disaster for political gain.
At a press conference Sunday, General Prosecutor Ina Rama said investigations are under way.
"We are evaluating several directions;
from dishonest competition to a criminal act," Rama said.
Albanian police sources told the news agency BalkanWeb that three people have been arrested.
Mihal Delijorgji and Dritan Minxholi are the owner and the manager of the Albanian firms subcontracted to destroy the munitions.
Ylli Pinari, a defense ministry officer, was also arrested.
Berisha said a US-based company, Southern Ammunition Incorporated, was contracted to work at the site.
It issued a brief statement saying it had been contracted in April 2007 "to demilitarise small calibre ammunition" but that the project ended in December.
The US Embassy in Tirana has issued a press release saying the "US government has not assisted the Ministry of Defence with munitions disposal at that particular storage facility" and "the contract with the American company was not sponsored by the US government".
The statement also expressed deep condolences to the victims and their families.
Rescue operations continue with about 1,000 military personnel and 500 police officers working to clear the surrounding area, which is littered with unexploded munitions.
They are also keeping residents away from their homes and businesses until the area is safe.
