18/03/2008
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 18/03/08
A total of 14 medical professionals in Split and Osijek are facing bribery and corruption charges after Croatian police and the Office for the Prevention of Corruption and Organised Crime (USKOK) mounted a sting operation in February.
The defendants -- six of whom are doctors -- allegedly belonged to two different groups involved in granting fraudulent healthcare privileges.
Using the same methods, the two groups are suspected of issuing documents that would allow primarily individuals in the Croatian military to receive higher pensions, early retirement and other veteran privileges.
Those who were granted privileges paid between 3,500 and 8,000 euros for the favour.
The perpetrators allegedly fabricated medical diagnoses by saying patients were receiving treatments in hospitals, but USKOK found that treatments did not take place.
In Split, for example, police are researching whether documents issued by the Split Hospital Clinic Centre and the Institute for Pension Planning regarding post-traumatic stress disorder and disabilities were forged.
USKOK identified 11,000 medical records that were forged, allowing recipients to receive invalid bonuses.
Investigators found audio tapes of patients complaining that they were cheated because they paid for diagnoses of 70% disability and they received documents for only 50%.
Minister for Family, War Veterans and Inter-Generational Solidarity Jadranka Kosor would not release the names of these taken into custody.
"I ask that all who illegally received rights as invalids in this case return them," Kosor said, adding that all subjects' information will be forwarded to the state's attorney after the review.
She also said she is disturbed that the press emphasised the veterans involved in this case, when USKOK also found that some civilians took false pensions.
USKOK presumes that the 14 medics are not the only individuals involved in these types of operations in Croatia.
It vows to continue similar investigations.
The so-called "medical mafia" also offered to secure rights to buy stocks, exemptions from paying taxes or customs fees, as well as loans at extremely favourable rates.
In all, it is estimated that such organisations caused about 150m euros in damage to Croatia's budget.
This case highlights the country's continuing problem with corruption, not only in the judiciary and economy, but also in the medical field.
The arrests come as Croatia tries to end corruption, a key provision in its EU membership bid.
