16/09/2008
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 16/09/08
New amendments to laws governing surveillance of communications came into effect earlier this month after parliament adopted what many considered controversial changes earlier this summer. 
The amendments, which relate to the Law on Criminal Procedure, increase the number of suspected crimes for which police may apply special investigative measures -- eavesdropping, surveillance and recording.
The government enacted the amendments in hopes of accelerating the country's fight against organised crime. 
Still, some experts and human rights NGOs denounced the move. 
The groups say the government acted without a public debate or any discussion by parliamentary committees.
The VMRO-DPMNE-led government used its two-thirds majority in parliament to pass the law without a debate.
The amendments list 22 suspected crimes for which wiretapping is justified. 
"A court may order surveillance of communications when there are bases for suspicion that a criminal act meriting a jail sentence of at least four years is being prepared, is under way or has been performed," the new law says.
The amendment also says that a court may order surveillance "to provide information and evidence necessary for a successful criminal procedure that cannot be obtained otherwise or when their acquisition is related to substantial difficulties."
Police may apply special investigative measures in cases of drug trafficking, extortion, blackmail, money laundering, trafficking, customs fraud, abuse of office and authority, embezzlement, fraud, acceptance of bribes, illegal mediation, illegal witness influence, criminal association, formation of terrorist organisations and terrorism.
Many experts, however, say the range of offenses is too broad. 
Because of low legal awareness, a permissive political culture and a failure to prioritise state interests, an increase in surveillance will come at the expense of human rights and freedom, law professor Miodrag Labovic told the Dnevnik daily.
"Furthermore, Labovic warned that the public would never know how often the police abuse rather than correctly apply their new powers."
Many NGOs -- including the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights and the Criminal Law and Criminology Association -- also responded to the new amendments.
The Metamorphosis Foundation expressed concern that the new form of "preventive eavesdropping" lacks defined mechanisms for preventing arbitrary abuse of the new powers.
Responses also came from many bloggers. 
"For me, the most troubling part is the ability of an investigative judge and a prosecutor to agree orally on surveillance of communications for no longer than 24 hours. 
Given the bad history of protection of the right to privacy of communications, such legal solutions [deserve and receive] severe criticism," Misa Popovic wrote in his blog.
