15/09/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 15/09/08
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz visited Belgrade last week, just four days before EU foreign ministers discuss unblocking Serbia's further EU integration.
The EU wants Serbia to fully co-operate with the ICTY in order to put the interim trade agreement, signed on April 29th together with the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), into effect.
But Belgrade's EU integration hopes cannot advance unless it is certified as fully co-operating with The Hague tribunal.
The European Commission now believes that by arresting Radovan Karadzic in July, Serbia has met that condition, but the Netherlands, part of the 27-member EU, demands that Belgrade also extradite Ratko Mladic, indicted for genocide in Bosnia and Herzegovina, or that the ICTY chief prosecutor assess the existence of full co-operation with the tribunal.
Serbian President Boris Tadic, in a meeting with Brammertz, said the new government has handed over 44 of 46 war crimes indictees, demonstrating its will to co-operate with The Hague.
However, the chief prosecutor said that the arrest of Mladic and fellow remaining fugitive Goran Hadzic remains "the key objective for Serbia's full co-operation with the tribunal".
The head of the national council for co-operation with the ICTY, Rasim Ljajic, admitted Belgrade still encounters problems in enforcing co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
He said police recently lost Ratko Mladic's fingerprints on file, adding investigators will try to determine who stole that information.
Ljajic added that neither Mladic nor Hadzic has been located yet.
"Mladic was in Serbia for a long time, but at the moment we have no clear evidence that he is still here.
We are working as if he were in Serbia," he said.
The European Commission wants the interim trade agreement to take effect as soon as possible, in fact as early as Monday, when the EU foreign ministers will decide on the matter.
Brammertz announced that he will submit a report on co-operation with Serbia to the UN Security Council in December.
Since it is not known whether he has given Serbian authorities a "passing grade", all eyes are now on the Netherlands, which is effectively the only EU country blocking Serbia's further EU integration with its insistence on Mladic's arrest.
