15/09/2008
(Reuters, Office of the High Representative - 13/09/08; AP, AFP, Reuters, Office of the High Representative, EC Delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina, US Embassy in Bosnia and Herzegovina - 12/09/08)
Republika Srpska (RS) authorities have come under strong criticism over their decision to pull out of the state power transmission company and establish their own operator instead. 
International officials warn that such an "illegal" move would harm Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) interests and are urging Banja Luka to rescind that decision.
"The conclusion by the RS government to proceed towards unilateral withdrawal from the energy transmission corporation would be damaging to the country and its European goals," High Representative Miroslav Lajcak said in Bratislava on Saturday (September 13th).
Echoing a statement issued by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) the previous day, he urged the RS government "to revoke its conclusion and continue to work within the established institutions and laws" of BiH. 
The RS government "must understand that when it makes an agreement, it must honour it".
His remarks came two days after RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik's cabinet decided on Thursday to pull out of Elektroprenos BiH, citing the company's failure to adopt a business and investment plan for 2008 as one of its motives.
Elektroprenos came into existence as part of a 2006 agreement. 
RS holds a 41% stake in the company, while the Federation of BiH holds the remaining 59%.
Local and international experts have stressed that neither of the two entities can legally pull out of the company, whose establishment rests on legislation approved by the state parliament in 2004.
"An entity cannot withdraw unilaterally from a previously agreed reform," the PIC Steering Board ambassadors said in their statement Friday.
Lajcak's deputy, Raffi Gregorian, warned at the weekend that the PIC, which oversees implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement, would use "all mechanisms necessary" if RS does not revoke its decision.
"The RS government entered into an open conflict with the international community that may have long-reaching consequences," he told the Sarajevo-based daily Dnevni Avaz.
Dimitris Kourkoulas, the head of the European Commission delegation in BiH, warned that Banja Luka's decision would undermine reforms in the electricity sector implemented with "substantial" support from the EU and other donors, as well as the country's SAA process.
The French and US embassies in Sarajevo also expressed their governments' concerns over the RS authorities' act.
It "raises profound constitutional questions ... 
and is politically reckless," the US Embassy said on Friday.
