12/09/2008
(Zaman - 12/09/08;
AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, Bloomberg, FT, BBC, CNA, UN News Centre - 11/09/08)
Substantive negotiations aimed at ending Cyprus's 34-year ethnic division opened in Nicosia on Thursday (September 11th), as leaders of the Mediterranean island's Greek-run south and Turkish-controlled north met to discuss how to administer a future bi-zonal federation.
The meeting between Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat took place at an abandoned airport, eight days after the official launch of a new UN-backed effort to reunify the country.
Their discussion, which exceeded four hours, focused on governance and power sharing.
The UN special envoy for the talks said they went well.
"It's been a good discussion today but there's obviously a long way to go," Alexander Downer, a former Australian foreign minister, told reporters Thursday.
"The talks have been productive, and the talks have been fruitful."
Talks resume on September 18th.
While some experts view governance as one of the easier topics, Talat has described power sharing as one of the most difficult to solve.
Both are big issues, Downer said on Thursday.
Therefore, reaching an agreement on them would "inevitably" require "a bit of time".
The two sides have agreed in principle that a reunified Cyprus should be a bi-zonal federation of two constituent states, but still disagree on the power of the central government.
The UN has stressed that the process cannot drag on forever without concrete progress.
According to Downer, the two leaders "are doing what they can to push the process ahead at an appropriate speed".
"We may first identify where we converge and where we disagree, and we'll collect these issues in two separate files," Talat said in an interview with the Financial Times (FT).
The latest international effort to reunify Cyprus ended in failure in April 2004, when Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected a UN-sponsored reunification deal.
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriot voters supported it, only the internationally recognised Greek-run part of the island joined the EU on May 1st of that year.
Given this, the Greek Cypriots had fewer incentives to seek a solution to the long-standing problem, Talat told the FT.
Any agreement the talks may produce will require approval by both communities in simultaneous referenda.
Among the thorny issues is property, the next topic on the agenda.
Other equally difficult questions include security, territory and Turkish settlers.
"The road ahead ...
does not look blocked," UN Special Representative to Cyprus Taye-Brook Zerihoun said on Wednesday.
A cautious Christofias voiced hope earlier this week that the two sides can resolve their differences and reach a solution this time.
"I remain optimistic that through these negotiations, an agreed-upon solution will be possible," he said on Tuesday.
