14/10/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 14/10/08
Co-operation among the Southeast European Defence Ministers (SEDM) began in 1996 and soon led to a tradition of annual meetings. 
US Defence Secretary Robert Gates attended this year's meeting in Ohrid, Macedonia, from October 8th to the 10th.
The SEDM has a dozen members -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Italy, Macedonia, Romania, Slovenia, Turkey, Ukraine and the United States -- and four observers -- Georgia, Moldova, Montenegro and Serbia. 
US Admiral Mark Fitzgerald, commander of NATO's Allied Joint Force Command Naples, also attended.
Gates also conferred with Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, Defence Minister Zoran Konjanovski and President Branko Crvenkovski. 
"As many of you, we were also disappointed from this April's outcome, when Macedonia did not receive an invitation to join the Alliance at the Bucharest summit," he told the officials. 
Greece blocked Macedonia's candidacy due to the long-running dispute over Macedonia's name.
However, Gates also urged the Macedonians to be "as creative as they could and forward-leaning as possible … so we can try and get their NATO membership done at the foreign ministers meeting in December".
Macedonia and Greece are currently considering a proposal by UN mediator Matthew Nimetz, under which Macedonia would use the name Republic of Northern Macedonia internationally, while calling itself Macedonia domestically and in relations with countries that accept its usage of that name.
Addressing the meeting, Gates asked the ministers to consider sending military trainers to Afghanistan. 
"As the situation on the ground in Iraq continues to improve, I urge you to consider sending your military forces to Afghanistan where there is an urgent need for trainers as they expand their army," Gates said.
The permanent members of the SEDM have 5,100 troops in Afghanistan. 
According to reports from international media, the joint NATO and US command plans to almost double its troops there in the next three to four years to 134,000 soldiers.
"Your assistance will not only help Afghanistan better protect and care for its citizens, but will also reinforce your important role in ensuring peace and stability around the globe," Gates said.
This year's ministerial conference marked the 10th anniversary of a SEDM treaty -- signed in Skopje -- that led to the formation of the multinational Brigade of Southeast Europe.
Macedonia holds the rotating two-year chairmanship of the SEDM process and of the committee managing the Multinational Peace Force of Southeast Europe until June 2009.
