14/03/2008
To better serve you -- our readers -- Southeast European Times conducted an online poll in October and November 2007. 
Our goal was to get to know our readership better, and to find out what you think about the site. 
We asked about your backgrounds, sought your opinions on the site's features, design, and content, and invited suggestions about how we could improve. 
More than 720 of you participated, helping to give us a clearer idea of who you are and what you want in this website.
Who reads Southeast European Times?
Based on your responses, the average reader of Southeast European Times is a well-educated male who is currently working full time for the government, private industry, the media, journalism, academia, or an NGO. 
Our typical reader speaks more than one language -- and may have a working knowledge of several.
In all, 68.6% of you are men and 31.4% are women. 
Most of you are professional-age adults, with the largest bloc between the ages of 30 and 39. 
The Southeast European Times readership is well educated. 
Nearly 70% of you either have a university education or have completed graduate studies. 
More than half of you (55.5%) are working full time, while 12.5% are self-employed and 15.3% are students.
Nearly two thirds of you identified yourselves as residing in a country within the region SETimes covers, including Albania (3.9%), Bosnia and Herzegovina (5.2%), Bulgaria (7.9%), Croatia (2.3%), Greece (6.5%), Kosovo (6.7%), Macedonia (13.3%), Montenegro (1.2%), Romania (5.5%), Serbia (8.1%), and Turkey (7.7%). 
Worldwide, responses came from countries such as Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Of the ten languages we provide on the site, English appears to have the highest readership (80%). 
Serbian has the next highest number of readers (37%), followed by Croatian (29%), Bosnian (24%) and Macedonian (22%).
What do you like about Southeast European Times?
Several questions on the survey aimed to gather reader viewpoints about the site. 
We asked you where we excel, where we need to improve, and what new features you would like added. 
We also asked you to tell us which existing features you would like to see more of, and which ones are less welcome.
Overall, you gave Southeast European Times a favourable review. 
Many of you said you like the quality and style of our writing. 
You appreciate the site's availability in multiple languages and our cross-regional coverage.
Nearly a third of you (31.2%) said you would like to see more country information on the site. 
Many would also like to see more content about economic development (27.5%), interviews (26.7%), and research information. 
Asked what you would like to see less of, many of you cited sports and weather.
In terms of possible new site features, the most popular choice was a photo gallery (37%). 
Other suggestions included video clips (29.1%), more links (26.2%), and improved look and layout (23.4%).
Among our strengths, you cited multiple languages, regional coverage and writing style. 
Two areas where you thought we need to improve are in-depth reportages and conveying an alternative viewpoint.
Ipod contest
The iPod drawing has taken place and the winners have been notified. 
If you have not yet received an email from Southeast European Times, you did not win an iPod.
We thank all of you who participated in the survey. 
Your answers will help us greatly as we strive to shape the future development of the site and make it even more of a "one stop shop" for news and information about the Balkans.
