14/03/2008
(AFP, Reuters, BBC, Euobserver, Euronews - 14/03/08;
AFP, Reuters, DPA - 13/03/08)
Actions to address the challenges of global warming and relations with Mediterranean countries were among the main issues EU leaders discussed Thursday (March 13th) as they began a two-day summit in Brussels.
They agreed that talks on a series of measures to fight climate change should be completed by the end of 2008.
Last year, member states gave their principle support for an action plan, proposed by the European Commission (EC), setting a series of targets on greenhouse gas emissions and renewable energy, and measures for the creation of an EU internal market for energy.
The measures the EC proposal calls for include reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20% by 2020, compared to 1990 levels, while also increasing the share of wind, solar, hydro and wave power in the total energy consumption across the bloc to 20%, up from its current level of about 7%.
It also set a binding minimum target of 10% for biofuels in passenger vehicles by 2020.
"The proposal submitted by the European Commission is highly ambitious.
It's a very good proposal and I believe that tomorrow we will be able to support it by way of council conclusions," Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, said at a news conference Thursday.
"We must reach agreement in the first months of 2009 at the latest."
But the negotiations are expected to be tough, given the concerns expressed by member nations about the economic impact of meeting the targets and the potential risk of European industries moving to countries with lower environmental standards.
EU leaders also endorsed on Thursday a joint French-German proposal for the creation of a Mediterranean Union to enhance the bloc's co-operation with its southern neighbours, stretching from Morocco to Turkey.
"The European Council approved the principle of a Union for the Mediterranean which will include the member states of the EU and the non-EU Mediterranean coastal states and be an upgrade of the Barcelona process," Reuters quoted the draft conclusions as reading.
The Barcelona process refers to the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership launched in 1995 as a mechanism for regulating the EU's relations with ten countries -- Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, the Palestinian Territories, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey.
The original version of the plan, first proposed by French President Nicolas Sarkozy last year, envisioned that only some of the 27 member nations would be involved in the EU-funded initiative, which prompted criticism.
"Clearly this is something that would need to involve all European Union member states," said a spokesman for British Prime Minister Gordon Brown.
EU leaders eventually decided to endorse the project after France agreed to a milder, all-inclusive version.
Details of the plan, envisioning one secretariat, a joint north-south presidency and periodic top-level meetings, are expected to be finalised by June.
On July 13th, Paris hosts an EU summit, succeeding Slovenia at the helm of the Union on July 1st.
