13/10/2008
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 13/10/08
Macedonia has become the 50th country in the world to recognise Kosovo. 
Parliament voted for recognition on Thursday (October 9th). 
Only one day later, Serbia declared the Macedonian ambassador to Belgrade persona non grata, and Serbia's ambassador to Skopje submitted a protest note to the Macedonian foreign ministry.
On the other hand, Pristina expressed its delight.
"This gesture ... 
strengthens peace and stability in the region [and] facilitates integration of our countries in the EU and NATO," Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said.
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu called the recognition another signal to Serbia to share the "rational approach" of other Southeast European countries towards European integration.
The Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) and the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), two ethnic-Albanian parties in Macedonia that had proposed recognition in parliament, celebrated its passage, since they had long pressed for it.
All this is happening in a complex political climate in which many high-stakes issues are playing out. 
These include wrangling over the constitutional name of the Republic of Macedonia, demarcation of the border between Macedonia and Kosovo and recognition of the Macedonian Orthodox Church by the Serbian Orthodox Church, a dispute dragging on for more than a decade.
Responses from Serbian leaders were varied. 
Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic, while expressing his displeasure, promised continued co-operation with Skopje and said expulsion of its ambassador should not be interpreted as a slap at Macedonia's people.
His refusal to contemplate economic sanctions pleased the Macedonian business community, which fears losing access to Serbia's market.
Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic, though, said his country might have to reconsider its earlier decision to accept the constitutional name of Macedonia, which it made despite what he called "serious pressure" from Greece.
Adding to the political complexity is that demarcation of the border of Macedonia with Kosovo, which Serbia regards as its own border, remains incomplete.
Ethnic Serbian citizens of Macedonia have also voiced dissatisfaction.
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski acknowledged some citizens' dismay but said he decided, after serious study, that recognition of Kosovo was in Macedonia's interest. 
He contended relations with Belgrade would not deteriorate.
Washington welcomed the recognition by Skopje. 
The EU said each country has the right to make its own decision on the issue.
