13/10/2008
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 13/10/08
Turkey's political and military leaders are seeking new measures to combat the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), following the deadliest attacks in a year.
The PKK's success revealed serious shortcomings in the current antiterrorism strategy.
On October 3rd, a large group of PKK members attacked an outpost on the Iraqi border and killed 17 soldiers in an hours-long shootout.
On Wednesday, terrorists fired on a service bus carrying policemen in southern city of Diyarbakir, killing the driver and four policemen.
The second attack occurred, not coincidentally, while parliament was extending the military's mandate to continue cross-border anti-PKK operations in northern Iraq.
Under public pressure, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan convened the Higher Counterterrorism Board (TMYK) on Thursday (October 9th) and met with top commanders and relevant ministers.
The board agreed to meet again on Tuesday.
The conferees discussed, rather than a wholesale change of strategy, a revision of priorities in confronting the PKK threat.
Erdogan faces a difficult question, since the military is requesting increased powers.
The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) fears granting that wish in the southeast would undermine civilian authority and abridge basic freedoms.
The EU and domestic human-rights groups denounced previous emergency rule in the region.
Following EU-initiated reforms, troops must obtain a prosecutor's permission before searching individuals or private property -- a handicap the military wants to end.
It also wants to restrict telecommunications in contested areas, in order to cut off communications among PKK militants and thwart remote-controlled bombs.
Other demands include longer detention periods for terror suspects and limiting their right to consult with lawyers, whom the military accuses of carrying messages back to the PKK.
The AKP government will analyse the recently strengthened anti-terror laws of EU members Spain and Britain and plans to introduce new laws that conform with EU standards.
Turkish press reports earlier said the military should harden outposts on the Iraqi border.
After the media ridiculed initial military complaints of "financial problems", a spokesman for Turkish General Brigadier General Metin Gurak denied on Friday that a lack of money was delaying border outpost reconstruction.
He said hardening of the outposts was proceeding according to plan.
Some experts say a broader change of strategy is essential against the PKK.
International Strategic Research Organisation head Sedat Laciner said short-term measures such as hardening border posts or creating a new buffer zone would not end PKK violence.
"You cannot solve this problem by killing more and more terrorists," he said to Kanal D TV.
"There is a need [to tackle] political, diplomatic and socio-economic dimensions." Laciner stressed engagement with Iraqi Kurdish leader Massoud Barzani and adoption of a carrot-and-stick policy towards the Iraqi Kurdish government.
