14/04/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/04/08
After last month's collapse of the Serbian government and the decision to hold snap elections in May, the country entered a period of political instability that could cost its economy at least 2 billion euros in foreign investment.
President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia, former ruling coalition partners, have jeopardised major foreign ventures out on the campaign trail.
First, a gas deal with Russia, which would have injected 900m euros into the Serbian oil industry alone, was postponed. 
The agreement also would have ensured lasting stability in gas supplies.
After that, construction of the Horgos-Pozega highway by the Austrian companies PORR and Alpina was delayed. 
The highway's final value was estimated at 1.7 billion euros. 
Construction was postponed by the concession holders' inability to reach financial terms with Deutsche Bank.
The delay of both investments led to heated, public arguments between Kostunica and Tadic's parties. 
Kostunica's ministers accused the Democrats of stalling the projects in hopes of dominating the new cabinet and then taking all the credit for them.
Tadic's ministers, on the other hand, blamed Kostunica for allegedly exploiting the ventures for political purposes. 
In the end, it was decided that the new parliament would vote on the Russian gas deal, while the Austrian firms will have until the end of the year to raise the money to build the highway.
The third major investment threatened by the campaign is the tender for the copper mine and smelter complex RTB Bor, which an Austrian company, A-Tec, had planned to buy for approximately 300m euros. 
A-Tec failed to pay the sum by the arranged deadline, so the government decided to launch negotiations with the second-ranked bidder, SMR, a company owned by Russian businessman Oleg Deripaska. 
A-Tec said that it could not provide the entire sum because its lender, Deutsche Bank, withdrew from involvement in Serbia. 
The bank denies the allegation.
Economist Stojan Stamenkovic said that the halt in foreign investment results from political instability and threatens economic growth.
"Creditors and investors, especially foreign ones, are waiting for the resolution of the tangle caused by the secession of Kosovo and its impact on Serbia's economic orientation after the May 11th election," he said.
This year, Serbia expects to see around 1.3 billion euros' worth of foreign investment. 
Last year, it amounted to approximately 2 billion euros. 
Economists warn that a dearth of investments will impede both economic growth and job creation, as local capital is insufficient.
