28/11/2005
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times -- 11/28/05
As Croatia's bid to join the EU moves forward, it is certain to come under intensified pressure to stamp out corruption.
In its most recent progress report on the country, the European Commission found the issue continues to be a "serious problem", despite the establishment of a legal framework for tackling it.
The latest report from the international anticorruption watchdog Transparency International (TI), meanwhile, demonstrates just how serious a challenge the Balkan country faces.
Croatia has dropped three places in the group's Corruption Perceptions Index, suggesting that businessmen and economic analysts see little to celebrate in this area.
Out of 159 countries listed in this year's survey -- the largest number since it was established in 1995 -- Croatia ranks 70th.
In 2004, it placed 67th.
Although higher than all of its former Yugoslav neighbours except EU member Slovenia, Croatia's score puts it well behind the average in the Union.
The figure is the result of a series of inquiries conducted by independent institutions, including the Economist's Intelligence Unit, the Merchant International Group, Freedom House, the World Economic Forum and the World Market Research Centre.
The index uses a ten-point scale, with zero meaning the fullest degree of corruption and ten meaning no corruption.
Croatia received a score of 3.4, which puts it in the same league as Egypt, Burkina Faso, Lesotho, Poland and Saudi Arabia.
The world average is 4.11.
By contrast, Iceland, Finland, New Zealand and Denmark are among the highest-ranked countries on the list.
With a score of 9.7, Iceland is considered practically corruption-free.
The worst-ranked countries in the world are Chad and Bangladesh, both of which scored 1.7.
Austria was in 10th place, with a score of 8.7;
Great Britain and the Netherland shared 11th place, with 8.6 each;
and Germany was in 16th, with 8.2.
Bulgaria and Romania, which are expected to join the EU together in 2007, had significantly divergent scores -- 55th place (4.0) and 85th place (3.0) respectively.
The United States ranks 17th, with a score of 7.6.
Among the countries of the former Yugoslavia, Slovenia had the highest ranking -- 31st place, with 6.1 points.
Lowest was Macedonia, which is in 103rd place with 2.7 points.
Serbia-Montenegro is 97th, and Bosnia and Herzegovina 88th.
"Corruption isn't a natural disaster:
it is the cold, calculated theft of opportunity from the men, women and children who are least able to protect themselves," said TI chief executive David Nussbaum in a press release accompanying release of the 2005 index.
"Leaders must go beyond lip service and make good on their promises to provide the commitment and resources to improve governance, transparency and accountability."
Among poorer or less developed countries, pervasive corruption drains away the impact of international aid, the TI press release said.
The watchdog is urging governments to take a number of measures, including dedicating greater resources to anticorruption efforts and providing the public with more detailed information about budgets, revenues and expenditures.
Various factors combine to fuel corruption in Croatia, analysts say.
These include an underregulated market and institutional weakness, unstable social norms and an underdeveloped administration.
Nepotism and favoritism are not uncommon.
The process of privatisation and decentralisation has spawned abuse.
While leaders say they are taking the issue seriously, a lack of political willpower means the rhetoric often fails to translate into action.
As a result, the business climate is hampered, economic development stymied, and the hopes of Croatia's citizens deferred.
A recent survey found that nearly 90 per cent of Croatians see corruption as a very common type of behaviour.
Doctors, hospital supervisors, heads of government agencies and local government employees are regarded as the most corrupt among Croatian professionals, the poll suggests.
As for institutions, the judicial and health systems have the worst reputations, along with local government.
More than 50 per cent of the respondents said they favoured punishing corrupt politicians with financial penalties, imprisonment or, as an ultimate punishment, a lifelong ban on political activity.
The TI report notwithstanding, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader is confident that things are getting better.
As an example, he cites the new "one-stop shop" process for businesspersons seeking to establish a firm.
The previous, labyrinthine procedures were a fertile ground for all sorts of corruption and bribery, Sanader notes.
However, too many other avenues for corrupt behaviour remain open.
Amid 20 per cent unemployment, for example, bribes and personal contacts can play a weighty role in landing a job, while nepotism and power politics keep some in positions where they may be neither qualified nor competent.
Such phenomena reflect the legacy of earlier regimes, which bestowed privileges on those who were obedient, and in which connections and influence were the determining factors.
To fully break with this legacy, say anticorruption experts, Croatia will need to take immediate, decisive steps, including legislative changes and measures meant to boost transparency in government.
