13/08/2008
(Mediafax, Nine O'clock, Agerpres - 13/08/08;
AP, Nine O'clock, Adevarul - 12/08/08;
AFP, Reuters, AP, Mediafax - 11/08/08)
The lower house of Romania's parliament on Wednesday (August 13th) rejected a request by the National Anti-Corruption Directorate (DNA) to begin investigations into former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase and former Transport Minister Miron Mitrea.
The two allegedly were complicit in a variety of offences, including graft.
Only 120 members of the Chamber of Deputies supported the DNA's request for a probe of Nastase, well below the required 218-vote threshold, while 150 lawmakers rejected it, with six votes declared null, Mediafax news agency reported.
In a separate vote on Mitrea's case, 160 lawmakers voted in favour of prosecution and 108 against, with one vote declared null.
The move came a day after leaders of the main political parties agreed during consultations with President Traian Basescu that Romania should ensure its removal from European Commission (EC) monitoring by July 2009.
In its latest monitoring report on Romania, released on July 23rd, the commission criticised Bucharest for its slow progress in fighting high-level corruption.
But it also praised the DNA for beginning to investigate key figures earlier this year.
Nastase and Mitrea topped the list of eight former and current officials that DNA head Daniel Morar suspected of corruption and other alleged offences.
However, some politicians from Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu's National Liberal Party, as well as some opposition lawmakers, claimed Morar had political motives.
"The fight against corruption needs to be de-politicised and Romania must affirm its unequivocal commitment to fight against high level corruption," the EC said in its report last month.
Expressing their support for Morar, whose three-year mandate ended on Monday, officials in Brussels have sent a clear signal that they would like to him stay at the DNA.
"Reconfirming the head of the DNA in his position will be a test of the Romanian authorities' commitment" to the fight against corruption, EC spokesman Mark Gray said recently.
On Monday, however, Justice Minister Catalin Predoiu replaced Morar, nominating criminal prosecutor Monica Serbanescu to succeed him at the DNA.
"Our goal is to receive a positive report on our justice system from Brussels in December 2008 and the lifting of monitoring mechanisms in July 2009," the minister told reporters in announcing his decision.
"I will propose that Mr Morar become either a high representative for the justice ministry at the European Commission or number two at the DNA," he told reporters.
In response, the DNA issued a statement saying its head "was not considering" any of the minister's proposals.
Later Monday, Prosecutor General Laura Codruta Kovesi appointed Morar as acting DNA head for another three months, Romania's English-language daily Nine O'clock reported.
Serbanescu, 47, advised former Prosecutor General Ilie Botos and is currently an adviser at the justice ministry.
Basescu would have to confirm her appointment to the DNA.
