12/08/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic and Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo and Split -- 12/08/08
The BiH Commission for Co-ordination of Youth Issues presented its findings after conducting the first extensive survey of BiH youth opinion.
Pollsters questioned 1,500 citizens aged 16 to 30 on economic, political and social issues.
The young respondents singled out employment, housing and education as their priorities.
Employment
Pollsters found that 58.5% of the youth in BiH are unemployed -- a figure four times higher than in any EU country -- and that a large number are leaving for foreign countries.
Fifty-seven percent of the young respondents stated that they would temporarily leave the country for a job.
Such willingness to work abroad comes even though few young people have travelled abroad:
about 35% said they had never done so;
40% of respondents aged between 18 and 30 do not even have passports.
Another factor forcing respondents to think about working abroad is the absence of job security in the so-called grey economy.
According to the Fena news agency, one in five young workers lacks an employment contract.
Housing
The employment problem arguably contributes to the difficulty young people face in establishing households of their own:
85% of survey participants between 16 and 30 reported living with their parents.
They ranked housing as their second worst problem, after employment.
Education
Youth were also unhappy with the educational system of BiH.
Most expressed dissatisfaction with inadequate equipment in universities and a lack of practical training.
They cited financial problems as the principal reason for dropping out.
On the other hand, whether because or despite of the local educational system, one in two respondents speaks English and one in five speaks German.
Apathy
Discouraging realities appear to have engendered widespread apathy among the respondents.
Only 7% of youth participated in organised sports.
Three of four aged 16 to 30 claimed to have no interest in politics, in a country born of a recent war.
According to election data, the youth turnout in the 2006 general elections was 47%, an unimpressive figure but twice as high as the turnout in 2002 and 2004.
"The data are not terrifying, and they are much better than those from a couple of years ago, when some international organisations [reported] 60% of youth wished to leave BiH permanently.
[But these findings] should stimulate the Council of Ministers of BiH to create youth policies as soon as possible, in order to preserve human resources as a core asset of BiH," said Commission President Nadja Lutvikadic.
