12/03/2008
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 12/03/08
Albania has begun talks with the European Commission (EC) on liberalising the visa regime with EU member states, as part of a general initiative by the bloc to ease restrictions for Western Balkan countries.
EC Vice President Franco Frattini formally launched discussions with Albania during a visit to Tirana on Friday (March 7th).
"I came personally to Tirana to bring you a strong, positive political message from the EU," Frattini said at a press conference.
The aim of the dialogue, he said, was to give clear indications to Albanian authorities about the measures that must be taken before visa-free travel can be granted to all Albanian citizens.
The EU will set a roadmap with clear benchmarks for each of the Western Balkan countries.
Document security, including biometrics, is one of the primary conditions for easing visa restrictions.
Other conditions include stepping up the fight against illegal migration and organised crime, as well as correctly and effectively implementing the agreements on visa facilitation and re-admission.
"It is clear that the speed of movement towards visa liberalisation will depend on your progress in fulfilling the requirements that are set," Frattini said.
He added that the EU will continue to assist Albania politically and financially to fulfil the conditions for visa liberalisation.
Prime Minister Sali Berisha said talks with the EU on the visa issue represent a historic step for Albanians.
"The Albanian government will make all efforts, will implement every law and reform needed in accordance with the European standards," he said.
In this way, a fundamental freedom -- free movement of people -- will be achieved, Berisha said.
On January 28th, the Council of the EU welcomed the EC's initiative to launch a visa liberalisation dialogue with all Western Balkan countries.
As part of this programme, the visa-free dialogue started with Serbia on January 30th and continued with Macedonia and Montenegro, respectively, on February 20th and 21st.
Since the beginning of this year, Albanian citizens have enjoyed some benefits from a visa facilitation agreement with the EU.
This agreement provides for easier access to visas for various categories of people -- including students, athletes, cultural workers, journalists, people visiting family members living in the EU, people in need of medical treatment and those working with EU companies.
The visa facilitation agreement also includes a lower visa fee (35 euros instead of 60 euros), visas valid for up to five years that will allow for multiple entries in the EU, and visas free of charge for children and pensioners.
