12/03/2008
(The Guardian, Independent - 12/03/08;
AP, Reuters, BBC, VOA, International Herald Tribune, Javno, Balkan Insight, UN News Centre - 11/03/08)
The trial against three former top Croatian generals, accused of war crimes committed against Krajina Serbs towards the end of the 1991-1995 war in Croatia, opened at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague on Tuesday (March 11th).
Ante Gotovina, Ivan Cermak and Mladen Markac face nine counts of crimes against humanity and violation of the laws or customs of war, according to a joint indictment issued last May.
The three are accused of orchestrating the killings of at least 150 Serbs, as well as the forcible expulsion of up to 200,000 others during a 1995 Croatian military offensive, known as Operation Storm.
It was launched to regain control over the Krajina region, which was seized by Serb separatists earlier in the war.
The generals are also held responsible for the plunder of property, wanton destruction and the mistreatment of Serbs by Croatian forces during the three-month operation.
"This trial arises from the forcible elimination of Krajina Serbs from Croatia and the destruction of their communities in August 1995 and the roles and responsibilities of the generals in that process," UN prosecutor Alan Tieger said in his opening statement.
"The Serb community was a scarred wasteland of destroyed villages and homes.
The case is about three men who were instrumental in those crimes."
At the time of Operation Storm, Gotovina was commander of the Split Operative Zone of the Croatian Army and exercised full command and control over all Croatian forces taking part in the offensive.
While he knew, or had reason to know, of the atrocities committed by troops under his command, he failed to prevent them or to punish the perpetrators, prosecutors allege.
Furthermore, he knowingly allowed victims of the actions of the Krajina Serbs against Croatians earlier in the war to take part in the operation, which made them predisposed to revenge.
Along with several others -- including late Croatian President Franjo Tudjman -- Gotovina, Cermak and Markac were allegedly key members of a joint criminal enterprise aimed at the forcible and permanent removal of the Serb population from the Krajina region.
"Serbs were in panic-stricken flight, not by accident but by design," Tieger said on Tuesday.
"For those who remained, largely the elderly and the infirm, life became a nightmare.
While homes and villages were plundered and destroyed on a massive scale, many were murdered."
Tieger also stressed that prosecutors would not contest Croatia's right to regain control over the Krajina region.
"Operation Storm encompassed another objective -- to drive out the Serb civilian population and ensure their permanent removal," he said.
The prosecutor also quoted Tudjman as describing the Krajina Serbs as "a cancer on the underbelly of Croatia", and as saying once that Croats had to "inflict such blows that the Serbs will to all practical purposes disappear".
All three generals have pleaded not guilty to the charges brought against them.
Their trial -- one of the most high-profile case in the ICTY's history -- is expected to take more than a year.
If convicted, Gotovina, Cermak and Markac each face possible life sentences.
