12/06/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 12/06/08
US and EU representatives signed a common declaration to support Kosovo's regional integration and its institutional and economic development on Tuesday (June 10th), during a summit held in Brdo pri Kranju, Slovenia.
The agenda covered regional and political issues, global security, present-day global challenges and bilateral trade.
Regarding Kosovo, the EU said it "welcomes US participation in" the bloc's EULEX mission, which is expected eventually to replace UNMIK.
"We will co-operate on completing a smooth transition from UNMIK to EULEX responsibility for the rule of law and its full deployment throughout all of Kosovo, which is essential for the stability of Kosovo," the joint declaration said.
The United States and EU also hailed the progress of Croatia, Serbia, Albania, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro on the road to Union integration.
The document covered the wide range of topics discussed by US President George W. Bush and EU leaders, including Slovenian Prime Minister and EU Council President Janez Jansa.
"This is my eighth EU-US meeting, and my message in the end is that it's really important for the US to stay close with the EU," Bush said during a press conference after the meeting.
"It’s in our interests that the EU be strong and vibrant, and it's in our interest to work hard to have a partnership that solves problems, and we discussed a lot of problems today."
Bush spoke about Kosovo with his Slovenian counterpart, Danilo Turk.
"The two presidents discussed the situation in Kosovo, the peaceful process in Middle East and some international issues," the Slovenian president's office said.
During his trip, as reported by Reuters, Bush will seek support from the EU in fighting treatable diseases in Africa and increasing the number of healthcare workers on that continent.
Observers expect Bush to push the EU on a strategy against Iran.
On Monday, a US diplomat told the press that the US would like to see the EU impose further curbs on Iranian banking activity.
