16/04/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/04/12
It's a complaint that resonates with so many families who struggle to get their children through school, only to find job prospects bleak. 
In the Balkans too, university graduates are confronting two issues: limited available jobs and an education system that is not equipping them with the skills demanded by employers. 
Furthermore, experts say, secondary and university education fails to offer degrees in specialised fields, opting instead for general ones.
Ermal Krasniqi, an economist at the Kosovo Society for Social Research, told SETimes: "Young graduates ... 
get mostly theoretical preparations which are very weak, and do not have practical experience, because universities do not require that. 
If they do, you get an internship reference because of some ties to somebody."
The disconnect between education and the job market is mostly due to poorly qualified teachers, outdated educational methods and curricula, and limited job training opportunities.
Hazir Krasniqi, 49, manager of Krasniqi Publishing, experienced the gap firsthand. 
"In December, I had a need for proofreaders, and thought it would not be difficult to find a new one," he told SETimes. 
"But I realised that 90% of my applicants were unable to get the job; they did not have the required linguistic skills, could not proofread, and the writing skills were equal to zero."
Rina Berisha, 23, a graduate of geography at the University of Tirana, told SETimes that based on her experience, she wishes she'd done things differently.
"I [spent] a year after graduation without a job. 
I knew that I would face this problem, but I used the time to improve my skills, to get more knowledge. 
I did a lot of volunteer work just to learn more. 
During my studies I didn't do volunteer work, because we thought it was just lost time. 
This is one of the reasons skills are lacking in students."
Liridon Shehu, a law graduate in Pristina, says quality of instruction can be a problem, given the quantity of students. 
"In the Law Faculty, 1,000 students are admitted every year, [sharing] the same building as the Economy Faculty, which has the same number of students or more every year. 
We do not get the quality we need because there is no room. 
Quality is impossible in a class with 100 students or more, and professors, in some cases, don't care: they just want to get their salary."
The quality may well be an issue. 
According to a recent ranking of the top 400 universities in the world, no Balkan universities made the list, and only two from Turkey appeared.
There is also the issue of public versus private universities. 
According to Ermal Krasniqi, "Many say that private universities offer the best education. 
That might be right for some offering a good level, but … from what we have observed, young graduates from public universities have better chances of getting a job, because of a better quality, and the assurance that you 'can't buy a diploma."
Bashkim Imeri is a fellow law graduate, in Tetovo, Macedonia. 
In his experience, "Most graduates work in a different area than that in which they have graduated; otherwise they remain without a job. 
The market does not offer enough jobs. 
Many graduates of law or economy work in hotels or farms because they need something," he told SETimes.
Ermal Krasniqi agrees, reiterating that it is the education system that misdirects young people. 
"Many university students spend vast time in fields where they do not find jobs. 
Many fields like agriculture, engineering, and the natural sciences do not have enough graduates to fill the jobs, and in these fields you still can find workers who are older than 40."
He said that universities should do a better job of meeting job market needs by streaming students towards fields with hiring potential. 
"This means Economy or Law departments should not admit 1,000 students but 100. 
Agriculture or Engineering Departments should admit 1,000 and offer scholarships in those areas to motivate students and develop new curricula. 
These are the steps that need to be taken, but they are not taking them seriously, because it would mean that people who have power in decision making might lose jobs at the university."
