11/08/2008
Bulgaria's men's volleyball got off to a decisive start Sunday (August 10th), thrashing the host nation China 3-1. 
But the victory was clouded by intrigue concerning the team captain, Plamen Konstantinov, who was taken off the starting list for undisclosed medical reasons. 
In rowing, meanwhile, the two-brother team of Ivo and Martin Yanakievi qualified for the semifinals in men's double sculls, while Rumyana Neikova did the same in the women's single sculls.
Snjezana Pejcic won Croatia's first medal at the Beijing Olympics, a bronze in rifle shooting. 
Meanwhile, the basketball team had no problem defeating Australia Sunday (August 10th), finishing with a score of 72-52. 
In handball, where Croatia was the defending champion, the national team fended off a challenge from Spain. 
The final score was 31-29.
Greece faced the threat of another doping scandal after a male runner, identified by the media as Tassos Gousis, tested positive for a steroid. 
The news followed an International Olympics Committee decision Friday to ban another Greek runner, Katerina Thanou, because of a drug test incident in 2004. 
Thanou, a silver medallist at the Sydney games, has threatened to sue.
Alina Dumitru of Romania won a gold medal in women's 48kg judo on Saturday (August 9th). 
In lightweight boxing, Romania's Georgian Popescu easily defeated Ali Sadam of the United States in the 60kg category.
Serbia's Ana Ivanovic, a top seed in Olympic tennis, withdrew from the competition Monday (August 11th). 
She said an inflammation in her right thumb is continuing to bother her. 
Serbia had some good news in women's volleyball, however: the national team beat Algeria 25-14, 25-13, 25-13 and is in second place after Brazil.
Turkish athletes suffered a string of disappointments during the opening days in Beijing. 
Nurcan Taylan, the 2004 Olympic champion in 48kg women's weightlifting, was not able to manage a repeat. 
The gold went to China's Chen Xiexia, while another Turkish competitor, Sibel Ozkan, took the silver. 
In men's weightlifting, Sedat Artuc was eliminated in the 56kg category, while in light welterweight boxing, Adem Kilicci lost to Britain's Billy Joe Saunders.
