09/09/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/09/08
Since late July, Macedonians have been adjusting to changes in the way alcohol can be sold in the country.
Under amendments to the trade law, only licenced stores can sell alcohol products.
The economy ministry issues the licences, which cost 330 euros.
Alcohol can no longer be sold at farmers' markets, newsstands or gas stations.
Even at the licenced stores, nobody can buy it between 7pm and 6am.
Those wanting a drink during those hours will have to visit bars or restaurants.
They remain exempt from the new restrictions, which also cover tobacco sales.
"The aim of the amendments is to stop alcohol abuse and regulate the markets -- not to boost the national budget," says Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Bocevski.
"Abuse of these measures will be punished rigorously, and the State Market Inspectorate will closely monitor the process."
Those violating the law -- including parents whose underage children buy alcohol -- face a fine of up to 300 euros.
Reactions within the liquor retail industry have been mixed.
Owners of smaller shops complain that the licencing fee is too high, while large stores, such as the SP Market chain, back the changes.
"We will respect and abide by the law because it is in the interest of children," a representative of the company said.
Though most consumers agree regulation is needed, some are unhappy that they cannot buy liquor after 7pm.
"What should one do if friends suddenly call saying they are arriving and there is no alcohol at home, and it is after 7pm?" asks Nikola Petrovski of Skopje.
"There should be some stores selling alcohol and tobacco where those over 18 can buy such products at all times," Petrovski recommended.
The government has acted before to tackle underage drinking, which has become a serious problem in Macedonia.
A few years ago, the fine for selling alcohol or tobacco to minors increased.
Although bars and restaurants complied with restrictions on sales to minors, stores often did not.
Meanwhile, a report from Macedonia's ombudsman highlighted the need for efficient prevention of underage purchases.
Some experts, however, are sceptical that the new rules will have the desired effect.
"Those who are intent on drinking will find a way to buy alcohol," says sociologist Ilija Acevski.
"If the state wants to put an end to this, it should take other steps, such as better informing the public of the ill effects of alcohol consumption, especially in schools -- since schools are concerned with education and upbringing of the young."
