10/03/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/03/08
At a news conference early Saturday (March 8th), Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica announced his own resignation and said the cabinet can no longer function due to the coalition partners' deeply differing positions on Kosovo.
Because of this, the government on Monday asked President Boris Tadic, leader of the Democratic Party (DS), to disband parliament and call for early elections, potentially on May 11th, the date of local and provincial elections.
"A government that lacks a common policy can no longer function -- that is the end of the government. 
That means we have to return our mandate to the people," Kostunica said. 
He added that the cause of the coalition's dissolution is the impasse over Kosovo, which declared independence from Serbia on February 17th.
Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) backed a controversial resolution by the far-right Radical Party, which stated that Serbia could join the EU only if the Union pledged to respect Serbia's sovereignty over Kosovo. 
Partners in the fragile ruling coalition, the DS and the G17 Plus party, which advocate the quickest possible European integration, rejected the resolution, which finally resulted in the government's collapse.
Tadic said that with such a resolution Serbia cannot defend Kosovo, but can only halt its accession to the EU. 
He supports the decision to call an early election. 
However, the president also said that the primary problem in relations among the coalition partners is the attitude towards the EU.
"I believe that this is about the Serbian government lacking a common stand on Serbia's -- and its citizens' -- European and economic prospect. 
The people of Serbia deserve a better life and an economic prospect that is possible only within the EU, and I am also confident that we will best defend our Kosovo from independence precisely by joining that organisation," Tadic said on Saturday.
Analysts say the early election will be a referendum on Serbia's future path -- towards the EU if the pro-European forces win, or towards self-isolation if the nationalist parties win.
The primary battle is expected to be fought between Tadic's DS and the Radicals, whose leader, Vojislav Seselj, is on trial before The Hague tribunal. 
According to a poll released in February, if the election were held now, the Radical Party would win 39% of votes compared to 38% for the DS and its partners.
According to these results, both parties could form a government only with the help of coalition partners. 
Therefore, if the election turns out as predicted, the bloc around Kostunica would win around 10%, making the talks on forming a new cabinet tough and uncertain.
The public is polarised concerning Kosovo and the EU. 
Polls suggest 67% of Serbian citizens still want to join the EU. 
However, 74% would not accept accelerated European integration if it means recognising Kosovo's independence.
The early elections concern both economists and Kosovo Serbs. 
Economists believe Serbia will lose a great deal of foreign investment due to political instability, while Kosovo Serbs think snap elections will not help preserve Kosovo and that political bickering is taking up valuable time.
