11/07/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 11/07/08
Southeast European Times:
What are Macedonia's chances of becoming a NATO member soon?
Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki:
Even before the Bucharest summit, all NATO members, except one, had clearly confirmed that Macedonia fulfilled all relevant criteria for Alliance membership.
The invitation for membership for Macedonia was postponed due to the obstruction of Greece, which regretfully is an abuse of NATO membership by Greece to the detriment of the credibility and common interests of the Alliance.
Nevertheless, NATO is an organisation that has an integration strategy.
Hence, the policy of blocking NATO's enlargement is not sustainable in the long run, regardless of its ulterior motive.
Therefore, the integration of Macedonia into NATO is not only likely but also a strategic commitment of the Alliance to the Southeast flank of Europe.
SETimes:
The name dispute between Macedonia and Greece has lasted for years.
Do you see the dispute ending soon, and in what direction do you think the negotiations will go?
Milososki:
Contesting the name of Macedonia [takes] precedence in international relations [when] a larger country, such as Greece, disputes the right to national self-determination of a smaller peaceful country, such as Macedonia.
The positions of Greece related to this name dispute fall outside democratic principles and therefore hinder a [solution].
In addition, this dispute is compounded by the irrational fear of some Greek politicians over ethnic minorities, an issue that runs contrary to the state strategy for a purely Greek nation.
Namely, I would refer to the position of the former prime minister of Greece, [Constantine] Mitsotakis, who, in the foreword to In the Name of Macedonia, by his political counselor, Theodoros Skylakakis, says that he would not be worried about the name of the country … but he is worried by the possibility that a new minority issue could open up.
SETimes:
What is your opinion on the June 1st parliamentary elections?
How do you evaluate them?
Milososki:
The elections in Macedonia on [June 1st] showed two major features -- one old and one new.
The old one is that a small group of individuals or groups still believe that political advantage could be gained through irregularities.
But the state institutions reacted wherever there was evidence, and we expect that after the court procedures those persons will be punished in accordance with the law.
The new feature of these elections is that for the first time, Macedonian citizens voted proactively -- they supported the policies of the ruling government.
This is a new attribute of these elections.
SETimes:
Will there be changes to Macedonian foreign policy in the next four years?
Milososki:
Macedonian foreign policy is based on a broader political, inter-ethnic and social consensus, and it will remain on this course.
Our goal is Euro-Atlantic integration of the country and co-operation with our neighbours, aimed at stability in the region, as well as an active contribution to NATO-led peace missions.
SETimes:
Do you expect that Macedonia will get a date to start negotiations for EU membership by the end of this year?
Milososki:
Macedonia is ready to fulfil the criteria of the European Commission for getting a date for start of accession negotiations by the end of this year.
The country has both the political and administrative capacities to enter EU-membership negotiations.
We are aware that the negotiations are not an easy or short process.
However, the experience of countries from the former Yugoslavia -- such as Slovenia, which is already an EU member, and Croatia, which is in the course of negotiations -- will be greatly helpful for us, because our political, economic and administrative systems have many similarities.
SETimes:
What does the bilateral agreement between Macedonia and the United States -- signed after the April NATO summit -- mean for the future of Macedonia?
Milososki:
The document for the Strategic Partnership between the United States and Macedonia is a confirmation of our longtime co-operation and mutual trust, and it sets a very solid basis for deepening bilateral relations in several fields.
