11/04/2008
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 11/04/08
Albania is expected to send a delegation to Brussels soon to begin discussions on its NATO accession plan.
On Wednesday (April 9th), NATO spokesman James Appathurai expressed pleasure at the prospect of formally and fully welcoming the country into NATO on the Alliance's 60th anniversary next year.
He emphasised, however, that Albania must reform its armed forces, establish the rule of law, and set up functioning democratic institutions.
The government is committed to executing all reforms needed to join NATO, President Bamir Topi said on Wednesday, almost a week after the country received its invitation to join the Alliance.
"The process of Albanian integration in the Euro-Atlantic structures will be intensified," Topi said during a meeting with US Ambassador to Albania Jon Withers, additionally promising to carry out "electoral reform and an uncompromising fight against corruption and organised crime".
Albania "will play the role of moderator in the interests of peace and long-term sustainability in the region and beyond," the president added.
Withers praised the country for turning its aspirations into reality.
"This invitation, pure and simple, is a triumph of the Albanian people.
Not of one party or another but of all Albanians of all parties working and sacrificing together," he said.
As for changes still needed to secure membership, Prime Minister Sali Berisha said, "Our responsibilities are great, and we should proceed with the reforms.
Everyone must accelerate the pace of reforms."
"All the country's institutions have new tasks," he told his cabinet Tuesday, citing defence, the economy, public order, diplomacy, education, culture and the environment as areas requiring work.
Berisha also acknowledged the opposition's contribution.
"The government and the opposition, regardless of the number of votes, must never consider moving separately towards these two big projects that are the embodiment of the most sublime dreams of the Albanians."
The public has long welcomed integration into NATO.
In a survey by the Institute for Democracy and Mediation in June 2007, 90% of respondents said that they support Albanian membership in NATO.
About 83% said they considered NATO membership to be more of a "stepping stone" than EU integration.
