10/07/2008
By Manjola Hala and Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Tirana and Zagreb -- 10/07/08
Representatives from Croatia and Albania were in Brussels on Wednesday (July 9th) to sign the NATO membership protocol for their countries. 
Albanian Foreign Minister Lulzim Basha and Croatian Foreign Affairs Minister Gordan Jandrokovic signed the document, which opens the way for the countries' accession to the Alliance. 
The two will gain full membership once the parliaments of the 26 current Alliance members approve their entry.
After the signing, Basha said that Albania will take all responsibilities deriving from full NATO membership. 
"I'm bringing you the commitment of the Albanian government, politicians and the people to succeed in reforms to consolidate democratic institutions and the rule of law," Basha said at the ceremony in Brussels.
"With Albania and Croatia close to NATO membership, the region is safer than ever. 
The continuation of NATO's policy will give a strong message to other countries in the region," he added.
Albania joins NATO's strategic concept for security and protection, aims to be fully part of the military structures and collective defense system of the Alliance and will engage its capacities to be part of it, according to a letter that Basha sent NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer prior to the signing.
Basha said by becoming a member of the Alliance, Albania makes a historic investment for the future of its security. 
He noted that Albania fulfilled every obligation toward membership and is carrying out reforms through consensus.
Jandrokovic, who also sent a letter to de Hoop Scheffer on Tuesday, said joining the Alliance would increase Croatia and its new allies' security in the Euro-Atlantic area.
''The signing of the NATO membership protocol was a historic moment for Croatia. 
Starting from today, Croatia will take part in almost every NATO committee and in other activities of the organization,'' Jandrokovic said. 
''With NATO members we share democracy, a free market, human rights and the rule of law.''
Jandrokovic said he hopes that the ratification process will be completed on time, ''so that Croatia could take part as a full member at the next NATO summit in spring 2009 in Strasbourg".
There has, however, been speculation that certain groups in Slovenia might use the election campaign there to delay that country's ratification of Croatian membership.
However, the Slovenian government no longer opposes Croatian membership in the wake of the Croatian government's suspension of the protected-fisheries zone.
