08/08/2008
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 08/08/08
Southeast European Times:
How do you assess the overall security situation in Kosovo after independence?
Colonel Jean-Luc Cotard:
The overall situation is quite stable -- probably more stable than most people anticipated prior to the declaration of independence.
We've been able to maintain the level of violence under strict limits.
Especially on [March 17th];
we have been able to keep it under control, both in terms of scope of violence and also in term of duration.
And we were able to contain it so that there was no extension of violence.
SETimes:
What is the security situation in the Serb enclaves?
Cotard:
After February 17th, none of the major issues were solved yet.
They are still in front of us.
There are mostly political rather than pure military or security issues.
Soldiers can, at best, limit the violence.
We are not going to solve political issues.
It's not our role, it's not our mission, and it's not our duty.
The only thing we can do, as KFOR, is to create conditions for the political process.
We have no comment on any political suggestion.
SETimes:
What is your opinion of UNMIK chief Lamberto Zannier's proposal to establish an ethnic Serb police force within the Kosovo Police Service?
Would it have an impact on the overall security situation in Kosovo?
Do you think this would lead towards partition of the northern part from the rest of Kosovo?
Cotard:
Partition would violate the Contact Group Guiding Principles and the NATO guidance.
The territory of Kosovo is well established and our mandate under UN Security Council Resolution 1244 is also clear.
NATO has both a mandate and security responsibilities within the current limits and throughout all areas of Kosovo, including the north.
SETimes:
How difficult is it for the French troops to control northern Kosovo?
Do you think more NATO troops are needed to control the situation?
Cotard:
The Multinational Task Force North is not only French but made up of six other contributing nations.
The KFOR troops present there, like everywhere else in Kosovo, are handling the situation in a very professional manner.
However, you have to know that we don't comment on our contingency plans nor give details on our tactical deployment.
KFOR has about 15,000 troops on the field, and is ready to fulfill its mission all over Kosovo.
