09/04/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/04/08
Despite disappointment in Macedonia for failing to receive an invitation to join NATO last week, officials have vowed to keep pursuing membership. 
On Monday (April 7th), the government announced that it would launch discussions this week to solve the ongoing name dispute with Greece, which cost Macedonia its NATO invitation.
Although the Alliance's members recognised that Macedonia had achieved the prerequisites for membership, the name problem remains a sticking point. 
NATO said an invitation would be offered as soon as it was settled.
On Monday, President Branko Crvenkovski spoke with NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, who reiterated that the dispute had blocked Macedonia's invitation. 
He said, however, that as soon as it was resolved, NATO would automatically activate the country's membership process.
Crvenkovski said the state strategy on the issue must be defined but that the country's strategic goals should not be affected.
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski echoed that view. 
"We will take steps that will positively involve broader consultations with experts in the political and other public spheres," he said.
Macedonia has planned to intensify its efforts to end the dispute. 
US Assistant Secretary of State Daniel Fried contacted Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis on Monday to discuss whether Athens would approve further negotiations. 
Fried also spoke with Macedonian leaders and to the relevant UN envoy, Matthew Nimetz.
On Monday, Gruevski met with the leaders of the main political parties to discuss the issue. 
He said he would ask the parties to publicly confirm whether they accept some of Nimetz's suggestions. 
However, the stability of the government is in question, as the minority Albanian party within the ruling coalition is expected to demand early elections.
US President George W. 
Bush, who met with Crvenkovski and Gruevski in Croatia at the weekend, reiterated his support for Macedonia's NATO bid. 
Speaking in Zagreb, Bush expressed regret that Macedonia received no invitation to NATO membership. 
He praised the contribution of Macedonian soldiers serving with missions abroad and expressed hope that Macedonia would become a NATO member immediately after resolving the dispute.
"What is certain is that we want the process to continue, under the auspices of the UN, so that a mutually acceptable solution can be reached," a Greek government spokesman said.
