08/08/2008
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 08/08/08
Last month, Montenegro's water polo team succeeded in winning the European championship.
In doing so, it showed that this tiny country of only 650,000 citizens is becoming a superpower when it comes to international water polo.
Having split from the former union of Serbia-Montenegro in May 2006, the newly independent state is participating in the Olympics for the first time on its own.
Around 20 athletes will represent Montenegro, and more than half are water polo players.
The others will compete in swimming, judo, the marathon, boxing, shooting and jumping.
In judo, Srdan Mrvaljevic has a chance at a medal.
So do shooter Nikola Saranovic and boxer Milorad Gajovic.
Still, Montenegrins are placing most of their hopes in the water polo team, nicknamed the "Red Sharks".
After they won the European Championship, thousands came out to celebrate in public squares around Montenegro.
President Filip Vujanovic greeted them, and the mayor of Podgorica hinted that five big swimming pools could be built in the capital, which currently has none.
All of the Red Sharks come from two small towns on the seaside -- Kotor and Herceg Novi.
"It's a realistic prediction that they can go to the top if they repeat their performance at the European Championship tournament in Spain one month ago," says Nikola Nikolic, a sports journalist with the prominent Montenegrin daily Vijesti."They sunk the Hungarians, who are Olympic champions, and two other European world champions, Serbia and Croatia.
Besides these, the main challenger will be the Australians.
I believe we can get one of the medals."
He also told Southeast European Times that it would be no surprise if boxer Milorad Gajovic wins a medal.
"Gajovic was fifth at the World Championship.
He is 35 and he will be one of the older athletes at this Olympics.
Judoist Mrvaljevic and shooter Saranovic also have a chance," he says.
Despite its size, Montenegro has a number of internationally known athletes.
One of the best known is footballer Dejan Savicevic, who used to play for Milan.
World-class tennis players Ana Ivanovic and Jelena Jankovic have a connection to Montenegro, because their fathers were both born there.
They will, however, be playing for Serbia.
