09/04/2008
(Reuters, AFP, AP, European Commission, Eupolitix, Europolitics.info - 08/04/08)
The next three months will be critical for Croatia's bid to become the EU's 28th member in 2010 as hoped, a senior European Commission (EC) official indicated on Tuesday (April 8th) while urging Zagreb to step up its reform efforts.
''Croatia has good prospects of progress but also plenty of work ahead, for instance, on judicial and public administration reform and in the fight against corruption,'' EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said after talks with Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic.
''It is essential to do it by June, because otherwise the technical timetable becomes almost impossible.''
The EC has said it wants to complete entry talks with Croatia by autumn 2009, enabling it to enter the Union the following year.
The negotiations began in October 2005, and 16 of the 35 negotiating chapters have been opened since, with two of them provisionally closed.
Vincent Degert, the EC representative in Zagreb, said on Tuesday that up to ten of the 14 policy areas currently under discussion could be closed by the end of this year.
According to him, two new chapters would likely be opened this month and then a few more before France assumes the EU's six-month rotating presidency on July 1st.
"Overall, the accession negotiations with Croatia have been advancing well," Rehn said, voicing hope that Zagreb would take the necessary steps so talks on some of the more difficult chapters could begin by June.
The commissioner also congratulated Croatia for the invitation it received last week to join NATO.
Furthermore, Rehn noted that since the dispute between Croatia and Slovenia over border traffic had been resolved, there was no reason to postpone talks on fisheries and foreign policy.
Jandrokovic told journalists in Brussels that his country would make every effort to meet the required opening benchmarks and to be ready to present Zagreb's negotiating positions on them by June.
"We are ready to do it, and we will do it," he said.
He admitted in an interview Tuesday, however, that it would not be an easy task and would require a lot of hard work.
Following talks with Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader last month, EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said the Commission would present this autumn an indicative timetable for the technical conclusion of the negotiations in 2009, provided Croatia met a number of conditions.
Jandrokovic said that, in his talks with Rehn, he had "especially emphasised Croatia's readiness to do whatever it takes to meet the criteria for full membership and to become a member of the EU in 2010".
