09/06/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 09/06/08
Burglary was the motive behind an attempted break-in at the Pristina home of Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, according to the main suspect.
Late Friday (June 6th), Thaci's bodyguards discovered a man on the balcony of the house, trying to force entry.
The intruder escaped but reportedly suffered a wound to his right arm during an exchange of gunfire.
Police subsequently arrested a 19-year-old man with a criminal record, acting on a tip from the suspect's own father.
Police say it is still not clear if the would-be burglar acted alone or had accomplices.
Thaci was away at the time of the incident, but his wife and son were in the house.
"I am happy that my family is not injured," the prime minister said.
He declined to comment on possible motives, saying it was up to the courts to handle the case.
"I don't want to prejudge," Thaci said at a Saturday press conference.
"We have our judicial institutions and police.
They should have time to deal with this attack.
At the end of the process, we will know the motive."
Government leaders, who initially characterised the incident as an assault on Kosovo's institutions and the rule of law, expressed scepticism about the suspect's story.
But opposition politicians accused the government of trying to score points.
Ramush Haradinaj, a former prime minister who heads the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, said officials were trying to make political hay out of a serious security breach.
The incident comes at a jittery time for Kosovo, the self-proclaimed state that broke from Serbia in February.
It is still battling for international recognition despite opposition from Belgrade and Moscow, while Serbs in the north have refused to go along with independence and are setting up parallel institutions.
Meanwhile, the political coalition between Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo and its main rival, the Democratic League of Kosovo, is an uneasy one.
On Saturday, Thaci vowed that Kosovo would remain stable.
"No one will have the power to encroach on democracy, independence, freedom and security," he said.
Incidents such as Friday's would not hinder Kosovo's aspirations to become "a proud member of the EU family and NATO", Thaci said.
