07/03/2008
(FT, EurActiv - 06/03/08; European Commission, AFP, Reuters, DPA, Euobserver, Balkan Insight, RFE/RL - 05/03/08)
The European Commission (EC) unveiled a package of measures Wednesday (March 5th) designed to enhance the Western Balkan countries' European perspectives and to support their political and economic reform efforts on the road to accession.
The new initiatives will be presented to the EU member states during a two-day informal meeting of the 27-nation bloc's foreign ministers. 
It begins in Slovenia on March 28th.
"Within the EU, there is an unwavering will to support the people of the Western Balkans in opting for European values and living standards," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Wednesday as he announced the EC's proposals.
He added, "However, it is the leaders and people of the region who will determine whether their countries, through reforms, will move decisively towards a European future, marked by increased stability and prosperity."
Urging countries in the region to step up political and economic reforms, the EC outlined priority areas as the rule of law, good governance, judicial and administrative reform, people to people contacts and civil society development.
The package of measures outlines a series of initiatives supporting efforts in those fields, including steps towards the eventual lifting of EU visa requirements for Western Balkan citizens and a virtual doubling of scholarships for students from the region.
Stressing the key role civil society organisations play in the process of strengthening democracy and reconciliation, the EC promised support for projects focusing on inter-ethnic relations, poverty reduction, environmental protection and social development.
A new facility under the EU's Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA) is currently being established to promote civil society development and dialogue in the Western Balkans, the EC said in a statement Wednesday.
Viewing regional co-operation as critical for these countries' political, economic and social development, Brussels vowed support for different initiatives in this area, including the recently established Regional Co-operation Council and the Central European Free Trade Agreement.
The EC will also continue providing assistance for activities under the Energy Community Treaty -- which extends the EU internal energy market to countries of the region -- and the Agreement on a European Common Aviation Area. 
Stressing the need for better transportation links in the region, the EC also proposed that talks on a Western Balkan Transport Community Treaty be initiated.
Between 2007 and 2001, the EU has earmarked more than 3.5 billion euros for the seven countries in the region under the IPA. 
This includes a total of nearly 710m euros for 2008, which the EC describes as a "decisive" year for the Western Balkans.
