07/04/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 07/04/08
US President George W. Bush visited Zagreb for two days beginning on Friday (April 4th) to welcome Croatia to NATO and praise the country's democratic reforms, holding them up as an example to other formerly communist countries in the Balkans.
Bush, on one of his last European tours, stopped in Zagreb between the NATO summit in Bucharest and before his meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
President Stipe Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said the trip was one of modern Croatia's most important political events.
"President Bush's visit shows that, although we are a small nation, we are partners with the United States," Mesic said.
On Friday, Mesic hosted a dinner for the US delegation that was attended by Croatians prominent in cultural circles, sports, humanitarian efforts and economics.
The following day, Bush delivered a speech at St. Mark's Square, the symbol of Croatian national sovereignty, in historic downtown Zagreb.
The Albanian and Macedonian presidents and prime ministers were among those invited to attend the speech.
Additionally, more than 5,000 Croatians enthusiastically welcomed Bush.
"The Croatian people have overcome war and hardship to build peaceful relations with your neighbours and to build a maturing democracy in one of the most beautiful countries on the face of the earth," Bush said.
Congratulating Croatia on the invitation it received to join NATO at the summit, Bush said it was a vote of confidence in their continued reforms.
"Henceforth, should any danger threaten your people, America and the NATO Alliance will stand with you.
And no one will be able to take your freedom away," Bush added.
However, he expressed regret that Macedonia did not receive an invitation.
"America's position is clear:
Macedonia should take its place in NATO as soon as possible," he said.
Saying NATO is open to all countries in the region, he welcomed Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro's efforts to get closer to the Alliance by beginning the process of Intensive Dialogue.
He also thanked Croatian, Albanian and Macedonian soldiers for serving in Afghanistan, and Albanian and Macedonian troops for serving in Iraq.
"It's only a matter of time before freedom takes root across that troubled region.
And when it does, millions will remember the people of your nation stood with them in their hour of need," Bush said.
He ended his speech by saying, "May God bless Croatia."
Sanader then thanked Bush for his support, saying he hoped the US-Croatian partnership will blossom.
Minutes before Air Force One left Zagreb Airport, Bush warmly greeted Croatian soldiers who participated in the ISAF mission in Afghanistan.
