05/09/2008
(OSCE - 04/09/08)
UNMIK chief Lamberto Zannier said on Thursday (September 4th) that his mission now finds it difficult to impose its legal authority in Kosovo.
Addressing the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna, he also said the reconfiguration and downsizing of UNMIK gives the OSCE room for a larger role.
"The role of the OSCE will become even more critical, particularly at the field level, not only to help fill possible gaps but, more importantly, to ensure that the achievements we have accomplished together so far are not dispersed," he said.
UNMIK, Zannier said, is hampered by a lack of legal instruments.
"Efforts to impose my legal authority are simply disregarded by the majority of Kosovar Albanians who now consider Kosovo's Constitution the fundamental document," he said.
In the new climate, soft intervention -- conducted via nurturing personal ties at the local level through an advising, mentoring and mediating role -- may be needed to fill the gaps.
The OSCE, he said, has "distinct comparative advantages" due to its neutrality, rights-based approach and decentralised network of regional offices and sub-offices.
According to Zannier, the changes affecting UNMIK present the OSCE both with an opportunity and a challenge.
"An opportunity because it will be in the 'front line' in terms of monitoring, mentoring, advising and 'sounding the alarm bell' if necessary;
a challenge because none of us will have the robust rule-making authority once undisputedly in UNMIK's hands," he said.
Joint action between the two organisations is essential in areas such as protecting minority communities and returns of displaced persons, Zannier said.
"Stronger co-operation will be required, and the desirability for a more active role in the field may provide you, in this phase of transition, with a good opportunity to reassess the operation in light of the new realities emerging on the ground," he said.
The OSCE says its mission in Kosovo is its largest field operation, with almost 800 employees spread throughout the country.
Southeast European Times correspondent Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi contributed to this article.
