05/08/2008
By Ana Blazevic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 05/08/08
Since July 1st, soaring gasoline prices are not the main issue for motorists on Slovenian highways. 
Ljubljana implemented a new toll system that does not depend on distance driven. 
Instead, drivers of any nationality passing through Slovenia now have two options -- buying a 35-euro permit for six months of driving or a 55-euro one for one year. 
Those without a valid permit will have to pay fines between 300 and 800 euros. 
While Slovenians who regularly drive their own highways find the permit system cheaper than the previous distance-based model, foreign motorists are furious.
For example, a couple planning a brief holiday on the Croatian coast will now pay at least 35 euros to use the Slovenian freeway. 
Some might reconsider whether to drive to Croatia after all or will find themselves forced to economise once they reach their destination.
Another sore point for these motorists is that many Slovenian freeways are under construction -- road crews are currently repairing more than a fifth of the nation's 500km of freeways.
Recently, the Croatian ministry of tourism and Croatian Auto Club (HAK) held a joint press conference on the "Introduction of Six-Month Tolls in the Republic of Slovenia and the Presentation of Alternative Roads". 
Both Minister of Tourism Damir Bajs and HAK President Ivo Bikic emphasised the alternative roads leave much to be desired in terms of comfort and safety but will save motorists considerable money. 
They believe the current toll system to be an unfair burden on foreign motorists -- especially tourists -- passing through Slovenia.
Out of 75 million tourists who entered Croatia last year, 95% came by car. 
Of these, 32 million drove through Slovenia.
But Croatia is not the only country to complain. 
Auto clubs from Italy, Austria and Germany are asking Slovenia to introduce cheaper permits for one week and one month rather than retain the Swiss model. 
The Slovenian ministry of roads says the shorter-term permits do not generate enough revenue.
Austria tried to implement the same model years ago but gave in after the European Commission demanded ten-day and two-month permits. 
Those currently cost 7.70 and 22.20 euros, respectively. 
Since the EU has not yet pressured Slovenia to make similar modifications, European tourists will continue to pay 35 euros for using as little as 22km of Slovenian highways.
The permits are only a temporary method of collecting highway revenue; Slovenia will implement transponders in the next two years.
