04/08/2008
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 04/08/08
Recently, a Malaysian company expressed interest in exploring several potential oil fields in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), but bureaucratic procedures at the local level may present a serious obstacle to the idea.
Representatives of Tara-Drina, led by company President Joseph Vijay Kumar, spoke with Federation of BiH Prime Minister Nedzad Brankovic in July. 
Tara-Drina showed interest in drilling near Tuzla, Stolac and Livno -- northern, southern, and southwestern locations, respectively.
Brankovic, though, said that Sarajevo-based Energoinvest already had gained authority over the possible oil fields. 
The engineering firm has drafted a plan of oil and gas exploration in the FBiH for 2008-2017 but would need a partner, as it is unable to financially deal with the issue on its own.
However, Energoinvest's chances of forming a venture with the aid of foreign capital depend highly on local laws, which put concessions in the hands of ten cantons in FBiH. 
Ibrahim Bosto, the assistant general manager of Energoinvest, says the company has initiated an application for concessions from the cantons. 
But bureaucracy may make it impossible to begin drilling in 2009.
The director of BiH's Foreign Investment Promotion Agency (FIPA), Haris Basic, welcomed the idea of possible co-operation between Tara-Drina and Energoinvest but stressed that local governments must be more efficient in facilitating foreign investment.
"FIPA and other relevant agencies at state level established a procedure for a foreign company to register in only seven days. 
But in order to obtain full licencing from different cantons or municipalities, an investor sometimes has to wait even 145 days," Basic said to the Southeast European Times. 
He blames the problem on some mayors' bureaucratic mentality and on shortsighted local policies.
"We must change the practice of forcing an investor to knock on ten different doors ... 
to obtain relevant permission for research," Basic said.
After the 1990s conflict, BiH was split into two entities -- FBiH and Republika Srpska (RS) -- each with the right to use natural resources on its soil. 
The rights for oil exploration in RS went to Russia's Zarubezhneft after it bought a majority stake in the Brod refinery there last year.
Based on research by Amoco and British consultants, BiH experts believe the north could have as much as 20m tonnes of oil, with the south containing perhaps 500m tonnes.
