05/03/2008
(FT, Euobserver, Blic, B92 - 05/03/08; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, VOA, Balkan Insight, Beta, B92, Serbian Government - 04/03/08)
A controversial document which would make Serbia's EU accession progress conditional on the bloc's rejection of Kosovo's independence prompted a new clash Tuesday (March 4th) between the nationalist and pro-Western camps in the coalition government.
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica voiced support for the draft resolution, proposed by the ultra-nationalist Serbian Radical Party (SDS), and urged all parties to do the same.
Only a "joint policy can be satisfactory, both for parties that strongly insist on European integration, and for parties that strongly insist on the defence of Kosovo", he said in a statement.
The resolution is supported by the SRS, Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), the New Serbia party, and the late President Slobodan Milosevic's Socialist Party. 
With the four parties holding 144 of parliament's 250 seats, the document is widely expected to be adopted within the next ten days.
"We, the representatives of the people of Serbia warn the EU that only a whole, not a fragmented Serbia can and wants to negotiate on European integration," Reuters quoted the document as reading. 
"Parliament calls on the EU to clearly and unequivocally affirm the entirety of Serbia's territory as a condition for the resumption of talks on Serbia's association with the EU."
The resolution urges EU member states that have already recognised Kosovo's independence to annul their decision. 
Reiterating Belgrade's opposition to the Union's "illegal" justice and police mission in Kosovo, it also calls for its withdrawal.
Serbian President Boris Tadic warned on Tuesday that adopting the proposed document would effectively freeze the country's association talks with Brussels.
"This resolution demands of the EU to recognise the whole Serbia," the DPA quoted the president as saying. 
"Since the EU has no possibility of responding to that demand, it would be used to break off talks on (Serbia's) future membership."
According to Tadic, the document was in no way aimed at preserving Serbia's integrity, nor could it help the country's Kosovo cause.
He also warned that the proposed resolution ran counter to the interests of Serbia's citizens, because freezing of the EU integration process would discourage investors, leading to the collapse of the economy and state finances.
Parliament Speaker Oliver Dulic, a member of Tadic's Democratic Party, said on Tuesday that if DSS lawmakers side with the opposition SRS and support the resolution, it would mean a new parliamentary majority that would also have to operate as a new ruling majority, according to Belgrade-based Beta news agency.
Reacting to the new developments, the EU urged Serbia on Wednesday to confirm whether or not it wants to build closer ties with the 27-nation bloc.
