04/04/2008
(AP, Reuters, RIA Novosti, Balkan Insight, Beta, B92 - 03/04/08)
A draft energy co-operation deal with Russia foundered on Thursday (April 3rd), as pro-Western ministers in Serbia's outgoing coalition cabinet blocked its approval. 
Endorsement will thus await the appointment of a new government, after the country's early parliamentary elections on May 11th.
Under a January agreement, Serbia would be included in the Russian company Gazprom's South Stream natural gas pipeline project, which would in return acquire a majority stake of Serbia's Naftna Industrija Srbije (NIS) oil monopoly.
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica wanted the deal approved at the cabinet's regular session Thursday, so that it could then be sent to parliament for ratification.
However, the ministers from his Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) and its junior coalition partner, New Serbia, failed to get the necessary majority, as those representing the pro-Western Democratic Party (DS) abstained and the G17 Plus ministers boycotted the session to protest Kostunica's attempt to use the issue as a campaign issue.
Because the DS and G17 Plus parties hold the majority of the seats in the 22-member cabinet, only six ministers voted in favour of the energy deal.
The rift between Tadic and Kostunica's positions on whether Serbia should continue to seek EU integration after the majority of the bloc's 27 member states recognised Kosovo's independence led to the government's collapse last month. 
Tadic then dissolved the parliament and called for early elections.
He warned on Wednesday that the caretaker government did not have a mandate to adopt strategic agreements.
Experts and some politicians, including Economy Minister Mladjan Dinkic of G17 Plus, have criticised the deal over the exceptionally low price the Russians would pay for NIS. 
Gazprom would buy 51% of the Serbian oil monopoly for a mere 400m euros. 
It has also pledged an additional 500m euros in investment during the period ending in 2012. 
Many saw the proposed agreement as a reward to Russia for opposing Kosovo's independence.
Kostunica's push for approval of the deal reportedly followed a Russian government statement, urging Serbia to ratify the agreement as soon as possible to avoid any unnecessary delays in implementation of the project.
Energy Minister Aleksandar Popovic of Kostunica's DSS criticised the pro-Western parties for blocking the endorsement of the accord, saying that would slow the process of building the South Stream pipeline.
But, Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic, a DS member, said the new parliament would get the job done. 
Expressing his party's support for the agreement, he also noted that if it is in a position to propose its ratification after next month's election, it would do so.
