03/04/2008
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Split – 03/04/08
Hoping to attract interest from around the world, the Croatia Property Show is being held for the first time to offer potential investors information on the boom in the local real estate market.
The nine-day event opens on Saturday (April 5th) in Split, as part of the Croatian Boat Show.
The property show will cover 2,100sq m and will market the entire coast, which has more than 1,000 islands.
"We've decided to use the attraction of the wealthy potential investors to our Boat Show every year, which drew 50,000 visitors just last year.
Buyers interested in purchasing luxury yachts are good potential clients for the booming Croatian property market,'' said the event's spokesman, Gordan Jelavic.
He also said that the country's property administration recently went digital, which will assist international investors in their purchases.
He said 800 real estate and property agencies, as well as 100 investment and construction companies and dozens of developers are participating.
''Those most interested in Croatian property are the English and the Irish," said Jelavic.
Statistics suggest entrepreneurs from England and Ireland own 10% of real estate and property agencies in Croatia.
"They have not had the opportunity before to view the entire market.
One can still purchase land in Croatia for less than 19 euros per square metre," he added.
Jelavic is one of the many young businessmen with Profectus.
Run by Vicenco Blagaic, 30, it has for the past ten years organised fairs in Croatia, managing to position the Croatia Boat Show among world's ten biggest nautical events.
Profectus has also provided leadership on how to develop business in a country in transition, on its way to join the EU.
''The weather in Croatia is nice in April and no doubt the visitors to the two shows will have a great time, enjoying themselves while doing business.
We already have a confirmation from the United Arab Emirates, the United States and the UK.
There was much interest from Russia, as well," said Jelavic.
This year, more than 400 companies will have representatives at the Croatia Boat Show, a 30% jump from last year.
