04/03/2008
(The New York Times - 04/03/08; AP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, CNN, AKI, ANA-MPA, MIA, Makfax, UN News Centre - 03/03/08)
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer urged Macedonia on Monday (March 3rd) to seek a quick solution to its 17-year-old name dispute with Greece, in an effort to remove a major hurdle on its path to membership in the Alliance.
Skopje is hoping to receive an invitation to join during NATO's upcoming summit, which begins on April 2nd in Bucharest. 
But Greece, a member of the Alliance since 1952, has threatened to veto such a decision if the dispute over the name of its northern neighbour is not resolved.
"I think we have to realise that Greece is a staunch member of NATO, and aspiring members are not," de Hoop Scheffer said, following talks Monday with Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis in Athens. 
"This is a basic difference."
He arrived in the Greek capital two days after representatives of Athens and Skopje again failed to reach a compromise during the latest round of talks, held in New York.
After wrapping up two days of negotiations, UN special envoy Matthew Nimetz said on Saturday there was still "a substantial gap" between the positions of the two sides. 
They had neither accepted his latest proposals for a solution, nor made new ones.
The dispute between the two countries began soon after Macedonia's independence in 1991. 
Greece has opposed international recognition of the former Yugoslav republic under the name Macedonia, arguing that it could imply territorial claims on a northern Greek province with the same name.
Although more than 100 countries recognise the Balkan nation by its constitutional name, the Republic of Macedonia, international organisations, such as the UN, NATO and the EU, officially refer to it as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM).
Voicing hope that a solution can still be reached before NATO's summit next month, de Hoop Scheffer said on Monday it "would be a big plus" for Macedonia's bid.
Ahead of a key meeting Thursday in Brussels, where NATO foreign ministers will discuss the issue, de Hoop Scheffer noted that any decision to extend a membership invitation hinges on a country's "performance".
"There is no certainty that invitations will be issued to aspiring nations," he said. 
"(Invitations) will depend on performance. 
Performance is also the key word here in the name issue," he added, stressing that neighbourly relations with a current NATO member is a "dear principle".
Bakoyannis echoed that sentiment Monday.
"It is a prerequisite that there be no outstanding issues between a candidate country and a member state; issues that have a negative impact on their relations," she said. 
Any decision to invite a country to join NATO must be supported by all 26 member states.
