02/04/2008
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 02/04/08
World leaders are gathering in Bucharest on Wednesday (April 2nd) for the 20th -- and largest ever -- NATO summit.
Under tight security, the meeting will be held in Bucharest's landmark Parliament Palace, the product of communist-era dictator Nicolae Ceausescu' s grandiose ambitions.
Enlarging the Alliance is one of three major issues expected to be discussed during the three-day event.
Croatia, Albania and Macedonia are hoping for invitations to join the Alliance, although Macedonia's bid may be vetoed by Greece due to the ongoing name dispute.
Georgia and Ukraine may be invited to join the NATO Membership Action Plan.
The NATO mission in Afghanistan and the potential deployment of additional troops is also expected to be discussed.
The third item on the agenda is the possibility of protecting all NATO states with a missile defence system.
The Parliament Palace, built in the 1980s, has become one of Bucharest's primary tourist attractions.
More than 7sq km of the city's historic district underwent demolition and more than 40,000 people were relocated to make space for the building.
The structure occupies 330,000 sq m and has 16 floors -- four of which are underground -- as well as two anti-atomic bunkers.
Almost 700 architects and 20,000 laborers worked round the clock to build what was then called the People's House.
In 1989, the building was assessed at around 1 billion euros and in 2006 at roughly 3 billion euros.
The expansiveness of the building is evident in Union Hall -- where the NATO roundtable will take place.
The hall is 1,200 sq m and boasts one of the largest carpets in the world, requiring 35 men to roll it up.
The dictator who ordered the construction of this massive building, Ceausescu, was the leader of Romania's Communist Party beginning in 1965.
He was overthrown during the 1989 revolution and shot by a firing squad following a brief trial by a military tribunal.
His palace, intended as a testament to the glories of communism, now houses two chambers of parliament -- the Senate and the Chambers of Deputies -- and the Romanian Museum of Contemporary Arts.
Beginning on Wednesday, it will accommodate 3,000 delegates -- the largest number to attend a NATO summit.
The primary mission of the event's organisers has been ensuring the attendees' security, so the country has done everything from sealing off streets and deploying trained snipers to catching stray dogs.
Fighter jets and warships are on standby in Romania and neighbouring Bulgaria -- NATO's newest members.
Authorities have brought in thousands of additional personnel, including chemical and biological warfare experts.
An exclusive traffic lane has been established for official motorcades to run directly from the Henry Coanda International Airport to the Parliament Palace.
Roughly 300 minivans and 100 buses will shuttle attendees to and from the summit and almost 500 cars will be used for the official motorcades, 70 of which will be armored.
Additionally, trash cans have been dismantled and sewers sealed along motorcade routes.
