03/07/2008
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 03/07/08
Seen as a precursor to recognising Kosovo's independence, the demarcation of the Macedonia-Kosovo border began this week.
Workmen laid the first boundary stone on the northern border of Macedonia with Kosovo on Monday (June 30th) in a pyramid set up by officials where the borders of Macedonia, Kosovo and Albania meet.
The 150km-long border has gone unmarked since Macedonia's independence in 1991.
"This is a joint process ...
and we expect it will be solved in the best way possible," Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu said on Monday.
Macedonia and Serbia signed an agreement defining their border in 2001, but Kosovo has refused to recognise the stretch between itself and Macedonia.
Defining the boundary between the two states was part of former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan in 2007.
Officials in Pristina say that recognition of Kosovo's independence is necessary and must precede demarcation.
However, the Macedonian government required the demarcation first.
After a protracted exchange of messages among Skopje, Pristina and Belgrade, construction teams have finally come out in the field.
Skopje sought to quickly mark the border;
however, Pristina questioned the status of around 2,000 ha of forest and pastureland in two regions, and Belgrade insisted on the presence of its representatives before any demarcation occurred.
The standstill ended after the Skopje and Pristina authorities formed a joint demarcation commission at the end of March.
According to Todor Nanev, chairman of the Macedonian Commission for Demarcation of the Border, crews laid the six main stones on the first 12km section of the border.
They also are installing concrete numbered pyramids on the border.
Officials expect completion of the demarcation over the summer, with the pace depending on weather conditions in the mountainous terrain, Macedonian Foreign Ministry spokesman Vasko Andonovski said.
According to local media, the demarcation started out of public view and it is unclear whether any changes have been made to the 2001 marking.
