02/04/2008
(UN News Centre, Balkan Insight, Beta, B92 - 01/04/08; AFP - 31/03/08)
UN Security Council Resolution 1244 remains in effect for UNMIK despite Kosovo's declaration of independence, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said in a new report, published on Tuesday (April 1st).
The UN mission will continue to implement its mandate in line with provisions of the document adopted in June 1999, "unless the Security Council decides otherwise" he also said in the paper, covering developments in Kosovo from December 16th 2007 to March 1st 2008.
It was during that period that Kosovo declared independence from Serbia, despite Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs' opposition. 
The February 17th declaration and the events that followed have created "significant challenges to UNMIK's ability to exercise its administrative authority", according to the report Ban submitted to the Security Council late Monday.
"To address these challenges, UNMIK, guided by the imperative need to ensure peace and security in Kosovo, has acted, and will continue to act, in a realistic and practical manner and in the light of the evolving circumstances."
The UN chief however indicated that the evolving reality may call for changes to allow UNMIK to exercise its functions in line with the new circumstances.
"Pending Security Council guidance, there might be a need for UNMIK to adjust its operational deployment to developments and changes on the ground in a manner consistent with the operational framework established under Resolution 1244," Ban said.
A number of serious incidents occurred in Kosovo during the reporting period, he noted, adding however that the overall security situation remained "calm though tense".
The declaration of independence prompted a series of protests by Kosovo Serbs, particularly in the country's north. 
Although the demonstrations were largely peaceful, several incidents occurred around February 17th.
Regarding February 19th attacks, in which Kosovo Serb demonstrators destroyed the customs service points at the Jarinje and Brnjak crossings on Kosovo's border with Serbia, Ban stressed that any violence against UNMIK staff or facilities, or against members of any of Kosovo's communities, is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated.
The worst outburst of violence occurred in Mitrovica on March 17th, when UNMIK police and KFOR troops came under attack while trying to retake the UN-controlled court in the ethnically divided town, three days after it was seized by ethnic Serbs. 
One UNMIK policeman was killed and a more than 100 people were injured, members of the international forces and Serb protesters alike. 
Though the incident is not discussed in the report -- occurring after the timeframe under review -- Ban urged all concerned to show restraint.
The aim of UNMIK's efforts is to ensure that the political and security situation in Kosovo and the wider region remains stable, and that the safety and security of the population are preserved, he chief noted.
