04/06/2008
(Office of the High Representative - 03/06/08;
Balkan Insight, Fena, Javno.hr -- 01/06/08 - 03/06/08)
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) criticised Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik on Tuesday (June 3rd) for using nationalist rhetoric that could poison the political atmosphere in the country.
Dodik's recent statements in Zagreb "represent a direct confirmation of his fundamental lack of understanding of European values, such as good neighbourly relations and interethnic tolerance," High Representative Miroslav Lajcak said in a statement.
In a speech at the congress of the Serbian National Council in Croatia on Saturday, the leader of RS's ruling Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) said the BiH state was "imposed" on Bosnian Serbs.
He further claimed that the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords, which established BiH as a sovereign state consisting of two entities, provided "a tight framework within which we cannot achieve our own interests".
His remarks drew criticism from Croatian President Stipe Mesic, who attended the Zagreb forum, as well as from politicians in BiH's other two main ethnic communities.
While downplaying the statements as part of Dodik's campaign for the October 5th local elections, Lajcak warned that such language was creating an atmosphere of mistrust in the region and could in no way foster political stability in BiH.
"Utilisation of a nationalistic platform for one's own promotion is counterproductive to the creation of a healthy political atmosphere," the Slovak diplomat said.
"The stability and prosperity of the whole country, which includes both entities, depend on a positive political atmosphere.
The tense situation suits only those who are interested in disorder."
Lajcak also warned that he will not tolerate the use of language that sows interethnic hatred in a multiethnic country.
Urging BiH politicians to avoid making "inappropriate statements" during the election campaign, he also stressed that his office would not hesitate to take action against those who cross the line.
Reiterating that BiH is an internationally recognised state, Lajcak stressed that its status is "unquestionable" and that any attempts to stir up a debate on this issue are pointless.
According to his office, Lajcak "expects that citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina will not allow to be drawn into this manipulation that has only one purpose, which is to divert attention from issues that are of crucial importance for them and this country, such as the European future, new jobs, the fight against corruption and poverty, and [the] accountability of elected politicians".
Lajcak also warned that inflammatory rhetoric could lead to a negative evaluation of the situation in BiH by the Peace Implementation Council.
This could further delay the closure of the Office of the High Representative and its transition into the Office of the EU Special Representative.
