03/03/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 03/03/08
To meet one of the most demanding conditions for joining the EU, Croatia needs to reform its slow and inefficient state administration apparatus.
Deputy Prime Minister Djurdja Adlesic is spearheading a comprehensive and detailed reform process that should show its first results by the end of the year.
According to the EU, Croatia needs to undertake two important reforms.
The first is reform of the judiciary, and the second is an overhaul of the state administration.
With more than 50,000 civil servants, the state administration is not unusually large, but it is critically inefficient.
An inefficient bureaucracy, moreover, is a breeding ground for corruption.
The government has acknowledged the need for a small, streamlined and effective state administration that should serve the public needs based on EU rules.
Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, who won re-election in January, has vowed to speed up Croatia's integration processes and bring the country closer to the EU.
The state administration reforms will not only need to meet expectations in Brussels, but also at home, where much of the public is frustrated with the system.
Adlesic has proposed a detailed list of changes.
More than 120 measures will be put before the government and parliament in order to meet EU standards and change how the state administration works.
Civil servants will have to work on their professional skills, their education and specialised knowledge in exchange for financial incentives.
At the same time, some outdated and unnecessary procedures will be abandoned.
This means that Croatians will no longer have to queue up to obtain documents that the state already has in its possession.
Previously, for each financial transaction or address change, one had to procure basic documents such as a copy of a birth certificate and a national identity certificate (so called "domovnica"), which practically never change.
Because the state already has these documents, the new reform proposal would eliminate unnecessary queues.
This will enable the civil servants to focus more on vital state functions instead of stamping and printing documents.
So far, Adlesic's efforts have been welcomed in government and by the public.
There is support in parliament as well, as all parties recognise that change is long overdue.
