02/10/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 02/10/08
President Boris Tadic told Serbian state TV on Monday (September 29th) the partitioning of Kosovo remains an option, even though it was not under discussion at the moment. 
His statement provoked heated criticism from Kosovo officials and rejection by the representatives of most Serbian parties, even by members of the ruling coalition.
Responding to the furor, Tadic emphasised on Wednesday he cited partition only as a possibility, not as a solution. 
He continued to vow Belgrade would offer extensive autonomy to Pristina but would never recognise its independence.
On Tuesday, Tadic had said the idea of partition merited consideration if negotiators exhausted all other options. 
"The matter of partitioning is being discussed by Serbian intellectuals and the international public ... 
I can think about it only if all the other options are exhausted, and whether I would choose that solution would be too hypothetical to speak of now," Tadic said.
Tadic's statements angered officials in Pristina, where President Fatmir Sejdiu insisted Kosovo is an independent and internationally recognised state. 
"We [Kosovo] are a state, and any other idea is in vain," Sejdiu said. 
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci urged Serbia to abandon such ideas if it wished to join the EU.
US Ambassador to Serbia Cameron Munter said the United States was "against the partitioning of Kosovo". 
Munter added certain Serbian officials had assured him Tadic did not propose the division of Kosovo.
International organisations also condemned the idea. 
Alexander Ivanko, spokesman for UNMIK, said the mission opposed dividing Kosovo. 
Cristina Gallach, EU security chief Javier Solana's spokeswoman, said the EU has never favoured partition either.
Even among ruling coalition partners in Belgrade, Tadic's words sparked concern. 
Dusan Bajatovic, vice president of the Socialist Party of Serbia, a coalition member, dismissed the idea of partitioning Kosovo but stressed Kosovo should have broad autonomy within Serbia.
Certain opposition parties accused Tadic of laying the groundwork for recognising Kosovo's independence under pressure from the United States and the EU.
Some analysts caution two-thirds of the remaining Kosovo Serbs live south of the Ibar River, complicating any attempt to divide Kosovo without stranding them in the new state.
