05/03/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 05/03/12
In Montenegro, 1 euro is a fair price for a glass of beer, a spot of sunshade at a beach along the coast or, according to the government, a failing aluminum plant.
The government offered that symbolic amount to the Russian owners of the Aluminum Factory in Podgorica (KAP), along with guarantees to pay down 22m euros in debt to Deutsche Bank, and five times that much, 110m euros, in the future.
The owners turned down the deal, but lawmakers are hoping to take over KAP regardless.
It's part of a growing trend in the Balkans, where governments are taking control of struggling industrial plants in an effort to keep thousands of people working in the region, which is ravaged by high unemployment.
But such deals come at a steep price, with states absorbing huge losses while trying to find new buyers in an extremely competitive global market.
And analysts believe the patchwork arrangements will ultimately fail.
"I don't think the Balkan states will have more success in running the plants," analyst Bridget Freas, who covers the steel and aluminum sectors for Morningstar Inc., told SETimes.
"It may be a political decision to keep them operating, but it is likely not an economic decision related to the plants themselves.
I think the priorities of a private company -- generating returns for shareholders -- are sometimes different than those of the government -- promoting economic growth and employment," Freas said.
Montenegro sold 52% of KAP stock to the Russians in 2005 for 52m euros, and has already written off 60m euros in debt via electricity subsidies over the past five years.
Falling metal prices have cut deeply into KAP's finances, making the nation's only aluminum plant unprofitable.
KAP's owners rejected Montenegro's offer of 1 euro, and lawmakers reluctantly approved the 22m-euro payoff of KAP's debt in order to keep the 1,200 uneasy employees working.
But lawmakers agree that the deal with the Russians should be terminated and that the state should take over.
KAP employee Srdjan Vuckovic, 34, told SETimes he is disgusted with the way in which the factory is operated.
"The authorities and the owners are playing with millions of euros, and we get fired every day.
No one even mentions the salaries.
Workers will not allow their dark arrangements to be achieved behind our backs," Vuckovic said.
Worse off right now are workers at the steel factory in the Croatian town of Sisak.
Nearly 1,000 workers were left jobless after the plant's owners, the US company CMC, closed the factory in December.
According to Croatian media reports, CMC invested 151m euros in the company but plunging demand -- down by virtually 50% in the market -- and the economic crisis forced CMC to cut and run.
Government officials said they are working on a solution and will know soon whether it will seek a new partner or if the state will take over the factory.
Mladen Novosel, president of Croatian Workers Union, described the scale of the situation in Sisak.
"Nearly 1,000 people were left without a job;
it is the largest workers' crisis that exists in Croatia.
Dialogue with the government is ongoing and I hope that we will reach some solution.
We must keep these men off the street," Novosel said.
Serbia's government last month purchased Smederevo Steelworks from US Steel (USS) for $1 after the US company withdrew from Serbia due to unprofitability.
The plant, which was the biggest exporter in the country with 5,500 employees, sold for the same price as 1kg of apples.
And though Serbian authorities have announced they are seeking a new partner for the plant, Mahmut Busatlija, an associate at the Belgrade Economics Institute, doesn't think it will happen soon.
"There is currently a downward trend in the global production of steel.
The Smederevo factory lacks high technology and high processed products.
I fear the company could be bought by someone who will abuse the factory, as has already happened in privatisation in Serbia," Busatlija told SETimes.
Freas, of Morningtar, said it all comes down to profitability.
"US Steel sold its Serbian steel assets because they were losing money, had been for some time, and were unlikely to become profitable any time soon.
In Eastern Europe, demand was too weak and costs were too high to justify continuing to run the business.
It was becoming a strain on the company's resources.
USS's steel assets in the US are much better positioned so the company needed to conserve cash to run those operations," she said.
The biggest steel factory in Kosovo, Ferronikel, which was privatised in 2006 for 33m euros by the former UNMIK administration, may also be in trouble.
Ferronikel has invested more than 60m euros since privatisation, of which more than 12m has been invested on environmental issues.
Ferronikel employs more then 1,000 people, plus outside contractors, swelling its payroll to about 2,000.
It is the biggest exporter in Kosovo, selling steel products in Italy, Germany, Spain, India, China and South Korea.
At this point, no one is talking about selling it back to the state, but management is emphasising that the eurozone crisis is raising the prices of essentials, such as the low quality fuel oil, mazut, and spare parts, as well as transportation fees.
"These additional costs directly affect our costs.
The euro crisis is not preventing exports at least up to now, but the company is trying to make good efforts to cover increased costs," Ferronikel general manager Ionnis Gaitanos told SETimes.
Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade and Linda Karadaku in Pristina contributed to this report.
