02/06/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 02/06/08
Macedonia's snap parliamentary elections Sunday (June 1st) resulted in a decisive win for the ruling VMRO-DPMNE party, which secured more than 60 votes in the 120-seat parliament.
International officials, though, expressed concern over clashes that left one person dead and several injured.
Nikola Gruevski, the incumbent prime minister, said his party achieved a "historic victory".
"The rebirth of the Republic of Macedonia continues," Gruevski said.
"This is a huge victory for Macedonia and for the forces that have shown they can fulfil their promises." Despite irregularities in the northwest of the country, he said, the elections were mostly fair and democratic.
With around 98% of the votes counted, the VMRO-DPMNE garnered around 440,000 votes compared to 215,000 for the opposition Sun coalition, led by the Social Democrats.
Turnout stood at 805,844, or 58% of eligible voters.
The results apparently vindicated Gruevski's decision -- hotly debated at the time -- to call early elections in hopes of gaining a stronger mandate.
But the violence may hurt Macedonia's image at a time when the country is striving to show it is ready for EU accession.
The most serious incident took place in Aracinovo, just outside Skopje, before polls opened.
It claimed one life and injured nine people, one critically.
The violence stemmed from a bitter political struggle between two ethnic Albanian parties -- Ali Ahmeti's Democratic Union of Integration (DUI) and the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA), led by Menduh Thaci.
Ahmeti's party ended up with 11.1% of the vote Sunday, compared to 10.2% for the DPA, which was a coalition partner in Gruevski's previous administration.
The DUI says several of its staff offices were vandalised and accused its rival of trying to assassinate Ahmeti.
The DPA, meanwhile, said armed DUI activists were intimidating voters and interfering with the police.
"This kind of incident won't improve the final marks given to this country for carrying out the elections," said Jovan Josifovski, president of the state election commission.
EU representatives voiced concern and asked for a revote in places where voters were unable to cast ballots.
Social Democratic leader Radmila Sekerinska, who hoped to become Macedonia's first female prime minister, acknowledged defeat Sunday and congratulated Gruevski.
But she also sharply criticised the problems surrounding the vote.
"Macedonia will pay a high price for these elections," she said, calling them "the worst ever organised in Macedonia".
Marina Stojanovska contributed to this report.
