02/06/2008
(Reuters, DPA, AP, Balkan Insight, BIRN, Office of the High Representative - 30/05/08)
High Representative Miroslav Lajcak dismissed an officer of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Intelligence and Security Agency (OSA) on Friday (May 30th) as part of new measures targeting sympathisers of war crimes fugitive Stojan Zupljanin.
He also ordered authorities to seize the travel documents of 16 people linked to the former Bosnian Serb police commander.
"There is clear evidence showing that these 16 individuals have met or had contact with Stojan Zupljanin since he became a fugitive," Lajcak's office said in a statement Friday.
It noted that Lajcak, who co-ordinated action with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the BiH security agencies, sought to ensure that alleged supporters would not flee the country.
Authorities refused to reveal their names in order to protect any potential investigations against them.
"We must ensure justice and the rule of law if we are to build confidence among the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina," Friday's statement quoted Lajcak as saying.
Authorities identified the OSA officer -- who faces immediate firing -- as Predrag Ceranic but described his post only as "sensitive".
Lajcak barred him from any access to "classified information that would compromise the ability of OSA to perform its legal responsibility to co-operate with the ICTY".
Without naming Ceranic, Lajcak cited the failure of the latest bid to arrest Zupljanin, widely blamed on leaks.
Police raided a house in the Serbian city of Nis in late March, but the fugitive had already disappeared.
Lajcak said on Friday, "Zupljanin's flight just 24 hours before ...
shows that indicted war criminals are receiving information [beforehand]."
About ten days before the Nis operation, Zupljanin's wife and sons wrote to the BiH media calling on him to surrender and free his family from "their own prison".
The ICTY issued its initial indictment against Zupljanin, 56, in December 1999, holding the former commander of the Regional Security Services Centre in Banja Luka responsible for war crimes victimising non-Serbs during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH.
The second amended indictment in October 2004 did not confirm the initial charges of genocide and complicity in genocide.
Zupljanin currently faces 12 charges of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws of war.
He is one of four remaining war crimes suspects still sought by the ICTY, including wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic.
"Justice in war crimes cases is a core element of my mandate," Lajcak said on Friday.
"I take the view that my powers should be used when the hands of the domestic institutions are tied."
