31/03/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 31/03/09
Victory in Sunday's (March 29th) local elections was not entirely sweet for Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP).
Popular support fell against a backdrop of worsening economic times.
Unofficial results showed the Islamist-rooted AKP winning 39% of the vote nationwide -- enough to carry the day, but a seven-percentage-point drop from its total in the 2007 general elections.
Among the AKP victories that looked like defeats was the mayoral race in Istanbul.
Observers have long considered Istanbul an AKP stronghold, but incumbent Mayor Kadir Topbas held on with a relatively weak 44% total.
In addition, the AKP's entrenched incumbent in Ankara -- Melih Gokcek, in office for 15 years -- won re-election, but his percentage of the vote slipped from 55% to 38%.
By polling 27%, Mansur Yavas of the Nationalist Movement Party gained status as a rising star.
The opposition in both cities angrily cited power shortages and computer failures during the vote counts as suspiciously useful to the AKP.
However, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan accused his party's competitors of trying to dismiss the election results.
In other cities, voters threw out AKP mayors.
Among the ruling party's biggest disappointments was its inability to retain the mayoralty of Antalya, a high-profile tourist destination.
It also lost the mayor's seat in the mining town of Zonguldak.
In both cases, the leftist Republican People's Party (CHP) won.
The AKP also found the results in the Kurdish southeast disappointing, where the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP) made major gains.
Incumbent Osman Baydemir of the DTP polled 65% in the mayoral race in the biggest regional city, Diyarbakir.
The overall results represented a significant failure for the AKP, which won more than half the vote in the southeast in 2007 and had introduced reforms such as the country's first Kurdish-language TV channel.
One election-night surprise was the substantial gain recorded by the Islamist Felicity (Saadet) Party.
Attacking the AKP for "serving Israel" and "collaborating with Western powers", it more than doubled its percentage of votes gained in 2007, polling slightly above 5%.
However, even with a seven-percentage-point drop, the AKP was far ahead of its challengers.
The strongest opposition party, the CHP, polled at approximately 23%, compared to the ruling party's 39%.
Erdogan conceded the AKP's shortcomings at the polls but still proclaimed victory on Sunday night.
"We are going to evaluate these results ...
and we will fix the deficiencies," he said, pointing out the AKP won in the midst of a global economic crisis.
On the other hand, former foreign minister Ilter Turkmen told Bloomberg News that the election results "could be ...
a warning to Erdogan to moderate some of his more extremist policies and to deal more effectively with the economic crisis".
The government announced record-high unemployment of 13.6% shortly before the elections.
