31/03/2009
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 31/03/09
A rapidly darkening economic picture moved Belgrade on Thursday (March 26th) to agree to an IMF loan of 3 billion euros. 
The 27-month loan replaces a standby 520m-euro loan Serbia accepted in January. 
It will come with a stiff cost to the public: the government has to raise taxes and slash politically popular spending.
Serbia thus joins Hungary, Latvia, Belarus, Romania and Ukraine in accepting emergency financial aid from the Fund. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has said it is starting talks on the same issue. 
The Serbian package awaits the approval of the IMF executive board in May.
Belgrade is preparing, in exchange for the aid, to make politically painful decisions. 
Terms include cutting government spending by 1 billion euros, which is 3% of GDP. 
The budget cut will include a wage freeze for employees in the public sector, a full fourth of the nation's workforce.
The government also plans to impose a 6% surtax on all wage and pension income exceeding 125 euros a month, on top of the already existing 12% income tax. 
It had initially planned to "soak the rich", but the finance ministry realised the rich were not as numerous as it had hoped. 
Eventually, it decided to levy the surtax on anybody earning 1/3 or more of the average income.
However, trade unions are threatening to demonstrate if Belgrade goes ahead with the tax increase, causing it to consider reducing the number of taxpayers affected.
Officials sounded gloomy but resigned to hardships ahead. 
"The quicker that we accept a crisis is here, the sooner we will recover," said Finance Minister Diana Dragutinovic. 
"These measures are tough for Serbia but absolutely necessary for [the bailout's] credibility," remarked Albert Jaeger, chief of the IMF mission to Serbia.
Some experts question the prospects for the government's strategy, predicting employers will cut wages or pay their employees under the table to reduce the tax bite. 
Vladimir Gligorov, of the Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies, said Belgrade should have asked for 5 billion, not 3 billion, euros.
Arguably, though, Serbia had no choice but to take the highly conditioned IMF aid. 
A country that had GDP growth of 7% in 2008 and envisioned 3.5% growth in 2009 might instead suffer a 2% contraction of GDP in 2009 and zero growth in 2010, as projected by Jaeger.
The loan had another goal besides helping a dwindling treasury: to preserve the confidence of foreign banks with subsidiaries in the country.
It apparently succeeded. 
On Friday, representatives of ten of them agreed in Vienna to maintain their current level of exposure in Serbia. 
A precipitous withdrawal of capital by those banks would have brought the country's economy to a halt.
