26/03/2009
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 26/03/09
Polls suggest that Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic's Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS), which has held power since the advent of democracy in 1991, will win another four-year mandate. 
The opposition's inability to form a coalition will probably simplify the DPS's task.
Together with its smaller coalition partner, Ranko Krivokapic's Social Democratic Party (SDP) and with support from the national minorities' parties -- the Bosniak Party and the Croatian Civic Initiative -- the DPS is confident of a sweeping victory. 
It promises voters a fast track European integration, major investments in infrastructure and a higher living standard.
According to Centre for Democracy and Human Rights findings published last week, Djukanovic's coalition has 51.5% of the vote. 
Of the 15 opposition parties, the closest to the DPS is Srdjan Milic's Socialist People's Party (SNP), trailing far behind at 17%.
The DPS's trump card is its charismatic standard-bearer, Djukanovic.
"The DPS is going to ... 
send a clear message to our opponents," he said at a campaign rally, "that we are ... 
willing to take responsibility for the security and prosperity of Montenegro and for a policy that takes us safely to our European destination".
The DPS and its leader have only grown in strength since the passage of the referendum on independence in May 2006. 
The ruling party contends that only it can save Montenegro from the global economic crisis.
According to media reports last month, the government was contemplating whether to eliminate 30,000 public sector jobs. 
Reports on Saturday (March 21st) said the KAP aluminum smelter, the country's largest exporter, faced closure as aluminum prices crashed.
The DPS promises to fight the economic crisis with ambitious infrastructure projects such as construction of a north-south highway and by investing generously in the tourism and energy sectors.
The opposition, though, warns against the danger of entrenching the DPS as a ruling party and opening Montenegro to the risk of corruption and organised crime. 
Last October, Italian prosecutors charged seven of Djukanovic's associates and seven Italians with cigarette smuggling.
Such are the warnings of Andrija Mandic's New Serbian Democracy (polling at about 12%) and Nebojsa Medojevic's Movement for Changes (polling at 6.3%). 
Mandic and Medojevic also assure the public that they have their own remedies for Montenegro's ailing, import-dependent economy, while Milic's SNP insists on welfare benefits for the country's most vulnerable residents.
All other opposition parties are at the lower end in the poll ratings, unable to obtain the necessary number of votes to win seats in parliament, or are far too small to entertain such a hope. 
Parties need to gain 10,000 to 13,000 votes to win any seats in parliament in a country of 500,000 registered voters.
