30/03/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 30/03/09
Prosecutors-general from 112 countries and 16 international organisations active in criminal justice convened at a summit in Bucharest last week to discuss the role of the chief prosecutors as pillars of the justice system.
The third World Summit of Prosecutors General, which ran from Tuesday (March 24th) through Thursday, served as a forum for delegates to hold discussions on prosecutors' investigative independence and effective management of the challenges posed by criminal tendencies.
Romanian Prosecutor-General Laura Codruta Kovesi, in her opening remarks, said the summit's goal was to help meet the need of citizens for a climate of confidence in justice.
She added that, according to a recent study, 30% of Romanians think the political environment makes prosecutors very susceptible to pressure. 
Also, 63% believe prosecutors who make mistakes should be punished in order to raise public trust in the justice system.
The prosecutors decided at the plenary to base the prosecutors' Permanent Technical Secretariat in Bucharest -- a decision publicly welcomed by Kovesi.
The secretariat will administer a database with prosecutors' contact information and type of work they perform per country. 
It will help co-ordinate the organisation of future summits. 
Chile will host the next summit in November 2011.
Romanian President Traian Basescu, Foreign Minister Christian Diaconescu and Prime Minister Emil Boc welcomed the prosecutors-general. 
Basescu underlined the importance of sharing experiences and deepening co-operation to combat crime worldwide.
"Today, the global threats [force] us to adopt a common position," he said. 
National efforts alone are not enough to fight these challenges, added Basescu.
Boc stressed that public trust in the independence and impartiality of legal investigations is more important than political and media pressure and temptations leading to corruption.
In the summit's closing remarks, Diaconescu told participants that Romania had received a nomination to chair the UN Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice's 18th session in Vienna, from April 16th to 24th. 
Romania has a three-year commission membership starting this year.
"This nomination represents an acknowledgement of the special importance my country shows to consolidating criminal justice," Diaconescu said. 
He expressed hope the results of the Bucharest summit will be useful to the UN commission.
