27/03/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 27/03/09
A controversial probe in Turkey gained a new dimension on Wednesday (March 25th) with the arrest of an active-duty colonel for alleged involvement in the murder of Kurds during antiterrorism operations in the 1990s.
A court in Diyarbakir issued the warrant for Colonel Cemal Temizoz in connection with the discovery of human remains around the southeastern Cizre district. 
He faces charges of incitement to murder and membership in an armed organisation.
The remains found at Cizre may provide concrete evidence of atrocities carried out by military death squads, although forensic and DNA tests are not complete. 
Meanwhile, prosecutors in the broad-ranging Ergenekon investigation have seized on the case.
Ergenekon is the name of a shadowy group said to have operated within Turkish power structures, plotting assassinations and other unlawful activities in defence of a nationalist, secularist agenda. 
The allegations have been widely touted as uncovering a "deep state" in Turkey -- that is, a network of political, military and intelligence figures acting outside the law.
Leaders of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), which has roots in political Islam, have made frequent, if indirect, references to a supposed cabal of military and civilian officials thought to date back to the cold war era. 
The AKP has clashed bitterly with secularists and in July 2008 narrowly avoided a Constitutional Court ban that would have also barred several key members -- including President Abdullah Gul and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan -- from politics.
Critics, however, say the government is exploiting the case to settle scores and pressure the political opposition.
Currently, around 100 prominent politicians, journalists and retired military officers are in jail awaiting trial for alleged membership in Ergenekon. 
Prosecutors in the case now hope to draw links to the extrajudicial killings allegedly carried out in the southeast.
Witnesses, including former Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) members who informed for the Turkish gendarme intelligence agency JITEM during the 1990s, have confessed to various murders in the southeastern towns of Cizre and Silopi.
The colonel arrested on Wednesday had headed the gendarme force stationed in Cizre from 1993 to 1996. 
As part of the probe, police also arrested Kamil Atak, former mayor of Cizre and former head of a local Kurdish militia.
On Wednesday, Milliyet newspaper published witness accounts saying Atak and his son killed at least five PKK supporters between 1993 and 1997.
Temizoz's arrest has drawn no objections so far from Turkey's General Staff. 
The AKP, meanwhile, is strongly backing the latest investigations -- in part, analysts say, because it hopes to gain the support of Kurdish voters during the upcoming local elections.
"The Ergenekon probe has now crossed the Euphrates," Diyarbakir AKP deputy Abdurrahman Kurt told Turkish television, referring to the major river in the region. 
"The arrest of [Colonel] Temizoz marks a new beginning … of Turkey's examination of this period."
