30/03/2009
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 30/03/09
The "For a European Montenegro" coalition led by Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic prevailed in Sunday (March 29th)'s snap parliamentary elections with slightly under 51% of the vote.
Djukanovic will begin a sixth term as prime minister in a country that he has led continuously since 1991.
Djukanovic's Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) and its smaller coalition partners -- the Social-Democratic Party, Bosniak Party and Croatian Civil Initiative -- won 47 to 49 of the parliament's 81 seats, according to various sources.
The ruling coalition emerges even stronger than it did after the last elections in September 2006.
It will now have at least six more seats in parliament.
Party performance largely followed pre-election forecasts.
The leading opposition party in parliament will be Srdjan Milic's Socialist People's Party (SNP), which polled approximately 16.2%.
Following it are Andrija Mandic's New Serbian Democracy (9%) and Nebojsa Medojevic's Movement for Changes (approximately 6.1%).
Parties representing the ethnic Albanian minority, under rules applying only to them, will also hold seats in parliament.
About 65% (324,850) of the nation's registered voters cast ballots under the eye of more than 1,200 foreign and domestic election monitors.
Djukanovic ran on a platform of entering the EU and NATO and attracting foreign investment in the tourism and energy industries.
He promised to lead the country through the global economic crisis.
"We will do our best to quickly set up a responsible and competent government that will ...
quickly move Montenegro to its European and Euro-Atlantic goals," Djukanovic told cheering supporters, who set off fireworks in front of DPS headquarters Sunday night.
Medojevic, even though his Movement for Changes party finished fourth, interpreted its showing as a "great success because it is a big deal in Montenegro to have 20,000 supporters ready to stand up against even organised crime and tycoons".
He contended that if the opposition had followed his suggestion and had formed a common list, it would have defeated Djukanovic's coalition, which reaped about 60% of the seats in parliament with less than 51% of the vote.
