30/03/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 30/03/09
The Peace Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board began two days of meetings in Sarajevo on Wednesday (March 25th) to officially mark the start of Valentin Inzko's mandate as high representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Inzko succeeded Miroslav Lajcak, who became Slovakia's foreign minister on January 26th.
"I will be partner to those in BiH who want to work on the country's European perspectives," Inzko said.
He reiterated his willingness to use the so-called Bonn powers to impose laws or dismiss officials, but only as a last resort.
The chairman of the BiH Council of Ministers and leaders of the governing political parties also attended the meeting.
The PIC discussed the international community's prospects for future work in BiH and welcomed the process launched in Prud last November to further the dialogue in the country.
Increased dialogue, in addition to a greater readiness to reach common ground and to take action on certain issues, is the key to progress, it said.
However, the PIC also expressed concern about some political developments.
It urged BiH authorities to quickly implement the Office of the High Representative (OHR)'s five-objective work plan.
The objectives include acceptable and sustainable resolution of property apportionment among different levels of government, as well as of military property.
Additional objectives call for full implementation of the Brcko District constitutional amendment and for fiscal sustainability through proper functioning of the national taxation and fiscal bodies.
Finally, the plan calls for cementing the rule of law through implementation of the national strategy for dealing with war crimes, the justice sector reform strategy and the law on aliens and asylum.
Implementation of the work plan and a positive PIC assessment of the situation in BiH are the conditions for closing the OHR, the PIC said.
BiH officials must avoid inflammatory statements and actions that may cause the situation to deteriorate, it said.
"Any challenge to the basic features of the Dayton Peace Accords will be considered unacceptable, including unilateral actions aiming at endangering the constitutional order of BiH," the PIC Steering Board said in a communique.
In his farewell address after the meeting, Lajcak said "the only people [who can] make BiH's effort to join Europe as a prosperous and stable democracy successful are its citizens."
The next PIC Steering Board meeting is planned for June in Sarajevo.
