28/11/2008
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 28/11/08
Health care in Kosovo is "scandalous" and not even a lack of funds can justify the situation, a WHO expert reported this month.
"You have professionals ... 
but you don't use them; that's why the problems in the healthcare system are catastrophic," local media quoted Antonio Duran as saying. 
He blasted the health ministry for lacking a plan to rectify the situation.
Kosovo Health Minister Alush Gashi, a doctor himself, said the authorities are doing what they can. 
"At 12 euro cents per day per person ... 
one cannot even imagine offering healthcare services at a West European standard," he told the daily Kosova sot.
But the WHO's message for Pristina authorities was clear: even a limited budget can produce better healthcare services in Kosovo. 
"Wipe out the damaging elements and start immediately with the reforms," Duran told the television station RTV21.
The Parliamentary Commission on Health, Labour and Welfare has summoned the minister to explain the nation's plight. 
Gashi assured the lawmakers the ministry is working to improve the situation.
Compounding the problems, parliament has been unable to pass a law on health insurance. 
A draft law sits on the docket because it would be expensive to enact.
Healthcare scandals have received major coverage recently in Kosovo, especially in the case of the Medicus clinic, where doctors allegedly performed illegal transplants, and the Turkish Hospital, which allegedly conducted improper artificial fertilisation.
Police spokesman Veton Elshani said several patients at the Turkish Hospital had testified about improper treatment. 
He emphasised, however, that their claims require careful review.
Meanwhile, the daily Express reports that authorities may shut down 40 other private clinics in Kosovo, either because they are performing illegal procedures or because they lack a health ministry license.
Parliament has approved a law on private medical institutions, and the Parliamentary Commission on Health, Labour and Welfare is expected to issue a report on operations at such institutions.
