27/11/2008
(AFP, Javno.hr, Xinhua, STA - 26/11/08; AFP -12/11/08; AFP - 03/11/08)
Croatia and Slovenia agreed on Wednesday (November 26th) that better bilateral co-operation is essential to resolving the outstanding issues between them.
A lingering border dispute since the two nations proclaimed independence from the former Yugoslavia in 1991 has periodically affected ties between Zagreb and Ljubljana. 
The two countries have also been unable to resolve a controversy over debts owed by Slovenia's Ljubljanska Banka to Croatian depositors.
They have, however, made some progress with regards to joint ownership of the Krsko nuclear power plant in Slovenia, another thorny bilateral issue.
"Communication on such issues [as the border] should be intensified and if there is a need we should use ... 
a third party," the AFP quoted Slovenian President Danilo Turk as saying Wednesday in Zagreb, following talks with his Croatian counterpart, Stipe Mesic.
Speaking during his first official visit to Croatia since assuming his post in December 2007, the Slovenian leader also voiced hope that his country's new government "will develop rich and very intense contacts" with Zagreb.
Echoing Turk's stance concerning the possible involvement of a third party in efforts to resolve the border dispute, Mesic stressed that "open issues should be solved patiently and through agreement."
In 2001, late Croatian Prime Minister Ivica Racan and his Slovenian counterpart at the time, Janez Drnovsek, signed an agreement on the maritime border between their countries, but it was met with opposition by the Croatian public and failed to win ratification by parliament.
Nonetheless, Turk saw that deal as an indication that a solution is possible. 
"The agreement shows that wisdom played its part, and will be relevant in modalities of implementing intensive negotiations," the Slovenian president said.
Slovenia joined the EU along with nine other Central and East European countries in 2004. 
Croatia, which began its accession negations with the Union in October 2005, is expected to become the second former Yugoslav republic to enter the bloc as its 28th member in 2010.
In late October, Croatia's chief negotiator with the EU, Vladimir Drobnjak, voiced regret over Slovenia's decision to block the opening of three new chapters in Zagreb's accession talks with Brussels because of the border dispute between the two countries. 
Talks on 21 out of 35 negotiating chapters have been opened since 2005, with four provisionally closed.
"Croatia has no intention whatsoever of bringing bilateral issues into the accession process and we expect nothing less from the relevant EU member states," said Drobnjak.
Slovenia, however, charged that its neighbour is trying to use the accession process to impose a fait accompli on unresolved border issues.
Bilateral issues, such as the border dispute, must be kept out of the accession talks, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said earlier this month. 
Such issues "should be settled bilaterally… in a good European spirit and a spirit of good neighbourly relations", he said on November 12th, during a two-day visit to Zagreb.
