25/03/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 25/03/09
More than 1,400 National Liberal Party (PNL) delegates convened last week to select a new leader amid calls for a party renewal.
Deputy PNL leader Crin Antonescu ousted incumbent head Calin Popescu Tariceanu in an 873-to-546 vote.
Antonescu is a former history teacher and has been a member of the Chamber of Deputies intermittently since 1992.
Tariceanu, a former prime minister, had led the party since 2004.
He will keep his job as a PNL member of the Chamber of Deputies.
PNL delegates also chose former Transportation Minister Ludovic Orban as the party's deputy head.
Orban and Antonescu worked well together during the campaign preceding the PNL congress.
"If I, a simple and ordinary man … have become president of Romania's largest party, then every one of us has a chance," Antonescu said in his victory speech.
The media hailed the intra-party campaign before the PNL congress and Antonescu's victory as an example of democracy in action.
Observers believe Antonescu could pose a formidable challenge to incumbent Traian Basescu in the presidential election later this year.
After the vote, former President Ion Iliescu, a member of the competing Social Democratic Party (PSD), unexpectedly issued a statement saying Antonescu is "intelligent, his speech is appealing and he is a decent man.
… I wish he were a member of the PSD", said Iliescu.
The new leader did not shy away from stating his presidential ambitions.
"One of the reasons I assumed this candidacy was to get a very good result for the party in this race," he said at a press conference.
As the excitement sparked by Antonescu's rise subsides, he will have to address his first challenge -- the elections for the European Parliament in June.
Analysts suggest Antonescu will have to resuscitate the PNL's popularity ahead of them and only then focus on winning the presidency at the end of 2009.
The PSD-Conservative Party Alliance and the Liberal Democrats (PDL) won the November 2008 parliamentary elections, combining for 229 out of 334 seats in the Chamber of Deputies.
The PNL won only 65 seats.
The ruling coalition cut off talks with the PNL rather than accommodate its demand for a liberal prime minister, effectively turning the PNL into an opposition party.
