30/12/2008
By Lubomir Christoff for Southeast European Times in Ohrid -- 30/12/08
The Economic Chamber of Macedonia hosted a conference of chambers of commerce from Southeast Europe last month in Ohrid. 
The conference theme -- "Faster towards the EU" -- allowed participants from ten countries, ranging from Slovenia to Turkey, to exchange experiences and discuss options for a faster track to EU accession.
Addressing the participants, Deputy Macedonian Prime Minister Zoran Stavreski gave a brief account of efforts to fulfil his country's commitments under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), including promotion of a constructive dialogue among the country's ethnic communities, judicial reform, police reform, a crackdown on corruption and strengthening of administrative capacity.
"I am convinced that [Macedonia], Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania all have ample capacity and are ready to shoulder their responsibilities as future members of the EU, together with the current ones," Stavreski said.
Bulgaria's Lubomir Christoff opened the discussion by suggesting the path to accession and to quality implementation of reforms under the SAA matters as much as the accession itself. 
Strengthening institutions, upgrading the infrastructure and preparing for the free movement of goods, capital and people served to enhance the competitiveness of his country's economy, he said.
Chairmen and chamber-of-commerce representatives shared their experiences and challenges in preparing for EU accession. 
Romanian Ambassador to Macedonia Adrian Constantinescu reviewed his country's path to the EU in 2007. 
He reiterated the willingness and the readiness of his country to assist the Western Balkan countries aspiring to join the Union.
Stopanska Banka CEO Gligor Bishev quoted the latest World Bank report on doing business, noting it listed several countries in the region -- including Albania and Macedonia -- among the ten fastest reformers in the world. 
He considered this status evidence of the political will in the region to prepare for EU accession as quickly as possible.
The conference also provided networking opportunities for business leaders in the region.
The Macedonian organisers expressed hopes of turning this conference into a regular event.
