25/03/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 25/03/09
Following recent agreements signed at NATO headquarters in Brussels, Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) military officers will join NATO forces in Afghanistan for the first time by month's end.
Two BiH officers travelled to Denmark on Monday (March 23rd) to join the Danish military contingent, which will become part of NATO's International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan for the next six months.
The ISAF is a key component of the international community's engagement in Afghanistan, assisting Afghan authorities in providing security and stability and creating conditions for reconstruction and development. 
There are 42 troop-contributing ISAF nations, providing a current force level of approximately 62,000.
The BiH ministers of foreign affairs and defence visited NATO headquarters in Brussels on March 11th for talks with NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and the Alliance's top political body, the North Atlantic Council.
De Hoop Scheffer and BiH Defence Minister Selmo Cikotic "signed agreements formally recognising BiH as a non-NATO ISAF contributing nation, taking account of the country's offer of personnel to support NATO's Afghan mission", according to an Alliance press release.
"This contribution is a welcome demonstration that [BiH] is increasingly becoming a contributor to international security," it added.
Deploying with the ISAF is another milestone for a country that aspires to become a full NATO member. 
After almost three years of successful deployment, BiH withdrew its Explosive Ordnance Disposal Platoon and Infantry Security Platoon from Iraq in December 2008. 
BiH forces currently serve in only one international military operation, the military observers' mission in Congo.
"We want to join ISAF in order to show our readiness to firmly participate in international peacekeeping efforts," BiH Assistant Minister of Defence for International Co-operation Zoran Sajinovic told the Southeast European Times. 
"Our staff officers will serve in ISAF commands, while their main job will be to gain familiarity with NATO operational deployment procedures."
Earlier this year, the state-level parliament approved the BiH presidency's decision to send ten staff officers to Afghanistan.
"There is no decision to send a whole unit to Afghanistan yet. 
But unexploded ordnance removal and infantry guard duties remain our niche capabilities that we are ready to perform," Sajinovic said.
