30/01/2009
(Europolitics, Nine O'clock - 30/01/09; European Commission, Reuters, HotNews, Financiarul, SNA - 29/01/09; Dnevnik.bg - 27/01/09)
The European Commission (EC) said on Thursday (January 29th) it is launching an infringement proceeding against Romania over a serious violation of the independence of its telecoms regulator.
In August last year, the Romanian government removed Dan Georgescu, president of the National Communications and IT Regulatory Authority (ANRCTI). 
The following month, the Bucharest Court of Appeal suspended that decision. 
Instead of enforcing the court's ruling and reinstalling Georgescu in his position, the cabinet immediately passed an emergency act on the institution's restructuring.
The ANRCTI was renamed the National Communications Authority (ANC) and Liviu Nistoran was appointed as president of the body, which regulates a market worth 7 billion euros, or 8% of GDP.
EU Telecoms Commissioner Viviane Reding immediately warned Bucharest that the move represents a serious violation of the national regulator's independence, an underlying principle of the EC telecom framework regulations.
"Independent national regulators are the backbone of the EU telecoms rules and are therefore central to fair regulation in Europe's single telecoms market," an EC statement quoted the commissioner as saying Thursday.
She also voiced concern that the government of an EU member state could decide to effectively nullify a court ruling, especially as this was not a first in Romania.
"It is against EU telecoms rules and challenges the very principle of the rule of law upon which the EU is based," Reding stressed.
She urged Bucharest to take quick action to bring its telecoms rules in line with EU law and to ensure the stability and independence of the national telecoms regulator.
"For us, the issue is not this or that person, but that long-term, stable solutions are found to secure the independence of whoever is at the helm of the regulator," the commissioner noted.
Bulgaria's telecoms regulator also came under fire Thursday. 
Reding sent a letter to the Communications Regulation Commission (CRC) in Sofia, urging it to move quickly to reduce mobile termination rates.
At 15.09 eurocent/minute in 2008, the mobile termination rates, or what operators charge to connect the call by another operator's customer, were the highest in the EU's poorest nation and well above the 8.7 eurocent/minute average for the 27-nation bloc.
As those rates are included in everyone's phone bill and are eventually paid by the calling customer, Bulgarian subscribers were forced to pay higher bills, too.
"For consumers to benefit from lower prices for calls to mobile phones, it is imperative that charges for wholesale mobile termination services are set at the level of the cost of an efficient operator, and not above," Reding said in her letter to the CRC.
The EC also asked the Bulgarian regulator not to discriminate when setting the level of termination rates between fixed and mobile networks and to apply symmetric prices for terminating calls, irrespective of whether they originate from fixed or mobile phones.
Commenting on the CRC's plans to reduce the level of mobile termination rates to 7.6 eurocents/minute in 2010, the EC said that would still be higher than the current rates in seven EU members, ranging from 2.01 eurocents/minute in Cyprus to 6.85 eurocents in France.
It also noted that the French regulator is considering cutting the mobile termination rate to between 1 and 2 eurocents/minute, which should eventually be applied by all mobile operators in the country.
