27/11/2008
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 27/11/08
Romanians go to the polls Sunday (November 30th) for general elections. 
These will be the first under the new uninominal voting system, in which voters choose individual candidates rather than selecting an overall party ticket, as was the case before. 
As a result, candidates have had to invest more energy in campaigning, for a chance at victory.
The vote comes at a turning point for the country. 
The economy has been growing at an unprecedented rate of 9%, corruption is still a huge hurdle and key infrastructure projects are slacking. 
A lack of visible efforts by government institutions to absorb EU aid could result in reprimands from the bloc.
In the search for votes, parties nominated a wide range of almost 3,000 candidates, including public figures such as artists, athletes and well known journalists.
The latest INSOMAR poll -- commissioned by Realitatea TV and released on Monday -- suggests 35% of voters favour the main opposition Social Democratic Party (PSD), 32% back the Democratic Liberal Party (PDL) and 21% support the National Liberal Party (PNL).
According to the same poll, however, 38% of the respondents want the PDL's Theodor Stolojan as prime minister, while only 30% want the PSD's Mircea Geoana and 23% choose incumbent Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu.
The PSD, which has joined forces with the Conservative Party (PC), hopes the current global economic crisis will bolster its position, as voters worry about losing their jobs. 
"Centre-left parties seem better prepared to cope with social pressures," PSD President Geoana said. 
"In times of crisis ... 
there is sort of subliminal inclination of the public to lean towards a party that is bringing both a sense of comfort and competence."
The PDL, meanwhile, is hoping a strong grass-roots effort will put it over the top. 
The party has made door-to-door campaigning a major part of its strategy, while also wooing voters with catchy slogans and negative attacks on its opponents.
One of the key campaign issues, especially at the beginning, was the controversy over a planned hike in teachers' salaries. 
Opposition parties favoured the raise, while the government rejected it. 
Faced with an outcry, Tariceanu eventually announced a 28% gradual salary increase for the teachers, which comes into force as of March and will be finalised in September 2009.
Several violent incidents have marred the campaign. 
A PSD campaign bus, carrying Geoana and others, was reportedly targeted by gunfire two weeks ago. 
In a separate case, activists from two different parties got into a brawl over setting up posters. 
Several people had to be taken to hospital.
The interior ministry says its agents have intervened in more than 700 campaign-related incidents, with 158 cases having been opened.
