29/01/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 29/01/09
Turkey, Iraq and the United States will set up a joint co-ordination centre in the northern Iraqi city of Arbil as part of a new plan to defeat the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) terrorist organisation, Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari, himself a prominent Kurd, said last week in Ankara.
"We have a new climate ... 
of co-operation and understanding among Turkey, Iraq and northern Iraq," said Zebari following talks with Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan on Friday (January 23rd) in Ankara. 
"We would like to revive the trilateral mechanism … in order to remove this poisonous issue," Zebari said.
The co-ordination centre is expected to focus on intelligence sharing in order to ensure border security and prevent cross-border attacks on Turkey. 
For years, PKK militants have used the mountainous part of northern Iraq as their base against Turkey. 
PKK terrorism has claimed almost 40,000 lives since 1984.
For the past five years, Ankara has accused Iraqi Kurdish groups of harbouring the PKK and repeatedly threatened to stage a ground offensive in northern Iraq. 
Following an upsurge in PKK attacks in 2007, Washington approved limited Turkish air raids on PKK bases in northern Iraq. 
It continues to share intelligence with Ankara.
US efforts to establish a trilateral consultation mechanism had stalled over mutual distrust between Turkey and Iraqi Kurds. 
But since May 2008, an improved climate has allowed closer dialogue between Ankara and the Iraqi Kurds.
Babacan hailed this new atmosphere, acknowledging the Iraqi Kurdish government's campaign to isolate the PKK. 
However, he said that Ankara expects more both from Baghdad and Arbil. 
"Elimination of the PKK in northern Iraq is a sine qua non for normalisation of our relations with Iraq," Babacan said.
Anti-terrorism experts in Turkey view the recent co-operation between Turkey and Iraq as useful but insufficient in itself. 
"Setting up a [co-ordination centre] … is without doubt an important step," anti-terrorism expert Nihat Ali Ozcan of the Economic Policy Research Foundation of Turkey told the Southeast European Times. 
"But in terms of its operational functionality, I still have doubts."
The evolution of the PKK problem and Turkey's relations with Iraqi Kurds will hinge on two developments, Ozcan said. 
First are Turkish local elections in March, which will gauge the attitude of Turkey's Kurdish population towards PKK-affiliated candidates. 
Second will be the policies of new US President Barack Obama regarding Iraq.
"Any decision related to troop withdrawal will change the equation inside Iraq," Ozcan said. 
"Under such circumstances, it is nothing but natural for Iraqi Kurds to seek good ties with Turkey, to co-operate against the PKK."
