29/12/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 29/12/08
In line with the country's current two-entity administration system, the police forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina have existed as two separate bodies since the end of the 1992-1995 conflict.
While tentative steps have been taken to unify the two forces, ground operations remain divided, with separate chains of command and separate jurisdictions.
The situation is a boon to those involved in crimes such as drug smuggling or auto theft, particularly in areas near the inter-entity demarcation lines -- including the capital, Sarajevo.
In November, for instance, a group of criminals stole an Audi 80 in Sarajevo.
Police spotted them the following month as they cruised in the stolen vehicle around the city's Dobrinja area, which itself is divided by the inter-entity demarcation line.
The gang reportedly tried to break into another vehicle parked in the area.
Chased by Federation of BiH (FBiH) police officers, the criminals drove towards the Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska, but crashed into a tree.
Fortunately for them, the accident site lay on the inter entity border.
While the FBiH police and their Bosnian Serb counterparts squabbled over who should investigate, the thieves got away.
The owner of the stolen vehicle -- which caught fire in the crash -- was left with its burned-out shell.
The perpetrators remain at large.
While this incident was particularly dramatic, it was by no means unusual.
Criminals routinely factor the entity line into their escape plans, knowing that jurisdictional disputes will greatly delay the pursuit of justice.
Police are severely hampered in their investigations by a system that places the top priority on maintaining political divisions based on ethnicity.
Although the authorities are obliged to respect those divisions, criminals don't.
They recognise no borders, crossing freely back and forth and mingling with their associates in both entities.
In the underworld, at least, BiH is unified.
