29/12/2008
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 29/12/08
St. 
Nicholas, the patron saint of sailors, inaugurates the Christmas holiday season for Kosovo's Catholic community. 
Celebrations in his honor begin on December 4th, when families begin roasting a lamb on a spit above a wood-fed fire.
Family members tend the fire and the lamb during the hours of roasting. 
Children watch the fire and sample bits of meat. 
During the day, families visit each other. 
The traditional liquor rakia, distilled from grape or plum, is available, as well as cheese, peppers and other homemade food.
By evening, the lamb is ready. 
Family members then each lick the spit on which they roasted the animal.
Before dinner, the father lights a candle and invites everybody to pray for the health and welfare of the family. 
Tradition holds that front door of the house should be kept open during this moment.
But the most famous Christmas tradition for Kosovo's Albanian Catholics is that of buzmi.
Buzmi is a tree branch on which someone has carved a cross on both sides. 
It has to be cut from the tree early on Christmas Eve.
At 6 pm, the buzmi ceremony starts, with everybody except the parents leaving the house. 
Two family members clutch the buzmi and call the father, asking if guests are welcome. 
The father replies, "Come with God," and asks, "What is coming with you?"
The family members outside answer, "With all the goods God can give." They each imitate a different farm animal.
The father opens the door and welcomes the whole family. 
The father and mother then begin to "feed" the buzmi, offering it rakia, cheese and other foods and drinks by saying, "I give you wine; you give me wine. 
I give you rakia; you give me rakia ..."After this part of the ritual is over, the family sits down to dinner.
The ceremony ends with the Christmas Mass at midnight.
Early the next morning, the head of the house prepares a lama, a wreath made of straw with a cross in the middle. 
Families exchange visits to wish each other "Merry Christmas".
