28/01/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 28/01/09
For the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), 2009 promises to be a crucial year.
The country has reached a crossroads in efforts to reconcile its ethnic and political divisions with aspirations for democracy and Euro-Atlantic integration.
This will not be a year for "business as usual" -- a fact driven home by two decisive events this month.
On Friday (January 23rd), High Representative Miroslav Lajcak announced his resignation in order to become foreign minister of his native Slovakia.
Days later, the country's main political parties came forward with a sweeping deal on future constitutional changes -- though many analysts say the agreement could lead to future squabbles, rather than to concrete progress.
It remains far from certain that the country can overcome the political gridlock that kept it from achieving key goals during 2008.
Prime Minister Nikola Spiric takes an optimistic view of the past year, pointing to achievements.
"We have signed the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), we began the Intensified Dialogue with NATO, we preserved macroeconomic stability ...
[and] we successfully conducted local elections," he declared at a New Year's party.
BiH did make undeniable progress in some areas, notably in its NATO aspirations.
The Armed Forces of BiH have become a state-level success story.
Currently, the country is in the final stages of processing the documents arising from the Individual Partnership Action Plan and from its Intensified Dialogue with NATO.
"In September 2008, one of the senior NATO officials stated that if BiH moves ahead at this pace, it may even expect an invitation for full membership in 2011," said BiH Defence Minister Selmo Cikotic.
That would be four years earlier than once anticipated for BiH.
Even so, most observers saw widening political and ethnic polarisation, along with an overload of nationalist rhetoric.
Hopes for interethnic harmony rose briefly on November 8th, when top political leaders -- Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, Dragan Covic of the Croat Democratic Union and Sulejman Tihic of the Bosniak Union of Democratic Action -- came to a general consensus regarding the political future of the country.
Initial optimism, though, quickly gave way to widespread criticism as observers accused the trio of tacitly preparing to divide the country and signing a hastily drafted document just to placate international officials monitoring BiH's EU progress.
It remains to be seen whether the latest agreement, announced on Monday, can overcome continuing scepticism.
During 2009, meeting the requirements imposed by the SAA will be a priority, and Brussels has made clear that it expects more than results on paper.
The formal process of EU integration has largely stalled, owing to the failure of state-level authorities to appoint a successor to the current head of the Directorate of European Integration, Osman Topcagic.
He was named the BiH ambassador to the EU in June, but remains unable to assume his new post, as politicians quarrel over the ethnic affiliation of his replacement.
The EU signed the SAA with BiH in June, and earlier launched visa liberalisation talks.
After those milestones, though, the process "essentially stopped", according to outgoing High Representative Lajcak.
"Progress was replaced by very negative and confrontational political messages and actions," he said.
