23/03/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/03/09
EULEX cannot ensure that all Kosovo citizens have equal access to the judiciary, freedom of movement and protection of property without the Kosovo Serbs' co-operation, chief Yves de Kermabon said on Thursday (March 19th) in Belgrade. 
De Kermabon met with Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic, Finance Minister Diana Dragutinovic, Justice Minister Snezana Malovic and Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic.
De Kermabon said the meetings "opened new doors" for increased co-operation between Serbia and EULEX. 
"We should work with all interested sides, including Serbia, if we want to fight organised crime and bring stability to all people in Kosovo," he said.
Serbian officials refrained from making similar assessments. 
They reiterated their expectations for the EU mission's neutrality on the issue of Kosovo's status.
The ministers asked de Kermabon to end the power cuts suffered by ten Serb villages over the past two weeks. 
The Kosovo authorities demand payment of power bills first; Serbs say pervasive unemployment prevents them from paying the bills.
Serb officials also protested the EULEX court's acquittal of Florim Ejupi, previously sentenced by UNMIK to 40 years in prison for killing 12 Serbs in February 2001 by blowing up their bus.
The court freed Ejupi based on the evidence it had, but the "prosecution continues its work and can file an appeal", de Kermabon told Belgrade's B92 radio. 
"Rest assured that we will not abandon this case or any other," he said.
Serb Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic said Serbia would not abandon its demand for implementation of the UN Security Council six-point plan throughout Kosovo's entire territory, not just in the Serb-dominated north.
The plan covers police, the judiciary, customs, transportation, infrastructure and protection of Serbian cultural heritage. 
Pristina rejects it as an infringement on national sovereignty.
"Serbia ... 
expressed [its] expectation that the international civil presence in Kosovo will find a way to a lasting solution of problems that endanger the Serbs and other non-Albanian population in the province," Bogdanovic said.
De Kermabon said the mission is attempting to implement a "pragmatic solution" but that there are some technical problems. 
"Currently we are implementing the existing legislation, but we are trying to find solutions for the future," he said.
The UN unveiled a report on Kosovo by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon concurrently with de Kermabon's visit to Belgrade.
The report, which the Security Council receives on Monday, says the security situation in Kosovo has improved, despite incidents in the north. 
However, it also says that the number of ethnic-minority refugees returning to Kosovo fell below 600 in 2008.
SETimes correspondent Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi contributed to this report.
