28/01/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/01/09
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic unveiled the government's plan to apply for EU membership by June and to become a candidate by year's end during an official visit to Brussels on Monday (January 26th).
However, the requirement to arrest remaining war crimes fugitives -- Ratko Mladic, indicted for genocide in the Bosnian town of Srebrenica, and Goran Hadzic, charged with crimes in Croatia -- stands in Serbia's way.
The toughest position is held by the Netherlands, which, contrary to the wishes of the other 26 EU members, said it would continue to block Serbia's further association with the EU until the country hands over Mladic to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), thereby fulfilling co-operation with the tribunal.
Jeremic invited an EU mission to come to Belgrade and see that Serbia is fully committed to co-operation.
"I think that the EU needs to help us and see for itself that we are doing all we can in terms of Hague co-operation," Jeremic said. 
"We have nothing to hide; that is why I am inviting you to come to Serbia and see our efforts with your own eyes."
During his visit, Jeremic met with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, EU security chief Javier Solana, Czech Foreign Minister Karel Schwarzenberg and Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt. 
Sweden is due to take over the rotating EU presidency in the second half of the year.
Rehn said he will visit Belgrade on February 12th, when he and the aforementioned EU mission will determine how far Serbia has gone in meeting the conditions for visa liberalisation. 
"It is very important that we make it clear in every possible way that we are devoted to Serbia's European future," Rehn said after meeting with Jeremic.
Jeremic said the Belgrade authorities' "strategic goal" is to make conspicuous progress on European integration in 2009. 
According to him, there is no doubt in the Serbian government that co-operation with the ICTY commands top priority.
Jeremic also said that he spoke with the ministers of leading EU members in Brussels who assured him they are ready to help Serbia "achieve the priority goal [of becoming] an EU membership candidate by the end of 2009".
As part of the broad diplomatic action taken by Belgrade, Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic visited the Czech Republic on Monday. 
In Prague, Djelic said Serbia would harmonise its laws with the EU legal system by 2012 but added it is more realistic to expect Serbia to become a full member of the EU in 2014.
