29/12/2008
(B92 -- 27/12/08 - 28/12/08; Reuters, ECIKS - 23/12/08; AFP - 22/12/08; Albanian Economy News - 20/12/08; New Kosova Report 19/12/08)
Kosovo confirmed on Friday (December 26th) that it will impose a ban on imports of products from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) beginning on Thursday (January 1st).
It first announced the move earlier last week as a reprisal against Belgrade and Sarajevo's decision to block the import and transport of goods stamped with the seal of the Kosovo Customs authority instead of UNMIK's.
"If Serbia and Bosnia continue with such a practice, then Kosovo institutions will be forced to take reciprocal measures to impose a ban on the import of goods made in Serbia and Bosnia," the Kosovo Chamber of Commerce (KCC) said on December 22nd.
The two Balkan nations have been blocking the entry and transit of goods from Kosovo through their territories since early December, when UNMIK handed over customs to the Kosovo authorities.
Safet Grcaliu, head of the KCC's foreign trade department, said on Friday the decision to impose a similar ban on products from Serbia and BiH was now "final and supported by most consumers in Kosovo". 
It will be introduced gradually, in three or four stages, starting on Thursday.
More than 80 trucks originating from Serbia and EU countries enter Kosovo every day through Merdare, the biggest crossing point on the country's border with Serbia, according to Reuters.
Kosovo's official imports from Serbia in 2008 alone amounted to more than 250m euros, Grcaliu said. 
But their actual volume exceeded 500m euros, if one includes goods going to Mitrovica and "everything that entered illegally".
"How can a market and potential such as Kosovo be lost because of political stands in Belgrade," Grcaliu noted.
Kosovo's exports to Serbia are reportedly worth less than 30m euros.
Kosovo declared independence on February 17th and has since received diplomatic recognition by more than 50 countries, including all former Yugoslav republics except for Serbia and BiH.
Kosovo officials view the steps taken by Belgrade and Sarajevo as unacceptable and a violation of the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) signed by all non-EU countries in the Balkans and Moldova. 
UNMIK signed the accords on behalf of Kosovo.
"In the case of Kosovo and Serbia and Kosovo and Bosnia, CEFTA no longer exists, and if it does, it is high time to do something [about] the barriers, because they are not leading anywhere," Grcaliu said on Friday.
Milos Bugarin, the head of the Serbian Chamber of Commerce, says there was no boycott of products coming from Kosovo. 
He also warned Pristina that a ban on Serbian imports would violate the free trade agreement.
"UNMIK signed CEFTA on behalf of Kosovo, meaning that this agreement is binding for them too," said Bugarin.
