27/01/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 27/01/09
Serbian film director Emir Kusturica hosted the 2nd annual Kustendorf Film and Music Festival between January 7th and 14th, drawing 35 young filmmakers from 16 countries to vie for awards.
The festival took place in Drvengrad, the art village Kusturica conceived and designed. 
The director decided to create the village a few years ago while making the film Life Is a Miracle in western Serbia. 
He fell in love with the region, particularly enjoying a sunlit village named Mokra Gora on the slope of Mount Zlatibor, and designed Drvengrad near it.
In addition to 20 wooden cottages modelled after 19th-century houses, Kusturica built a ski resort and a hotel, making Drvengrad one of the major sites of tourism investment in western Serbia. 
The streets of the village bear the names of world-famous film directors and actors.
Kusturica launched the festival to support young filmmakers. 
This year's guest of honour was US director Jim Jarmusch, who has a street named after him in Drvengrad.
"Some of the worst, as well as some of the best, things come to us from Hollywood," Kusturica said in welcoming Jarmusch.
Jarmusch said he felt "like being in a strange dream" in Drvengrad. 
"Emir told me several years ago about the idea of making an art village where he would gather the beginners and the experienced authors. 
I admit I thought those were just beautiful dreams. 
But he succeeded in realising his idea, like he always does, and I am exceptionally honoured to be here," Jarmusch said.
At the beginning of the festival, performers buried a Hollywood movie in the "graveyard of bad movies".
"The idea was to bury one kind of film and, like in Dionysian times, make everything more fruitful for those who do serious film work," Kusturica said, adding that Mokra Gora "is becoming a mythical place of auteur films."
The festival enjoys the backing of the Serbian culture ministry, whose head, Nebojsa Bradic, attended. 
Kustendorf has "a special cultural mission as [well as being] a festival of auteur films and up-and-coming filmmakers", Bradic said. 
"It is important that the festival attracts major world auteurs and thus strengthens the place Serbian culture has in the world."
The biggest award of the festival, the Golden Egg, went to Japanese director Kohki Hasei for his documentary, Godog. 
Other awardees included Serbian director Nina Vukovic, who received the Silver Egg for Mickey's Ballad, and Taiwanese-American director Shih-Ting Hung, who won the Bronze Egg for Viola.
