27/02/2009
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/02/09
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Thursday (February 26th) pledged the Obama administration's support for Kosovo.
Meeting Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci in Washington, Clinton praised the new country's commitment to building a democratic and multiethnic state.
"The US stands by Kosovo and will continue to work for it," she said after the meeting.
She vowed Washington would continue lobbying for additional countries to recognise Kosovo's independence and hailed its leaders for their "reasoned, careful approach" to "the remaining challenges posed with territorial integrity on your borders ...
particularly Serbia".
Clinton emphasised Washington's backing of Pristina through "three administrations, starting with my husband, President Clinton, President Bush, and now President Obama".
Sejdiu and Thaci both expressed gratitude for US support and confidence in their country's prospects.
"Without the role of the United States of America, Kosovo and its people would not have achieved this point ...
Kosovo has proved itself as a good neighbour," said Sejdiu.
He reaffirmed his country's interest in becoming "a part of the European Union and NATO".
The people of Kosovo "shall always remain grateful for [America's] help", said Thaci.
"In the very near future, we expect Kosovo to become a member of the International Monetary Fund as well as the World Bank."
After their session with Clinton, Sejdiu and Thaci met with US Vice-President Joseph Biden.
Observers expected Biden to convey the Obama administration's support for Kosovo as well.
On Friday, the Kosovo delegation will visit the UN in New York, in an effort to convince more countries to extend diplomatic recognition to Pristina.
Serbia, which considers Kosovo a breakaway province, has battled Pristina's diplomatic efforts.
It currently has a case pending before the International Court of Justice on the legality of Kosovo's proclamation of independence.
So far 55 countries recognise the new country, which declared independence on February 17th 2008.
