26/02/2009
(Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, SNA - 26/02/09; US Department of State, Sofia Echo - 25/02/09)
The Bulgarian government "generally respected" the human rights of its citizens, the US Department of State said in a report Wednesday (February 25th). 
But there were several problem areas, including police brutality, harsh jail conditions, arbitrary arrest and detention, and impunity of the highly placed.
While the country's constitution and laws prohibit torture and other forms of cruel or degrading treatment or punishment, there were cases of police beating up or otherwise mistreating pretrial detainees, prison inmates and members of minorities.
"Human rights groups continued to claim that medical examinations in cases of police abuse were not properly investigated and that offending officers were very rarely punished," the report said.
The number of inmates in Bulgaria's 13 prisons dropped to nearly 10,300 at the end of 2008, but jails remain overcrowded and do not meet international standards. 
The government has not set aside funds for any significant improvements.
Detainees in most cases promptly learned of the charges against them but not always about all their legal rights, the report found, noting that "lack of timely access to legal counsel remained a problem".
Overburdened law enforcement officers often submitted hasty indictments, only to see them returned by judges for further investigation.
Other problems the US experts observed in Bulgaria included increasing limitations on press freedom and growing discrimination against non-traditional religious minorities, as well as widespread corruption in all three branches of government.
The government generally respected freedom of speech and of the press. 
"However, there were increased reports that individuals with political interests threatened and intimidated journalists," the study noted. 
Significant numbers of cowed journalists practised self-censorship; some allegedly accepted bribes in return for positive coverage. 
Furthermore, attacks against journalists increased.
Highly placed officials often engaged in corrupt practises with impunity. 
"The government did not aggressively prosecute high-profile organised crime or corruption," the report stressed.
Among the examples cited in the paper was the case involving senior interior ministry officials. 
Ivan Ivanov, the former director of the ministry's organised crime unit, received a one-and-a-half-year suspended sentence for abuse of power in October. 
Former Interior Minister Rumen Petkov, who resigned under pressure 40 days after Ivanov's March arrest, remains a member of parliament despite prosecutors' assertions that he leaked the identity of a State Agency for National Security agent.
The report outlined violence against women and children, substandard education of Roma children and dismal conditions in state-run institutions for children as other instances of human rights problems in Bulgaria.
Human trafficking remained a problem, as well as societal discrimination against the disabled. 
Discrimination against the Roma and other minority groups occasionally led to inter-ethnic violence, the report found.
