27/02/2006
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 27/02/06
At the start of 2006, Austria took over the six-month presidency of the EU. 
Its task has been made easier by the fact that Britain was able to settle the EU budget issue during its mandate, although the budget must still be validated by the European Parliament. 
The budget, covering years 2007-2013, allots substantial structural and cohesion funds to Romania and Bulgaria. 
Croatia, too, can look forward to considerable financial assistance as an accession country.
One of the key events expected to take place during the Austrian presidency is the decision on when Bulgaria and Romania will join the EU. 
That will come in May, when the European Commission (EC) releases its report, after which the European Council will make a formal determination about whether to activate the "safeguard clause" delaying entry by one year.
Along with the Netherlands and Sweden, among others, Austria is part of the group of EU member states that is opposed to major issues being decided by the bloc's "heavyweights". 
We can expect to see this point of view receive a higher profile during the coming months. 
Vienna has also been critical of the larger member states for their approach to the Maastricht rules, such as the Financial Stability pact -- requirements imposed on smaller states are softened when it comes to Berlin or Paris.
With regards to enlargement, Austria is among the EU states where public opinion harbours reservations about bringing new states into the Union, and its leaders have called for taking into account "absorption capacity" before stretching the boundaries further. 
Recently, the country's justice minister indicated that it is in no hurry to ratify the accession treaties of Bulgaria and Romania, and will wait to do so until the EC report.
At the same time, however, Austria is close to Southeast Europe geographically and has close historical, political and economic ties to the region -- a fact that bodes well for the EU prospects of Balkan states.
In January, Chancellor Wolfgang Schuessel insisted that the commitments Brussels has made to the Balkan countries must be respected. 
"The countries in the Balkans have a clear European perspective. 
They belong to the European context without any doubt." Schuessel told Le Monde
Austria is now the country with the largest volume of investments in Romania, a status it gained when Erste Bank won the race for the privatisation of the Romanian Commercial Bank (BCR) -- the largest external acquisition ever made by an Austrian company. 
Austrian capital is decisive in the oil industry, especially in the wake of OMB's acquisition of 51 per cent of Petrom, as well as in banking, insurance and other industries.
In a sense, this economic presence ties Romania closely to "Mittel Europa" (Central Europe). 
Austrian banks have also made important inroads into Bulgaria, Croatia and Serbia, signaling an overall strategy of economic expansion in the region. 
Vienna's attitude towards Bucharest could be influenced by the stake held by Austrian capital in the Romanian economy.
Arguably, the advantageous inclusion of Romanian companies into European industrial networks is key to the country's steady development and its chances of catching up economically. 
Such inclusion brings with it the transfer of high technologies, rising productivity, the creation of new jobs and higher incomes for Romanian citizens. 
This logic should apply to other emerging economies from Southeast Europe as well.
Vienna's economic and political interest in this region goes back centuries. 
Some Western media have even been making fanciful comments about the reconstruction, by economic means, of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire. 
Such talk is an exaggeration, of course. 
Nevertheless, the fact is that Austrian companies are very active in the Balkans, just as German companies have been active in Central Europe. 
Dynamic areas of influence exist across the EU, and it is reasonable to guess that Austria places a high value on Southeast Europe's membership prospects.
From the point of view of the EU as a whole, the accession of SEE countries has a number of important implications. 
In the short term, it means substantial outlays of financial assistance to help with the development of infrastructure and the enhancement of economic progress. 
It also sharpens anxieties over labour flow, a concern which has helped fuel anti-enlargement sentiment in the older EU member states and contributed to the defeat of the proposed constitution.
Over the longer term, however, this problem should be defused as countries improve their economic situation -- an expected benefit of accession. 
With economies growing and living standards on the rise, the new EU members will no longer function as major suppliers of labour.
EU prospects are also vital to maintaining regional stability, especially in the face of thorny issues such as the status of Kosovo. 
Such issues will be considerably easier to resolve if the countries involved see a clear path to EU membership in the not too distant future. 
By contrast, obstacles on the path increase the risk of countries turning inward and becoming more vulnerable to nationalist myths. 
The best way to discourage dwelling on the past is to offer a promising future.
