26/01/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 26/01/09
The EU has asked former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari to head a "mediating council" that will try to resolve the border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia, according to a European Commission (EC) announcement Friday (January 23rd).
"EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has discussed with former Finnish President Ahtisaari whether he would be available to preside [over] an expert group in order to facilitate a solution on the border issue," the EC said. 
Rehn called the matter a "bilateral issue" that had "become a European problem".
Ahtisaari, who helped push the peace process forward in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo, won the 2008 Nobel Peace Prize.
French legal scholar Robert Badinter, whom the Union has also approached for help, played a major role in adjudicating the dissolution of the former Yugoslavia. 
He headed the Badinter Commission in the early 1990s, which ruled that the borders of the former Yugoslav republics should become international boundaries after the country ceased to exist.
However, the EC said, both Slovenia and Croatia need to support the group. 
Without their consent, the experts' work would be useless.
The border issue has burdened the countries' bilateral relations since their independence. 
Slovenia, an EU member, has blocked the opening of nine negotiation chapters for Croatia's candidacy. 
The situation might make impossible Croatia's goal of completing membership negotiations by the end of the year.
Talks between Zagreb and Ljubljana have hit an apparent dead end, and mutual tensions seem to be rising. 
Rehn visited Ljubljana and Zagreb on Wednesday, just days before the EC plan became public.
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader met with Rehn in Zagreb, where the EU commissioner presented a number of initiatives.
"Such an initiative to move away from a frozen position and blocked Croatian [EU] talks is certainly welcomed," Sanader told the state-run HINA news agency after the meeting.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic said Zagreb welcomes the EU effort, since the ongoing deadlock "threatens to degrade ties between the two countries over the long term".
Officials in Ljubljana also expressed a positive opinion of this new idea, but Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor said his government is not ready to unblock Croatia's EU accession negotiations.
Slovenia has taken a more conciliatory tone regarding Croatia's NATO ambitions. 
Croatian media reported on Friday that Slovenia's parliament will probably approve Croatia's accession to NATO later this week, making it the last Alliance member to ratify its neighbour's entry.
