24/11/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 24/11/08
Zagreb's international book and teaching-aid fair, Interliber, this year again gathered authors and book lovers alike from November 12th to November 16th. 
The ministry of culture sponsors the fair, which is gaining international recognition with about 300 Croatian and foreign publishing houses participating. 
Some books were available for the discounted price of one euro.
Interliber has enjoyed great success. 
Last year, more than 80,000 visitors attended the fair, taking advantage of free admission. 
High attendance at Interliber and at other book fairs in the country reflects a renewed love of books among readers and authors. 
According to Katja Kovacic, CEO of the 2008 Interliber, last year Croatia published more than 7,000 new books.
Publishers from Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Iran, Israel, Germany, Poland, the United States, Serbia, Spain and the United Kingdom attended the fair.
This year, the first Croatian edition of Misha Glenny's political best-seller McMafia was the star of the fair. 
Glenny, the BBC's former Southeast Europe war correspondent, also wrote The Fall of Yugoslavia. 
Croatian publishers invited Glenny to the fair, where he met with readers and <i>journalists and discussed McMafia, which reports on organised crime that preys on countries in transition.
"The fair is a great opportunity for the general public to find out more about the latest in publishing and be introduced to new world-famous writers. 
This adds value to Interliber as a cultural event," Croatian Minister of Culture Bozo Biskupic, who officially opened Interliber, said.
However, this year, Interliber was unable to steer clear of international scandal. 
The Iranian delegation included a notorious 1920's work by Henry Ford, The International Jew, in its complement of books. 
Observers generally consider it an inflammatory anti-Semitic tract.
While organisers of the Frankfurt Book Fair did not remove the book from their event, claiming they lacked the authority, the 2008 Interliber administration demanded its immediate removal. 
The Iranians complied.
