26/01/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 26/01/09
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina caught the country by surprise with his announcement Friday (January 23rd) that he is stepping down to become Slovakia's foreign minister.
"In the past weeks it became known that the position of minister of foreign affairs of Slovakia was open," High Representative Miroslav Lajcak explained to reporters.
"I told them that I was not available for this office considering my mandate in BiH."
"However, yesterday morning, Slovak Prime Minister [Robert] Fico told me that he wanted to see me in the position of foreign minister," he added.
A 45-year-old career diplomat, Lajcak was the sixth to hold the position of high representative, established after the 1991-1995 conflict with the aim of helping the country achieve stability and fulfil the preconditions for EU entry.
Taking up the position on July 1st 2007, Lajcak served simultaneously as the EU's special representative to the country.
On Friday, he stressed that he accepted his new job on the condition it would not create a vacuum at the Office of the High Representative (OHR).
"The Slovak prime minister supported me in this," he said.
"The continuity of the OHR will not be disrupted.
I will be in Bratislava on Monday to accept formally the office of foreign minister.
After that, I will return to BiH until a solution is found that will ensure continuity."
Ambassadors of the Peace Implementation Council countries now plan to meet with OHR experts Tuesday in order to review the options.
Lajcak said he has done everything to help BiH make progress towards achieving its goals.
"Some will accuse me of leaving BiH in the lurch, and I have already seen it written in the press that I am fed up with everything.
Neither is true," he said.
Local politicians, meanwhile, are using the occasion to reiterate their viewpoints on the future of the OHR.
Leading Bosnian Serbs say the time has come to close down the OHR;
the chairman of the tripartite presidency, Nebojsa Radmanovic, said the EU office in BiH should take over its functions.
By contrast, Bosniak politicians insist the high representative's mandate must continue, saying such a figure is needed to make the country stable and prosperous.
