20/03/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 20/03/09
A joint working group of the interior ministry and Kosovo Police Service (KPS) will prepare recommendations for action concerning Serb policemen who are on the KPS payroll but have refused to work for more than a year now.
Approximately 300 Serb KPS officers refuse to be part of the KPS chain of command and consider UNMIK their commanding authority. 
They walked out after Kosovo's February 17th 2008 declaration of independence and asked the international community to put UNMIK police officers in charge of police stations in Kosovo's Serb-dominated areas.
The KPS is still paying the striking officers, who number about 300, in hopes they eventually will resume work under KPS authority. 
"The decision to continue with the paid suspension was a political decision … because we wanted to express our readiness for their return," Radio Free Europe quoted Interior Minister Zenun Pajazitit as saying.
However, patience in Pristina is waning as the dispute drags on. 
Pajazitit has said he will begin a recruiting process for new officers if the strikers do not return to their jobs.
Belgrade has previously warned that any such move will imperil security talks with UNMIK and EULEX.
EULEX chief Yves de Kermabon asked the Kosovo government on Wednesday (March 18th) to hold off from firing the Serb police officers, local media reported. 
He visited Belgrade on Thursday to discuss the issue.
Emerging from those talks, de Kermabon said on Friday EULEX seeks a "pragmatic" resolution of the northern Kosovo situation and that he is "ready to consider all proposals", according to Belgrade's B92.
Two days before his visit, de Kermabon confirmed in Pristina that Brussels officials are urging Serbia to resolve the matter.
Pristina and EULEX are struggling to assert law enforcement powers in Serb-dominated northern Kosovo. 
On March 5th, Kosovo police chief Sheremet Ahmeti and EULEX police chief Rainer Kuehn planned to inspect two border crossings and police stations in Leposavic, Zvecani and Zubin Potok. 
Protests by local Serbs, however, prevented those inspections.
