24/12/2008
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 24/12/08
An announcement by Romania's labour minister in November, that by May 2009 as many as 34,000 workers could lose their jobs, sent shock waves through the country. 
In the government's assessment, unemployment will hit the private sector hardest. 
While the governor of the National Bank of Romania tried to down play that estimate, saying it represents only around 0.5% of the country's labour force, he also warned projections could go higher.
Union leaders maintain that unemployment might reach 8%, or about 1.2 million people, as the most affected industries will be textiles, construction, agriculture, automobiles and finance.
Figures vary, depending on the source. 
The president of the SME (Small and Medium Enterprises) Council, Ovidiu Nicolescu, said that as of October, private firms in 30 counties had shed around 50,000 employees, raising unemployment in the private sector to 150,000.
The Romanian Association of Construction Entrepreneurs (ARCO) announced in mid- November that around 70,000 employees will be temporarily laid off until January, and another 35,000 could lose their jobs permanently as of April. 
According to ARCO, 32% of Romania's construction companies are affected by the crisis.
In turn, the Agrostar Federation asked the minister of agriculture to approve the dismissal of 50,000 employees -- almost 75% of its combined payrolls -- until April, as most agricultural firms cannot continue production.
Several companies announced they would either reduce production or suspend activity. 
For example, the carmaker Dacia announced it would suspend activity from November 30th till December 7th, as sales collapsed.
Rompetrol Petrochemicals, a division of the Rompetrol Group, announced it would cut production by 55% in December and January, while dismissing 24% of its employees.
The chemical plant Oltchim Ramnicu Valcea said it would reduce production by 20% to 40% after suffering a 50% drop in demand. 
Five hundred of the company's 4,800 employees will lose their jobs, mainly those approaching retirement, announced plant management.
The fertiliser plant Azomures temporarily dismissed 250 employees for lack of orders. 
Krafts Food Romania will close its production unit in Brasov with 400 employees and partially relocate the jobs to Bulgaria, but Coca-Cola dismissed speculation about closing its units in Iasi and Oradea.
President Traian Basescu last week visited the headquarters of the companies Dacia, Oltchim, Azomures, Ford, Daewoo, Nokia and ArcelorMittal and assured the public none of the market giants would go bankrupt.
Meanwhile, the government passed several measures to help the economy, including abolishing the first year's registration tax on a new car and earmarking 1,000 euros for each employer who creates new jobs.
