23/12/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 23/12/08
Christmas comes twice a year in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
While the country's Catholics celebrate on December 25th, the Orthodox population observes the older, Julian calendar, which differs from the Gregorian one by about a fortnight. 
Thus, Orthodox Christmas is on January 7th, and the New Year falls on January 14th.
The main Christmas liturgy in Sarajevo occurs at the old Orthodox Church of the Congregation, one of the largest Orthodox prayer houses in the Balkans, built in 1863-1868 upon the general initiative of Sarajevo residents. 
On Orthodox Christmas last January, workmen installed new lighting on this building. 
It is one of the four major religious buildings symbolising the four faiths of Bosnia and Herzegovina, all found within a several-hundred-metre circle. 
The other three are the Catholic cathedral, the Islamic Bey's Mosque and the Jewish synagogue.
The traditional way to celebrate Orthodox Christmas is as follows: on the morning of Christmas Eve (January 6th for the Orthodox), people decorate homes with ivy and hay, bring in the traditional oak tree and prepare cakes and main course meals, including veal and pig roasts for the ceremonial Christmas dinner. 
In the evening, the faithful attend church services and rites involving burning of the oak tree.
The Christmas oak is special because it has to be young, cut early in the morning, and brought in front of the house. 
Tradition prefers felling the tree with only three axe strokes and having the tree fall directly to the ground. 
Once he selects a tree, before cutting it, the head of the house will turn to the east and cross himself three times. 
In some areas, people also use firs or pines. 
On the evening of Christmas Eve, the family cuts the tree and brings it into the house with the decorative hay and the roast prepared earlier.
According to tradition, on the evening of Christmas Eve, the family will gather in the house to sing and rejoice together at the birth of Jesus. 
On Christmas Day, people visit their neighbours to exchange congratulations. 
As Christmas Eve is normally a fasting day, which means meals such as fish or beans, the Christmas table of an Orthodox family will be rich with various dishes, including sarmas(stuffed cabbage, normally with pork), pies, various cakes and cookies, andcicvaraas a must. 
Cicvarais a real Bosnian Serb specialty, made made of curd and cornmeal, and is eaten on Christmas morning, before lunch.
Christmas cicvara
Ingredients:
Preparation:
