23/12/2008
(AFP, FT, Reuters - 23/12/08;
AP, DPA, BBC, IHT, VOA, RFE/RL, OSCE - 22/12/08)
The OSCE will begin dismantling its civilian mission in Georgia at the beginning of next year, after Russia blocked the extension of its mandate at a meeting in Vienna on Monday (December 22nd).
Finnish Foreign Minister Alexander Stubb, whose country currently holds the rotating chairmanship of the Europe's largest security organisation, voiced regret that the 56 member states failed to resolve a standoff with Russia over the breakaway region of South Ossetia.
"The OSCE still has much work to do in the region," Stubb said.
"I hope that negotiations on future OSCE activities in Georgia can be continued next year."
The OSCE mission began in 1992 with the task of assisting Tbilisi in conflict settlement, democratisation, human rights and the rule of law.
It currently numbers about 200 staffers.
Twenty military observers deployed to Georgia following the August Russo-Georgian conflict can stay on until February.
An OSCE statement said a proposal envisioned the creation of "parallel, mutually independent field offices to Georgia and South Ossetia".
As an alternative, Finland proposed a three-month extension of the mission's current mandate to allow more time for talks.
But Russia, which has banned the OSCE monitors from South Ossetia since the end of the war, rejected the proposal.
"A consensus for a three-month technical extension was not possible today so it means we have to start withdrawing the mission, ceasing activities, on January 1st," Finnish Ambassador Antti Turunen said after the closed-door meeting Monday.
Russian Ambassador Anvar Azimov said on Monday that Moscow wanted to see a separate mission for South Ossetia and Abkhazia and insisted the other 55 OSCE nations should acknowledge their independence as a "reality".
Only Russia and Nicaragua have offered diplomatic recognition of the breakaway regions so far.
France, which currently holds the rotating EU presidency, expressed regret at the lack of a solution.
The British and US ambassadors to the security body, Ian Cliff and Julie Finley, were more critical.
"All it comes down to ...
is the insistence of Russia that there has to be recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in the future structure of the mission," Cliff told the AP.
Finley called Russia's refusal to support the extension of the OSCE mission "appalling" and a new attempt to undermine the OSCE.
Senior Georgian foreign ministry officials viewed Russia's move Monday as part of a broader strategy to gradually reduce the number of international organisations on the ground.
"Russia did its best to kill one more international mandate in Georgia," Foreign Minister Grigol Vashadze said.
"It was done deliberately in order not to have any witnesses."
