23/12/2008
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 23/12/08
Experts project the global economic crisis will have a relatively moderate impact on Albania, since the country only partially integrated with world markets and still lacks a capital market. 
The absence of a stock exchange and prevalence of informal economic practises are expected to minimise damage to Albania's economy.
Observers expect Albanian exports to Italy and Greece to decline. 
It is becoming increasingly hard to obtain credit, and foreign direct investors will also face difficulties. 
Public investments, mainly supported through foreign debt, will rise in cost.
Experts point out one of the principal consequences of the global crisis will be a decrease in emigrant remittances (which provide about 14% of GDP) from Albanians living mostly in Italy and Greece.
"There will be difficulties in guaranteeing economic growth in 2009. 
Business in many sectors will have a hard time [trying] to increase investment and employment," said Adrian Civici, the rector of the European University of Tirana.
Critics blame the government for failing to head off the crisis. 
"I think Albania is in danger of being hit hard by the international crisis, as a country with weak government, high corruption and unsound macro economic policies," said Shkelqim Cani, the former governor of the Bank of Albania.
However, Finance Minister Florion Mima said the budget for next year insures the economy against such risks. 
"The budget of 2009 has the highest level of contingent funds ever," he told the media.
The Albanian economy and banking system are operating within normal parameters, said Bank of Albania Governor Ardian Fullani in an interview for the dailyAlbanian.
"Our system's financial situation is sound, liquid, profitable and unaffected by toxic products," added Fullani, pointing out the loan-to-deposit ratio is still low at around 45%. 
"Presently, the Albanian system is well-capitalised, almost twice as much as in the developed countries," said Fullani, who has heard calls to lower the national currency interest rate, now at 6.25%.
While the government projects the global crisis will not influence economic growth in the next year, the IMF foresees a slowdown.
"Obviously, the government … should take extra steps to shore up confidence domestically, as in the current environment, policies should be cautious," Gerwin Bell, the IMF mission chief, told Reuters.
"This would allow Albania to weather the turbulent times and still record significant growth between 3.5% and 4% in 2009, with continued low inflation and an improved current account position," he added.
