29/04/2009
(Blic, B92, Javno, Makfax - 29/04/09; DPA, FT, B92, Javno - 28/04/09; AP, Reuters, DPA, Beta, Javno - 27/04/09)
Sreten Jocic, a Serb underworld boss now in custody in Belgrade in connection with the assassination of a prominent Croatian publisher, denied any involvement in the case on Tuesday (April 28th).
The Balkan drug kingpin says there was no evidence that could link him to the car bomb that killed Ivo Pukanic, the owner of Croatia's leading Nacional weekly, in October last year.
His attorney, Zdenko Tomanovic, said that Jocic, aka Joca Amsterdam, insisted in his statement to police that he had been dragged into a game of the Croatian intelligence structures, police and underground.
Police arrested Jocic in Belgrade on Monday, following close co-operation between the Serbian and Croatian authorities and just days after Croatian media reported that a protected witness had named him as the person who ordered and organised Pukanic's assassination.
Jocic, one of the leading underworld bosses in Europe, has alleged links to numerous other crimes, including murder, intimidation and blackmail, and has served prison terms in Bulgaria and the Netherlands.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader both welcomed Jocic's arrest as proof of good co-operation between the Croatian and Serbian police departments.
"They have no obstacles, but this is why the police have to be a step ahead to catch up with them and take all the necessary steps," Mesic said on Monday.
Jocic, indicted in Serbia for the murders of two men, has been living under house arrest since 2006 at a Belgrade suburban villa that he rented from former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic's widow, Mirjana Markovic.
Serbian anti-terrorist units carefully planned his arrest in a reported effort to prevent his possible flight to Austria, using false personal documents.
The burnt bodies of Goran Maric and Ilija Novovic, two of Jocic's close associates, turned up in a jeep late last week.
Those arrested in Croatia in connection with Pukanic's murder so far include Robert Matanic, Luka Matanic, Amir Mafalani and Slobodan Djurovic.
Others suspected of involvement in the explosion that also killed Nacional marketing director Niko Franjic include Milenko Kuzmanovic, Zeljko Milovanovic and Bojan Guduric, purported members of the group around Jocic.
As the Serbian police cannot hold him for more than 48 hours without charges, Jocic is expected to appear before the country's special court for organised crime before Wednesday night.
Croatian authorities suggested earlier that they would like to try Jocic in Zagreb. 
Croatian Justice Minister Ivan Simonovic explained, however, that as his country does not allow the extradition of its citizens, Zagreb cannot demand others extradite their own.
Therefore, the trial in the Pukanic case will most likely have venues in both Serbia and Croatia.
