28/05/2009
(AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, Fena, HINA, B92, Makfax - 27/05/09; Forbes - 13/05/09)
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) Prime Minister Nedzad Brankovic, who was charged with abuse of power last month, tendered his resignation Wednesday (May 27th).
"I am submitting my irreversible resignation... 
with a request to relieve me of my duties and initiate moves to appoint a new prime minister as soon as possible," Brankovic wrote in a letter to FBiH President Borjana Kristo and Vice Presidents Mirsad Kebo and Spomenka Micic.
He cited Tuesday's re-election of Sulejman Tihic as leader of the Party of Democratic Action (SDA), of which he is also a senior member, as the main motive for his decision.
Brankovic, who took office in March 2007, has been at odds with the SDA leader for the larger part of his mandate. 
Following a Sarajevo court's decision last month to charge the prime minister with abuse of power over an illegal real estate deal dating back to 2000 and launch several other fraud and criminal investigations against him, Tihic repeatedly called for his resignation.
Brankovic shunned those calls hoping that SDA Deputy Chairman Bakir Izetbegovic, son of wartime BiH President Alija Izetbegovic, would win the party's top post at its congress Tuesday.
Since this didn't happen, he sent a letter to Tihic on Wednesday, saying the vote indicated that he and his cabinet had lost the needed political support to conduct their work, so he would respect the SDA leader's calls for his resignation.
"This is Brankovic's showdown with the SDA, but the problem is that he is jeopardising the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina," Reuters quoted Vlastimir Mijovic, former editor-in-chief of the Sarajevo-based daily Oslobodjenje as commenting.
Kebo said the presidency would follow the procedures envisioned in the constitution. 
This implies the SDA and the other parties in the ruling coalition -- the Party for BiH, HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990 -- will have to choose a new prime minister-designate within 30 days after Brankovic's resignation is officially accepted.
Tihic said he had no candidate in mind, but that it should be a person with political and economic experience.
In his letter of resignation, Brankovic reportedly asked Kristo that either Finance Minister Vjekoslav Bevanda or Culture Minister Gavrilo Grahovac be allowed to take over his duties during the transition period, as he wanted to take a vacation immediately.
Earlier this month, the BiH government reached an agreement with the IMF on a new, three-year stand-by arrangement, worth about $1.5 billion, or more than 1 billion euros. 
Before it is approved by the Fund's board, however, BiH must implement a series of tough fiscal reforms, including slashing spending. 
The country could get the first tranche in August, if it has met the conditions.
"This is a time with thousands of challenges," said Kebo.
