28/04/2009
By Marina Stojanovska and Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 28/04/09
Public sector hiring and government salary increases will go by the wayside if parliament approves the government's proposals for facing down the global economic crisis.
Aiming to reduce the budget by 9%, or 173m euros, the government proposed the package last week in an effort to send a message of fiscal responsibility.
Macedonians will feel the pain in many parts of public life.
The government will freeze public sector hiring and will postpone a previously announced raise in government salaries by a year.
It will also reduce overhead in matters large and small -- including a ban on new office furniture purchases, a reduction in the number of official vehicles and scaled back construction of sports facilities, theatres, museums and embassies.
It additionally intends to slash defence spending.
"[T]here will be reductions in all categories ...
wherever it is possible," Deputy Prime Minister Zoran Stavrevski said.
He added, however, there would be no reductions of current salaries and pensions.
Parliament will vote on the package in mid-May.
According to former Finance Minister Dzevdet Hajredini, any delay could be very harmful to the economy.
The budget rebalancing "is necessary, and the government has already announced … [it for] next month," said Hajredini.
A significant factor behind the country's economic downturn is a plunge in tax revenue -- 9.5% less in income and excise taxes and 11% less in VAT income than one year ago.
With taxpayers unable to fund the government, it is now running a 28m-euro budget deficit.
In addition, the highest interest rates in the region -- up to 18% -- stifle the borrowing essential to any expansion of business activity.
Virtually all commercial banks in Macedonia raised interest rates and made record profits in 2008, but Macedonians have largely stopped seeking loans rather than pay those rates.
The business community has weighed in, asking for a new budget spending formula.
It suggested a new government arrangement with the IMF similar to the ones negotiated with Serbia and Turkey.
Stavrevski and Finance Minister Trajko Slaveski, who were in Washington at the weekend for the IMF and World Bank spring meetings, have not ruled out an IMF loan.
However, officials are reluctant to turn to the Fund unless the country's economic situation worsens.
World Bank officials, amidst the gloom, say the global crisis could turn into an opportunity for Macedonia.
Bank economist Simeon Dzankov reported "high interest among investors in Macedonia".
The World Bank's representative in Macedonia, Markus Repnik, also offered the Bank's help in patching the budget deficit in co-operation with other international partners.
