28/04/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 28/04/09
Tensions flared in northern Kosovo on Monday (April 27th) as police broke up a protest by local Serbs demonstrating against the reconstruction of seven Albanian homes destroyed during the 1999 conflict.
Around 100 Serbs rallied in the Brdjani neighborhood of the ethnically separated town of Mitrovica.
Kosovo police, EULEX and KFOR reacted after they tried to break through a cordon separating Albanian and Serb protesters in the village, a EULEX press statement said.
Police used tear gas and stun grenades to disperse them, Kosovo police spokesperson Besim Hoti confirmed.
At least one person went to hospital.
The situation is tense and is under observation by the security forces, but the reconstruction of the homes continues, Hoti added.
According to international press reports, KFOR has sent in tanks and is in control of the area.
The reconstruction project got under way Thursday amid heated opposition by local Serb leaders.
They are demanding a ban on the return of Albanians to the north of Kosovo until they see more progress in the return of displaced Serbs.
Kosovo media quoted the Serbs as saying "the reconstruction of Albanian houses is possible only with an agreement reached by both sides -- a provision of the deal reached in 2000." Local representatives held talks last week with the Russian liaison office and the British and Italian ambassadors, but the negotiators could not reach agreement on the right of return.
Brdjani resident Sinisa Lazic told reporters that "the international community has made it its goal to drive Serbs out of that settlement and out of northern Kosovo with the use of force".
"[The] return of Serbs is not realised even at a minimum," Kontakt Plus Radio quoted Milan Ivanovic, chairman of the Serb National Council of Northern Kosovo, as saying.
He says Albanians who never lived in the north are migrating to the area as part of a plan to implement the Ahtisaari Plan for Kosovo independence.
Kosovo's ethnic Albanian leaders, however, accused Serbia of stirring up conflict.
"The recent incidents in the north have been caused by people directly guided by Belgrade," RTK television quoted President Fatmir Sejdiu as saying.
He called on the international community to exert pressure on Serbia.
Kosovo Interior Minister Zenun Pajaziti told the BBC that Pristina has sent messages of co-existence to the north.
He described the police action as a last resort.
