24/06/2009
By Ilija Djordjevic for Southeast European Times in Mitrovica – 24/06/09
Crowds in Zvecan sampled a buffet of jazz and blues at the North City Jazz & Blues Festival from June 5th to 7th.
Eight orchestras and 60 top musicians from Greece, France, Algeria, Russia, Cyprus and Serbia turned out for the event, organised by the Mitrovica Association of Musicians.
Branko Markovic, a contrabass player and one of Serbia's top jazz musicians, was the festival's artistic director.
"We were fortunate to hear, among others, Ana Popovic, Peter Herbolzheimer, Judy Niemack, Chuck McPherson, Sylvain Luc Trio and others, which bespeak the quality of the North City Jazz & Blues festival…I'm convinced that the organiser will …continue to invite quality jazz musicians, and, if possible, even more raise the quality of this jazz happening," Markovic told Southeast European Times.
The KM Guitar Quartet opened the event under the lead of legendary Mitrovica jazz guitarist Petar Rakic. 
Cypriot Big Band, the first jazz orchestra in Cyprus, according to their website, played next.
Audiences cheered for the Oleg Chaly Hammond Trio on the second evening. 
Chaly, one of the best known Greek jazz pianists, and who is known to collaborate with musicians from different genres, enticed the audience with the beauty and subtlety of his sound.
Premier jazz saxophone player Igor Butman and his trio took the audience by storm on the last evening of the festival. 
The former Russian citizen, now a US émigré, has played with some of the biggest names in US jazz.
Belgrade's Del Arno Band wrapped up the festival. 
The band thrilled the crowd, especially younger members who danced to the group's reggae rhythms.
"We, of course will not stop at this point. 
We already have ideas about inviting some big names at the eighth edition," festival producer Nenad Ilic told Southeast European Times.
The European Commission (EC) Liaison Office to Kosovo was one of the main sponsors of the event.
"The European Commission attaches great importance to culture and promotion of cultural activities, especially to those that bring communities together. 
In order to reach more people of Kosovo, the EC Liaison Office particularly encourages cultural activities happening outside Pristina," said the EC web site.
