24/06/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 24/06/09
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) will not make the cut in gaining visa-free travel by the end of the year, European Commission foreign ministers said last week.
The news -- which was no surprise -- came two days after the BiH House of Representatives adopted a set of laws to further the visa liberalisation process.
The bills, which target four main categories -- international legal aid in criminal matters, border control, movement of arms and military equipment, and money laundering and the financing of terrorist activities -- aim to help implement the 174 EC conditions for BiH.
To take effect, the new legislation needs the approval of the House of Peoples.
The laws bring the country a step closer to visa-free travel and EU membership, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana's spokeswoman Cristina Gallach told the SRNA news agency. 
However, she added, "one must be very cautious when speaking about the timeframe" for lifting visa restrictions for BiH citizens.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn met with BiH Foreign Minister Sven Alkalaj last month in Brussels to discuss the issue.
"It really will depend on the ability of political leaders, democratically elected political leaders, of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take such decisions, adopt laws, and implement such measures as required from the EU ... 
to achieve visa-free travel," said Rehn, and added that biometric passports are among the key criteria.
Alkalaj said BiH authorities are committed to implementing reforms, and will start issuing biometric passports next week.
"It is most important for BiH authorities to dedicate their full attention to adoption of necessary laws and introduction of biometric passports, so that the country may receive a positive assessment as soon as possible," BiH Ambassador to the EU Mission in Brussels Osman Topcagic said.
EU visa liberalisation is a sensitive issue in BiH as ethnic Croats have long had the opportunity to enjoy visa-free Croatian passports. 
Now that Serbia is on its way to visa liberalisation, Bosnian Serbs will have the same privilege by way of Serbian passports. 
Only Bosniaks will be unable to travel freely in the foreseeable future.
