22/12/2008
(Zaman, Blic - 22/12/08;
Reuters, Hurriyet, Beta, B92 - 21/12/08;
AFP, DPA, Euobserver - 19/12/08)
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn urged Turkey on Sunday (December 21st) to overcome domestic issues and step up its reform efforts within the next few months if it really wants to join the Union one day.
"Next year will be an important litmus test of whether Turkey is serious about its EU accession perspective," the commissioner said to Reuters.
"We would expect Turkey now to put up a new gear and seriously start to pursue ...
reforms again."
The political divisions Turkey has been facing for months led to a slowdown in the pace of EU-required reforms.
"I am aware of the dilemmas of the Turkish society in relation with the more secular and more religious lifestyles," Rehn told Reuters.
"It is essential that Turkish society find a modus vivendi."
The EU launched accession talks with Turkey and Croatia in October 2005.
But Zagreb has made faster progress than Ankara.
Turkey was able to make a small step Friday, when the EU agreed to open two more negotiating chapters -- on free movement of capital and information society and media -- in the talks.
It has been able to close provisionally only one out of the 35 required chapters so far.
Rehn stressed, however, that further progress would require much stronger reform efforts on Ankara's part, particularly in constitutional reform, as well as on meeting EU requirements in areas such as freedom of expression and religious and linguistic rights.
"The sooner the better, but at the latest after the March (local) elections, Turkey should totally resume the reforms again," the enlargement commissioner said.
Other Southeast European countries hoping to join the EU should also continue implementing the required reforms, despite the financial and economic crisis, Rehn stressed.
The commissioner said other Balkan countries were likely to follow Montenegro in officially applying for membership.
But he warned potential applicants not to take that step before they have shown "a convincing track record" of reform.
