20/11/2008
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 20/11/08
Parliament passed the new electoral code, a consensus between the ruling Democratic Party and the main opposition Socialist Party (SP), on Tuesday (November 18th), in hopes of ensuring free and fair elections this coming spring.
The new code, which is based on European models, attracted 112 votes in the 140-seat parliament.
"This code will be remembered not only because it will ensure free and fair elections but as a great example of political co-operation," said Democrat Ilir Rusmali, co-chairman of the commission that drafted the code.
The electoral code completes the legal framework underpinning implementation of a new election system.
Although the two main parties agreed to amend the current code in April, the process stumbled in the face of opposition from smaller parties, who were protesting their exclusion from election committees under the new code.
They also say the new regional system of proportional representation will greatly reduce their number of seats in next year's general election.
However, many experts say the role of the smaller parties under the existing system is problematic.
Both the Democrats and the SP face accusations of fraudulently boosting their small-party allies in order to broaden their own power bases in parliament.
Ten members of the parties, including Movement for Socialists for Integration head and former Prime Minister Ilir Meta, staged an eight-day hunger strike in protest.
"This is a crime against the constitution and democracy," Meta told a crowd of protesters who chanted "Shame" outside the parliament building.
"You are approving the code of theft and are undermining the 2009 elections," Nard Ndoka, a former ally of Prime Minister Sali Berisha, told parliament before ending the strike.
Holding free and fair elections has been a recurring EU demand of Albania -- one the European Commission mentioned again in its latest report on Albania, released earlier this week.
Albania has yet to hold uncontested elections that meet international standards.
Observers consider the next general elections, expected in June, a test of Albania's readiness for further European integration.
On Monday, the OSCE representative in Albania, Robert Bosch, urged political parties to improve the new electoral code.
"Every discriminatory element should be excluded," Bosch said.
