27/05/2009
(AP, Reuters, DPA, France24, New York Times, Bianet - 26/05/09; Euronews - 21/05/09; Russia Today - 20/05/09)
Turkish writer Nedim Gursel, who is being tried on charges of inciting racial and religious hatred in his latest novel, rejected the accusations in an Istanbul court Tuesday (May 26th).
His book on the birth of Islam in the 6th century, "The Daughters of Allah", was published in Turkey last year. 
Ali Emre Bukagili, a civil engineer, filed a lawsuit against the author, insisting that his depiction of the Prophet Muhammad, his wives and the Koran, was insulting to Muslims.
"This is a novel, and it is not possible for novels to commit crimes," Gursel, who fled Turkey during a military coup about 30 years ago and is now a naturalised French citizen, said in court Tuesday. 
"I reject the accusation of having made fun of religion."
The writer had hoped to see the charges dropped, but the hearing, which lasted less than an hour, was adjourned until June 26th. 
If convicted, Gursel could face a sentence of at least six months.
Prosecutors say there is no evidence to support Bukagili's claim and no justification to put the writer on trial. 
But the court rejected that decision based on the engineer's separate complaints about the book's first and second editions. 
The two separate cases were merged at Tuesday's hearing.
"The Daughters of Allah", which raises questions about faith and violence in Islam, is a work of fiction that was not meant to offend anyone, Gursel said, stressing that he respects all religious creeds.
"The book has been out for a year," he told Reuters in a telephone interview. 
"It has reached 30,000 people -- where is the hatred it has incited? 
Where is the anger?"
Still hoping for an acquittal, he was disturbed by the Turkish Religious Affairs Directorate's decision to intervene in the case by conducting a report on his book. 
It was "worrying", he said, that a panel tasked with overseeing the activities of mosques and the teaching of theology has chosen to overstep its powers and accuse him. 
Furthermore, it is the job of literary critics to criticise books, not religious institutions, he said.
"It is sad that a writer can be tried with such a mentality," Turkish BIA news agency quoted Gursel as saying.
Although Turkey has lifted some restrictions on freedom of expression in recent years, Gursel is just the latest among scores of Turkish writers and intellectuals to be put on trial.
Orhan Pamuk, winner of the 2006 Nobel Prize for Literature, for example, was tried on charges of "insulting Turkishness" over his comments to a Swiss magazine several years ago that his country was responsible for the deaths of 30,000 Kurds and 1,000,000 Armenians.
"I thought those times were over," Gursel told the DPA, commenting on censorship in Turkey.
