19/11/2008
(CNN, Euobserver, Euronews, UPI, MIA, Kathimerini - 18/11/08;
AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, MIA, Makfax - 17/11/08)
Greece criticised Macedonia on Tuesday (November 18th) for instituting proceedings against it before the International Court of Justice (ICJ), accusing Skopje of seeking to further delay a solution to their long-running name dispute.
In a surprise move Monday, Macedonia filed a complaint with The Hague-based court, arguing Greece violated a 1995 interim agreement between the two countries by blocking Skopje's NATO entry bid at the Alliance's Bucharest summit last April.
In taking that step, Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski's government "continued its delaying tactics" in the UN-led negotiations on the name row between Athens and Skopje, Greek foreign ministry spokesman George Koumoutsakos said on Tuesday.
Macedonia's decision to sue Greece before the ICJ represents a violation of "the fundamental principle of good neighbourly relations", added Koumoutsakos.
Greece has been refusing to recognise Macedonia by its constitutional name, Republic of Macedonia, fearing the name could imply territorial claims over its northern province of Macedonia.
Athens insists on calling its northern neighbour the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), the name under which it joined the UN in 1993.
Most international organisations, including NATO and the EU, officially do so.
In its complaint to the ICJ, Skopje argued Greece's decision to veto a NATO invitation to Macedonia constituted a "flagrant violation of its obligations under Article 11" of the 1995 accord.
The article stipulates that Greece "agrees not to object" to Macedonia's application for membership in international organisations and institutions that refer to it as FYROM.
Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki, who represents his country in the ICJ case, said his government decided to take Greece to court, as it saw "no other way to satisfy justice and to protect" its rights.
Koumoutsakos retorted the Greek authorities would present evidence Macedonia had itself violated the 1995 accord on numerous occasions.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski said on Monday the government had filed the complaint against Greece without any prior consultation and that the move violated the constitution and the law on foreign policy.
The following day, he said the move was fully legitimate but could impede Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic integration.
Erwan Fouere, the EU ambassador to Macedonia, said "We are expecting the government to focus all of its energy [on meeting EC benchmarks], as completion of all reforms [and] fair, democratic elections are achievements the EU appreciates."
Declining to comment on Macedonia's move, Matthew Nimetz, the UN mediator of talks on the name dispute, noted only that Skopje had reassured him of its continued commitment to reaching a mutually agreeable solution to the name issue.
