27/04/2009
(Various sources -- 24/04/09 - 26/04/09)
Participants in a two-day natural-gas summit in Sofia wrapped up discussions Saturday (April 25th), pledging support for the implementation of all projects aimed at diversifying supply sources and routes in order to guarantee energy security.
A declaration adopted at the end of the high-level meeting, dubbed "Natural Gas for Europe, Security and Partnership", called for the "rapid development of international gas infrastructure, pipelines, Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) terminals and strategic storages, to guarantee diversification of gas supplies to Europe in a sustainable and viable way".
The summit, hosted by Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov, brought together leaders and top officials from nine other Southeast European (SEE) countries, gas-exporting nations from the Caspian region, Central Asia and the Middle East and senior US and EU representatives.
Six other presidents attended the meeting, those of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey. 
Greece sent Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis, while Macedonia and Romania sent government ministers to the forum. 
Other participants included European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso; Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, emir of Qatar; and US Special Envoy for Eurasian Energy Richard Morningstar. 
Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin cancelled at the very last moment, sending Energy Minister Sergey Shmatko instead.
The forum took place just months after the Russia-Ukraine price row in January, which severely disrupted gas deliveries to Europe.
"A crisis such as the gas delivery stop must not happen again," Barroso said, noting that "security and solidarity" are essential to preventing emergencies like the one sparked by the Russian-Ukrainian dispute.
The summit declaration also called for the establishment of "an efficient international dispute settlement mechanism".
While the document did not mention the Nabucco and South Stream gas pipeline projects, the two dominated many of the discussions in Sofia.
Backed by the EU and the United States, the 7.9-billion-euro Nabucco project envisions the construction of a 3,300km pipeline to deliver Caspian Sea gas via Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary to Austria. 
An effort to reduce Europe's heavy dependency on Russian gas, the project has languished during years of wrangling.
Turkish President Abdullah Gul said "Turkey has the necessary political will" to implement the project.
Governments could finally sign an agreement on the project by June, officials indicated in Sofia.
The builders of South Stream, a 10-billion-euro joint venture by Russian energy giant Gazprom and Italy's Eni, intend to ship Russian natural gas to Europe -- passing under the Black Sea to Bulgaria and then running through Austria, Serbia, Hungary, Greece and Italy.
Observers had thought the signing of an agreement on South Stream possible during the summit. 
Putin's pullout, however, confirmed speculation about disagreements between Sofia and Moscow.
According to Parvanov, Bulgaria should not rush to sign but should not postpone doing so beyond May, since parliamentary elections are coming this summer.
