18/11/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 18/11/08
Kosovo leaders, strongly opposed to an amended UN plan for the deployment of EULEX, have put forward their own proposal. 
It agrees to quick deployment of the EULEX mission while insisting on respect for Kosovo sovereignty.
Unveiling the new plan Tuesday (November 18th) was President Fatmir Sejdiu, who met with visiting US Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Daniel Fried and the EU's special representative to Kosovo, Peter Feith.
EULEX has suffered a months-long delay as the international community struggles to reach a consensus. 
The UN last week adopted an amended version of a six-point plan proposed by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. 
It would reportedly place policemen, customs officers and judges in the Serb-run parts of Kosovo under a UN umbrella -- a provision welcomed by Belgrade but detested in Pristina.
Kosovo leaders see the UN plan as a setback to their efforts to bring the northern enclaves under the direct control of Kosovo institutions. 
At worst, they say, it could amount to a de facto partition.
Speaking on Monday during a first round of talks, Fried pledged respect for Pristina's concerns and said Kosovo can count on US support. 
At the same time, he emphasised the need to deploy EULEX as soon as possible.
"The Kosovo government is a sovereign government ... 
they listen to other governments, but they make their own decisions and the fact is we have to respect them," Fried said.
According to him, there is "a lot of good and ... 
no harm" in the UN plan, which he described as a "temporary" solution. 
"In another two years no one will even remember this fight," Fried said. 
The United States is contributing police officers, prosecutors and judges to the EU mission.
During their meeting with the US diplomat, Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci reiterated their objections, terming the UN plan "unacceptable".
"Everyone in Kosovo is against this six-point UN plan," Thaci said, pledging, however, to co-ordinate any steps by Pristina with the international community.
