26/05/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 26/05/09
Despite a 200-year tradition, Serbia is facing major challenges in its higher education sector -- chiefly the adoption of European standards and accession to a common European education system.
In 2003, Serbia signed the Bologna Declaration, a key document endorsed by 46 countries. 
The agreement envisions establishing a single university space and introducing equal standards for instruction and grading in European countries. 
This will allow disparate degrees to be valued on equal footing in the European labour market.
Unified education space will permit students to move freely between continues to complete their education at any university within the Bologna system. 
Experts predict the common European higher education system will be complete next year.
At a recent ministerial conference on higher education in Leuven, Belgium, Serbia received 3.8 points out of five for progress it has made in implementing the Bologna Declaration over the past three years. 
It ranked 24th out of the 46 countries, though it was among the last to have started implementing the declaration.
Education Minister Zarko Obradovic said he is satisfied with Serbia's score and believes it reflects the quality of Serbian higher education. 
While that quality is indisputable, Obradovic said, certain aspects should be changed.
Belgrade University's Student Parliament head Aleksandar Jovic echoed the need for changes. 
He believes the biggest problem is the courses' overwhelming breadth. 
Many students have difficulty passing exams, despite their dedication to systematic study.
However, he added, the students are "concerned … that a large number of schools have announced the possibility to increase tuition", affecting adversely families' standard of living.
Belgrade University Vice-Rector Neda Bokan told Southeast European Times that "both students and educators need to engage more to achieve a more efficient higher education and [produce] experts who will be able to do their job well after graduation." To do so, the university must harmonise its tradition with modern education trends and European standards, she said.
Belgrade University was founded in 1808 with the establishment of the so-called Higher School for law and philosophy. 
Its studies lasted three years, akin to the then Austrian academies, and correspond to what today's professional studies, explained Bokan.
It has grown to 31 faculties with nearly 90,000 undergraduate and graduate students, ten institutes and about 4,500 teachers and assistants. 
There are six additional state universities in Serbia and seven private ones.
