23/06/2009
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 23/06/09
Montenegro has high hopes of moving ahead soon with visa liberalisation. 
At their recent meeting in Luxembourg, EU foreign ministers indicated the country -- along with Macedonia and Serbia -- was on track and could see the requirements lifted within months.
Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, recently elected to his sixth term, has declared the issue a government priority.
"There is no more visible way to promote reforms and European values than visa liberalisation," he said after his inauguration. 
"We believe ... 
[that] we will enable Montenegro to be among the first countries in the region whose citizens will soon travel to Schengen countries without visas."
The government must still convince Brussels that it will deliver on several key issues, such as battling corruption, money laundering, and equipping all border crossings with the requisite technology.
Many analysts, however, think the road ahead will be relatively hassle-free. 
Montenegro has met most of the EU's conditions, including the issuance of biometric passports, which it rolled out last year.
"The demands on Montenegro are not big, everything is in [the] domain of cosmetic work," European Movement in Montenegro Secretary-General Momcilo Radulovic told Southeast European Times. 
"I think that it will be enough for Podgorica to promise that it will do something and show clear signals that it will be like that."
"The opportunity is here, and until the EU council of justice ministers assembly in July, there is enough time for Montenegro's government to show a greater degree of devotion to this issue and to fulfil the missing conditions," Centre for Civic Education Executive Director Daliborka Uljarevic said.
According to Social Democratic Party spokesperson Rasko Konjevic, visa liberalisation represents a key milestone in the accession process. 
"That is the most specific move on the way to joining the EU," Konjevic told Southeast European Times.
The issue is especially important for young people and for those who want to study abroad, he added.
