18/11/2008
(Reuters, Euobserver, International Herald Tribune, Irish Times, VOA - 17/11/08; Deutsche Welle - 16/11/08; AP, AFP, Euronews - 15/11/08; VOA - 10/11/08)
NATO reiterated on Monday (November 17th) its support for a US plan to build a missile defence shield in Eastern Europe designed to protect the majority of the Alliance's 26 member nations from potential threats by rogue states, such as Iran and North Korea.
Leaders of NATO countries endorsed the plan, envisioning the deployment of ten missile interceptors in Poland and a radar system in the Czech Republic by 2012, during their April summit in Bucharest.
NATO spokeswoman Carmen Romero said on Monday, "The decision taken at Bucharest is very clear, and we are continuing to analyse different options relating to missile defence."
Once in place, the system would cover all of Europe except NATO members Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and Turkey. 
The Alliance wants to see all of Europe protected from long-range missiles. 
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer has asked for a report on possibilities for expanding missile defence to areas not covered by the US shield before the Alliance's summit in April 2009.
On November 12th, Iran said it had test-fired a new medium-range ballistic missile. 
Named Sejil, the missile has a stated range of 2,000km, which would bring southern Italy and countries in southeast Europe and the Middle East within striking distance.
US experts believe Iran will have missiles capable of hitting their country and the rest of Europe by 2015.
Russia, however, adamantly opposes the US plan, viewing it as a potential threat to its military deterrent. 
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev threatened to station new missiles near Poland's border if the Pentagon went ahead with the missile defence plan.
Seeking to allay Moscow's concerns, Washington has repeatedly stressed the shield is "not aimed at Russia" and has made several offers of co-operation, all of which Moscow has rejected.
Following talks with Medvedev on Friday, French President Nicolas Sarkozy, whose country currently holds the six-month rotating EU presidency, voiced doubts the US project would improve European security, to the chagrin of Warsaw and Prague.
"The question of the anti-missile shield is governed by an agreement between Poland and the United States," Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk said on Saturday. 
"I don't think that third countries, even good friends like France, have a particular right to express themselves on this issue."
Czech Deputy Prime Minister Alexandr Vondra said "the French presidency mandate for the EU-Russia summit… did not contain any mention of the US anti-missile shield."
Western media interpreted remarks Medvedev made in Washington at the weekend as indicating Moscow might be ready to consider other options, not necessarily involving cancellation of the shield.
