19/03/2009
By Art Malone for Southeast European Times -- 19/03/09
Born to an Albanian father and an American mother, Dr.
Ferid Murad studied medicine and pharmacology simultaneously at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio.
Murad has worked at The University of Texas Health Science Centre since 1997.
He is currently director of the Institute of Molecular Medicine and holds the John S. Dunn Distinguished Chair in Physiology and Medicine.
Murad spoke with Southeast European Times about his Nobel Prize and his work.
Southeast European Times:
You shared the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with your colleagues Robert Furchgott and Louis Ignarro.
What does the prize mean to you?
Dr.
Ferid Murad:
It is recognition by your peers, colleagues and other scientists of your work and its importance.
It has become the highest honour in science, and it ensures that your name will survive in the history books.
SETimes:
People sometimes think of scientists as being isolated in "ivory towers" or laboratories, with little connection to the everyday world complete with an array of issues and problems -- political, economic or social.
How do you respond to this stereotype?
Murad:
They are simply wrong.
Most of us are quite normal people who have been fortunate to have discovered something important that has applications to other important areas of science.
SETimes:
What is the focus of your current scientific work?
Murad:
I continue to focus on cell signalling or cell communication with nitric oxide and cyclic nucleotides in a number of biological systems such as stem cells, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, bacterial-toxin-induced diarrhea, etc.
By studying these signalling pathways, we have been able to discover many new important drugs to treat various diseases.
SETimes:
What does your Albanian ancestry mean to you?
Has it had any impact on your life and work?
Murad:
My Albanian heritage has taught me the importance of education, hard work and setting goals.
With a good education, determination and hard work, you can usually succeed and get what you set your mind on.
SETimes:
Should governments do more to foster education, science and technology?
Murad:
Absolutely yes;
governments should do more to encourage and help education by providing scholarships, loans and making it affordable.
But the major issues are the motivation and drive of students to learn, work hard and strive for success.
If you have to earn money to go to school, it is still possible to finish your education, though it may take a little more time.
It is a crime that in western, developed nations, so few students finish high school or go to college.
As a result, governments must invest heavily in social programmes, welfare, healthcare, unemployment benefits and job creation.
The lifetime income of a college graduate is markedly greater than that of a high school graduate.
There is yet another significant increase with postgraduate training.
SETimes:
What role can science play in regions that have endured tensions and conflict, either now or in the recent past?
How can science help a region such as the Balkans achieve a better future?
Murad:
Science will add information and technology to improve the quality of life and healthcare for everyone.
Without advances in science, there would be no progress or improvement in the quality of life.
Imagine trying to be efficient and survive today without a telephone, radio, television, automobile or clean water.
One of the best investments in peace and crime reduction is in the education of a country's citizens.
SETimes:
What is your advice for new scientists who dream of moving science forward in their countries?
Murad:
Be prepared to obtain an excellent education, set goals for yourself, work hard, be the best at what you decide to become and try to leave the world better off than when you entered it.
You must be a role model for others and trustworthy to your mentors, yourself and others.
The beauty of science is that deception is discovered as the truth is found.
You can't hide false information or data in science.
