23/01/2009
(AFP, Office of the High Representative, EU - 21/01/09)
A signed Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU does not guarantee a country's accession progress, international officials warned Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Wednesday (January 21st).
"The EU does not issue blank cheques, neither when it comes to joining the EU nor when it comes to visa-free access," High Representative and EU Special Representative Miroslav Lajcak stressed during a meeting of the BiH-EU interparliamentary committee in Brussels.
Also attending were EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana; the current chairman of BiH's tripartite presidency, Nebojsa Radmanovic; and other senior BiH officials.
The EU signed the SAA with BiH in June after the country's feuding politicians reached an agreement on some outstanding issues to avoid falling off the train to Europe. 
The move followed the launch of visa liberalisation talks with BiH, designed to eventually grant BiH citizens visa-free travel to the EU.
"Despite all these opportunities, once the SAA was signed, further progress towards the EU essentially stopped," Lajcak said on Wednesday. 
"Progress was replaced by very negative and confrontational political messages and actions."
The process of implementing EU-required reforms did not accelerate even after the October municipal elections. 
Only seven laws out of the more than 125 short-term bills envisioned in 2008 have passed. 
The BiH government has failed for six months to appoint a new director for European integration, and its ambassadorship to the EU has been vacant for months, a lapse that Lajcak called "absurd".
BiH is now lagging significantly behind other EU hopefuls in the region, according to Lajcak.
"There is a clear discrepancy between the proclaimed commitment to the EU agenda and the concrete actions by the political leaders and the respective institutions," the Slovak diplomat said.
The next 12 months will be critical for BiH and all hurdles barring its progress towards integration must disappear, Solana and Lajcak both warned.
Lajcak voiced confidence that BiH can make significant progress on its EU agenda for this year if its politicians manage to "avoid negative and confrontational rhetoric or actions and [to] focus on the benefits to citizens".
All parties must focus on finding a solution to the state property issue and legalisation of the status of the Brcko district.
The government must also take steps to ensure that a key political agreement reached in Prud in November will translate into "concrete legislative initiatives" and to tackle constitutional reform, Lajcak added.
"This year, the Western Balkans and the future of the countries of the region are high on the EU's agenda," Lajcak said. 
"But eventually, responsibilities lie in the country."
