23/04/2009
(EurActiv - 23/04/09;
AFP, Reuters, Bloomberg, Euobserver, European Parliament, European Commission - 22/04/09)
The European Parliament (EP) on Wednesday (April 22nd) endorsed new wide-ranging rules that would boost competition on the EU energy market, while ensuring better protection of consumer rights and giving more rights to national regulators.
The legislative measures, which a large majority of lawmakers supported, also promote energy efficiency as well as regional solidarity during natural gas crises.
The European Commission (EC) proposed the package in 2007 to further liberalise the EU gas and electricity markets.
Officials in Brussels welcomed the adoption of the reforms, which observers expect will gain final approval from the governments of the 27 EU member states in the coming weeks.
"This is a major step towards a truly integrated European energy market, and the right European Union response to the structural challenges we face," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said on Wednesday.
The initial proposals called for full separation of the network operation of electricity and gas from supply and generation activities.
That idea encountered strong opposition by some of the biggest energy companies in Europe.
The compromise reached eventually and supported by EU lawmakers allows member states to choose one of three options.
One would force electricity and gas companies to split their production and transmission businesses.
But if the countries do not wish to do that, they could either require energy companies to hand over the management of their grids to an independent operator or oblige them to comply with detailed rules on autonomy, independence and investment.
The new measures also give national regulators the right to refuse certification of a transmission system operator controlled by companies from non-EU states if they do not comply with the ownership-unbundling rules or if their market entry could jeopardise a given country's or the EU's security of supply.
The new legislation sets the stage for better protection of the rights of consumers, who would be able to change their gas and electricity suppliers within three weeks for free.
They would also have greater control over their energy bills, as they will have access to all relevant data concerning their gas and electricity consumption.
The new rules also envision having independent mechanisms handle complaints and out-of-court disputes.
At the EP's initiative, the new legislation includes special measures to ensure better protection of vulnerable energy consumers.
It also obliges EU nations to address energy poverty by taking steps such as providing social security benefits to guarantee the delivery of energy to vulnerable customers or improving energy efficiency.
EU Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs hailed the deal, saying it would benefit both consumers and businesses.
"The package will give the EU a clear regulatory framework needed to ensure a properly functioning internal market and to promote much needed investment," the commissioner said.
