23/04/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 23/04/09
Orthodox Christians in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the vast majority of whom are Serbs, celebrated Easter last Sunday (April 19th).
Easter is a moveable feast that does not fall on a fixed date.
The Eastern Orthodox use the Julian calendar for religious dating;
Easter falls on a Sunday between March 22nd and April 25th.
BiH's tripartite presidency sent best wishes to the Orthodox believers and the Serbian Orthodox Church dignitaries in the country.
"On the occasion of the upcoming Easter, I am sending to you, the clergy and all Orthodox believers in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in diaspora honest greetings," wrote Croatian presidency member Zeljko Komsic to Metropolitan Nikolaj Dabrobosanski, the head of the Orthodox Church in BiH.
In Banja Luka, Bishop Jefrem Milutinovic held the Sunday ceremonial liturgy at the Holy Trinity Church of Congregation.
He greeted the flock with the traditional "Hristos Voskrese" ("Christ has risen") and wished "that the joy of Easter may enter every home and every human heart".
Orthodox believers organised a number of humanitarian aid drives, including the provision of Easter parcels for children and financial aid for poor families.
In RS, the Easter holidays -- Good Friday ("Veliki petak"), Saturday, Sunday and Easter Monday -- were non-working days.
There are about 1.5 million Serbs in BiH -- 37% of the population nationwide, but 90% in RS.
In BiH's other entity -- the Federation of BiH (FBiH) -- Metropolitan Dabrobosanski celebrated mass in the Holy Congregation Central Orthodox Church in Sarajevo.
He wished for the clergy and flock that "the resurrected Lord be always among us and bring us joy".
Holy liturgies took place in other towns in FBiH -- Trebinje, Glamoc, Bosansko Grahovo, Drvar and Livno.
A large number of pre-war Orthodox residents returned to help the remaining Orthodox minority in Mostar celebrate Easter.
The 1992-1995 Bosnian conflict devastated Mostar and left Bosnian Muslims and Croats as the local majority.
This year, the country's military also marked Orthodox Easter.
Sladjan Vlajic, head of the military's Orthodox office, organised a reception in Sarajevo.
NATO headquarters commander Brigadier General Errico Sabato attended the celebration.
