18/06/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 18/06/09
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Ministry of Defence and Armed Forces are preparing to conduct Combined Endeavour 2009 (CE09), a United States European Command (USEUCOM) sponsored training exercise that will assemble NATO countries from the Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme, as well as other countries.
The initiative focuses on command, control, communications and computer (C4) integration and interoperability.
Approximately 1,200 soldiers, marines and airmen from nearly 40 countries are expected to participate in roughly 1,000 military communication tests over a two-week period.
The drill will be held in September in Banja Luka, the capital of BiH entity Republika Srpska (RS). 
Two additional operations sites will be located in Denmark and the Netherlands.
"This is a good opportunity to promote our country and our armed forces, and is an important test on our way to full NATO membership," BiH Defence Minister Selmo Cikotic said.
Despite optimism from those like Cikotic, who view the exercise as politically important, CE09 has received a backlash of criticism from locals because of the 1995 NATO campaign in BiH. 
Critics say the exercise puts political pressure on RS officials who are involved in BiH's constitutional reform. 
With RS and BiH at an impasse regarding political aims, RS officials see the exercise in compliance with the NATO and US agenda for BiH.
NATO spokesman for BiH Derek Chappell denies this. 
"The exercise is purely military in nature. 
It is also BiH's first opportunity to demonstrate technical interoperability with NATO/ Partnership for Peace (PfP) forces, and to demonstrate its ability to contribute to PfP by hosting a major military training activity. 
Both of these are important steps for the development and credibility of the Armed Forces of BiH (AFBiH)," said Chappell.
"Suggestions that the exercise is intended as a pressure tactic, in response to current political issues, overlook the fact that BiH's role in the exercise was approved in the AFBiH training plan approximately one year ago," he added.
The US Embassy in Sarajevo said that hosting CE09 is a significant achievement for BiH, and demonstrates the evolving capabilities of the armed forces and the ministry of defence.
"This exercise highlights BiH's progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. 
We must not forget that none of this would have been possible without the significant achievements in implementing comprehensive defence reform," a spokesperson for the US Embassy said.
