18/03/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 18/03/09
The foreign ministers of Croatia and Slovenia, as well as EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, met on Tuesday (March 17th) in Brussels for trilateral talks on the ongoing Croatia-Slovenia border dispute.
They proposed a new solution.
According to reports, Rehn said the new solution derives from a joint statement to ensure that both sides will not issue any declarations or undertake actions to prejudge the existing border, set with the dissolution of Yugoslavia in 1991.
The proposal seeks to address Slovenia's claims that Croatia has tried to prejudge the border in the accession documents it has submitted to the EU.
The plan would give the countries a fresh start to negotiate a solution.
"This would be a confidence-building measure and a step in the right direction," Rehn said after the meeting in Brussels.
Rehn encouraged Croatia to keep looking for a solution.
Rehn also said that Slovenia's three-month blockade of all efforts by Croatia to open talks on accession chapters has cost Zagreb time it needs to finish its negotiation process.
The foreign ministers welcomed the opportunity to issue a joint statement and left Brussels to consult with their governments.
They will meet again in Brussels next week.
While Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic said he hoped the joint statement represented unblocking of the chapter-negotiation process, Slovenian counterpart Samuel Zbogar said that may not be the case.
The two officials also discussed the EU's proposal to mediate the dispute after Croatia's negotiation talks came to a halt last December.
Although both sides accepted the plan, Croatia has insisted that it lead to an agreement on transferring the issue to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague, while Slovenia opposes such a transfer.
On Tuesday, Croatian President Stipe Mesic said his country would not relent.
"Croatia recognises the judicial institutions and international law.
Therefore, why would Slovenia, which is a member of the EU and NATO, oppose the court?"
