22/04/2009
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Split – 22/04/09
The Croatian coastal city of Split hosted one of the world's ten largest nautical fairs from March 28th to April 5th, directly in front of the historic Diocletian's Palace. 
The event showcased 450 luxury boats, yachts and marine equipment. 
In attendance were 1,355 exhibitors, sponsors and other participants, representing 20 countries.
Now in its 11th year, the show succeeded in drawing visitors despite the global economic crisis. 
The crisis, though, forced organisers to slash ticket prices.
"We cut the price from 9.5 euros as it was last year to 6.8 euros [this year] on weekdays and 8.2 euros on weekends," said Vicenco Blagaic, the young Croatian entrepreneur in charge of the fair.
"We had the same number of foreign and domestic exhibitors as the year before. 
That's a great achievement ... 
considering what has happened to other, similar industries and other, similar events," he added.
Blagaic has been less fortunate with some of his other ventures during the current downturn, trying to hold car and real estate shows but without success. 
The failure, he explains, reflected "a crisis in those industries ... 
it has been different with the nautical industry".
Minister of Tourism Damir Bajs, the opening day guest of honour, saw it as a banner event for Croatian tourism.
"The fact that the Croatia Boat Show is among the top ten nautical fairs in the world is extremely important…At the moment, during the current global economic crisis, when many fairs closed their doors, Split offers the Croatia Boat Show, which attracts many foreign tourists," said Bajs.
He noted that the country earned 800m euros from nautical tourism in 2008 and said similar results are expected in 2009, despite the crisis.
Parliament Speaker Luka Bebic also attended the event.
Earlier, Croatia announced plans to build another 15,000 ship berths in its harbours in ten years, to boost the country's annual revenue from nautical tourism to 2 billion euros.
