22/04/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/04/09
Saudi Ambassador to the UN Khalid al-Nafisse announced on Monday (April 20th) that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has recognised the state of Kosovo. 
Al-Nafisse confirmed the news to Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni in a phone call. 
Saudi Arabia is the 58th state to recognise the former Serbian province's independence.
Hyseni wrote on Tuesday to his Saudi counterpart, Prince Saud Al-Faisal, expressing Kosovo's dedication to the establishment of close and full relations between the two countries.
According to an official of the foreign ministry in Riyadh, the Kingdom made its decision "in line with the existing religious and cultural bonds with the people of Kosovo and with respect for the will of the people of Kosovo to obtain independence", Saudi Press Agency reported.
The Kingdom "hopes that this development will positively contribute to strengthening the pillars of security and stability in Kosovo and its neighbouring countries", the official said.
In Pristina, President Fatmir Sejdiu said the Saudi decision will "have an impact on other states of the Arab world and the Islamic Conference".
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said the Saudi recognition will send a message to other countries and that they will follow suit. 
"This recognition … is a recognition of the vigourous diplomatic activity of Kosovo," Thaci said.
Hyseni told Kosovo public broadcaster RTK that the Saudi decision clearly shows that the International Court of Justice (ICJ)'s hearing on the legitimacy of Kosovo's independence is not undercutting Pristina's pursuit of diplomatic recognition.
In Belgrade, however, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic called Riyadh's decision to recognise Kosovo regrettable. 
He argued that the ICJ should declare its opinion on the legality of Kosovo's independence.
Many bloggers also weighed in. 
"Great! 
Now Qatar, Bahrain, Oman, Jordan, Yemen, Lebanon, Kuwait etc. 
will follow their leader! 
Thank you," Heki wrote on the Belgrade-based B92 site Monday.
Radoslav directs attention to the ongoing ICJ case. 
"I expect more US-allied Arab countries to recognise Kosovo, but it still won't change anything. 
... 
If [the ICJ] ruling goes in Serbia's favour, all previous recognitions go out the window," he says.
But Ivica has a different opinion. 
"It is very important that people in Serbia open their minds and see a future together with Kosovo Albanians. 
It is sure that after Arabia there will be more countries in Asia that will recognise Kosovo as a country."
"This is great news; however, I just wonder why Serbia doesn't make life easy for everybody: recognise Kosovo and let the local Serbs get on with their lives," Kosovar writes.
