21/04/2009
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 21/04/09
Belgrade and Pristina have begun sparring at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) over Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence, proclaimed in February 2008.
On Friday (April 17th), both countries officially submitted motions to the ICJ.
Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci said his country was putting up with a process that Serbia started.
"Kosovo has engaged the best [experts] in the world" to defend its case, Kuci said.
Opposition parties, however, have criticised the government for failing to give parliament a copy of the document it sent to the ICJ.
"We would have had co-operation among all parties" had the government done so, said Ibrahim Makolli of the New Kosovo Alliance.
Those objections aside, the government is confident of success.
"We are 100% sure that [the] decision of the Court will be in our favour," Reuters quoted Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni as saying.
"The declaration of independence and the fight for freedom are not a legal issue.
This is a result of an historic process."
His Serbian counterpart, Vuk Jeremic, said Belgrade would prove that Kosovo's independence was "unlawful".
He told Belgrade's B92 that the case, the first on secession ever heard by the ICJ, would have "huge significance" for international relations in the future.
There is no deadline for the ICJ to issue its ruling, which will be non-binding.
Jeremic, however, predicts that the first hearing will come in December, with a decision likely in the first half of 2010.
On the same day as the court filing, Serbian President Boris Tadic was in Kosovo to mark Orthodox Good Friday.
Flying in via KFOR helicopter, he visited the Decani Monastery and delivered a "message of peace", as he described it.
"On this day, there should be no hate," Tadic said.
Kosovo authorities had earlier said they would not permit him to enter Kosovo, but backed down under pressure from western officials, according to Reuters.
In a statement, Thaci said he decided to allow the visit because it was strictly for "private" and "religious" reasons.
