19/02/2009
(Various sources)
With the rapid growth of electronic media, medical professionals can provide an increasing range of healthcare information and services at a distance.
Telemedicine, as this emerging phenomenon is called, was the focus of a seminar held on February 6th and 7th in Skopje.
The event, organised by the International Virtual e-Hospital Foundation (IVeH) in co-operation with Macedonia's health ministry, brought experts in the field together to discuss current technologies and applications.
Over two days, they highlighted ways of using telemedicine in disasters or emergencies, in conflict areas and battlefields and in everyday situations.
In addition, organisers presented a new electronic library that will enable Macedonian doctors to use the e-libraries of the most eminent universities in Europe and the United States.
Health Minister Bujar Osmani opened the event, giving participants an overview of technological advancements in Macedonia's health sector.
Technology plays a key role in the reform process, he said.
Telemedicine has burgeoned in recent years, providing new ways to connect physicians and specialists with their patients.
Many see it as particularly valuable in rural, poorer or low-population areas that, in the past, often faced serious obstacles and limitations.
Through electronic communication systems, even the most remote outpost can enjoy a virtual connection with state-of-the-art facilities, a full range of medical information, and qualified specialists.
The IVeH, formerly known as the Kosova Foundation for Medical Development, strives to help rebuild the medical system in Kosovo and other developing countries by introducing and implementing telemedicine, telehealth and virtual educational programmes.
It is based in Anchorage, Alaska.
Since its establishment in 2001, the IVeH has worked to develop "an affordable model in developing countries, which will combine telemedicine and virtual educational programmes through international collaboration", according to its web site.
The organisation's chairman, Dr.
Rifat Latifi, is associate director of the Arizona Telemedicine Programme.
He has also helped establish exchange programmes for physicians, nurses and technical professionals from Kosovo, Montenegro, Macedonia and Albania.
"Sharing medical knowledge and spreading it to as many people as possible from a distance is the key concept of telemedicine.
I maintain that concept as my main guidepost in my surgical academic carrier," the TelehealthNet news site quoted Latifi as saying.
