22/05/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/05/09
US Vice-President Joe Biden is the highest official from Washington to visit Serbia in 29 years. 
Analysts and officials describe his visit as a new beginning in the two countries' relations.
Ties had significantly deteriorated after the United States led a wave of countries to recognise the independence of Kosovo, which Belgrade considers its province. 
Relations between Belgrade and Washington nearly froze after protesters set fire to the US Embassy, to protest Pristina's independence in February 2008.
After meeting with Serbian President Boris Tadic on Wednesday (May 20th), Biden said the United States does not expect Serbia to recognise Kosovo, adding that "recognition is not a precondition" for Washington to support Serbia's EU integration.
The two held a joint news conference at which Biden emphasised his government's desire to deepen co-operation with Serbia and see it "become a strong, successful, democratic member of the Euro-Atlantic community".
Biden also stressed that while the two countries disagree on certain issues -- primarily Kosovo -- it is possible to boost ties.
Tadic welcomed the opportunity to establish a new phase in bilateral relations, yet reiterated "Serbia will never recognise Kosovo."
Biden also met with Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac, agreeing there is room for new US investments in Serbia. 
They also agreed that Serbia's co-operation with the United States and military allies could be "the key stability factor in the Balkans", said Sutanovac.
Opposition parties demanded an apology from Biden for advocating the bombing of Serbia during the 1999 conflict in Kosovo. 
They called on the government to make it clear to Biden that Serbia has proclaimed its neutrality and will not become a NATO member.
There was heavy security throughout Biden's visit. 
Serbian MiGs guarded his jet, while his motorcade passed through sealed-off, deserted streets.
On Thursday morning, Biden flew into Pristina, where Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni greeted him.
Enthusiastic crowds waving US and Kosovo flags lined the streets. 
Thousands of Kosovo Albanians acknowledged Biden's long-standing support. 
His picture was plastered on Pristina billboards. 
But in northern Mitrovica, about 100 ethnic Serbs protested the visit.
Back in Pristina, President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci met with Biden, later describing the visit as historic and noting that 60 countries had recognised their country's independence. 
"We will never forget what you have done," said Thaci.
During a speech to parliament, Biden said he had told Serbian leaders "that Kosovo cannot be divided".
But he urged the lawmakers to strengthen "the rule of law" and enact "measures that will give municipal authorities and ethnic communities greater degrees of control of local affairs".
Biden also visited Camp Bondsteel and the Decani Monastery, an Orthodox Serb landmark.
Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi contributed to this feature from Pristina.
