19/02/2009
(Reuters, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, BTA, SNA - 18/02/09)
Bulgaria is determined to preserve its financial stability despite the turmoil caused by the global economic crisis, Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev said on Wednesday (February 18th).
While initially insisting that his country faces no major risks, he told participants at an economic forum in Sofia that the first signs of crisis have emerged in Bulgaria.
Many assets have depreciated;
some business sectors are finding their markets and orders diminishing;
and banks have sharply cut lending, while interest rates have gone up, Stanishev noted.
Strapped companies are laying off workers and consumption has dropped, as people are forced to curb their spending amidst economic uncertainty.
Nevertheless, Bulgaria is suffering less from the crisis than many leading economies and remains financially and economically stable, the prime minister stressed.
He also assured forum participants that the currency board regime introduced in Bulgaria in 1997 will remain until the country's admission in the eurozone.
Under that arrangement, the Bulgarian lev trades at a pegged rate of 1.95583 leva per euro.
To counter the negative effects of the current crisis, the government is planning to spend nearly 3.1 billion euros on different projects and on the creation of nearly 80,000 new jobs.
"We will fight for preserving every job.
We don't look at the situation through rosy glasses;
the situation is very dynamic indeed," Stanishev said.
He also stressed the need for stronger efforts against corruption and strengthening the effectiveness of the judicial system as a means of boosting foreign investors' confidence and better absorbing EU funds.
Stanishev promised on Wednesday that the government will not increase taxes but is planning to raise pensions twice by July.
Bulgaria will hold domestic and European Parliament elections this summer amid growing public resentment of politicians and the three-way coalition government led by Stanishev's Socialist Party.
More than 70% of the respondents in a recent poll said they want the government to go.
Addressing participants at Wednesday's forum, the head of Bulgaria's central bank warned that the government's anti-crisis spending plans could push the budget deficit above affordable levels.
"We need calm and not to act stupid," Reuters quoted Bulgarian National Bank Governor Ivan Iskrov as saying.
"We must achieve at least a budget balance to avoid creating risky situations."
Brussels has warned Sofia that the planned pension increases may foster a greater budget deficit and a correspondingly deeper financial crisis.
