17/06/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 17/06/09
Former UN envoy for Kosovo Status Martti Ahtisaari received a warm welcome in Pristina Monday (June 15th) at a celebration marking the first anniversary of Kosovo's constitution.
"Kosovo's independence is irreversible and this is evident from the recognitions that continue to arrive from around the world," he told a group of parliamentarians. 
"Acceptance of this reality by all would go a long way toward ensuring stability not only for Kosovo, but for the entire Western Balkans region and Europe as well."
However, despite relative progress in the former province, Ahtisaari said many challenges remain.
"Institutional structures are in deep need of further reforms, economic and social development must be strengthened, jobs must be created, accountability and transparency in institution-building must be secured," he said.
Ahtisaari, who won the Nobel Prize last year for his work resolving international conflicts over the past three decades, referred to a major provision in the 2007 Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status Settlement document, dubbed the "Ahtisaari Plan", that says there is a legitimate place for the Serb community in Kosovo.
He added it is crucial for Kosovo Serbs to take advantage of upcoming opportunities as Kosovo develops.
"What is needed is your positive response to the outreach by the Kosovo leadership toward you and other communities, particularly returnees, and a willingness to co-operate within the framework of the Kosovo institutions," Ahtisaari said, in an appeal to Kosovo Serbs.
Regarding the relationship between Serbia and Kosovo, which he called "inevitable", Ahtisaari said "Serbia should accept the new realities and extend its co-operation to this young nation."
"Belgrade and Pristina could together find common ground on their place in the world and determine that they could actually move away from adversarial rhetoric, toward co-existence, reconciliation and friendship."
President Fatmir Sejdiu, who awarded Ahtisaari the Golden Medal of Independence, said Kosovo plans to uphold the Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status Settlement through its laws and constitution.
"These laws give guarantees and full insurances to the minority ethnic communities that their rights and freedoms will be respected in the highest possible level," said Sejdiu.
The Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status Settlement document influenced Kosovo's unilateral proclamation of independence, and is part of its constitutional foundation.
