20/04/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 20/04/09
On Friday (April 17th) an appeals court overturned a lower court's ruling to hold Romanian tycoon George Becali for 29 days while prosecutors investigate allegations concerning his activities.
Hundreds of supporters gathered at the prison and the businessman's home to celebrate his release.
Becali's star rose in 2004 when he took over the Steaua Bucharest Football Club, which served as a springboard for him to become one of the most renowned figures in the country.
But the glory of the "Light Warrior", as he calls himself, faded when a special police task force arrested him earlier this month on charges of kidnapping.
The charges Becali faces stem from an incident in January, when thieves stole one of his limousines.
Becali's bodyguards eventually caught the three culprits and held them until they signed a promise not to press charges against him.
"Inquiries will continue until prosecutors decide whether to indict him," a police spokesman said.
The daily Jurnalul National quoted Becali as saying he was the real victim.
"I caught the criminals, and they complained to the police.
I am accused of deprivation of freedom because my bodyguards recovered the car and took the thieves to a bar," he said.
Amid widespread press coverage, prosecutors released evidence to advance their case.
They showed surveillance camera footage of a car chase in which the bodyguards' vehicles smashed into their quarry's cars.
Prosecutors also released a recorded call by a witness to the police, a taxi driver who claimed to have heard gunshots at the scene.
Becali faces seven to 15 years in prison if found guilty.
A poll -- commissioned by Realitatea TV -- shows that 83% of the Romanians surveyed think Becali's arrest was politically motivated, while 17% find it justiied.
Several politicians also denounced his arrest.
Social Democratic Senator Olguta Vasilescu described it as "a smokescreen" and a "made-up case" to distract from the attention President Traian Basescu's brother is receiving for shady business deals.
Given Becali's huge image, Greater Romania Party (PRM) head Corneliu Vadim Tudor suggested he run in June's European Parliament elections.
Becali accepted.
Last week, the PRM named him as a candidate for the June 7th elections.
This is not Becali's first brush with the justice system.
He is currently facing trial on charges of offering a 1.7m-euro bribe to ensure his football team would win a championship match, charges that he denies.
In 2005, prosecutors investigated Becali for receiving a 3.3m-euro profit after a suspicious land swap with the ministry of defence.
