20/04/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times – 20/04/09
Conservative nationalists won Sunday's (April 19th) early legislative elections in Turkish-run northern Cyprus, potentially complicating prospects for a reunification deal. 
With close to 90% of the votes counted, the hard-line National Unity Party (UBP) grabbed 43.9% of the vote, while the incumbent Republican Turkish Party (CTP) got only 29.3%. 
The UBP will be able to govern on its own, with no need to form a coalition.
The party advocates a two-state solution for Cyprus -- an option firmly rejected by the Greek Cypriots, who currently represent the entire island in the EU. 
Negotiations between Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat and Cypriot President Demetris Christofias have focused on reuniting the island in a loose federation. 
On Sunday evening, however, UBP leader Dervis Eroglu signaled a more conciliatory approach, saying he wants the current peace talks to continue.
"We also support having our president, Mehmet Ali Talat, continue these talks as the negotiator," he said. 
"Nobody has the right to show the UBP as opposing a solution, an agreement."
Nevertheless, the results considerably weaken Talat's mandate, with voters punishing his party for failing to deliver on campaign promises. 
The moderate CTP was unable to persuade the EU to ease the isolation of Turkish Cypriots, whose troubles have mounted with worsening economic conditions.
The pace of reunification talks has already been sluggish. 
Now, even if a draft solution is reached, the government and president may disagree on the details.
The defeat was not a big surprise for Talat, who even before Sunday, was urging the UBP not to undermine his efforts. 
He stressed that the current approach reflects years of negotiations and has Ankara's blessing.
"A move to reverse these policies, which I do not expect naturally, would create chaos," Talat said. 
"What I expect is to conclude elections in a democratic, mature way."
With CTP support hemorrhaging, Talat's hopes of regaining voter trust and securing a second term in 2010 depend entirely on concluding the peace talks successfully before the end of this year.
The UBP, however, has no incentive to save Talat's career. 
The Greek Cypriot side, meanwhile, is in no rush to finish talks. 
With EU membership already in hand, Nicosia views time as being on its side as Christofias's team attempts to extract more concessions.
Just days before the vote, Talat met with US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and called for stronger US involvement in the peace process. 
The symbolically important meeting, however, was not enough to salvage the CTP's chances.
