21/01/2009
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 21/01/09
Albania's three main religious communities have taken a step towards co-operation by signing an agreement that will regulate relations between them and the government, paving the way for improved co-operation.
The highest representatives of the Sunni Muslim community, the Orthodox Church of Albania, and the Bektaashi (Shiite Muslim) community signed the agreement late last year with Tourism, Culture, Youth and Sports Minister Ylli Pango.
He represented the government at the signing, just as the three religious communities represent the country's cultural diversity, his ministry said.
The fourth large faith community, the Albanian Catholic Church, signed the same agreement in 2001 at the Vatican's request.
The new talks went smoothly, leading to a quick signing process.
"Though Albanians always enjoyed religious rights and freedoms, the new agreement is part of [the government's] constitutional duty," said Rasim Hasanaj, the head of the State Committee on Cults.
According to the agreement, the state returns to those communities land it confiscated before 1967, when the communist regime banned all religious activity and closed every religious entity outright.
Prime Minister Sali Berisha called the signing of the pact a historic event, asserting that it will initiate new relations between the government and faith communities in Albania.
The agreement establishes tax exemptions and state financing for religious entities.
The State Committee on Cults, in charge of drafting the bill, took into account the experience of other European countries that endorsed the same bill, while respecting international documents on human rights and freedoms.
According to the constitution, Albania has no official religion.
However, the state recognises equality among its religious communities and their independence.
Four faiths in Albania -- Muslim (Sunni), Orthodox, Catholic, and Bektaashi (Shiite Muslim) -- together comprise 98% of the population.
The rest, some 135 smaller communities, are Protestants (Evangelists), Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormons, Baha'i and others.
The Muslims are traditionally Albania's majority.
After decades of harshly enforced atheism that ended in 1990, a relatively small number of Albanians worship regularly.
Albanian religious communities have long demonstrated mutual tolerance and harmonious co-existence, which are especially visible during religious holidays.
