18/02/2009
(B92 - 17/02/09; Reuters, AP, AFP, AGI, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 16/02/09; Sense News Agency - 23/09/08)
Prosecutors at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) filed a new amended indictment against Radovan Karadzic on Wednesday (February 18th), charging the former Bosnian Serb leader with two counts of genocide instead of the initial one.
On Monday, a three-judge panel at the UN tribunal granted their motion to amend the 11-count operative indictment that was in force at the time of Karadzic's arrest and transfer to The Hague last July. 
The trial chamber, however, told the prosecution to remove three alleged incidents of killing referred to in the draft submitted in September, because they "were not adequately supported by evidence".
The changes reflect the current case law and take into account evidence collected over the past eight years, as well as facts established during previous war crimes trials at The Hague.
The streamlined new indictment should "contribute to a more efficient and expeditious presentation of the prosecution's case," chief UN war crimes prosecutor Serge Brammertz said as he filed the updated version in September.
The document approved on Monday also contains 11 counts but reduces the number of crime scenes from the initial 41 to 27 municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
One of the main changes is that prosecutors split the genocide charge in the operative indictment into two separate counts, each relating to two different periods in the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH. 
The first one refers to atrocities committed in several Bosnian municipalities between March 31st and December 31st 1992. 
The second genocide charge refers only to the July 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys.
Another major difference between the two documents is the removal of two counts from the earlier indictment -- of complicity in genocide and of grave breaches of the Geneva Convention -- and the addition of two new ones.
On Monday, the trial chamber also turned down Karadzic's request to reduce the charges in his indictment.
He will enter a plea on each of the charges in the new indictment at a pre-trial hearing Friday.
In his initial appearance at The Hague on July 31st, Karadzic refused to enter a plea to any of the charges in the operative indictment, saying he was still studying it. 
As he again refused to enter a plea at the next hearing about a month later, the presiding judge entered not-guilty pleas on his behalf.
The former Bosnian Serb leader was first charged with war crimes in July 1995 under a joint indictment against him and his wartime military commander, Ratko Mladic.
