21/05/2009
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 21/05/09
Led by Tirana Mayor and opposition leader Edi Rama, the municipality has undertaken a "one citizen -- one tree planted" initiative to boost the "green dimensions of the city".
Designed as a public-private partnership between Tirana's businesses and residents, the initiative aims to plant trees in various parts of the city over the next two years.
According to a Tirana municipality statement, "the initiative is designed as a movement in which every citizen can contribute to create a more healthy environment," while recognising the interest of private business as well.
Since November 2008, over 8,000 trees have been planted on 27 streets. 
The initiative is changing the city's appearance, particularly in Tirana's long-neglected suburbs.
Many view Rama's effort as an election-year stunt. 
Fatos Lubonja, an independent social commentator and writer who spent 17 years in prison under the communist regime, called the initiative "a typical facade move by a facade man before the general elections" on June 28th.
Lubonja accuses Rama of ruining Tirana by issuing a large number of building permits and causing a construction boom in a concrete-covered city. 
"Even if [the initiative] is a good move, he is doing it to lie to the people, and most important, it is very late for this, as Tirana is now transfigured."
Environmental experts say that augmenting green space requires building or expanding parks and other green areas, not just planting trees.
"While people can easily feel the effects of economic growth, they have not noticed the increase in green spaces that should have followed," Gerti Bogdani, former spokesperson of the ruling Democratic Party and head of municipality unit No. 
10, told TV's Ora News.
Politicians have traded jabs ever since Rama announced the initiative and the aim to create 7 sq. 
m of green space per resident. 
As soon as the municipality declared that the current space in Tirana is 4.3 sq. 
m, Deputy Minister for Environment Taulant Bino disagreed publicly, claiming the real figure is 3.1 sq. 
m. 
When the municipality reported on the initiative's results, the ruling Democratic Party's spokesperson would characterise it as "simple demagoguery" in a pre-election period.
Tirana's residents have noticed the change in scenery. 
Many say they would hold elections every year if it meant having a green city.
The initiative has spurred citizen involvement. 
At times, entire families have helped plant trees in areas near their neighbourhoods.
"The initiative is to be welcomed, especially the public-private partnership mechanism; let us hope that it will have a chain effect in the future," said Alket Myftiu of Tirana's Regional Environmental Centre.
