17/02/2009
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 17/02/09
Kosovo began celebrating its first year as an independent state on Monday (February 16th).
The Kosovo and Albanian flags flew throughout the capital of the new republic, which has won recognition from 54 countries.
Many citizens, however, have moved from elation over the country's independence to frustration over the continuing violence in the north, high unemployment and the lack of universal diplomatic recognition.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci contends, however, that Kosovo's first full year as a sovereign state has been "a complete success".
"We will be recognised by the entire world," he told the AP on Monday.
"We're building a homeland for all of Kosovo's people."
Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi congratulated citizens and noted the developments of the past year.
"The anniversary of independence finds Kosovo with historic achievements in the domestic and international arenas," he said.
"We remember with pride the martyrs who died for Kosovo's freedom and independence."
Many countries that have recognised the state sent congratulations, the office of President Fatmir Sejdiu announced on Monday.
"The United States will continue to support multi-ethnic, independent and democratic Kosovo," US President Barack Obama wrote.
However, not all nations celebrated the day.
Serbia's policy on Kosovo remains unchanged -- the major Serbian parties say they will never recognise Kosovo's "illegal" independence, even if recognition turns out to be a condition for EU membership.
According to media reports, a number of Serbian lawmakers were travelling by bus from Belgrade to Zvecan in northern Kosovo, where they planned to show solidarity by attending a session of the self-proclaimed ethnic Serb parliament.
Serbian President Boris Tadic says Kosovo is "the most delicate issue for Serbia", as well as for regional and European security, one that Serbia will try to solve by diplomatic means.
Tadic added that for Belgrade, February 17th "is just a date when an illegal act was made, when Pristina illegally made Kosovo a self-proclaimed state".
Meanwhile, Belgrade has announced a number of diplomatic initiatives aimed implementing the UN's six-point plan for Kosovo.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic meets with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in New York on Tuesday, and UNMIK chief Lamberto Zannier will visit Belgrade on Thursday.
"The six-point plan does not exist for Kosovo," said Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Rame Manaj, reflecting Pristina's long-held attitude towards the plan.
