20/01/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 20/01/09
Liviu Dragnea, deputy head of the Social Democratic Party (PSD), has been tapped as Romania's new interior minister. 
The PSD's executive committee unanimously approved his nomination Monday (January 19th).
The choice of Dragnea caught many by surprise. 
Media reports had predicted that Dan Nica, deputy prime minister and interim interior minister, would be the one taking the portfolio. 
Furthermore, Dragnea purportedly fell out of favour with President Traian Basescu after quitting the latter's Democratic Liberal Party and joining the PSD. 
The head of state has to give the final approval for any designated minister.
In a now-notorious incident, the president called Dragnea a "terrorist" following a meeting with him in March 2007.
PSD leader Mircea Geoana, however, says he discussed the nomination with Basescu and Prime Minister Emil Boc prior to selecting Dragnea. 
He said Basescu received the PSD's proposal "correctly and institutionally", indicating he does not want to undermine the newly formed ruling coalition.
Dragnea "has all the qualities and all the correct instincts for this important position. 
He is a champion of decentralisation," Geoana said. 
"His presence will be a guarantee that this ample process of Romania's democratisation will continue in a sustained rhythm."
"Everybody agreed with this nomination. 
There was no abstention, no objection," said honorary PSD President Ion Iliescu. 
He added that Dragnea's experience as three-time head of the Teleorman County Council would prove "very useful" at the interior ministry.
The nomination strengthens the principle that interior ministers should come from the civilian and not the military sector, Iliescu said.
Dragnea has said his main objectives will be to improve public safety, including in schools, and to decentralise and reform the administration. 
Although he will have to give up his county council seat, he will continue to supervise the PSD branches in Giurgiu and Calarasi counties.
Former Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, who heads the opposition National Liberal Party (PNL), greeted the choice with scepticism, saying it shows the PSD is suffering from an acute lack of personnel.
Dragnea reportedly underwent investigation by the National Anti-Corruption Department in a case concerning the absorption of EU funds, but the department later closed the file. 
He left the Democratic Party, which later became the PDL, in 2000 and joined the PSD. 
In 2005, he won promotion to deputy party president.
He replaces Gabriel Oprea, whose own party forced him to resign over his controversial selection of Virgil Ardelean to head the country's intelligence services.
