15/06/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 15/06/09
Roma face the highest levels of discrimination among surveyed ethnic groups in Europe according to the EU Minorities and Discrimination Survey (EU-MIDIS) last year.
EU-MIDIS collected data from select ethnic minorities and immigrants living in the 27 EU member states in an effort to address discrimination.
The report, which surveyed nearly 23,500 people, focused on the Roma minority, as well as immigrants from North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, Turkey, former Yugoslavia, Central and Eastern Europe and Russia.
According to the survey, Roma reported that they are most discriminated against in Hungary (62%) and the Czech Republic (64%), and on the other side of the coin, least discriminated against in Romania (25%) and Bulgaria (26%).
The study focused on Roma in seven EU countries -- the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Greece, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Romania.
In ten countries, the majority was also polled for juxtaposition.
Survey questions spanned nine categories:
seeking employment, on the job, renting or buying a home, dealing with personnel at medical institutions, social assistance institutions, educational institutions, in public places, access to shops, opening a bank account and getting a bank loan.
On average, Roma said they were discriminated against in at least one category within the last year.
Romanian Roma also said they are discriminated most when dealing with private (14%) and medical services (11%).
In Bulgaria, 15% report to be discriminated against when seeking employment, and 11% when trying to obtain medical services.
The low levels of discrimination in Romania and Bulgaria are due to Roma isolation from mainstream society.
The Roma unemployment rate in Bulgaria is 33%.
Reports of discrimination are allegedly low because Roma are unaware of their legal rights.
According to the 2002 Romanian census, more than 500,000 Roma live in the country, the second biggest minority population after the Hungarians.
