18/12/2008
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 18/12/08
The spreading global crisis has reached Kosovo as well as its neighbours.
Pension Savings Trust, which had holdings in the crashing international stock markets, continued to hemorrhage millions of euros.
Officials of the trust told KTV it had lost, in September alone, 22.3m euros.
In early November, the Kosovo government approved its budget for fiscal 2009, which observers expect to disburse 1.43 billion euros.
Minister of Economy and Finance Ahmet Shala said the government set aside 200m euros as a precautionary measure in light of the ongoing crisis.
Minister of Trade and Industry Lutfi Zharku told the Kosovo news agency Economy that the global crisis is killing incentive abroad to invest in Kosovo.
Another sign of weakness in Kosovo's struggling economy is a decline in small-business activity.
According to a Thursday (December 18th) report by Inter Press Service, Zharku's ministry estimates "around 50%" of the 90,000 small businesses registered in Kosovo are "inactive".
Safet Gherxaliu of the Kosovo Chamber of Commerce characterised the figure as a sign of "crisis".
In neighbouring Albania, Prime Minister Sali Berisha told Balkan Insight that both Foreign Direct Investment and emigrant remittances would suffer.
Taking preventive measures, the Albanian Central Bank said it will limit the amounts that foreign banks operating in Albania can invest in their parent companies.
Elsewhere in the Balkans, Macedonia is enduring the collapse of prices for metals and textiles, two of its main exports.
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic predicts a 4% decline in his nation's GDP in 2009, which he contrasted to its recent record of 7% annual GDP growth.
Fran Nazi, an Albanian expert affiliated with the East-West Management Institute, is among those experts who prescribe a pro-active strategy of concrete measures.
Among them are "a temporary halt on the privatisation of operational medium and large enterprises", the creation of a "temporary unemployment support fund" and "negotiations with the major international lending institutions for emergency relief funds".
