17/04/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 17/04/09
The head of the Catholic Church in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Cardinal Vinko Puljic, talked of the serious inter-ethnic and governance challenges facing BiH at an April 10th press conference on the eve of Easter.
"Ethnic cleansing is continuing with a 'silent outflow of people,'" Puljic warned in Sarajevo.
He alleged that authorities now used "perfidious administrative ways" rather than outright brutality to push out unwelcome groups.
Puljic sounded an alarm about the vanishing Catholic population in BiH.
"If the international community wants to preserve BiH as a multiethnic country, it must take into account that some 220,000 Catholic Croats lived on the territory of Republika Srpska [RS] before the war," he said, referring to the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH.
Now "there are only 13,000."
He cautioned that Catholics may disappear altogether from RS.
The Catholic population is declining in the other BiH entity, the Federation of BiH (FBiH), as well.
Out of 528,000 Catholics who lived in the Vrhbosanska Archbishopric (based in Sarajevo) before the 1990s conflict, only 213,000 remain, said the cardinal.
The last year alone saw the archbishopric's Catholic population decline by 3,000.
Puljic lamented, as quoted by the Croatian news agency Javno, that his dwindling flock is increasingly elderly, as younger members emigrate.
Puljic called for a re-organisation of BiH to improve citizens' lives and the political situation.
He borrowed a suggestion from the Bosnian Bishops' Conference to re-organise the country so that none of the country's three major groups would constitute less than 30% or more than 40% of any region's population.
Puljic also sent a traditional Easter message from the Sarajevo Seminary.
He reaffirmed "the celebration of Resurrection [as] the biggest treasure of our faith" at a time when many basic human and Christian values come into question.
On behalf of BiH's Catholics, Puljic received Easter greetings from various dignitaries, including all three current members of the BiH presidency, ministers of the FBiH government and political party heads.
