16/02/2009
(EurActiv, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, BNN - 13/02/09; European Commission, AFP, Reuters, AP, DPA, BBC, Euobserver, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, Sofia Echo, SNA -12/02/09)
Bulgaria said on Friday (February 13th) it would take measures within the coming months to address the shortcomings identified in the European Commission's (EC) interim report on Sofia's progress in judicial reform and the fight against organised crime and corruption.
The six-page paper released on Thursday welcomed "some initial steps" taken by the Balkan country towards structural and legislative reform within its justice and interior ministries and the prosecution office.
A comprehensive report will follow this summer.
It will assess Bulgaria's progress in meeting six benchmarks for judiciary reform and the fight against corruption and organised crime. 
Observers considered the previous report, published in July 2008, the most critical ever issued on a member state. 
Citing fraud and irregularities, the EC froze 500m euros in aid to the poorest of the bloc's 27 nations.
Last week's interim report noted some positive developments in Bulgaria since the July assessment. 
One such example was the establishment at the Supreme Cassation Prosecution Office of multi-agency teams investigating fraudulent misuse of EU funds, money laundering, and organised crime and corruption.
The EC found that Bulgaria still needs to address inefficiencies in the pre-trial phase and to reform its penal code. 
It also called for the establishment of effective parliamentary control over the State Agency for National Security (SANS).
Brussels additionally sought the introduction of "coherent, clear and strict control mechanisms" in legislation on campaign financing ahead of the national and European parliamentary elections this summer.
The lack of any major court rulings on high-profile cases of organised crime in recent months demonstrated there was no significant change in the prosecution and judicial follow-up of such cases in 2008, the EC concluded.
The Bulgarian government promised more results in the last four or five months of its mandate.
The report sends "a clear, encouraging signal" that Bulgaria is moving "in the right direction", Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev said on Thursday, vowing that "the government is firmly and wholeheartedly resolved to maintain the pace of the reforms ... 
I want to state clearly that we will not fall back."
Stanishev and the leaders of the other two parties in Bulgaria's three-way governing coalition promised a day after the report's issuance to adopt a plan containing measures Sofia will implement by the EC's next comprehensive assessment.
They are reportedly considering enactment of the law on conflicts of interest, the adoption of amendments to the legislation on forfeiture of criminal assets and the establishment of parliamentary control over SANS.
