19/05/2009
By Ilija Djordjevic for Southeast European Times in Mitrovica –19/05/09
Serbian State Secretary for Kosovo and Metohija Oliver Ivanovic was elected president of the Social Democratic Party's (SDP) provincial committee at the second election conference in Mitrovica, attended by representatives of UNMIK and KFOR and guests from Slovakia and Romania. 
Ivanovic announced that social issues and the survival of Serbs in Kosovo will top the SDP agenda.
"That does not mean the SDP will neglect political themes," said Ivanovic, adding "We support active dialogues with all."
The leader of the SDP, Nebojsa Covic, announced the party's comeback on the Serbian political scene and said he would never support empty rhetoric, self-serving careerism or excessive politicisation of important matters. 
He also affirmed Serbia's presence in Kosovo given the Serb minority there. 
Covic called for politics to make a real difference in the lives of Kosovo and Metohija citizens.
"Serbian nationalism and hypocritical patriotism will not strengthen the Serbian community in the province. 
That's why the SDP must co-operate with the international community, UNMIK, KFOR and the EU and seek solutions for the Serbian community," said Covic.
"We cannot be stubborn. 
In such a case, by 2015 our numbers will diminish [in Kosovo], and by 2020 there'll be fewer of us," Covic warned delegates at the SDP conference.
He pointed out previous, strongly phrased warnings by US Vice President Joe Biden that the region, especially Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, are threated by the global economic crisis.
Covic mentioned Biden's observation that economic woes compounded the upheavals of the 1990s and the break-up of the former Yugoslavia. 
He also noted that Biden strongly suggested a prudent approach towards current negotiations and open dialogue.
Ivanovic said the United States and Serbia differ only on Kosovo. 
He thinks that this issue need not be emphasised, "at least not by us". 
He continued, "The difference is that we will never recognise Kosovo independence, but that should not damage our relations with the US."
In all, 108 delegates participated in the second SDP electoral conference for Kosovo, electing a three-member supervisory board and a 37-member provincial council.
