17/12/2008
(Los Angeles Times - 17/12/08; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, NPR, US Department of Defence - 16/12/08; NPR - 20/11/08)
Three Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) citizens were flown home Tuesday (December 16th), nearly four weeks after a judge in Washington ordered their release from the US detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
The three -- Mustafa Ait Idir, Mohamed Nechla and Hadji Boudella -- were among six Algerian-born residents of BiH who were arrested in October 2001 on suspicion of involvement in a plot to blow up the US Embassy in Sarajevo. 
The other three were Lakhdar Boumediene, Saber Lahmar and Belkacem Bensayah.
The BiH authorities handed over the group to US custody in January 2002 and the suspects were transferred to Guantanamo Bay.
Earlier this year, the Algerians and other inmates at the detention facility in Cuba won a US Supreme Court ruling allowing Guantanamo prisoners to contest their imprisonment in civilian courts.
Last month, US District Judge Richard J. 
Leon ruled that Idir, Nechla, Boudella, Lahmar and Boumediene should be released, as there was insufficient evidence to prove their involvement in terrorist activities.
"While acknowledging that the evidence was appropriate for use as intelligence… (the judge) concluded that the government had not carried its burden of proving in habeas corpus proceedings that these detainees were enemy combatants, subject to detention under the law of armed conflict," the US Department of Defence said on Tuesday.
The statement announced the transfer of three detainees to "their country of citizenship", BiH, without identifying them by name. 
Lahmar and Boumediene, who must also be released under Leon's orders, were not transferred to BiH along with Idir, Nechla and Boudella on Tuesday. 
Although they have Bosnian residency, they have reportedly been stripped of citizenship.
"Approximately 60 detainees remain at Guantanamo who the US government has determined to be eligible for transfer or release," the Defence Department said. 
"Departure of these detainees is subject to ongoing discussions between the United States and other nations."
Regarding Bensayah, Judge Leon ruled last month that there was enough evidence to support accusations that he had been planning to travel to Afghanistan "to facilitate the travel of any others to do the same", which was sufficient to label him an enemy combatant. 
He therefore remains in custody.
At the time of the arrests in BiH, Bensayah was described as the key player in the group and, allegedly, Osama bin Laden's top lieutenant in Europe. 
He was arrested on the basis of foreign intelligence reports showing he had had at least one telephone conversation with a senior al-Qaeda operative.
The other five Algerians were working for Arab aid agencies operating in BiH. 
At the time of their arrest, some humanitarian agencies in BiH reportedly played a role in strengthening the international terrorist network. 
"Related Article: Humanitarian Agencies Under Scrutiny in Bosnia and Herzegovina"
Idir, Nechla and Boudella arrived at Sarajevo airport Tuesday night aboard an unscheduled flight. 
They were handed over to the BiH police authorities and were set free a couple of hours later after going through an identification process.
There are about 250 detainees still being kept at the Guantanamo Bay, according to the Defence Department statement. 
Since 2002, approximately 520 prisoners have left the facility for other countries, Albania and Turkey among them.
