17/12/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 17/12/08
One of the trademarks of the former Yugoslavia, the Yugo, began its journey from the Kragujevac car factory to retirement last month, when the carmaker Zastava removed it from production.
In September, Zastava closed a deal with Fiat, giving the Italian firm a 70% stake in the factory at Kragujevac, a town in central Serbia.
In 2009 and 2010, the plant will produce two new Fiat models.
Instead of losses, Serbia now hopes to export cars to the tune of 1 billion euros per year.
However, there was no room in these plans for the Yugo, which once aimed to conquer global consumer markets but received ridicule instead.
"We marked the beginning of production of the Yugo in 1980 pompously and the end of production quietly, because the moment was a sad one for all of us," the head of the Zastava Planning Department Zoran Milanovic, told the Serbian media.
The last Yugo is being placed in a museum.
Milanovic said he does not want to have his photo taken in front of it, preferring instead to remember "the happy days when production of a brand-new Zastava vehicle started".
Based on a popular, low-cost Fiat model, the Yugo appeared on the scene with a splash.
It cost conspicuously less than a Fiat or other similar foreign vehicle, spare parts were easy to acquire, and all car mechanics knew how to fix it.
Despite the mockery it received abroad, the Yugo was the car most Yugoslavs preferred.
It ended up outliving the country for which it was named.
The car's prospects reached their apex in the mid-1980s, when 147,000 units were marketed in the United States.
At the time, Zastava boasted over 53,000 employees, compared to about 3,000 now.
But US exports proved to be a double-sided sword.
In 2004, Forbes magazine put together a list of the worst cars of all time, and the Yugo easily won first place.
It even became a film and TV celebrity.
Bruce Willis will forever be associated with the Yugo, after his character received one as a gift in one episode of the TV show "Moonlighting".
He spends the rest of the episode trying to get rid of it.
Willis must have been charmed by the car, since he later used a Yugo to chase criminals around New York in "Die Hard".
It also starred in the movie "Drowning Mona", in which all the characters drove Yugos.
And even though Zastava may have given up on it, Hollywood hasn't.
The comedy "Nick and Norah's Infinite Playlist", which premiered in the United States on October 3rd, featured a Yugo.
On the official website for the film, a tiny replica of the vehicle welcomes visitors.
The rock band Metallica is also keeping the flame alive.
The Yugo can be seen in the video for their latest song, "The Day That Never Comes".
