12/03/2009
By Ivo Scepanovic for the Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 12/03/09
Southeast European defence ministers gathered in Zagreb last week for an informal meeting that focused on the countries' NATO bids.
The ministers also discussed the challenges facing regional security, as well as co-operation possibilities among the Adriatic Charter states.
Representatives from Italy, Albania, Greece, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Hungary attended the March 6th meeting in Zagreb.
Speaking at the conference, Croatian Defence Minister Branko Vukelic said the Euro-Atlantic integration process is the only way to stabilise Southeast Europe, the Croatian news agency HINA reported.
''I can say that all the countries support Croatia joining NATO, as our membership in NATO would be good for Croatia and for the entire region.
That's why we have such strong support," Vukelic said.
The expected accession of Croatia and Albania at next month's NATO summit in Strasbourg and Kehl is viewed as a success for the entire region, Vukelic added.
''I absolutely believe Croatia will be a full member at the next NATO summit.
Every effort [to] promote regional co-operation helps us attain better understanding, more stability and better relations," Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor said after the meeting.
Vukelic said the country would continue its participation in the NATO, UN and EU missions in Afghanistan, Chad and the Golan Heights and would continue its efforts to adopt NATO standards in equipment modernisation.
However, he said, the country must cut its military budget by about 74m euros.
''That will slow down some activities, but we will not give up our strategic goals,'' Vukelic said.
Assistant NATO Secretary-General Jiri Sedivy, who attended the meeting, reiterated that the Alliance plans to remain in Southeast Europe to help aspiring countries implement military and other reforms.
''NATO remains open to all the countries that are ready to fulfill the [Alliance's] standards,'' Sedivy said.
The conference came days after NATO spokesman James Appathurai said the Alliance expects to welcome Croatia as a member, despite the ongoing border dispute with Slovenia.
He expressed NATO's "very strong hope and desire to see Croatia and Albania sit down together ...
around the council table", at his weekly press briefing on March 4th.
All 26 NATO states have ratified Croatia's NATO accession protocol.
