16/04/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 16/04/09
Informed about recent troubling developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the US Helsinki Commission heard stern criticism of several BiH politicians two weeks ago.
The chief target of the criticism was Milorad Dodik, prime minister of Republika Srpska (RS), one of two entities comprising BiH.
Participants at the commission's hearing on the Western Balkans, held in Washington, warned that Dodik expects the international community to tire of BiH-related issues.
By reversing reforms of past years and undermining the state's credibility and efficiency, Dodik is laying the groundwork to secede when a suitable opportunity arises, they said.
Lord Paddy Ashdown, former high representative to BiH, said the United States and the EU needed to co-operate on "a single strategy" to thwart efforts by "elements largely in" RS that want to "undo the reforms towards statehood".
In Ashdown's opinion, the biggest lever available to the West is the prospect of EU membership.
A possible platform for secession may be a declaration on constitutional reforms recently adopted at an extraordinary session in the RS parliament.
The declaration envisions transferring the majority of state functions and competencies to RS.
The Peace Implementation Council (PIC) -- which oversees the implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords -- criticised the declaration at a recent meeting in Sarajevo.
It concluded the document would slow BiH's EU accession.
Of particular concern at the commission hearing was that private protection organisations and hunting clubs registered in RS are amassing arms.
Concerns were also raised that Wahhabi Islamists present in the other entity, the Federation of BiH (FBiH), have reportedly been stockpiling money and arms.
FBiH politicians have expressed alarm.
Martin Raguz, a parliament member from the Bosnian Croat HDZ 1990 party, warned the RS parliament's position should "not be underestimated as an ad hoc situation, because … it has tendencies of a process that need to be acted upon".
Beriz Belkic, vice-president of the Bosniak Party for BiH, said the declaration is one of the first specific moves for RS's secession.
By weakening the state institutions, Dodik may be preparing the ground and testing reactions, he said.
Dodik himself told the AP on Wednesday (April 15th) that he would prefer to keep the current entity structure.
He sees BiH as a loose federation of two or three ethnically based mini-states but not as a unified country.
He would not oppose a third Croat entity as long as RS's boundaries are intact.
Dodik said compromise and state-level co-operation are very difficult to achieve.
He questioned "living together in a hybrid country in which everybody is pursuing his own agenda".
RS would not give up its autonomy as a condition for EU membership, he vowed.
