16/12/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 16/12/08
With Croatians worried about the state of the world's finances, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader has decided the public sector should set a good example. 
Croatia needs to prepare for difficult economic times, he said, announcing a "New Deal" last month.
"There is no need for panic," Sanader said, promising that the government would do its part by cutting back costs.
All Christmas and New Year's Eve parties in the public sector will be cancelled for this year, he announced, while state-run companies and organisations will not distribute presents to their business partners as they have done in the past.
The prime minister also called for a salary freeze in 2009 and urged the public not to spend more than they can afford. 
The government fears that one of the most profitable sectors of the Croatian economy, tourism, might suffer as prospective travellers scale back their plans.
Sanader's plans have not been embraced by the opposition. 
Social Democratic leader Zoran Milanovic mocked the announced measures, and said they would simply punish ordinary people rather than provide any real solution.
"This is not a New Deal. 
A New Deal represents a number of pro-active measures that give an exit strategy for the crisis and a new perspective," Milanovic said, adding Sanader's package should be dubbed "Old Peel" instead.
Labour unions are not happy either. 
"Over 60% of Croatians earn less than the average monthly salary of 750 euros and [can't cover their] monthly expenses. 
So freezing their position is not acceptable," the Croatian Labour Union leadership said in a statement. 
It called on Zagreb to cut civil servants' salaries and the relatively generous benefits they enjoy.
In Zagreb recently, 3,000 people attended a rally that was organised by a Facebook group which is critical of Sanader's plans. 
The group calls itself "Stegnite vi pojas, bando lopovska" ("Tighten your own belt, you bunch of thieves") and has about 60,000 members.
"I came here to voice my discontent with the current situation in Croatia, which the government caused," one protester told reporters. 
"We simply demand better conditions for every individual in Croatia."
At shopping malls, meanwhile, there are few signs of belt-tightening among the general public. 
Stores were packed with holiday shoppers, and store owners said the atmosphere was "business as usual", with no apparent drop in profits.
