18/05/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times -- 18/05/09
Abdulah Hasanagic is the proud owner of AS Company in Gorazde, a small city on the Drina River next to the Serbian border in eastern Bosnia.
Devastated during the 1992-1995 conflict, any entrepreneurial effort leading to economic renewal is greatly welcomed here.
By some accounts, there were around 100,000 people living in Gorazde prior to the war.
Official government statistics from 2006 show 31,000 residents, of which nearly 4,000 are employed, and a little over 4,100 are unemployed.
Gorazde's population is poor and households subsist mainly by farming and breeding cattle.
The majority of the pre-war population worked in Pobjeda (Victory), one of the then biggest ammunition factories in the Balkans.
Today, Pobjeda's output is slim.
It mainly produces detonators for the international community's effort to clear the remaining mines in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Hasanagic purchased a plastic waste processing machine from China, and will start recycling plastic waste this spring.
He already has a plant for casting plastic parts, but the new machine will enable him to recycle plastic bottles, crates and other plastic refuse in BiH, and produce completely new products.
The recycling idea resulted from a visit by a Slovenian business delegation.
"They wanted me to collect plastic containers and send them to Slovenia," Hasanagic said.
"However, I understood that the same kind of recycling can also be done here, in Bosnia."
He says he has invested around 250,000 euros in the plants.
At 0.5 euro per kg, he has already bought 70 tonnes of plastic waste from suppliers in Sarajevo, Tuzla, Travnik and other cities.
The recycling machine is multi-purpose.
It washes, classifies, mills and converts plastic waste into granulate, which is used to make new plastic products.
Chinese and Slovenian companies are also interested in purchasing granulate, said Hasanagic.
Besides profits, the entrepreneurial effort means significant environmental gains.
Plastic products are major pollutants.
Great quantities of plastic waste float in the Drina every year, and it takes 100 to 400 years for it to dissipate.
Hasanagic said despite the foreign demand for his granulate, it will first be used to feed the plant to produce a variety of plastic containers.
If successful, he plans to start manufacturing products for the electrical industry as well as agricultural tools.
