14/05/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 14/05/09
Croatians will head to the polls on Sunday (May 17th) for the first time ever to elect directly their local representatives. 
Mayors, prefect and municipal heads will run under new regulations.
The biography and achievements of each candidate seem crucial for winning votes in the new process.
According to the new rules, voters in local units with populations up to 10,000 will elect one deputy municipal head or mayor, while units with population exceeding 10,000 in the counties and the city of Zagreb will elect two deputy municipal heads.
Prime Minister Ivo Sanader called on voters to make a difference by exercising their democratic rights. 
The local elections are also important because "they are reflected on the state level," said Sanader, while campaigning on behalf of Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) candidates for the city of Zadar.
"We are particularly proud that at these elections people born in 1990 will vote for the first time," he said. 
Some rather unusual candidates have joined the mayoral races. 
Among them are a self-proclaimed shaman, a former prostitute, a Bosnian football coach and a controversial journalist and adventurer who has appeared on late-night TV.
Among the major cities, only Rijeka, where polls show the Social Democrat Party (SDP) incumbent Mayor Vojko Obersnel will retain his job, has an apparently predictable outcome.
The election promises to be particularly fierce in Split. 
Three serious candidates are battling it out -- HDZ incumbent Ivan Kuret; the former head of the national police directorate, Social Democrat Ranko Ostojic; and independent candidate and controversial businessman Zeljko Kerum.
In Zagreb, polls show the mayor, Social Democrat Milan Bandic, will likely remain in office despite numerous corruption scandals and the perception that he is an outsider from Herzegovina. 
An independent, university professor Josip Kregar, bills himself as the diametric opposite of Bandic, and polls show him mounting a serious challenge.
Kregar explained to Dnevnik last week that Croatia cannot afford for its "citizens to remain in their homes for the elections, and the situation demands progress … and change".
Incumbent Pula Mayor Boris Miletic has reportedly tried an innovative way to motivate voters. 
His campaign slogan is "You have a beautiful voice -- use it". 
"Voice" and "vote" are the same word in the Croatian language.
