13/02/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 13/02/09
Mourners will bury Romanian handball player Marian Cozma, who was murdered last week outside a nightclub in Veszprem, Hungary, on Friday (February 13th). 
Cozma, a centre who joined the Hungarian club MKB Veszprem in 2006, was out last Saturday night to celebrate the birth of a teammate's child when a dispute with another group in the club erupted, police said.
Cozma died in hospital from stab wounds. 
Two teammates who rushed to his aid -- goalkeeper Ivan Pesic, 19, of Croatia and 22-year-old Zarko Sesum of Serbia -- remain hospitalised in stable condition. 
Pesic lost a kidney, while Sesum suffered a fractured skull.
According to one account, the players came to the defence of a barmaid when a Roma group refused to pay its bill and struck her.
Authorities arrested three suspects -- two men and a woman -- on Sunday in the southern Austrian province of Styria, according to a police statement.
Hungarian police have identified the trio as Roma members of local gangs. 
Austria will extradite the main suspect, Rafael Sandor, to Hungary.
"The whole town is shocked; people simply cannot believe this could happen here," Veszprem Mayor Janos Debreczenyi said.
The reaction is the same in Serbia. 
"We are completely shocked by the incident because Sesum is an exemplary young man and an important national team player," Bozidar Djurkovic, the secretary-general of the Serbian Handball Federation (RSS), told Belgrade's B92.
The brutal attack shocked fans in both Hungary and Romania and drew unprecedented coverage from the European media.
Cozma's death renewed a fierce debate in Hungary about the high rate of crime among members of the Roma community. 
Roma leaders in the region around Veszprem expressed fear of reprisals.
Hundreds of Hungarian fans lit candles at the stadium where the Veszprem team trained before authorities shipped Cozma's body to Romania on Tuesday. 
The late handball player is now an Honorary Citizen of the city of Veszprem.
Romania's minister of youth and sports made him a posthumous "Honoured Master of Sports", and a sports arena in Bucharest will bear his name.
The Veszprem club has retired the no. 
8 jersey worn by Cozma, and the Romanian national handball team did the same with jersey no. 
82, which Cozma wore when representing Romania at the recent World Handball Championship in Croatia.
"A Romanian, a Serbian and a Croat fought for the success of a Hungarian town. 
It was normal for them to live here not only as a Romanian, Serbian or Croat but to enrich the values of a Magyar community, to consolidate its identity. 
For that, I respect and thank them," Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany said on his blog.
