15/12/2008
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 15/12/08
Positive comments from the EU have fueled hopes in Macedonia that a fully liberalised visa regime could be in place during 2009. 
A recent report from Brussels on implementation of the visa liberalisation roadmap found significant progress in a number of areas, including document security and measures against illegal migration.
The visa issue is a huge one in Macedonia, where long queues of applicants outside foreign embassies are a common sight. 
Early this year, the EU introduced visa relief for some categories of citizens, allowing them to obtain visas quickly and free of charge. 
Nevertheless, for most, the procedure remains complex, requiring different documents and long waits.
Skopje has taken a number of steps designed to meet EU standards. 
Last year, biometric travel documents and ID cards were introduced. 
Personal data is now better protected. 
Significant progress has been made in implementing a deal with the bloc on migration and re-admission.
The process is far from complete, however. 
The European Commission has announced another assessment in early 2009 to monitor further progress. 
The foreign ministry says that after this report, Macedonia will expect a positive response from EU member states regarding fulfilment of the roadmap requirements.
The country is already working to build support within the bloc, with some success. 
In November, members of the Parliamentary Committee of the Macedonian Assembly and EU parliamentarians held a joint meeting in Skopje, announcing their support for the visa liberalisation.
Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister for European Affairs Ivica Bocevski was in Paris recently, meeting with Jean-Pierre Jouyet, France's secretary of state for European Affairs. 
Jouyet delivered a strong statement of support for EU integration in the Western Balkans, including Macedonia.
Meanwhile Estonia's foreign minister, Urmas Paet, has voiced his country's support for liberalising the visa regime with Macedonia. 
This should happen no later than 2009, Paet said.
