15/12/2008
(CNA, FT, Famagusta Gazette - 15/12/08; Cyprus Mail, ANA-MPA - 14/12/08; The Times - 13/12/08; Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, BBC, UPI, International Herald Tribune, CNA, Financial Mirror, Famagusta Gazette - 12/12/08)
Former Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos was laid to rest Monday (December 15th) after a funeral service at the St. 
Sophia church in Nicosia. 
The veteran Greek Cypriot politician died of lung cancer on Friday. 
He was 74.
A heavy smoker, the former president developed severe breathing problems in November and was admitted into the intensive care unit of Nicosia General Hospital.
Following his death, the Greek Cypriot government declared a three-day official mourning period, with flags at all public buildings and schools flying at half staff, and all official events and public engagements cancelled.
Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat expressed his condolences to Papadopoulos's family and the Greek Cypriot community over the former president's death. 
"I share their sorrow," he said.
Senior Greek officials and politicians, including Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis, Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and the leader of the main opposition socialist PASOK party, George Papandreou, arrived in Nicosia on Monday for Papadopoulos' funeral.
Demetris Christofias, who defeated Papadopoulos in presidential elections held earlier this year, praised his predecessor for the "devotion and passion" with which he served his community in his political career, which spanned more than half a century.
"In this category of political men, Tassos Papadopoulos has a distinguished place," the president noted in his speech at the funeral service, officiated by the head of the Cyprus Orthodox Church, Archbishop Chrysostomos II.
"Our respect and recognition for all he has offered to our homeland and our people, for all his struggles and his political actions, will accompany him during his long journey."
Papadopoulos, who was elected president in 2003, left politics after losing to Christofias in the February vote.
His term in office saw Cyprus enter the EU, but with the Turkish Cypriots in the north shut out. 
Papadopoulos spearheaded opposition to a peace plan put forward by then UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, with the president making an emotional televised appearance ahead of twin referenda being held on the island.
The plan then went down to defeat in the Greek Cypriot referendum, although it was approved in the north. 
During his five-year tenure as Cyprus's fifth president, Papadopoulos also oversaw the adoption of the euro as the country's currency.
Born on January 7th 1934 in Nicosia, Papadopoulos studied law at King's College in London. 
After his return home in 1955, he joined the EOKA guerrilla group, which fought against British rule. 
Two years later, he became head of the group's political arm, and in 1959 he took part in the London conference on his country's future.
At age 25, Papadopoulos became the youngest member of Cyprus's first government, headed by Archbishop Makarios. 
Over a period of 12 years, he served as minister of interior, minister of finance, minister of labour and social insurance, minister of agriculture and natural resources, and minister of health and agriculture.
He was first elected to parliament in 1970, on the ticket of the United Party, which he had co-founded a year earlier.
Cyprus was divided along ethnic lines in 1974, after Turkish troops invaded the country's north following an Athens-backed coup aimed at uniting the island with Greece. 
Between 1976 and 1978, Papadopoulos headed the Greek Cypriot negotiating team in intercommunal talks with the Turkish Cypriots.
In 1977, he submitted a proposal for a federated state of two distinct areas, a formula on which all subsequent initiatives for resolving the Cyprus problem have since been based. 
Papadopoulos returned to parliament in 1991 as a representative of the centre-right Democratic Party and was elected as its leader in 2000.
