16/01/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 16/01/09
The latest arrest in the crackdown on the alleged Ergenekon plot against Turkey's Islamist-rooted government was made Thursday (January 15th), when police detained retired General Levent Ersoz.
They had been pursuing him since July as part of the investigation, but he reportedly was abroad.
Anatolia quoted police as saying they began trailing Ersoz as soon as he returned to Turkey illegally through the Black Sea port of Zonguldak two weeks ago.
They apprehended him at a hospital where he had registered under an alias.
Many in Turkey are reeling with shock over the continuing arrests and munition seizures in the investigation of the alleged Ergenekon conspiracy.
Last week, police arrested 18 alleged anti-government secularists, including a former deputy chairman of their own special operations unit and an active-duty army lieutenant colonel.
Using maps found in the two men's homes, police unearthed dozens of hand grenades and smoke bombs and hundreds of rifle bullets in various sites.
However, Turks are uncertain whether the munitions belong to an organised crime faction or to a sinister secret organisation led by retired generals and politicians.
The ongoing dragnet has scooped up prominent military and police figures, recently including Ibrahim Sahin, the former deputy chief of police special operations, and active-duty Lieutenant Colonel Mustafa Donmez.
The ongoing arrests of retired generals are creating unease at military headquarters, causing Chief of the General Staff Ilker Basbug to hold an urgent meeting with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan last week.
Noted politicians and journalists are also in jail awaiting trial.
There are now 86 Ergenekon suspects on trial for allegedly plotting a coup.
Opponents of the Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party (AKP) government contend the AKP is trying to defame secularists by linking them to terrorism.
They express fear that political influence and prosecutorial unprofessionalism will lead to years of trials and no gain for Turkish democracy.
The 2,400-page indictment of Ergenekon failed to prove connections between known criminals under arrest and the other alleged members, namely, ex-generals, politicians and journalists who had all strongly opposed the AKP-led government.
On the other hand, pro-AKP news media freely publish leaked allegations -- even though the investigation officially is confidential -- that prominent figures had masterminded political assassinations and other terrorist acts and that it took the ongoing probe to stop them.
Officials and journalists hotly debate the merit of the anti-Ergenekon allegations.
A senior official who asked to remain anonymous told SETimes, "You can delete 50% of what has been written so far ...
But it becomes clear that some suspects have been involved in illegal activities."
Enis Berberoglu, a columnist for and Ankara bureau chief of Hurriyet, though, expresses scepticism and frustration.
"I lose more and more hope with each day," he complained, saying prosecutors are blowing the Ergenekon affair out of proportion as well as unsuccessfully tying it to the 1996 Susurluk scandal, which arose from a car accident that killed an internationally pursued criminal and a high-ranking police official.
Sahin received a six-year sentence for his role in that matter, but the president eventually pardoned him for medical reasons.
However, Mehmet Altan, a liberal anti-Kemalist writer and supporter of the investigation, contends that, flaws aside, it will anchor Turkey in the West and enhance its democracy.
"Ergenekon's members were plotting not only a domestic coup.
They wanted to pull Turkey back from the Western alliance of democracies," he wrote in the Star.
He cited the former generals' own past statements, in which they criticised Turkey's EU integration process and asked for a review of relations with NATO.
