13/02/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/02/09
Visiting Belgrade on Thursday (February 12th), EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn expressed satisfaction with the reform process in Serbia but added Belgrade must meet all requirements en route to EU membership -- co-operation with The Hague tribunal, the suppression of organised crime and corruption, and the adoption of pro-European laws.
After a meeting with Serbian President Boris Tadic, Rehn promised the EU would speed up liberalisation of the visa regime with Serbia and the country's inclusion on the White Schengen List.
Three days before he arrived in Belgrade, Rehn said he did not recommend that Serbia apply for EU membership this year, which the government has planned to do. 
Rehn clarified later in Belgrade that "convincing evidence" of the successful implementation of the Interim Trade Agreement and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) is necessary.
He praised Serbia's co-operation with The Hague war crimes tribunal but said the country must do more to convince the tribunal and some sceptical EU member states of its full co-operation.
"The objective of my visit is to carry the European Commission's message, to underscore the determination and importance the EU gives to Serbia's European future and to boost the necessary reforms in Serbia," Rehn said.
Tadic says his country is doing all it can to elicit a positive response from the EU. 
He announced that Belgrade plans to wrap up co-operation with The Hague tribunal soon and adopt the laws necessary for association with the Union.
One of the key topics Rehn discussed with his hosts was the status of Kosovo, which declared independence on February 17th 2008. 
Rehn reiterated that Serbia's European integration and resolving Kosovo's status are not linked.
Tadic denied allegations that Belgrade wants to halt Kosovo's accession to certain financial institutions.
Rehn also talked with Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and Parliament Speaker Slavica Djukic-Dejanovic about the possibility of the EU boosting Serbia's financial stability.
On Wednesday, Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic announced that Serbia had asked for 400m euros in macroeconomic assistance from the European Commission and another 233.2m-euro loan from the World Bank. 
He said the Bank should approve the credit in April.
