15/01/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 15/01/09
The commemorative Ski Legend Hit Challenge -- organised at Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)'s Mt. 
Bjelasnica resort in late December -- briefly brought back Sarajevo's fondly remembered Olympic past. 
Several superstars of old raced down the mountainside to mark the 25th anniversary of the 1984 Winter Games.
Participating were celebrated skiers like Italy's Alberto Tomba; Sweden's Ingmar Stenmark; Austria's Anton Steiner, Hans Enn and Franz Klammer; and Slovenia's Bojan Krizaj, Mateja Svet and Jure Franko -- whose 1984 men's giant slalom silver medal made him Yugoslavia's first Winter Games medalist ever.
The United States' Bill Johnson, the 1984 gold medalist in men's downhill skiing, regaled listeners with reminiscences of his time in Sarajevo.
In 1978, Sarajevo won the competition to host the 1984 Winter Games. 
At the time, the city was the capital of BiH within the former Yugoslavia. 
For Sarajevo and Yugoslavia, hosting the Olympiad was a priceless advertising opportunity and a star turn on the world stage.
Money poured into the BiH capital, which received international plaudits for its staging of the Olympiad. 
A number of impressive winter sports facilities arose in Sarajevo and on the surrounding mountains -- Jahorina, Trebevic and Bjelasnica. 
The city got its first outdoor skating rink, which both professionals and children still use, especially during the winter holidays. 
In the new indoor facility beside the rink, East German Katarina Witt won her first gold medal for women's figure skating.
Modern slalom and downhill racetracks and their accompanying facilities also emerged on the mountains surrounding Sarajevo.
Meanwhile, tourists and locals benefited from an increase in housing -- the Olympiad bequeathed 2,850 apartments and several hotels to the city.
Enthusiasts snapped up 250,000 tickets to different events, and 2.5 billion viewers around the world watched on TV. 
The Games grossed $142m, with the organising committee making a profit of $10m.
More than 1,270 athletes from 49 countries took part under the eye of 4,500 local and foreign reporters. 
The Games popularised youth winter sports in a region where they had been practically unknown.
A few years ago, an initiative sprang up for Sarajevo to host the 2014 Winter Games as a commemoration of the 30th anniversary of the 1984 Olympiad. 
The initiative, though, remained just that -- since Sochi, Russia, prevailed in the bidding. 
The threat of uncleared land mines on Sarajevo's Mt. 
Trebevic bobsled run and Mt. 
Igman ski slopes -- a legacy of the 1990s conflict that ravaged BiH -- was a major reason for the International Olympic Committee to look elsewhere.
