15/04/2009
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/04/09
A planned joint venture at Serbia's Nis Airport cannot get off the ground, allegedly because of bureaucratic interference. 
Austrian real estate developer EYEMAXX, in co-operation with British-based investment fund Chayton Capital, was scheduled to begin building a new cargo and logistics centre at Nis Airport this month.
However, bureaucrats at the Serbian geodesy registry, whose approval is required before work starts, failed to modify the land's status to permit construction. 
The airport authority and EYEMAXX signed a contract for the purpose of building such a facility last October.
Nis Airport General Manager Dragan Bugarinovic told the Southeast European Times that he hopes the foreign investors will wait for Belgrade to end the geodesy registry's inaction. 
This is not an economic issue but a political one, he added.
At stake are 500 potential jobs and a quantum leap in the ability of Serbia's second largest airport, Constantine the Great, to compete for passengers and to serve regional businesses that want to ship goods to European customers.
The Nis city council has asked the government -- the infrastructure ministry, the environment and urban planning ministry and even Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic -- to end the inertia in Belgrade. 
"Somebody in the bureaucracy is untouchable ... 
As time passes ... 
the danger increases that 500 people will not get jobs while the city will lose its first foreign investor in four years", said Nis Mayor Milos Simonovic.
This is not the first clash between Nis and the Belgrade authorities. 
In 2006, the national carrier JAT gained a monopoly at the airport, making airline service infrequent and uncompetitive. 
The airport has tried several times to increase business by opening new routes to Montenegro or luring low-cost carriers from EU carriers.
However, Belgrade's response has always been "not now". 
Increased activity in Nis would allegedly threaten JAT or would antagonise the Montenegrin government.
The city's last hope is the pan-European "open skies" agreement, which may free Nis to sign contracts with low-cost airlines. 
That agreement, though, still awaits ratification by the Serbian parliament.
The price Nis has paid is the loss of 500m euros in foregone revenue. 
It could sorely use the stimulus of a rejuvenated airport; unemployment in Nis (population, 250,000) has risen to 40,000 while the average salary is 20% less than the country's average.
Nis's boosters fear that big investments -- such as the Philip Morris acquisition of the local cigarette factory in 2003 -- will be the exception and not the rule if the city is unable to end the perceived foot-dragging in Belgrade.
