15/01/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 15/01/09
Turbulence developed quickly in Romania's new ruling coalition, which pairs the Social Democrats (PSD) and the Democratic Liberals (PDL).
On Tuesday (January 13th), Interior Minister Gabriel Oprea submitted his resignation after his own party, the PSD, withdrew its support.
The party savaged his decision to appoint Virgil Ardelean as head of Romania's intelligence services without first seeking PSD approval.
Oprea was in office for only 21 days before stepping down.
Ardelean was a controversial choice.
Nicknamed "Vulpea" (the Fox), he led the General Directorate of Information and Internal Protection (DGIPI), one of the seven Romanian secret services, between 1998 and 2007, under three presidents.
His name has surfaced in connection with several scandals -- the most important being the wiretapping of media organisations in 2003 under the guise of investigating police leaks to the media.
Detractors also accused him of hushing up several investigations and trying to frame two mobsters who allegedly had refused to bribe his deputies.
PSD leader Mircea Geoana accused Oprea of failing to consult the party leadership before making the nomination and submitting the appointment for approval directly to Prime Minister Emil Boc.
Geoana asked Boc not to approve the nomination, saying the party disagrees with it -- but Boc signed the nomination, which appeared on Wednesday in the Official Gazette.
In a party meeting called on Monday, the PSD decided to replace Oprea.
The decision sparked protests from the members of the Ilfov county party branch -- which Oprea leads -- and the members marched in front of PSD's national headquarters.
"I've decided to resign in order not to create further tensions inside the ruling coalition," Oprea said on Tuesday.
"My intention was only to lead the interior ministry in a professional way."
Oprea also resigned as president of PSD Ilfov, saying that he refuses to be a "marionette minister".
Observers expect Deputy Prime Minister Dan Nica to serve as interior minister in the interim.
Oprea said Ardelean's appointment was solely the responsibility of the minister and that he did not have to seek party approval.
"I think I have done my duty to the party exemplarily.
I have never worked against the party and party discipline," he insisted.
Some media analysts suggest President Traian Basescu is behind the appointment of Ardelean.
They speculate the president saw the move as a way to bring the secret services under his control and to disrupt the PSD.
Others suggest an internal power struggle within the PSD was to blame, with some party officials making a bid for greater influence within the government by supporting the appointment.
