25/03/2013
By Drazen Remikovic and Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka and Sofia -- 25/03/13
The political landscape in the Balkans has seen several new governments assume power within the last 18 months, and analysts said that economic reforms are needed to keep them in office.
With new leadership, citizens are eager for swift, decisive action to solve the economic problems that are prevalent across the region.
But expert observers and politicians said governments find it challenging to act quickly enough to satisfy the public.
In Croatia, a government elected in December 2011 has lost much public support.
The Federation of BiH government endured nearly two years of instability before the new majority in the parliament decided to dismiss the government on February 12th.
The Slovenian government lost citizens' confidence after four months of protests.
And in BiH's Republika Srpska (RS), President Milorad Dodik initiated changes in the ministers' offices, explaining that the government "needs a refresh."
But the most stark change of direction came last month in Bulgaria, when Prime Minister Boyko Borisov resigned following 10 days of nationwide protests, some of which turned violent.
Protests were focused on high electricity prices and complaints against power distribution companies.
Dimitar Avramov, a political analyst who specialised at Zagreb University's political science department, said Bulgaria needs a right-centrist reformist government.
"No economic reforms based on a strategic framework have been implemented in Bulgaria since 2005," he told SETimes.
Avramov said the steps necessary to improve economic conditions include "liberalisation of the energy market, creating of guarantee funds and banking instruments to stimulate the small- and medium-sized enterprises, and a fast adoption of a strategies to attract investments in key sectors of the economy."
Bulgaria's GERB-led government, which resigned earlier this month and was replaced by a caretaker government, has been widely accused of failing to take steps to stimulate business and economic growth, instead following a tight path of maintaining macro-economic stability.
But many analysts said this has been achieved at the expense of social benefits and stimulus for small- and medium-sized businesses.
"Upholding financial stability at the expense of freezing the people’s incomes is a dead-end solution," Ivan Neykov, chairman of the Managing Board of the Balkan Institute of Labour and Social Policy, said.
"This was one of the main mistakes in GERB’s policy."
The government's austerity measures have included raising the retirement age, and introducing tighter conditions for unemployment payments.
Pensions and bonuses for pensioners have not been raised in three years.
Bulgaria is facing early elections on May 12th.
Political parties are offering various steps in their campaigns, including tax reforms to stimulate business and measures to boost employment and create new jobs.
"Several types of governments were compromised in our recent past -- a wide coalition and a minority government, which was heavily counting on 'bought' lawmakers.
Both left a very bitter taste," Anna Krasteva, a political science professor at New Bulgarian University in Sofia, told SETimes, adding that it is difficult to predict the outcome of May's elections.
"There are two options:
a majority government, but this is a utopian option, considering the current situation, or an expert government, equally distant from all political parties."
Avramov said the country should seek to become more self-sufficient.
"Bulgaria should stop seeing EU funds as a main instrument to develop the economy," Avramov said.
Bulgaria is set to receive 15.4 billion euros of EU funding for 2013-2020 under the bloc's new multi-annual financial network -- an increase of 2 billion euros from the amount stipulated in the previous EU budget (2007-2013).
In many sectors, and especially in smaller towns and villages, Bulgarian businesses, particularly agriculture, rely almost completely on EU funding.
Desislava Nikolova, chief economist at the Institute for Market Economics, told SETimes that Bulgaria's next government should focus on funding productive investments instead of making direct payments to the people.
"Authorities should not focus exclusively on absorbing the available funds, but rather implement parallel reforms in the field of education, healthcare, judiciary and other fields," Nikolova said, adding that building infrastructure will create conditions for business development and an improved life for Bulgarians.
The domestic economy was the dominant issue in Croatia's last parliamentary elections.
Zoran Milanovic became prime minster as part of a centre-left coalition that won a decisive victory.
Fifteen months later, the government has the confidence of just 14 percent of citizens, according to the latest poll from the Croatian Centre for Market Research.
Milanovic's support individually is at 17 percent.
Davor Djenero, a professor at the faculty of political sciences in Zagreb, said Milanovic's government took office in a difficult economic situation and is simply unable to solve all the problems that people hoped would be solved.
"Investors are still not coming, new taxes for the citizens are introduced," Djenero told SETimes, adding that the steps to fight the economic crisis -- including layoffs, reduced paycheks and increased value-added taxes -- have made voters less confident in the government.
"Nobody told the citizens in the election campaign that the next period will be difficult.
The politicians just keep promising prosperity," Djenero said.
"I'm totally apathetic to the government and the authorities.
I don't think that politicians can help the citizens regarding their problems," Mario Guzijan, 31, an unemployed chemistry teacher from Zagreb told SETimes.
"If you don't do something to help yourself in these difficult times, politicians are the last group of people from whom you can expect some help.
Whoever comes to power will first look to secure himself and his family.
Maybe we should all deal with politics, that's the one of the solutions."
Analysts think that Croatia will be in the best strategic position for Western investments after it joins EU in July.
"When Croatia joins the EU it will be forced to operate under EU law and function as other Western countries," Damir Novotny, an economic analyst and former member of the governors' council at the Croatian National Bank, told SETimes.
Once a member, Croatia will have access to EU funding programmes -- including being a partner in the Union budget.
The budget, which was 864 billion euros from 2007 to 2013, covers expenditures in member states for sectors including agriculture, internal policies, administration and compensation.
Croatia will finish the privatisation of six shipyards under the supervision of the European Commission by the end of May and this will contribute to the revival of these enterprises, which employs 15,000 workers, officials said.
"The privatisation of the shipyards will provide a chance to investors to invest their capital and contribute to saving the shipyard.
Some of those privatisations are still ongoing.
Croatian shipyards have a future, but it needs to be restructured," Paul Van Doren, head of EU Delegation in Croatia, said.
The government also plans to complete the privatisation of the Croatian Post Bank and a leading insurance company Croatia Osiguranje by the end of the year, in an effort to bolster the budget.
Vjekoslav Visekruna, profesor of economy at the University of Pula said that, besides privatisations and attracting foreign investors, Croatia needs to invest more in agriculture and tourism in the future.
"We have more than 1,000 kilometres of coast and it is still not used in the best way.
We need better promotion of tourism potentials, subsidies for small family hotels ...
also, authorities should get more attention to agriculture sector because we will have the chance to export our products in a market weight more than 500 million people and this is our chance to sell our products," Visekruna told SETimes.
Economic issues have dominated the political landscape in BiH as well, where unemployment reached a record high of 44.4 percent in 2012.
Problems in the Federation of BiH began immediately after the 2010 parliamentary elections with a struggle over political coalitions and parliamentary majority, and ended with disagreement about the budget.
"Everything erupted with the budget proposal," Veso Vegar, vice president of the Croatian Democratic Union, a minority party in the Federation of BiH, told SETimes.
"Very complicated constitutional structure has led to this" situation.
"A solution to the political crisis must be through constitutional reform and complete reorganisation of the Federation of BiH, in order for this kind of crisis never to happen again.
Of course, in addition, the objective of the new government should be to establish a tighter financial discipline," Vegar said.
Citizens in RS said the old government did not prove it was capable of solving problems, and Dodik's recent changes need to have an impact on the economy.
"That means more employment, reducing public debt, starting production, the elimination of taxes," said Bojan Vlaski, 28, a lawyer from Banja Luka.
"If they don't do something quickly on this issue, I am afraid that the new government would soon suffer the fate of the old one."
Politicians agree that the economy is the most significant challenge.
"Reasons for the fall of the governments are various in the countries of the region, but I think they all share the difficult economic situation, that is, the inability of the existing government to address the economic crisis," Mladen Ivanic, president of BiH's Party of Democratic Progress, a minority part in RS, told SETimes.
"This led to a fall of governments in Slovenia and Bulgaria.
However, the new government in RS will be chosen from the same political party, which is not the case in other countries, so I think that the new government will not be able to significantly change the difficult economic situation."
