12/11/2008
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Split -- 12/11/08
Ministers from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Austria, the Czech Republic, France, Poland, and Sweden met in Zagreb, Croatia, last week for a two-day forum to discuss collaboration in the fight against organised crime, corruption and arms and human trafficking.
Representatives of the EU, European Commission and EU agencies, like Europol and Frontex, participated in the event.
The part of the meeting dealing with judicial issues addressed corruption, financial investigations and confiscation of property acquired through criminal activity.
"That must be the priority of the countries in Southeast Europe (SEE)," said recently appointed Croatian Justice Minister Ivan Simonovic.
He also pointed out that Croatia is ready to begin its stepped-up fight against crime.
"The coming year should be a key one in Croatia's resolve to impose restrictive laws against those who acquire property through criminal activity.
SEE countries should form a system that would successfully face organised crime of any kind," suggested Simonovic.
French Interior Minister Michele Alliot-Marie called for an uncompromising fight against weapon trafficking.
"We need to work on a database of arms traffickers.
Human trafficking is another priority of the EU and building an information network in the war on crime," Alliot-Marie said after she opened the forum in Zagreb.
"More effective regional co-operation is necessary in combating organised crime," Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said in his remarks.
"Determined reforms are needed to create secure and safe day-to-day conditions for ordinary citizens while combating criminal activity.
Imposing new laws and adapting them to European legislation will not be enough, without implementing them according to European standards," said Sanader.
"Interior ministries need to collaborate in the exchange of information.
Therefore, no country should hide criminals," added Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic.
Croatian authorities praised French efforts in organising the event at Zagreb's Hotel Esplanade.
Conference officials announced that a follow-up meeting will take place in 2009 during the Swedish presidency of the EU.
The forum participants also discussed EU immigration, asylum policy, visa regimes and integrated border management.
The two-day meeting concluded with an agreement to tighten overall collaboration among the SEE countries.
