14/01/2009
(Blic - 14/01/09; DPA, B92, HINA - 13/01/09; Reuters, Beta, B92 - 12/01/09; AP, AFP - 11/01/09)
The head of Serbia's National Council for Co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) urged the public Tuesday (January 13th) to help capture the two remaining war crimes fugitives sought by The Hague.
Those who have any information on former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic and wartime Croatian Serb leader Goran Hadzic should contact the authorities, Rasim Ljajic told reporters in Belgrade.
They would thus be doing a "good thing for the state", he said, as well as meeting their legal obligation.
Ljajic's appeal came two days after Serbian police put up "wanted" posters offering a 1m-euro, tax-free reward for information leading to Mladic's arrest and 250,000 euros for Hadzic's. 
The United States is offering another 3.8m euros for information that will facilitate the capture of Mladic.
"The gain from Mladic's extradition is much bigger than the amount offered for the information that would lead to his and Hadzic's arrest," Ljajic said on Tuesday.
Full co-operation with the ICTY, including the handover of indicted war criminals to The Hague tribunal, is a key requirement for Serbia's Euro-Atlantic integration.
Mladic faces charges of war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and charges of genocide over the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. 
Hadzic allegedly committed war crimes during the 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia.
Ljajic noted on Tuesday the wanted posters were only one element in the pursuit of the two suspects.
"We rely on the work of state services and [the] good co-ordination between civil and military services that exists at this moment," he said.
According to Serbian intelligence officials, the 9191 hotline listed on the posters has received many calls.
"Serbia has made significant progress in its co-operation with the tribunal," but "the job has not been finished yet," chief UN prosecutor Serge Brammertz told the Belgrade-based daily <i>Blic</i> in an interview Wednesday.
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic said earlier this week that his country is making every effort to meet its ICTY obligations.
In another interview carried by the Sarajevo-based daily Oslobodjenje on Tuesday, Brammertz stressed that Mladic and Hadzic cannot evade justice. 
He also indicated officials are devising a mechanism to ensure the pair will face trial, regardless of the place and timing of their arrest.
"The message is simple: there is no impunity, and there cannot be a refuge for Mladic and Hadzic," the Croatian news agency HINA quoted Brammertz as saying.
