13/05/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/05/09
Serbian tennis legend Novak Djokovic, ranked 4th in the world and one of the most popular athletes in Serbia, won the first ATP tournament in Belgrade -- the Serbia Open -- after beating Poland's Lukasz Kubot, (6-3, 7-6), in Sunday's (May 10th) final match.
The tournament, an undertaking of the Djokovic family enterprise Family Sport, was deemed by organisers as extremely important to the development of tennis in Serbia.
After his victory Sunday in front of a crowd of 7,000 -- including President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic -- Djokovic admitted he found the tournament difficult because of the pressure of playing in front of local fans. 
"I feel very good right now, and I feel relief, as there were great expectations and a lot of pressure. 
It was not easy dealing with that, but the most important thing is that I won," Djokovic said.
For that reason, he said, the trophy won in Belgrade -- the 13th of his career -- is the most important to him.
Tadic sent a note of congratulations. 
"This tournament is important, because it promotes Serbia in the best possible way and improves its reputation in the world. 
I wish you plenty of success in the future."
Djokovic, together with fellow Serbs Ana Ivanovic and Jelena Jankovic, has helped make tennis one of the most popular sports in the country. 
The three athletes have become heroes in the eyes of many Serbs.
"We, as a tennis nation, quite deservingly have a tournament. 
I am proud of the fact that my family managed to organise such a serious tennis event in just five months," Djokovic said before the tournament.
The Serbia Open purse was 450,000 euros, with the winner taking about 72,000 euros.
Croatian Ivan Ljubicic, who was the sixth seed at the event, worked within the ATP to give Belgrade this tournament. 
"Tennis has absolutely boomed in Serbia over the past few years," he said.
Mayor Dragan Djilas also praised the event. 
"I think Belgrade now has a truly great event in the form of this tennis tournament, which has placed us on the map of Europe and the world."
