11/03/2009
(Reuters, Nine O'clock - 11/03/09;
AFP, FT, DPA, Reuters, Euobserver, Market Watch, Mediafax - 10/03/09)
Romania sent a letter to the European Commission (EC) on Tuesday (March 10th) asking for the launch of talks on the 27-nation bloc's contribution to a possible IMF-led multi-billion-euro rescue package, to help the country stave off an economic crisis.
Brussels issued a statement later in the day expressing the EU presidency and the Commission's "readiness to support Romania in avoiding risks of increasing market pressures and in achieving the orderly unwinding of imbalances".
Talks with the EC and the IMF will determine the size of the loan.
The Romanian Finance Ministry and central bank have started "preliminary discussions" with the two organisations and other international institutions to evaluate the macroeconomic situation in the country and its potential need for external financing, the finance ministry said on Tuesday.
Meanwhile, an EU source told Reuters that negotiations with the EC would begin "very soon" and that a deal was likely to emerge within days.
IMF experts were scheduled to arrive on a two-week mission to Bucharest on Wednesday.
Though the government remains silent on the matter, sources close to the cabinet have told reporters that the country is considering borrowing 12 billion euros from the IMF and 7 billion euros from the EU.
Romania was among the countries with the strongest economic growth within the EU until the global financial crisis hit in autumn.
Although the national currency, the leu, has stabilised in recent weeks, it has lost 18% since last summer, economic growth has stalled and the repayment of euro-denominated loans has become more difficult for Romanians as their currency depreciates.
An IMF-led rescue package "should calm fears of an immediate meltdown", Neil Shearing, an analyst at London-based Capital Economics, said.
However, he warned that the loans Romania seeks would not allow it to revert to its recent pattern of development or thwart a plunge into a deep recession this year.
"Rapid growth has been driven by an unsustainable credit binge, funded by borrowing from abroad," Shearing said.
Observers have also noted that an IMF-led rescue programme could put the Romanian centre-left coalition government to a test, as it will likely have to commit to further spending cuts to secure a deal.
Asking lawmakers to support the government's request for external financial assistance, President Traian Basescu urged them Monday to back belt-tightening measures and trade unions to refrain from demanding pay hikes.
If Romania secures a bailout package, it would become the latest Eastern European country to gain external support after Hungary, Ukraine, Latvia, Serbia and Belarus.
