13/04/2009
By Ema Kovac for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 13/04/09
A hospital destroyed in the siege of Sarajevo is back in operation, thanks to a multimillion-euro renovation project.
Late last month, a pediatric clinic became the first department to return to the Jezero medical complex, site of the future Mother and Child Centre.
The Sarajevo University Clinical Centre's Pediatric Clinic, founded in 1947, was Bosnia and Herzegovina's first specialised institution for treatment of children.
By 1991, it had grown from an original 60 beds to 250.
In 1992, however, shelling heavily damaged the Jezero complex, forcing the clinic to move.
Now Jezero, popularly known as "Bebe" (Babies) because of its maternity ward, has received repairs and renovation.
The upgraded complex has 11 departments and 160 beds.
The 253 staff members include 46 doctors and 143 nurses.
The hospital has expanded from a cramped 2,500 sq m to 6,500 sq m, providing a more comfortable environment for patients and staff.
The reopening has considerable symbolic significance for a city once gutted by war.
In a display of enthusiasm and teamwork, Pediatric Centre staff accomplished the entire move -- patients and all -- in eight hours.
A volunteer group, "Muzika i boja za nadu i lijecenje" ["Music and colour for hope and healing"], delivered 100 gift boxes to the children, representing a donation from NATO, EUFOR, other organisations and individuals.
The same group equipped two playrooms and provided an aquarium.
Its members plan to visit at least once a month to cheer up the patients.
Nine-year-old Adnan Mevic, the official 6 billionth resident of the planet Earth, had the honour of re-opening the new facility.
Born in the clinic in October 1999, Mevic received the designation of "Baby 6 Billion" from then UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who became his godfather and made a donation to the clinic.
Reconstruction of Jezero started in 2003.
Sarajevo Canton allocated 6.3m euros for the project, and considerable financial and expert support -- amounting to 3m euros -- came from the Turkish government, with the promise of professional training and additional donations to follow.
A number of other companies and individuals also provided support for Jezero.
The entire project will cost an estimated 15.3m euros.
