13/01/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 13/01/09
Macedonian National Bank Governor Petar Goshev predicts the country's economic growth for 2009 will be between 3% and 4.5%, with inflation of 2.2% to 3.4%. 
He says the year "brings huge uncertainties for countries with small and open economies like the Macedonian economy," adding that economic growth will slow from last year's pace.
The National Bank will focus on price stability as its primary monetary goal this year. 
Due to the worldwide economic crisis, Macedonia should expect slow economic growth, lower foreign currency inflow, less saving and less credit. 
According to Goshev, the public will have a more difficult time obtaining credit this year, even via their credit cards.
However, Goshev says, bank liquidity is not in danger, although there are slight difficulties in accessing fresh money. 
"There is a trend of only slight reduction in the liquidity of banks, but in order to protect the stability of the banking system, the National Bank took preventive steps," he said.
The banking system did not suffer a direct hit from the crisis, Goshev said, and 2008 was a success overall. 
"In the banking market, there were three new strategic investors during 2008. 
Now there are 14 banks in Macedonia owned by foreign investors, which is 84% of the total capital of the banking system," he said.
He also ruled out a currency devaluation. 
"We have foreign currency reserves on a solid level, and if necessary, we will intervene on the foreign currency market to stabilise the exchange rate. 
In 2008 we intervened in [that] market. 
In one part we are buying, and in another one we are selling. 
The gross foreign currency reserves are 1.537 billion euros. 
At the moment we have ... 
reserves that can cover 3.5 months of imports, which is a very solid level."
The main challenge for the National Bank this year will be the current-account deficit, which in 2008 was 15% of GDP and is expected to be around 10% of GDP in 2009.
Goshev does not expect inflation to be a severe problem. 
Economists project inflation between 2.2% and 3.4% this year.
Skopje has also taken steps to ward off a recession. 
Authorities plan to charge capital gains taxes on dividends only and will reduce tariffs on materials imported by Macedonian industries.
It also will write off companies' unpaid health insurance contributions within four years if they resume those contributions within that period. 
The government will apply tax forgiveness to penalty interest on corporations' unpaid income tax, capital gains tax, value-added tax, property taxes and pension contributions, according to Reuters.
