13/04/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 13/04/09
Last month's nearly fatal beating of an ethnic Macedonian student by nearly 50 armed ethnic Albanian students has upset inter-ethnic relations in Struga, a town historically known for its serenity.
Increased student violence has plagued Struga's Niko Nestor secondary school complex since the enlargement of Struga in 2004.
In that territorial reorganisation, the then ruling Social Democratic Union (SDSM), supported by the ethnic Albanian Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), added several municipalities to Struga, giving Albanians a 55% majority of the population.
Two years later, the DUI-controlled city council split the school complex:
the gymnasium became a separate school called Ibrahim Temo, with a newly appointed ethnic Albanian principal, while the technical schools retained the old name, Niko Nestor.
The demographic changes of the larger community were reflected in the schools.
In the school complex, Albanian students became the majority as well.
Fights multiplied, becoming especially pronounced between ethnic Albanians from the recently added municipalities and ethnic Macedonians from Struga proper.
Local parents, insisting on anonymity, said the problem is not urban-rural in nature, but ethnic and political.
They claim that "quiet ethnic cleansing of Macedonians is under way." Eighteen Macedonian students have left Struga this year.
School cameras have recorded fights, but Macedonian parents believe Struga Mayor Ramiz Merko, a DUI member, and his officials refuse to punish the culprits.
The upset parents agree the only way to prevent further attacks on their children is to have the two ethnic groups instructed separately.
In February, faced with student violence and a boycott of classes, Minister of Education Pero Stojanovski agreed to institute such a plan.
The shifts, based on the language of instruction -- Macedonian and Albanian -- will be in place until the end of the year.
The government also promised to construct a new school building by the end of the academic year to address the problem.
"This is only a temporary solution," said school principal Mare Saveska.
"The local government accepted this solution, although the Albanian instructors and the city council members hardly agree," said Jamie Hajredini, director of Struga's education sector.
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski faults the 2004 enlargement of Struga for the ethnic tensions.
"The government is determined [to solve] the problem and is ...
constantly in touch with the parents, instructors and local government," he said.
