26/12/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 27/12/05
Earlier this year, the Institute for Strategic Studies and Prognoses (ISSP) published a groundbreaking report on human development in Montenegro. 
The study, the first of its kind, was drawn up in collaboration with the UNDP, and is entitled "Diversities – Potential for Development".
Diversity is Montenegro's major strength, and fostering it is crucial to sustainable human development, the report found. 
Multiculturalism has broad-based support in Montenegro, although income disparities and inequality of opportunity could hamper societal cohesion and progress if left unaddressed, it said. 
Elaborating on that conclusion, UNDP Senior Programme Manager for the Western Balkans Moises Venancio said the republic must prevent inequalities and deepening gaps between different groups in order to maintain stability, and it must ensure equal access to services, benefits and economic growth.
The report highlights three major issues -- inequality, gender and poverty. 
It notes a large inequity between the wealthiest 10 per cent and poorest 10 per cent in Montenegro -- the largest such disparity in the region. 
Although there is a balanced number of educated men and women, the number of women in politics, positions of authority, and public life in general remains low, even by regional standards. 
Only 10.67 per cent of Montenegrin Parliamentary deputies are women. 
Meanwhile, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia have more than doubled the amount of women in public service.
As with other countries in the region, poverty represents a major concern. 
Some 12 per cent to 13 per cent are poor, and about 33 per cent are economically vulnerable.
The Human Development Index (HDI) for 2004 in Montenegro was 0.799, which is slightly higher than in 1991. 
During the period from 1999-2004, the HDI showed a positive growth rate. 
Over time, average life expectancy has slightly decreased, from 75.2 to 73.1 years, but adult literacy rates have increased to 97.5 per cent. 
Nevertheless, per capita GDP increased since 1991, from $5,347 to $6,641 in 2004, representing a rise of 24.2 per cent. 
Compared to other countries in the region, Montenegro has a medium level of human development, the ISSP found.
The report pointed to disparities that exist among different areas in Montenegro. 
The GDP per capita in the northern region is only 46.1 per cent of the Montenegrin national product standard per capita, while the GDP in the southern region, including Podgorica, is 13.46 per cent above the Montenegrin average national product per capita. 
In the coastal area, as well as in several larger cities, a relatively small number of people dominate the economic assets. 
In the north, many rural areas and smaller cities are impecunious. 
Moreover, a number of areas -- namely, Savnik. 
Pluzine, Zabljak and Kolasin -- are demographically endangered, requiring special development support.
The highest level of human development is achieved in the central region and the lowest in the northern region, according to the ISSP. 
Three municipalities, Savnik, Andrijevica and Plav, have HDI indices in the range from 0.600 to 0.700, while the HDI of the majority of other municipalities -- Berane, Bijelo Polje, Danilovgrad, Zabljak, Kolasin, Kotor, Mojkovac, Niksic, Pljevlja, Rozaje, Tivat, Ulcinj, Herceg Novi and Cetinje -- is in the range of 0.700 to 0.800. 
Four municipalities, Bar, Budva, Pluzine and Podgorica, have a high level of human development (HDI>0.800).
Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic attended the official ceremony marking the report's release. 
He expressed satisfaction that the first Human Development Report for Montenegro portrayed it as a multicultural republic, one which is resolutely making economic progress. 
"Today’s Europe represents an abundance of different cultures, peoples and religions. 
In line with that we consider that Montenegro, through its ethnic, cultural and religious differences, shall give its contribution to the European future along with preservation of its culture and tradition," he said.
"The protection and strengthening of the existing nature of the Montenegrin society, based on diversity, is a necessary precondition for sustainable human development," the president added.
According to Vujanovic, ethnic, religious and cultural diversity has been a source of strength for Montenegro over the centuries. 
Montenegro not only steered clear of the ethnic conflicts that erupted during the breakup of the former Yugoslavia, he said, but also gave shelter to refugees of differing ethnicities who were fleeing the conflict. 
Moreover, the president said, the republic has taken significant steps in the area of minority rights protection. 
A Council for Minority Rights Protection has been established under the Constitution, the cabinet includes a ministry for minorities, and a wide normative and institutional framework has been provided for minority rights recognition and protection.
Minorities actively participate in the political life in Montenegro, and progress has been made also in the field of education, through improved programmes in minority languages at all levels, Vujanovic said.
