12/05/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 12/05/09
Despite a public outcry, Macedonia's government says it will respect a court ruling that blocks public schools from offering religious studies courses.
The decision "is final ...
and we will act according to it," Education Minister Pero Stojanovski said.
At issue is Article 26 of the Primary Education Law, which permitted religious studies in public schools.
The country's constitutional court has repealed it on the grounds that it breaches the constitution, which guarantees separation of church and state.
As a result of the judges' decision, the education ministry's Bureau for Educational Development is revising school curricula nationwide to fill the suddenly introduced vacuum in students' schedules.
Teachers and school psychologists will lead discussions on conflict resolution, improved communications and ecology, according to Vesna Horvatovic, director of the bureau.
The constitution allows for religious education, but not in public schools, explained court spokesperson Jugoslav Milenkovic.
The education ministry introduced the two electives -- religious studies and history of religions -- last September.
According to Stojanovski, the first course was offered for parents "who believe such education is necessary for their children, while others may select the alternative, history of religions".
Nearly 70% of interested parents enrolled their children in religious studies, while 30% chose history of religions.
The court's ruling -- handed down during the middle of the school year and over the Easter holiday -- ran into bitter opposition from the Macedonian Orthodox Church and the Islamic Community, which have promised to appeal.
The government, meanwhile, accused the court of acting in an undemocratic manner.
According to Aleksandar Spasenovski of the ruling party VMRO-DPMNE, the court "did not take into account Article 44 of the constitution, which guarantees the right and an equal access to education".
He claimed the decision discriminates against citizens by "denying them the right to take religious studies as an elective course".
An MP from the VMRO-DPMNE, Vlatko Djorchev, described it as an "unreasonable decision and absolutely politically motivated".
The opposition Social Democrats, however, accused the government of undermining judicial independence.
"It is obvious that [Prime Minister Gruevski] wants to claim the jurisdiction of the constitutional court," said departing President Branko Crvenkovski.
Former Chief Justice Milan Netkov has defended his colleagues on the court and described the criticisms as "unacceptable, for an institution whose decisions are final".
EU Ambassador to Macedonia Ervan Fouere has weighed in on the issue as well, warning against political interference in the work of the judiciary.
Those stirring up criticism of the court are "undermining the authority of one of the most important institutions", Fouere said.
