11/05/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 11/05/09
After two parallel trials that spanned four years, a Zagreb court last week sentenced Croatian General and MP Branimir Glavas to ten years in prison for war crimes against ethnic Serbs in the city of Osijek during the conflict in 1991.
Insisting he is innocent, Glavas immediately left Croatia for neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina to avoid serving the sentence.
In the first case, Glavas received five years in prison for ordering the arrest, torture and murder of Serb civilians in an Osijek garage. 
In the second case, he received eight years for ordering the arrest and murder of Serbs on the banks of the Drava River. 
The court combined the two sentences into one ten-year sentence.
"The sentence is unfounded, and we will attack it in full for all the legal reasons," said Veljko Miljevic, one of three defence attorneys.
Journalist Drago Hedl initiated the widely debated case against Glavas. 
Hedl found a key witness -- former Croatian soldier Krunoslav Fehir -- whom Glavas allegedly ordered to kill a Serb civilian.
Glavas was a founder of the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) party, which led the charge for Croatia's independence in the early 1990s. 
Glavas enjoys broad support in his hometown of Osijek for defending it during heavy Serb shelling in the 1990s conflict. 
Croatian veterans' groups announced their full support for Glavas.
"The sentence against General Glavas … is a sentence against Osijek, Baranja and Slavonia, and us all," said Miuljenko Kolobaric, president of an Osijek veterans' organisation, in a rally outside the courthouse.
Glavas's supporters promptly released a five-minute video message by him in which he claimed he is "not guilty of the charges and this whole process is a setup. 
… I will clear my name beyond any doubt".
The government refused to comment on the sentence, as has been its long-standing practice with court decisions. 
It did, though, state it "most vigourously rejects the ... 
claims about any influence on the judiciary during the court case".
Croatian police confirmed on Sunday that Glavas is in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where they lack jurisdiction to arrest him.
