10/11/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 10/11/08
In a report released last week by the European Commission (EC), Croatia received positive reviews of its readiness to join the EU. 
"The Western Balkan countries' advance towards EU membership can be accelerated, provided they meet the necessary conditions. 
It should be possible to reach the final stage of accession negotiations with Croatia by the end of 2009, provided that Croatia fulfils all the necessary conditions," the November 5th report presented by EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said.
The good news has boosted optimism in Zagreb. 
Croatians had been dreading the Progress Report, a fundamental document that examines reforms and achievements in the candidate countries, after their country's latest rash of gangland-style murders.
Much relieved by its tone, officials praised the report's findings and the opening of the membership window for Croatia.
On November 5th, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader told reporters it was extremely encouraging the EC had specified a deadline for ending talks.
"Our assessment is that Croatia will join EU in 2010 or 2011; that is, before the next parliamentary elections in Croatia. 
We are now facing a number of challenges that we need to resolve," Sanader said.
"Now it is time to cross over from plans to real action," said Vesna Pusic, the head of the parliamentary committee that follows EU accession.
"Croatia is keenly aware of the problems that exist in implementing laws, but it has the political will to do everything necessary to end negotiations by the end of next year," President Stipe Mesic said.
Although the report was positive, the country still has work to do. 
"Success depends on Croatia's ability to meet the conditions for EU accession. 
... 
The ball is now firmly in Croatia's court," Rehn said.
Problems noted by the EU include poor administration and pervasive corruption, as well as the country's chronically unprofitable and heavily subsidised shipyards.
