11/05/2009
(EurActiv, Guardian 11/05/09;
Dnevnik.bg, Zaman - 10/05/09;
Reuters, AFP, AP, DPA, UPI, Bloomberg, Dow Jones, BBC, New York Times, RFE/RL, VOA, Euronews, Euobserver, European Voice, Hurriyet, Mosnews, Czech EU Presidency - 08/05/09)
The EU and four partner countries signed a joint declaration Friday (May 8th) expressing political support for the realisation of the 27-nation bloc's Southern Corridor energy initiative, aimed at reducing Europe's dependence on Russian supplies.
The plan envisions the construction of three new gas pipelines -- Nabucco, White Stream and the Interconnector-Turkey-Greece-Italy (ITGI) -- that would bring Caspian gas to Europe, while bypassing Russia.
The leaders of Azerbaijan, Georgia, Turkey and Egypt signed the deal during a mini-summit in Prague, hosted by the European Commission (EC) and the Czech presidency of the EU.
"Our strategic priority in the EU is to enhance energy security, in particular by diversifying energy sources and energy routes," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said after what he described as a "very important" meeting.
"The Southern Corridor initiative is a key priority project."
Although key gas suppliers Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan did not sign Friday's declaration, the summit gave a new impetus to the long-planned 3,300km Nabucco pipeline, which is at the centre of the Southern Corridor initiative.
The breakthrough came after Turkey agreed to complete talks on an intergovernmental agreement on the project, completion of which observers expect by 2014.
The accord, slated for signing in Ankara by the end of June, would remove a key obstacle to the 9-billion-euro pipeline, which would run from the Turkish border with Georgia or Iran via Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary to Austria's Baumgarten hub.
"We have the determination, and we are ready," Turkish President Abdullah Gul said Friday.
Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolanek called energy security "a matter for the whole EU".
He also admitted the need to overcome some remaining obstacles, since the three Central Asian countries had not signed the deal.
There are still doubts about the availability of sufficient non-Russian gas supplies to make Nabucco economically viable.
Observers believe the signing of the agreement in Ankara next month could encourage potential investors, who have shown little interest in the pipeline so far.
The planned White Stream would run from Georgia to Romania under the Black Sea, while the ITGI pipeline would link Turkey and the continent via Greece and Italy.
By 2020, the three pipelines would deliver up to 10% of the EU's gas needs.
Europe currently gets about a quarter of its gas from Russia.
Friday's deal also envisions the establishment of direct connections between both sides of the Caspian Sea and of a central EU gas-buying consortium, as well as the adoption of new terms for the transport of Caspian gas.
Representatives from Russia, Ukraine and the United States attended the meeting as observers.
