11/02/2009
(AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, CNN, RTTNews, B92, EUFOR, Office of the High Representative - 10/02/09)
International troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) searched the homes of former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic's sister and sister-in-law early Tuesday (February 10th) as part of a new action against the top war crimes fugitive's support network.
EUFOR, which led the operation, said the raids fulfilled the request of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The goal was "to look for information which could assist the ongoing search" for the UN tribunal's most wanted indictee.
NATO troops and Republika Srpska (RS) police also took part in the raids in the towns of Vojkovic and Kasindol, near Sarajevo, where Mladic's sister, Milica Avram, and sister-in-law, Radinka Mladic, live.
International forces carried off numerous items for further examination but made no arrests.
"Both operations were co-operative, went smoothly," EUFOR spokesman Patrick O'Callaghan told Reuters on Tuesday.
"Interviews will be ongoing;
documentation will be looked into."
Mladic went on the run about 13 years ago, shortly after UN prosecutors issued their initial indictment accusing him of involvement in a host of war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH.
Mladic allegedly committed genocide during the 43-month siege of Sarajevo and the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys.
His pursuers think Mladic is hiding in Serbia, where authorities recently put up "wanted" posters offering a 1m-euro reward for information leading to this arrest.
EUFOR also noted on Tuesday that anyone who provides such information may be eligible for the reward of up to 3.9m euros, offered by the United States several years ago.
Full co-operation with the ICTY, including the arrest and handover of indicted war criminals, is a key condition that Balkan countries hoping to join the EU must meet to gain admission to the 27-nation bloc.
Noting the RS interior ministry's continuing co-operation in efforts to bring indicted war criminals to justice, EUFOR commended its members "for their professionalism, courage and determination to bring this issue to a close".
Raffi Gregorian, the acting high representative in BiH, also issued a statement Tuesday voicing his support for the joint operation against Mladic's support network and for future efforts towards his capture.
Referring to Mladic's defiance of numerous calls from Serbian authorities for his surrender, Gregorian said there could hardly be "a more dishonourable act for an officer than to abandon subordinates in order to save himself".
The other war crimes indictee from the Balkan conflicts still sought by the ICTY is former Croatian Serb leader Goran Hadzic.
