11/02/2009
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 11/02/09
Although the majority of Croatians are satisfied with their lives, 64% believe their country is going in the wrong direction, according to the Balkan Monitor survey.
However, only 7% would go abroad for better economic prospects.
The results of the poll were presented at a conference last week in Zagreb.
The Balkan Monitor poll -- which took place in September and October 2008 -- is the largest public opinion survey to take place in the region.
It is a joint project of the European Fund for the Balkans and the Gallup Agency.
The study continually monitors the views of Balkan residents on living standards, the EU, employment opportunities, residence abroad and the performance of their governments.
At the conference Friday (February 6th), Robert Manchin, director of Gallup Europe, presented the poll results.
"European institutions must take responsibility ...
if they want to support the integration of Balkan states into the EU.
Also, it is evident that Croatia is a leader in regional EU integration and most of the Croats don't see themselves as [part of the] Balkans," Manchin said.
Only slightly more than 25% of those polled support Union membership.
Slightly more citizens say that EU membership is beneficial for their country than say it is harmful (29% versus 26%), but a plurality of respondents (38%) did not take sides on that question.
The survey suggests Croats are becoming less passionate about the EU.
Pollsters consider the ongoing maritime border dispute with Slovenia one of the main factors sapping respondents' enthusiasm for the Union.
Aside from presenting the results of survey research, panelists weighed in on the topic "Croatia:
tired of EU reforms?" Participants included Manchin, European Fund for the Balkans member Hedvig Morvai, National Board for EU Negotiations President Vesna Pusic, philosophy professor and NGO activist Zarko Puhovski, Croatian Foreign Ministry State Secretary Davor Bozinovic and Delegation of the European Commission in Croatia head Vincent Degert.
According to Bozinovic, Croatia's positions remain unstated in only three of its EU negotiating chapters.
"These chapters concern administration of justice, fundamental rights and market competition.
I do think that we have time to complete our goals in the next period," Bozinovic said.
Commenting on the survey results, Pusic said that many times, they reflect emotion.
"It is clear that in Croatia we must have zero tolerance of organised crime.
For us, the most important is reform of the judiciary," she argued.
Puhovski doubted the warmth of Brussels' welcome for Zagreb, saying that currently Croatia cares more about entering the EU than the EU does about admitting Croatia.
Only 46% of Croats felt "welcomed by the EU", as opposed to 82% of Kosovo respondents.
