11/02/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 11/02/09
This spring, shoppers in EU countries might be able to find fish from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on their shelves.
After a long struggle to meet EU regulations, four BiH firms -- from Mostar, Blagaj, Banja Luka and Stolac -- have permits to export fish to the Union's member states.
Fish -- primarily trout -- is one of the few BiH export commodities that the country's veterinary office determined could compete in the demanding EU market.
"This export permit provides us with an opportunity to place our fish for sale in stores throughout Europe.
We already have arrangements with the countries to export fish, so deliveries could start as early as next month," says Sanel Saric, director of Norfish from Blagaj.
However, having pocketed those permits as early as last year, the four firms are still reluctant to begin actual exports.
Their managers say the prices possible under EU tax rates are too low to be profitable.
The companies object to the EU's tax-free export quota for trout, which they consider too low.
Currently, the maximum each firm can export while enjoying a tax exemption is 60 tonnes of trout per year.
They are negotiating with the Union for a higher quota before taxes kick in.
Since the EU has high hygienic standards for importing food, BiH runs a billion-euro trade deficit annually with the bloc and exports only several million euros' worth of products annually to the Union, mainly raw materials or semi-finished goods that do not require safety or quality certificates.
The BiH veterinary office, though, is trying to obtain export permits for dairy products, honey and chicken, as well as for some non-perishable red-meat products.
The country's exporters could benefit if they obtained permission to place the Conformite Europeene (CE) stamp on their goods.
CE-marked merchandise can be sold throughout the EU without requiring modification in each member state.
Local businesspeople, unaware of EU consumers' demanding standards, still believe the International Organisation for Standardisation's "ISO" certificates will suffice to placate EU shoppers and do not bother to meet CE certification requirements.
Radomir Marinkovic, co-ordinator of PHARE programmes in BiH, warns that such stubborn merchants will soon find themselves unable to sell to the CEFTA countries too, since they are quicker than BiH to adopt European rules.
He faults the government for failing to educate exporters on the importance of the CE mark.
