10/02/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/02/09
Two houses stand atop a hill in northern Kosovo.
These otherwise ordinary homes represent the boundary between the Albanian and Serb populations in the village of Suhadoll, on the northern part of the Iber River in the divided town of Mitrovica.
The Albanian owner of one house finds it impossible to rebuild, since local Serbs object to his plans.
Police and KFOR have had to keep them and his Albanian neighbours from coming to blows more than once.
The ongoing confrontation over a single house epitomises the instability and tension plaguing Mitrovica, where a series of inter-ethnic incidents -- such as the torching of Albanian shops and the stabbing of a Serb man -- began in late 2008.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci has promised that law and order will prevail in every part of Kosovo, pointedly including Mitrovica in his vow.
Mitrovica Mayor Bajram Rexhepi says he fully supports stepped-up enforcement by the police, EULEX and KFOR.
According to him, the multi-ethnic patrols, which began several weeks ago, "create trust in the population.
And as such, we support them, in order to create a safe and secure environment for everyone".
Interior Minister Zenun Pajaziti also praised the patrols for increasing security.
On January 23rd, Mitrovica region police spokesman Besim Hoti announced some progress by telling the Pristina daily Express that police had arrested two local Serbs for vandalism.
"Police arrested [them] for breaking car windows," Hoti said, referring to a spree that damaged more than 50 cars belonging to ethnic Albanians.
While northern Kosovo remains volatile, some now see reason for cautious optimism, such as Elizabeth Pond of the Christian Science Monitor.
She argues that Serbia and the EU have begun "tacit co-operation" in pacifying northern Kosovo, since Belgrade covets membership in the Union.
According to Pond, Serbian agents have kept "Serb troublemakers" from escalating their activities, while Kosovo police, EULEX police and KFOR peacekeepers have in turn held back "Albanian hotheads".
In another sign of tentative progress, some journalists in Serbia and Kosovo, as well as officials like Pajaziti, see more than simple ethnic hatred as a motive for the turmoil and are beginning to note the self-interest of both Serbian and Albanian crime rings in prolonging it.
The opposition Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), though, accuses the government of not doing enough for the north's beleaguered ethnic Albanians.
AAK chairman and former Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj said on Sunday (February 8th) he would be able to integrate the divided town of Mitrovica within three months of taking power.
Kosovo holds local elections in November.
