10/04/2009
(MIA, Makfax, Beta, B92, Radio Srbija - 09/04/09)
Eight EU member states have urged the European Commission (EC) to take quick steps towards lifting the visa requirements for the Western Balkan nations, Serbian and Macedonian media reported on Thursday (April 9th).
"We believe that the essential decision on the abolishment of the visa regime should be taken without delay, as soon as the states meet the set criteria," the foreign ministers of Estonia, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia said in a letter, dated April 4th. 
The EC opened visa facilitation talks with Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia last year.
The "road map" of requirements each country has received covers four sets of issues: document security; illegal migration, including readmission; public order and security; and external relations and fundamental rights.
"Progress has been achieved in all four blocks identified in the road maps," Macedonian news agency MIA quoted the eight ministers as saying in their letter. 
"Major reforms were launched in the area of justice, freedom and security."
The letter sent to EC Vice-President Jacques Barrot, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and the Czech EU presidency also urged the commission to finalise the reports on the countries' progress ahead of the European Parliamentary elections in early June. 
In the event of a positive assessment, the eight foreign ministers said, Brussels should recommend abolishing the visa regime for the countries that have met the criteria for this without delay.
The final decision, which requires approval by a qualified majority of EU member states to enter into force, will be taken in November. 
If abolition passes, citizens of the concerned countries will be able to travel without visas to any EU state starting in 2010.
Hailing the eight foreign ministers' move, Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Bocevski said Thursday that citizens of his country are paying 5m euros per year on average for EU visas. 
He also noted that 70% of the nation's youth had never visited an EU country, while their parents travelled freely throughout Europe in the Yugoslav era.
The EU visa regime introduced for the Western Balkan countries some 15 years ago achieved nothing except helping "small Balkan autocrats" stay in power for over a decade, said Bocevski.
He stressed the period had been a "lost decade" for those countries.
Visa liberalisation will create new opportunities for travel and business co-operation with European partners, predicted Bocevski. 
Furthermore, it will enable all citizens of Macedonia "to become exposed to the influence of the EU, which would result in a fundamental transformation of ... 
society," Bocevski added.
