10/12/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/12/08
After months of international wrangling, the EU's rule-of-law mission, EULEX, began deploying throughout Kosovo on Tuesday (December 9th).
EULEX chief Yves de Kermabon said the mission had succeeded in deploying throughout the whole country, including in the Serb-dominated north.
"I'm happy to say that this morning we have been able to launch EULEX throughout Kosovo," he said at a joint press conference Tuesday with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci.
"We will be determined to extend the authority of Kosovo institutions," Thaci said.
Reports indicated no problems in the early going at potential flash points.
In northern Mitrovica, the site of rioting by ethnic Serbs ten months earlier, more than 100 EULEX officials entered police stations and courthouses, as well as two customs posts the rioters had destroyed.
They inspected without incident cars crossing the border.
However, both the Serb minority and Albanian majority have complaints with EULEX, which emerged only after months of negotiations that included Serbia and its ally, Russia.
AFP reported "disgust" among witnesses as EULEX first appeared on Tuesday in Serb enclaves such as Gracanica.
Local resident Dragomir Vukovic called the EULEX officials an "occupying power".
Meanwhile, ethnic Albanians resent concessions the UN made to ethnic Serbs in order to win Belgrade's approval of the deployment, such as keeping EULEX "neutral" on the issue of Kosovo independence.
They fear a tacit partition of the fledgling country.
Observers expect that, ethnic tensions aside, EULEX's biggest problem will be curbing the rampant organised crime that has sprung up to take advantage of the poorly enforced borders with Serbia, Montenegro, Albania and Macedonia.
KFOR, the NATO peacekeeping force, raised its alert status in readiness for any violence.
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana predicted the Kosovo and Serbian governments both would give their "close co-operation" to the EU on the EULEX deployment.
On Monday, the EU foreign ministers welcomed the pending deployment in Kosovo.
"December 9th is an important moment in the chaotic situation that we have had regarding EULEX deployment.
But it is most important for Kosovo and Serbia," said French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner.
He says the deployment is a victory not only for the French presidency of the EU, but for all EU member states and resonates through the entire region.
EULEX has a unified chain of command leading up to Brussels and works within the framework of UN Security Council Resolution 1244.
Its budget for the first 16 months is 205m euros.
