10/02/2009
(AP, Reuters, STA, HINA, B92, Makfax, Albanian foreign ministry - 09/02/09)
Albania and Croatia moved a step closer towards full-fledged NATO membership on Monday (February 9th) after the Slovenian parliament ratified the two countries' accession protocols with the Alliance.
All 26 NATO states must ratify them for Albania and Croatia to join.
Tirana and Zagreb hope this will happen at the Alliance's summit in Strasbourg, France, and Kehl, Germany, in early April, when the organisation will celebrate its 60th anniversary.
Slovenia is the 21st member of the Alliance to complete the ratification procedures.
The law on Albania's accession protocol won the unanimous support of lawmakers in the country's 90-seat National Assembly, the lower house of parliament.
Croatia's bid passed by a vote of 75-11.
Four deputies were absent.
The bills required approval by two-thirds of the members to pass.
The Albanian and Croatian foreign ministries welcomed the move.
They voiced confidence that the remaining five NATO members -- Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Portugal -- will complete the process before the April summit.
Observers viewed the Slovenian parliament's approval of Croatia's bid as a show of goodwill towards its neighbour.
The two countries remain apart on some issues, including a border dispute dating back to the fall of Yugoslavia in 1991.
In late October, Slovenia blocked the opening of three new chapters in Croatia's EU accession talks over the issue.
Zagreb hopes to complete its negotiations with Brussels by the end of this year, to be able to join the Union by 2011.
The Slovenian government wants the border dispute resolved before the 27-nation bloc admits Croatia.
Some officials in Ljubljana have even threatened to call a public referendum on Zagreb's EU membership bid.
A poll conducted by the Ljubljana-based daily Delo among 398 Slovenians showed on Monday that 49.7% of the respondents would vote against Croatia joining the EU, while 32.7% would back its bid.
Zagreb's NATO bid won more support, with 46.8% of those favouring it and 37.5% opposing it.
"Slovenia has no justified reasons for reluctance ...
towards Croatia's accession to NATO," Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor told lawmakers ahead of Monday's vote, urging them to back ratification.
"Slovenia's national interests are not endangered by the debate on Croatia's accession to NATO."
Slovenia's news agency, STA, reported on Tuesday that a commission of the National Council, the upper house of parliament, plans to request access to Croatia's NATO accession documents, to make sure it had met all requirements.
