08/05/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara – 08/05/09
Two years into their hunt, investigators pursuing the Ergenekon case are still arresting suspects -- almost 200 at last count -- and unearthing ammunition caches. 
As a result, Turks find themselves simultaneously questioning the government's motives and marvelling at the size of arsenals police are turning up.
The investigation reached a critical point in April with raids of the offices and homes of distinguished secular activists and the uncovering of yet another arms cache in an Istanbul neighbourhood.
The surprisingly long-lived probe of an alleged right-wing plot to topple the Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party (AKP) government has increased the polarisation between religious and secular elements in society.
Now, with nearly 200 suspects facing charges -- many of them prominent, including former and current university rectors -- secular critics of the investigation are becoming increasingly dubious of its motives. 
One trigger for them was the April police raid on various offices of the Support for Modern Life Association (CYDD), a secular NGO favouring girls' education.
Detractors of the AKP objected to the police interrogating CYDD chairwoman Turkan Saylan, an elderly cancer patient. 
To them, it indicated, as did waves of earlier wiretaps and arrests, that the government is using the investigation to stamp out secularist opposition.
On the other hand, seemingly lending credence to the government's concerns, police on April 21st unearthed a second weapon cache in Istanbul's Poyrazkoy district. 
They found 3,000 bullets, 14 hand grenades, and 15 anti-tank weapons. 
Prosecutors also collected eight hours of testimony from retired Chief of the General Staff General Hilmi Ozkok, who may have prevented some generals from carrying out a coup during his tenure.
The current head of the armed forces, General Ilker Basbug, criticised the conduct of the investigation and the publication of distorted information about it but affirmed the military's commitment to the rule of law. 
"No one can have a place within the Turkish armed forces and conduct activities against the democratic government," he said last month.
Analysts express concern about the symptoms they are seeing as the investigation scoops up an increasing number of suspects: deepening polarisation of the society's religious and secular elements, a lack of judicial independence and even a perceived Islamist thirst for revenge against secularists.
Arzuhan Yalcindag -- head of the influential Turkish Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association -- voiced some of those concerns in an April appearance at the Brookings Institution in Washington, DC.
"The trial, the way it is being handled, is careless. 
There may have been violations of fundamental rights, such as presumption of innocence and the right to privacy," she said.
