09/04/2009
(AP - 09/04/09;
FT, UPI, AKI, Beta, B92, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International - 08/04/09)
International rights groups criticised Serbia on Wednesday (April 8th) over the forced eviction of nearly 130 members of the country's Roma community from their makeshift homes in Belgrade.
"The eviction conducted on April 3rd clearly violates [the] Serbian government's obligations under international human rights law," the European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC) and Human Rights Watch (HRW) wrote to Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic.
The two organisations urged Serbian authorities to secure alternative homes for the 47 Roma families who were left on the street as a result of Friday's move and to compensate them for lost property and other damage.
Last Thursday, the Roma families, living in cardboard-roofed shacks in the Serbian capital's New Belgrade district, received notification that they should move out of their illegal dwellings within 15 days to avoid forced eviction.
Less than 24 hours later, however, Belgrade Mayor Dragan Djilas sent police and bulldozers to raze shacks and build an access road for a July sporting event.
The demolition of about 50 shacks left 128 people homeless.
The city made pre-fabricated container houses in the suburb of Boljevci available as temporary housing for the displaced families.
Local residents, however, threatened to burn the containers rather than let the Roma move in.
Some of the affected families are now staying with neighbours, but at least 12 remain on the streets, according to HRW.
It believes authorities are planning more evictions in the future.
Amnesty International (AI) also criticised the Serbian authorities for flouting their international obligations.
"Forced evictions -- carried out without assurances of alternative accommodation -- are a grave violation of human rights," Sian Jones, AI's researcher on Serbia, said in a statement.
She faulted Serbia for violating the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Around 100 members of NGOs and Roma associations, holding banners reading "Discrimination Is the Heart of Serbia" and "Roma Our Neighbour" gathered in front of the Belgrade city hall Wednesday to protest last week's evictions.
Urging the authorities to quickly resolve the problem, they also demanded Djilas's resignation.
AI voiced concern that many of those left without a home last week could be among the 22,000 Roma from Kosovo registered in Serbia as internally displaced people.
"Few Roma displaced people possess the necessary documentation [for establishing] the right to residency or the right to adequate housing," the organisation said.
Serbia, which currently holds the rotating presidency of the Roma Decade of Inclusion, an initiative to improve the status of Europe's most vulnerable minority, organised a series of events to mark the International Day of the Roma on Wednesday.
