08/05/2009
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 08/05/09
Krassimir Avramov, considered by many a Jimmy Somerville sound-alike, will represent Bulgaria in the 2009 Eurovision Song Contest in Moscow.
Dubbed the "man-voice" in his country, the 40-year-old tenor-altino will present the song "Illusion" in the first semi-final on Tuesday (May 12th) in Moscow.
Avramov hopes to hit the stage again on May 16th as one of the 25 contestants to qualify for the final.
Like every other participant in the pan-European competition, he dreams of taking its 54th edition.
Bulgaria nabbed its best result in 2007, when Elitsa Todorova and Stoyan Yankulov finished fifth with their folk-based piece, "Water".
The country's track record at Eurovision is quite short, dating back only to 2005.
Avramov will share the stage with backup vocalists Petya Buyuklieva, Ani Lozanova and Albena Veskova, as well as two American stilt dancers.
"Illusion" blends together elements of opera, pop and folk music and includes some challenging high-pitch parts.
The song is about dreams, Avramov told Esctoday.com, an independent web site about the Eurovision contest, in a recent interview.
"People always dream of things which they cannot find in their real life," he said in the interview.
Avramov's red cape, the colourful outfits of the backup vocalists, a wind machine and gigantic fires on screens in the background enhance the performance's dramatic effect.
Born in the southeastern town of Sliven, Avramov is a graduate of the National Academy for Theatrical and Film Arts in Sofia.
His debut album, "Silent Voices", topped the pop charts in Bulgaria in 1997.
A year later, he moved to Los Angeles, California.
At the 2005 LA Music Awards, he won "Superstar of the Year" for his 2005 album, the title of which, "Popera," is his chosen term for his synergy of classical and pop music.
The Bulgarian singer and songwriter won the national Eurovision competition on February 21st, when more than 55% of those who voted by text messaging for the 12 participants in the final supported him and "Illusion".
His victory angered the supporters of his main rival, Poli Genova, who numbered less than 12%.
Backed by some musicians and composers, they claimed Avramov sang out of tune and called for his withdrawal.
