09/02/2009
(Sofia Echo, SNA - 06/02/09; Reporters without Borders, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg, Capital.bg, - 05/02/09)
Press freedom has diminished considerably in Bulgaria since the country joined the EU in January 2007, an international media watchdog group warned in a report Thursday (February 5th).
"Organised crime groups ... 
have extended their ascendency over the media," the Paris-based Reporters without Borders (RWB) said. 
Bulgaria ranked 59th out of 173 countries in the group's latest annual press freedom index, lower than any other EU member nation. 
Its ranking has fallen 24 places since 2006.
The RWB compiled its new 14-page report on the country's beleaguered press after several disturbing incidents in 2008.
In April, Georgy Stoev, a reporter with expertise on organised crime, was shot and killed in Sofia. 
In September, a gang beat Ognyan Stefanov, the editor of the Frog News web site, into a three-day coma.
It additionally emerged that month that the State Agency for National Security (DANS) had tapped the phones of a number of lawmakers and journalists.
That, according to the RWB, showed corruption and news manipulation have largely replaced the violent intimidation characterising the first half of the 1990s, although the Stoev and Stefanov incidents show violence still occurs.
"Some journalists are resigned to censoring themselves, while others continue to actively resist business and political pressure," the media watchdog found. 
Stoev's murder and Stefanov's assault, it added, "have served as reminders of the risks" for those who defy such pressure.
In addition, a 1998 law banning members of the country's communist-era National Security from holding executive positions in news media is not strictly observed, according to the RWB.
The group also found that the official Union of Bulgarian Journalists has little authority and that the journalists' code of ethics remains largely a piece of paper. 
For example, some reporters are prone to accepting "business gifts", since journalism is not a highly esteemed or lucrative career.
According to the group, the country's journalists experience two levels of press freedom, with those in Sofia enjoying more latitude than their counterparts in provincial cities, where powerful figures linked to local officials frown on honest reporting.
Assen Yordanov, a journalist from Burgas, told RWB that the situation has worsened over the past 15 years. 
The most sensitive subject, he said, was corruption involving high-level officials in the judiciary or in the interior ministry.
"But the number of such subjects is growing in [this] neo-feudal society," said Yordanov, who has endured threats and a physical assault.
The group said that the European parliamentary elections in June will test the Bulgarian authorities' commitment to ensuring that journalists can do their job freely.
