08/04/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 08/04/09
Turkey has a surprise pick for this year's Eurovision song contest in Moscow.
Unlike last year, when the band Mor ve Otesi performed an anti-war song, this year Turkey will send an attractive young pop star with an up-tempo hit.
With her catchy song "Dum Tek Tek" , surprising choreography and elegant dancing, Hadise hopes to excite millions of Eurovision viewers and boost her following in Europe.
The 23-year-old Belgian native is the daughter of Turkish immigrants. 
She made her debut in the Belgian "Idool 2003" talent contest. 
After releasing two albums, Hadise became one of Turkey's leading pop stars. 
She credits Janet Jackson, Alicia Keys and Toni Braxton with significantly influencing her music.
The Turkish public broadcaster TRT selected Hadise last year and considers her one of the favourites of this year's contest.
Hadise was exposed to a variety of cultures during her upbringing and speaks five languages. 
She considers her multicultural past an asset, and tries to synthesise rock, soul and ethnic music of various countries in her art.
"Dum Tek Tek" combines pop, oriental rhythms and Turkish musical influences.
Hadise has already received widespread support from the Turkish diaspora in Europe. 
Her performance during concerts last month shows that she can expect numerous tele-votes from countries with large Turkish immigrant populations, mainly in Germany, Belgium and France.
"I believe that stereotypes, prejudices about Turkey are still widespread … I would be happy if I could make any contribution in eliminating these false prejudices," she said.
Hadise is not alone. 
For decades, Turks yearned for an acknowledgment of their western identity through Eurovision and sent their best performers. 
However, bloc voting by other countries and a decades-long lack of success soured Turks on the contest; between 1975 and 2002, their entry finished above tenth only twice. 
A perception arose that Turkey had almost "no real friend" in Europe.
Turkey's win at the 2003 Eurovision (Sertab Erener, "Every Way That I Can") put an end to that perception. 
Many Turks remain uncomfortable with bloc voting being used to advance other countries' singers, yet cannot resist watching the contest.
Six years after their breakthrough, millions of Turks hope Hadise will bring the crown back to their country next month.
