07/11/2008
(Euobserver, AFP - 07/11/08; Reuters, The Economist, B92, B92 - 05/11/08)
EU foreign ministers are expected to endorse a proposal Monday (November 10th) urging the 27-nation bloc to assume the responsibilities of the Office of the High Representative (OHR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) by the middle of 2009.
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana and Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn drafted the paper amid growing concerns over the deteriorating political situation in BiH.
"The status quo is unviable and likely to remain so until and unless the international community is prepared to change the parameters of its presence and approach," the paper says, according to a Reuters report.
The OHR was a product of the Dayton Peace Agreement that ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH. 
It was originally supposed to close in early 2007 and hand over the leading role in the country to an EU Special Representative (EUSR). 
The Peace Implementation Council (PIC), which comprises more than 40 nations and international organisations, however, decided to postpone the closure amid concerns about BiH's inability to take full responsibility for its own affairs.
The country's political situation has been deteriorating since the October 2006 general elections, with its leading politicians fanning nationalist emotions. 
The most recent round of recriminations began when Haris Silajdzic, the Bosniak member of BiH's tripartite presidency, addressed the UN General Assembly on September 23rd, saying the creation of RS was a "mistake" of the Dayton Peace Accords and "genocide cannot be rewarded". 
His rival, RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, always a foe of BiH statehood, in turn threatened in an October 10th television interview to declare RS's independence if the OHR tried to remove him from office.
As a result, inter-ethnic tensions have deepened and implementation of reforms critical to BiH's EU integration has stalled.
In the apparent absence of domestic forces that can force squabbling political leaders in BiH to focus on EU-required reforms instead, "a stronger engagement of the EU is today more essential than ever before", the Solana-Rehn proposal reportedly reads.
They also called on the EU to "maximise its political leverage in the country" in the short and medium term by taking steps towards closing the OHR and adopting a new UN resolution allowing the EUSR to take over its residual powers in BiH. 
The document called for the EU to "be ready by mid 2009".
Elements of BiH's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU should serve as "drivers for reform".
The PIC's Steering Board is expected to discuss the OHR's future and possible closure later this month. 
Observers believe a decision to end its operations in BiH would likely attract support, all the more because the OHR's current budget expires in June 2009.
