08/04/2009
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 08/04/09
The prime ministers of Albania and Croatia, Sali Berisha and Ivo Sanader, were in Brussels on Tuesday (April 7th) for a ceremony marking their countries' accession into NATO. 
The two Balkan states became the Alliance's newest members late last week.
As Berisha, Sanader and NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer looked on, the Albanian and Croatian flags were raised. 
According to Berisha, it was the most important day for Albania since the country gained independence in November 1912.
"We owe NATO our freedom," the prime minister said. 
"The process of accession in the Alliance has become a guiding light for reforms in Albania."
Sanader also noted the significance of the occasion. 
"Full NATO membership has been Croatia's strategic goal since our country declared independence, and today's ceremony is one of the greatest achievements in Croatia's modern history," he said. 
"The Croatian flag flying in front of us represents generations of Croatians who had eagerly waited for the day when Croatia will become a modern state anchored in the Euro-Atlantic structures of peace and democracy."
Extending his congratulations, de Hoop Scheffer said the accession is a well-deserved reward for years of membership preparations and is of signal importance to Southeast Europe.
Albania and Croatia's entry, he said, demonstrates not only the attractiveness of NATO membership but also the vision and courage of the Alliance's founders.
In Tirana, the mood has been exultant. 
Most Albanians, regardless of political party, see accession as a key milestone for their once-isolated country. 
The next stop, they hope, will be membership in the EU.
Popular support for Alliance membership is overwhelming. 
A survey conducted by the Institute for Democracy and Mediation in June 2007 found support at about 90%. 
Approximately 83% of the respondents believed membership would accelerate EU integration.
Berisha hopes voters will credit his administration when they go to the polls for general elections on June 28th. 
The government is vying for a second four-year term.
"NATO membership guarantees our freedom," Berisha told a crowd gathered in Skanderbeg Square on Sunday. 
"We shall safely move towards the second biggest project, full EU membership."
Opposition leader Edi Rama, however, claims Berisha and previous leaders bungled the process, slowing Albania's entry.
"Albania entered NATO -- but not because of the politicians who delayed the process more than once over the last 18 years," he said at a press conference.
