06/03/2009
(Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, New York Times, BBC, VOA, NATO, EurActiv - 05/03/09)
NATO foreign ministers agreed on Thursday (March 5th) to formally resume the NATO-Russia Council (NRC) meetings, which the Alliance suspended seven months ago following Moscow's invasion of Georgia.
"Russia is an important player, a global player. 
Not talking to them is not an option," NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said.
According to Slovak Foreign Minister Miroslav Lajcak, meetings will resume "as soon as possible" after the April 3rd-4th NATO summit.
The agreement to revive talks with Russia came after a prolonged debate, with Lithuania insisting that it was "premature to open the formal dialogue" and urging Allies to postpone a decision until next month's summit.
Participants in Thursday's meeting made it clear, however, that their frustration over Russia's invasion of Georgia last year and its diplomatic recognition of Georgia's breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia had not cooled yet.
"Ministers will urge Russia to meet its commitments with respect to Georgia," the statement stressed.
Established in 2002, the NRC is a mechanism for consultation, consensus building, co-operation, joint decision and joint action by NATO and Russia.
Despite the 26-nation pact's serious differences with Moscow, Alliance members recognised that they need to revive the dialogue with Russia to address mutually relevant issues. 
These include Georgia, Afghanistan, counterterrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, de Hoop Scheffer said in his opening speech.
"We have quite a number of areas where we have fundamental differences of opinion and where we think that Russia should really change its position," the NATO chief said.
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also pushed for "a fresh start" in the Alliance's relations with Moscow.
"We can and must find ways to work constructively with Russia where we share areas of common interest," she said.
Ahead of Thursday's meeting, Moscow said it would allow the passage of nonlethal US military supplies through its territory to Afghanistan.
Voicing hope that NRC meetings could resume later this month, Russian Ambassador to NATO Dmitry Rogozin said on Wednesday that the "period of estrangement" in his country's relations with the Alliance is "largely behind us".
However, he expressed regret the talks would not resume as quickly as he had hoped.
"We are just surprised that this issue of the resuming of practical work is postponed for another month," he said at a press conference.
Clinton proposed on Thursday an international conference on ways to stabilise Afghanistan, to be held in the Netherlands on March 31st and with the UN chairing the meeting.
Georgia, Afghanistan and Washington's plans to build a missile defence shield in Eastern Europe are among the issues Clinton likely will discuss with Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov in Geneva on Friday (March 6th).
