07/05/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 07/05/09
After years of relative laxity, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is again making an effort to confront the growing Wahhabi and other hard-line strains within its Muslim community.
This week, authorities arrested three foreigners who fought in the 1992-1995 conflict and who are now in the hands of BiH's immigration service.
Last March, Sarajevo extradited Ali Ahmed Ali Hamad, a native of Bahrain, to his homeland after he had served a 12-year sentence for terrorism.
The al-Qaeda member arrived in BiH in 1992 and spent the 1992-1995 conflict serving in the mujahideen unit "Al Mujahid".
The government termed him a "threat to public order" and sought at that time to deport another two suspected Islamic extremists.
According to Ali Hamad, there are still about 800 al-Qaeda members in BiH.
This figure differs from Deputy High Representative for BiH Raffi Gregorian's estimate of "somewhere more than ten and less than 100".
Gregorian also said some senior government officials had exhibited a willingness to help conceal terrorists and to provide them with false IDs and financial aid.
Immediately after the BiH conflict, the government allowed former members of Al Mujahid to receive special privileges:
immunity from arrest, memberships in numerous aid organisations and even passports on demand.
Many married local women.
Since then, successive BiH governments proceeded with caution, mindful of perceived political risks.
However, the willingness by Sarajevo to prosecute and deport may mean a new consensus within the government's ranks.
Some observers have tried to connect the extremist groups and the BiH Islamic community's leadership.
Grand Mufti of Sarajevo Mustafa Efendija Ceric rejected such accusations, referring to a community resolution dating back to the 1990s conflict.
The resolution clearly states that any individual or groups who seek to impose their own visions of Islam on BiH Muslims are unacceptable and reprehensible.
Recently, Ceric said Vienna -- a financial centre for Islamic extremists from the former Yugoslavia -- is the primary source of negative influences on local Muslims and that "we do not need anyone … to interpret Islam for us."
Illustrating the challenge Ceric faces was a gathering of European Muslims in mid-April in Vienna.
Attendees included the Wahhabi firebrand and Ceric foe Nedzad Balkan, identified as a "Vienna-born Serbian Muslim" by the Swiss-based International Relations and Security Network.
Ahmet Alibasic, a professor of Islamic studies at the University of Sarajevo, told the Southeast European Times "It is ridiculous and reprehensible to hold a gathering in Vienna to discuss who is a good Muslim and who is not."
