08/04/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 08/04/09
The arrests of Directorate General of Information and Internal Protection (DGIPI) chief Cornel Ilie Serban and General Anti-corruption Directorate (DNA) Operations Division Director Petru Pitcovici two weeks ago are the latest in a major scandal plaguing Romania's interior ministry.
Police also arrested former university rector Ioan Nicolae Alecu and businessman Aurel Puiu Popoviciu.
The four are being investigated for alleged participation in shadowy real estate deals in 2000, anti-corruption prosecutors announced.
The authorities charged Serban and Pitcovici with trying to block an investigation of Popoviciu and Alecu's alleged involvement.
The deals concern a 220ha plot in Baneasa, a wealthy suburb of Bucharest.
The land is worth hundreds of millions of euros, but the buyers paid only 82,000 euros.
One of Romania's most ambitious real estate projects, worth 1.5 billion euros and initiated by Popoviciu, is on the plot of land.
A DNA investigator told prosecutors that Serban and Pitcovici promised him a large amount of money and a job in the ministry if he could "work out Popoviciu's file".
Police put the pair under surveillance for three months before arresting them.
During the surveillance, the DNA found that Serban also disclosed classified information to the Romanian consul in Milan, Tiberiu Dinu.
The DNA has summoned Dinu as a witness.
The DNA investigator also said the two officers mentioned President Traian Basescu had interceded in the case on behalf of Popoviciu because allegedly his brother allegedly conducted business with Popoviciu.
The office of the president has refuted any association between Basescu and Popoviciu.
However, local media reported that Basescu's daughter, Ioana, opened a public notary office in Popoviciu's residential complex, where she also bought a 550,000-euro suite.
Two former interior ministers proposed by the governing coalition previously resigned in the DGIPI-related scandal.
Serban's arrest comes less than a month after his swearing-in as the head of the secret service.
Other high-ranking officials allegedly involved in the scandal include former Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, whose car import firm is based in Baneasa, and Health Minister Ioan Bazac, who has business dealings with Dinu's daughter.
Interior Minister Dan Nica denied rumours he would dismantle the DGIPI.
On April 1st, Nica said he would instead reform it to adhere to European standards.
He emphasised the DGIPI's key role in fighting crime;
almost 90% of criminals are apprehended based on DGIPI intelligence, Nica said.
