06/11/2008
By Igor Jovanovic and Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 06/11/08
As part of a diplomatic push, British Foreign Secretary David Miliband visited Belgrade and Pristina on Wednesday (November 5th).
The UN Security Council session on Kosovo is scheduled for November 11th, and Belgrade and EU representatives have confirmed that talks are under way on the deployment of the EU mission to Kosovo.
Belgrade initially fought the mission's deployment but now says it is possible on three conditions -- that the UN Security Council approves the mission, that it be neutral on the status of Kosovo and that it does not implement the plan of former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari, which envisions Pristina's independence from Serbia.
Serbian officials told Miliband that Belgrade wants to join the EU but would not abandon its terms regarding Kosovo.
"I think there is room for co-operation even though [our differences on Kosovo] are fundamentally large," Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said after conferring with his British counterpart.
Jeremic said Serbia would block any potential agreement in the UN that fails to meets its conditions.
Russia has backed it at the world body.
Miliband said Britain supports Serbia's EU aspirations but added that a solution on the deployment of EULEX is essential.
He said it was up to EU members to decide individually on the status of Kosovo and pointed out EULEX sought to "protect the people, all people, not to decide on the status";
hence, the mission's deployment would be in Belgrade's interest as well.
The British diplomat's visit came as the Serbian opposition, led by former Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, accused the government of conducting secret talks on EULEX that would aid Kosovo's independence.
However, the opposition lacks a majority in parliament and should be unable to pass a no-confidence motion.
Visiting Pristina later in the day, Miliband vowed that the international community would help Kosovo in its transition to democracy and that EULEX would deploy throughout Kosovo.
Britain was among the first countries to recognise Kosovo after it declared independence from Serbia on February 17th.
After a meeting with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, Miliband said London would not ask Pristina to sign "any document that violates its 'red lines'", conditions Kosovo would find absolutely unacceptable.
Miliband added, "The international community needs to be with you every step of the way.
The next step is the full deployment of EULEX throughout the territory of Kosovo, and that will happen."
Sejdiu said the people of Kosovo wanted to see the end of the UNMIK mission and the beginning of a EULEX deployment throughout Kosovo "very soon".
