06/11/2008
(European Commission, AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, FT, BBC, MIA, Makfax, Javno.hr, Beta, B92 - 05/11/08)
The European Commission (EC) issued on Wednesday (November 5th) its annual reports on eight Southeast European countries' accession progress, saying Croatia could complete its entry talks with the Union next year, if it meets the requirements.
It also urged six other Western Balkan countries and Turkey to speed up the implementation of political, economic and legislative reforms in order to gain membership sooner.
Croatia, one of the three official EU candidates, along with Turkey and Macedonia, began its accession talks with Brussels in October 2005.
Of the 35 chapters, or policy areas, that form part of the negotiation process, negotiators have opened 21 thus far, closing four of them provisionally.
"Based on the progress made by Croatia, it should be possible to reach the final stage of the accession negotiations by the end of 2009," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said.
Turkey, which also began its talks in October 2005, however, is far behind, with only eight of the negotiation chapters opened so far and one of them provisionally closed.
The EC, while critical of Turkey's pace of political reform, for the first time recognised the country as a "functioning market economy," a key economic benchmark.
It also praised Ankara for its active and "constructive" foreign policy, e.g., in the Caucasus.
Macedonia, which became an official EU candidate in December 2005, again failed to receive a green light for starting accession talks.
The country still needs to ensure free and fair elections and to improve dialogue among major political parties and figures, it noted.
The EC reports urged the aforementioned candidate countries and the five potential candidates -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Kosovo, Montenegro and Serbia -- to take bold action against corruption, which remains widespread across the region.
Serbia made some progress in this area and in developing a comprehensive anti-corruption policy during the reporting period, said the EC.
The country could win recognition as an official EU candidate next year if it makes tangible progress in priority political and economic reforms, as well as full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
"Serbia needs to do everything in its powers to arrest the remaining ICTY indictees, including Ratko Mladic," Rehn said.
Albania, BiH and Montenegro are moving ahead with the implementation of their respective Interim Agreements, the EC said.
They still need to consolidate the rule of law and administrative enforcement capacities.
The EC called on Albania to conduct its 2009 elections in line with international standards and on Montenegro to pursue aggressive judicial reform.
The EC also voiced concern over the rise of nationalism in BiH in recent months.
The EC report on Kosovo noted its widespread corruption and organised crime, saying the country's European integration was generally "at an early stage".
