07/04/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 07/04/09
US President Barack Obama swept through Turkey on Monday (April 6th) and Tuesday, meeting with government and opposition leaders and delivering a speech to parliament. 
By all accounts, he succeeded in turning around previously negative impressions of Washington.
He visited the Blue Mosque on Tuesday, and in a speech to students in Istanbul, said he is committed to opening a "new chapter in American engagement" with the Muslim world.
On Monday, Obama acknowledged the Iraq war had soured relations with Turkey, referring to "differences about whether to go to war". 
"I am committed to renewing the alliance between our nations," he told parliament. 
"Turkey is a critical ally."
Obama, who also met on Monday with counterpart Abdullah Gul, expressed new willingness to work closely with Turkey on an array of global challenges, including Afghanistan and the Middle East peace process.
But his most popular message was his clear statement on Islam. 
"The United States is not, and will never be, at war with Islam," he said to the applause of parliament members. 
"Many ... 
Americans have Muslims in their families or have lived in a Muslim-majority country -- I know, because I am one of them," Obama said.
Mindful of Turkey's ongoing political crisis, in which the Islamist-rooted ruling party and long-powerful secularists are at odds, Obama used every opportunity to underline that Turkey has been part of the West and Europe. 
He expressed his firmest-ever support for Turkey's EU membership in his speech to parliament.
"The United States strongly supports Turkey's bid to become a member of the EU," he said. 
"Turkish membership would broaden and strengthen Europe's foundation once more."
But Obama had pointed words for Turkey too, urging reforms and the reopening of Halki Seminary, an Orthodox institution closed by Turkey in 1971. 
"Freedom of religion and expression lead to a strong and vibrant civil society that only strengthens the state, which is why steps like reopening Halki Seminary will send such an important signal inside Turkey and beyond," Obama said.
He also faced the Armenia issue, a potential sore spot between the United States and Turkey. 
Ankara strongly opposes calling the deaths of 1.5 million Armenians in 1915 "genocide". 
Obama told reporters Turkey and Armenia are making progress in negotiations on normalising relations and that he is "not interested in the US tilting this negotiation in any way".
Another issue on which many Turks had entertained a negative opinion of Washington is the failure to stamp out terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) units entrenched in northern Iraq. 
Obama addressed that too.
"I pledge that you will have our support against the terrorist activities of the PKK or anyone else," he told parliament. 
However, he added, Turkey, Iraq and the Iraqi Kurdish regional government must keep building "ties of co-operation". 
In addition, he called for continued promotion of education and opportunity "for the Kurdish population here inside Turkey".
Obama won positive reviews from all elements of Turkey's polarised media and society. 
The secular daily Cumhuriyet hailed his "emphasis on secular democracy", while the pro-government daily Yeni Safakran carried his statement "I have Muslims in my family" as a headline. 
Vatan, a popular daily, concluded "Obama has won hearts."
