05/03/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 05/03/09
Greece may be seeing the end of Olympic Airlines' turbulent 34 years in state hands.
This week, three companies bid for the ailing state-owned carrier.
"We are close to a deal, which is expected to be finalised this Thursday," Reuters quoted an unnamed official from the Marfin Investment Group, Greece's biggest buyout specialist, as saying.
The rush of interest in the cash-strapped airline -- saving it from a nationally humiliating shutdown -- comes after the government's international tender expired in January with no satisfactory bidders.
Qatar Airways and the UAE's Etihad Airways were among the suitors who ultimately backed off.
Marfin controls almost 50% of the Greek passenger shipping market through its subsidiary, Blue Star Ferries.
Another subsidiary, Vivartia, is the largest player in the Balkan food industry.
The company estimates that its total investment -- if it wins the bid -- would range from 180m to 250m euros, including the cost of new planes and hiring of new staff.
Two other companies expressed interest while the government was reviewing Marfin's proposal.
Aegean Airlines, Olympic's privately owned Greek competitor, offered 170m euros on Wednesday, about twice as much as Marfin did.
Chrysler Aviation, a US-based air charter company, bid 210m euros on the same day, according to Greek state TV.
A fourth firm, the Spanish-owned air cargo and aircraft ground-handling firm Swissport, has bid solely for Olympic's ground-handling services.
The government's Intra-Cabinet Committee for Privatisations estimates the airline's current value at 120m euros.
Privatisation means an uncertain future for the airline's employees.
As part of the public sector, they currently enjoy generous fringe benefits.
In the past, they have resisted moves to sell off or overhaul the airline by staging strikes and demonstrations.
Business analysts, however, say Olympic's payroll is bloated.
The government has said it would transfer most of the 8,100 employees to other public sector positions, leaving the airline's eventual new owner with its corporate name and logo.
Athens has battled the EU for years over illegal subsidies to the carrier, which have been a profound drain on state coffers.
According to the AP, Olympic has "accumulated losses of around 2.7 billion euros".
Legendary shipping tycoon Aristotle Onassis founded Olympic in 1957 after acquiring TAE - Greek National Airlines.
The company, which enjoyed its glory days in the 1960s, passed into state hands in 1975 following Onassis's death.
Formerly known as Olympic Airways, it acquired its current name as part of a massive restructuring effort in 2003.
