06/05/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 06/05/09
The global economic crisis and the stalling of Turkey's EU accession talks have observers alarmed about the future of the Turkish economy.
The signs are ominous. 
The World Bank forecasts Turkey's economy will contract by 2% to 6% this year. 
Unemployment hit a record 15.5% in the first quarter, increasing 3.9 percentage points in a single year.
These figures contrast starkly with those of the 2002-2005 "golden years", when the economy grew at an annual average rate of 6%. 
Experts ranked Turkey as one of the world's 15 most attractive countries for foreign investment, since investors saw Turkey's EU bid as a reason for confidence and a source of stability.
Since 2007, though, Ankara's EU process has almost completely stalled. 
Among the brakes are the inability to resolve the Cyprus dispute and France's opposition to admitting Turkey into the Union. 
The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) appears to have lost its appetite for the EU.
However, Turkey's business leaders now believe that the country's economic future is closely linked once again to the EU process.
Rahmi Koc, honorary chairman of Turkey's biggest private enterprise, Koc Holding, called on the government to revive its efforts at joining the Union, which "would enable us [to have] an important anchor. 
Another anchor ... 
would be the IMF."
Bahcesehir University professor Seyfettin Gursel says the EU process exemplifies the long-term "South European" development model. 
He attributes the process's economic success to the benefits of EU integration, including low real interest rates and large Foreign Direct Investment.
Gursel contends, though, that "success does not only require economic reform … there is also need for political reforms." In short, "Turkey has to follow the road to democracy under EU standards."
The government has not turned a deaf ear to these calls. 
Turkey recently appointed an EU affairs chief negotiator, State Minister Egemen Bagis. 
He pledged to re-focus and accelerate political and economic reforms after the March local elections.
"We would like to work side by side with the opposition to pass major reforms in parliament, just as we did during the years of 2002-2005," he said.
The government said that among its main priorities is reform of the laws regulating elections and political parties.
The EU is expected to open two new chapters in Turkey's accession talks -- one on social policy and employment and the other on taxation -- by the end of June. 
The Union is also trying to convince Cyprus to rescind its veto on opening a key energy chapter. 
Pro-Union analysts hope the opening of these chapters will spark new enthusiasm in Turkey for EU reforms.
