06/02/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 06/02/09
The International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague on Tuesday (February 3rd) recognised Romanian sovereignty over a maritime area of 9,700 square km -- 79% of the 12,000 square km that Romania and Ukraine had been contesting. 
The waters lie south of Serpents' Island in the Black Sea.
The area holds an estimated 70 billion cubic metres of natural gas and 12 million tonnes of oil, currently valued at 23.4 billion euros, which could ensure Romania's energy independence for more than 15 years, according to experts.
The ICJ ruling ended a territorial dispute that festered for more than half a century. 
In 1948, the Soviet Union forced Romania, at the time its satellite, to cede Serpents' Island, located 45km east of the Danube Delta. 
In 1997, Romania and Ukraine signed a treaty on borders but agreed to disagree on the island and its surrounding waters. 
The Hague began hearing the case in September 2004.
"The verdict of the ICJ … represents a great success of the Romanian foreign minister," said President Traian Basescu, who was on an official visit to Hungary when the ICJ issued its ruling. 
He and Ukrainian counterpart Viktor Yushchenko had a telephone conversation on which they agreed that "both Romania and Ukraine will respect the ICJ's decision".
Since the ruling, Romanian media have covered rising star Bogdan Aurescu, 39, who represented Romania during the ICJ hearings, and is now secretary of state in the foreign ministry. 
Journalists are portraying him as the epitome of their country's new generation diplomats.
"The ICJ ruling ... 
observes general rules: no party is completely satisfied or completely dissatisfied. 
... 
I think, for Romania, this is half a victory -- but it is the best result we could have hoped for," Victor Lupu, deputy-editor-in-chief of the English-language daily Nine o'clock, told the Southeast European Times. 
"
Are these natural gas and oil reserves going to bring us energy independence? 
It depends on our leaders' ability to take advantage of the opportunity," he added.
Some of the nationwide delight dissipated with the revelation that the former Liberal government had granted partial rights of exploitation to a foreign company even before the court ruling.
Under siege from the media, the current government declassified a document that disclosed those dealings dated back to 1992. 
Prime Minister Emil Boc said his government would thoroughly review the document.
