05/02/2009
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 05/02/09
International opinion has been fiercely critical of Albania's new lustration law, which passed parliament with only the majority party's votes after being boycotted by the opposition. 
The law took effect last week, but the opposition immediately asked the Constitutional Court to declare it unconstitutional.
"The law breaches at least 28 articles of the constitution and violates human rights," said Fatmir Xhafa, a socialist member of parliament, as he filed complaints with the Court. 
The Albanian Helsinki Committee and the Association of Albanian Prosecutors, equally concerned by the law's implications, filed their own objections on Tuesday (February 3rd) and Wednesday, respectively.
The law bans from government employment anyone who worked in the now-defunct secret police (known as the Sigurimi), the judiciary and prosecutors' offices during the 1944-1990 communist era.
It also provides for setting up an authority that can verify the credentials of -- and bar from government -- anybody, including the president, members of parliament, judges extending up to Supreme Court and Constitutional Court members, general prosecutors, mayors and diplomats. 
The authority, which can order the firing of anyone without proving he or she committed a crime, will exercise its considerable powers until they expire on December 31st 2014.
The opposition fears the potential for abuse, warning that Prime Minister Sali Berisha and his party intend to fire judicial officials investigating corruption. 
Some members of Berisha's cabinet have been entangled in corruption scandals. 
Indeed, one of the chief prosecutors in the case of the Gerdec munitions blast, Zamir Shtylla, has already stepped down as a result of the law.
The EU has expressed serious concerns and will be undertaking discussions with Tirana, particularly about the potential impact on the judiciary. 
Half of the country's Supreme Court and Constitutional Court justices face being fired.
"For the EU, a politically independent judiciary is very important," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn's spokeswoman, Krisztina Nagy, told Deutsche Welle. 
The US Embassy in Tirana has also voiced reservations. 
"This law has raised serious legal, governmental, and constitutional questions among Albania's international partners, including the United States," it said in a December 23rd press release.
Speaking the same day, the deputy head of the OSCE office in Albania said any such legislation should comply with the requirements for a state based on the rule of law.
"The relevant provisions of the Constitution and accepted international standards should be fully observed," Alex Finnen said.
