05/02/2009
(European Commissions, New Europe, SNA, Focus News Agency, Radio Srbija - 03/02/09)
The European Commission (EC) proposed on Tuesday (February 3rd) to allocate at least 120m euros to the Western Balkans to help the seven countries of the region cushion the impact of the global economic crisis this year.
This crisis response package is "expected to leverage an amount of 500m euros in loans from international financial institutions," the EC said in a new document outlining the EU's regionally relevant activities in the Western Balkans for 2008-2009.
Half of the proposed 120m euros would go to municipal investments in the seven countries. 
The EU wants to lend 30m euros to projects that would increase energy efficiency. 
The remaining 30m euros would provide micro-credits, namely, loans for small and medium enterprises in a programme to enhance the region's competitiveness, as well as to strengthen co-operation among financial sector regulators in the region and the EU.
The proposed crisis response package is only one of the more than 90 specific EU-supported activities and initiatives the EU implemented last year or plans to carry out this year in eight different sectors.
"I welcome the progress achieved in the countries of the Western Balkans during the past year," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Tuesday.
One of the most important developments last year was the entry into force of the visa facilitation and readmission agreements that the EU signed in 2007 with Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia and the launch of the visa facilitation dialogue with those countries. 
A provisional visa-free regime was already in force for Croatia.
Progress resulted in enhancing regional co-operation and integration in many areas in 2008, when the newly established Regional Co-operation Council became fully operational.
Other important developments last year included the increased number of scholarships made available for young people from the Western Balkans and the increased funding for civil society development compared to previous years.
"I know how much free travel, or possibilities to study abroad, matter in people's everyday life," said Rehn.
More young people from the Western Balkans will be able to study in the EU this year as Brussels has decided to double the number of scholarships for students from the region for the academic year 2009-2010.
The EC initiative to create a Regional School of Public Administration likely will see its full implementation this year. 
The project aims to boost regional co-operation in the field of public administration, to strengthen administrative capacity and to develop human resources.
EU funding for civil society development in the Western Balkans is set to nearly triple in 2009.
