03/03/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 03/03/09
ZagrebDox closed in the Croatian capital on Sunday (March 1st) after a week-long run that included 54 documentaries from all over the world.
The documentary-centred festival, which marked its fifth anniversary this year, has become important regionally and has played host to several internationally renowned filmmakers.
More than 20,000 film buffs enjoyed this year's festival.
Several Croatian leaders attended the opening, including President Stipe Mesic.
ZagrebDox was the initiative of independent documentarian Nenad Puhovski, who envisioned the project 15 years ago.
"In the 1990s, things looked really bad for documentaries -- the government ceased funding them, [saying] they were a TV production.
Television, on the other hand, limited itself to glorifying or totally conflict-free documentaries," Puhovski wrote in a letter to the ZagrebDox participants.
"Although the war and postwar times were rich with topics and with conflicting and interesting characters who were tailor-made for documentaries, none of them could be found in film production."
The 54 films fell into two categories, international and regional.
The biggest audience draw was Croatian-American director Jack Baric's Searching for a Storm, about former Croatian General Ante Gotovina, who is currently on trial in The Hague.
Winning the prize for best international documentary was Israeli Arab director Ebtisam Mara'ana's Lady Kul el Arab, which follows a young Druze who competes in the beauty pageant for Israeli Arab women.
Serbian director Dragan Nikolic's The Caviar Connection won the top award in the regional category, while the Movies That Matter Award went to Danish director Anders Ostergaard for Burma VJ -- Reporting from a Closed Country.
During the festival the audience votes for its favourite film.
This year's title went to The English Surgeon, which deals with the fragile doctor-patient relationship.
The British film, directed by Geoffrey Smith, also won awards at Hot Docs (Toronto, Canada), SILVERDOCS (Washington, United States) and the Sheffield Doc/Fest (Sheffield, United Kingdom).
