05/02/2009
(Various sources)
Considered a priority by the European Commission, scientific research can help integrate Southeastern European countries because science can bring closer the institutions of different countries and cultures.
The countries of Southeastern Europe inherited many structural problems in the field, including a largely obsolete research and technology infrastructure and a dearth of industrial demand for applied research, combined with low research and development spending by businesses, a brain drain, fragmentation of the research system and a lack of linkage among industry and research sectors.
In the last few years, scientific co-operation between the EU and the Southeast European countries has made considerable progress. 
Programmes like the Trans-European Mobility Scheme for University Studies (TEMPUS) and Strengthening the Strategic Co-operation between the EU and Western Balkan Region in the Field of Information and Communication Technologies Research (SCORE) have infused considerable funding into these countries.
The Scientific Co-operation between Eastern Europe and Switzerland (SCOPES) programme, which the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) and the Swiss Agency for Development and Co-operation bankroll, aims to boost scientific co-operation among research groups in Switzerland and Eastern Europe, as well as to support institutional partnerships with scientific establishments in the target regions.
The objectives of this programme are to manage transition problems; to improve general conditions governing scientific research, thereby enhancing the performance of the research system; and to promote Eastern European research groups and institutions.
The range of funding instruments has evolved to meet changing needs. 
Until 1995, a large number of small research projects, the exchange of researchers and participation in conferences enjoyed support. 
Current efforts focus on two components that consume some 90% of available resources.
The Joint Research Projects element pairs groups of scientists from Eastern Europe with partners in Switzerland to conduct specific research aimed at expanding the boundaries of knowledge. 
The second element, Institutional Partnerships, aims at modernising the research environment to aid the successful completion of research.
These two elements receive supplemental help from Conference Grants -- which allow Eastern European researchers to attend international scientific conferences in Switzerland. 
Such participation fortifies the international networking that is a precondition for a successful career in research.
SCOPES also awards Valorisation Grants to help translate the results of the Joint Research Projects and the Institutional Partnerships into practice.
The Swiss invested more than 22m euros in the SCOPES programme from 2005-2008.
In December 2008, the SCOPES programme received an extension through 2012 with 11m euros in additional funding. 
Candidates will submit projects by the spring, with another round of submissions in 2010. 
These projects will replace the 148 tasks that the 2005-2008 SCOPES programme funded.
