04/06/2009
(Nine O'clock, Sega - 04/06/09; Transparency International, Reuters, UPI, Bloomberg, BBC, Euobserver, Javno, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Makfax, B92, The Kosovo Times - 03/06/09)
Political parties, followed by civil service and parliaments are perceived as the most corrupt institutions or sectors according to a Transparency International (TI) survey published Wednesday (June 3rd). 
Government efforts to combat graft are generally viewed as ineffective, the Berlin-based watchdog concluded in its 2009 Global Corruption Barometer, covering 69 countries and territories worldwide.
In all, 68% of more than 73,000 respondents identified political parties as the most corrupt institution, including in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Greece and Serbia.
Political parties in BiH and Greece were each given an average mark of 4.4 on a scale of 1 (not at all corrupt) to 5 (extremely corrupt), with 49% and 57% of the respondents in the two countries, respectively, considering political parties the most corrupt national institution. 
The Serbian parties received a slightly better grade, of 4.1, with 30% of Serbs placing them at the top of the list of sectors and institutions most affected by graft. 
Globally, political parties in Panama and Bolivia got the poorest marks of 4.6 and 4.5, respectively.
Although Romanians rated their parties and parliament poorly, giving each a score of 4.3, a third of them said the legislature was the institution most affected by graft. 
Globally, 60% of all respondents perceived their national parliaments as corrupt. 
Panama (4.6), Ukraine (4.5) and Indonesia (4.4) graded their parliaments the worst worldwide. 
The public in those three countries, as well as that in Lithuania, singled out their legislature as the institution most affected by graft.
Turkey was the only Balkan nation in the group of 19 countries, whose respondents viewed their public officials as the most corrupt. 
The Turks rated their civil servants at 3.6, giving the same mark to the country's business sector.
The judiciary, perceived as corrupt by half of the respondents in the survey, was singled out as the institution most affected by graft by people in other Balkan countries -- Bulgaria, Croatia, Kosovo and Macedonia -- and seven other nations. 
Balkan respondents that supported that view ranged from 38% and 39% in Bulgaria and Kosovo, respectively, to 44% in Croatia and 50% in Macedonia.
The Bulgarians gave their judiciary a mark of 4.5, with the Ukrainians and Cameroonians rating their own just as low. 
The Croatian judiciary received a score of 4.4, while Macedonian and Kosovo judiciaries got 4.2 and 4.0, respectively.
One key finding of the TI survey, conducted between October 2008 and February this year, is that there is much more distrust in the private sector than five years ago. 
According to the 2009 Barometer, 53% of all respondents viewed the private sector as corrupt or "extremely" corrupt, up from 45% of those interviewed in 2004, as it was believed to be resorting to bribery as a means of influencing public policy. 
This, the group said, came to show that the poorest families continue to be punished by petty bribe demands.
"These results show a public sobered by a financial crisis precipitated by weak regulations and a lack of corporate accountability," TI Chair Huguette Labelle said. 
"But we also see that the public is willing to actively support clean business."
None of the Balkan nations singled out the public sector in their countries as the one most affected by corruption, with the average percentage of people from the region who reported paying bribes in the previous 12 months standing at 4%, ten times lower than in the Middle East and North Africa.
The media appeared as the cleanest of the five public institutions or sectors assessed by the study.
Ukraine was the country with the highest rate of corruption among those surveyed, with a score of 4.3. 
Next was BiH and Croatia with average scores of 4.2 and 4.1, respectively. 
Six countries lagged closely behind, including Bulgaria and Romania, each rating 4.0 on average.
