29/08/2005
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times - 29/08/05
The countries of Southeast Europe are taking a significant step forward towards the integration of the regional energy sector, a key element for economic development and renewal. 
The South East Regional Energy Market initiative aims to create a single regulatory space for energy on the Balkan peninsula in order to bring the national legislation of the member countries into line with European energy legislation.
Improving the balance between energy supply and demand is crucial to boosting and sustaining economic development in South East Europe, analysts say. 
A regional approach to energy supply offers significant advantages both in terms of improved utilisation of existing supply and production capacities as well as optimizing future investments.
The process was initiated in 2002 with the signing in Athens of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on the Regional Electricity Market in Southeast Europe. 
It was confirmed a year later with the 2003 Athens MOU. 
In December 2004, representatives of the 25 EU member states and the states of the South East Europe agreed on the basic principles of an energy treaty and decided to establish an energy community.
By signing the treaty, Southeastern European nations stand ready to attract more investment. 
US investors are already present in the Balkans; the energy company AES is present in Hungary and plans to expand in other areas of the region, according to Terzic.
In Serbia-Montenegro, the moves towards energy integration have been welcomed as an important step forward, resulting in better access to and selection of suppliers and, in turn, leading to lower prices. 
Serbia and Montenegro will be signing the Energy Treaty separately, since the state union does not have authority in the area of energy. 
Instead, this sector is handled independently by the constituent republics, which have separate ministries, laws and energy systems.
The energy sector is one of the largest sectors of the Serbian economy, accounting for more than 10 per cent of GDP. 
Thanks to its central position in the Balkans, the power system of Serbia is interconnected to all neighbouring countries. 
Over the long term, Serbia plans to reform the energy sector by adopting EU principles. 
There are significant investment opportunities for energy efficiency improvement in Serbia’s energy sector due to the inefficient use of energy.
Montenegro strongly backs the formation of a regional energy market for Southeast Europe. 
The republic's entry into the European energy market has the potential to open up many developmental possibilities in the domestic sector, according to Aleksandar Bogdanovic, an advisor to the economy minister.
In addition to Serbia and Montenegro, the other parties to the treaty are the EU, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Romania, Turkey, and UNMIK.
One of the main problems facing Albania's energy sector are the increase in electricity consumption by household consumers, which has led to high levels of technical and non-technical losses and reduction of security of supply. 
Others issues include lack of electricity price liberalisation and a low efficiency of energy use. 
According to statistical evidence, Albania has become a net importer of considerable electricity quantities and will continue to import even more to meet the growing demand until construction of new plants.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has three vertically-integrated electricity companies. 
Despite technical constraints, they continue electricity trading in order to balance the system. 
Mayor investments are needed in generation, transmission and distribution systems.
In Croatia, parliament determines and passes the legal framework for the energy sector, and receives reports directly from the Croatian Energy Regulatory Council, which is a particularly important factor in the energy system. 
The council supervises the energy sector and gathers information for the energy policymakers.
The Bulgarian energy sector is characterised by an increasing demand and investments foreseen in the National Strategy include rehabilitation or replacement of existing capacities. 
Bulgaria has an Energy Efficiency Agency, which is a budgetary legal entity headquartered in Sofia with a statute of Executive Agency to the Minister of Energy and Energy Resources.
The Energy Regulatory Commission was founded by the Macedonian Parliament in June 2003 as an independent body. 
A new Energy Agency is in the process of being established. 
It is expected to provide professional and technical support to the government in the preparation and implementation of energy policies.
In Romania, the energy sector represents a strategic, national infrastructure crucial for the development of the entire country. 
The Romanian Agency for Energy Conservation was established in 1991. 
In October 2003, the Romanian Agency for Energy Conservation was officially launched.
In Turkey, in December 1992, the National Energy Conservation Center was established within the energy ministry to increase the effectiveness of the activities and extend them overall the country.
In January 2003 the Energy Office was established in Kosovo under the Central Regulatory Unit of the EU Pillar to assume responsibility for and to co-ordinate all energy sector activities in Kosovo. 
The Office of Energy is to be transformed into a ministry this year.
An important activity of the energy integration initiative is benchmarking, whereby data is collected from similar institutions in the Southeast European countries to compare their current performance and progress. 
The data is collected by means of a standard, annual questionnaire. 
European Commission Benchmarking, now in its second year, is one of them. 
The first year collected data and compared only the EU member states. 
The second annual report collected data on accession countries, and some questions were also submitted to the countries of South East Europe.
Participants without a right to vote include Austria, Greece, Hungary, Italy and Slovenia. 
A revised version of the treaty was presented in Brussels on 31 May, with signing planned for October. 
Its implementation will send a clear signal to Europe that Southeastern European nations are ready for further integration of other sectors. 
Regional co-operation among these countries in the energy sector is a training ground for future integration of the Southeast European Energy market into the internal European energy market.
The treaty calls for a number of specific steps to be taken in order to liberalise the electricity and natural gas markets. 
One crucial measure is elimination of the quantity restrictions on energy exports and waiver of the customs duties. 
In practical terms, this means that countries will be able to trade electricity and gas with each other and with any EU member states under the rules of the acquis communautaire.
Other goals include the establishment of common rules for generation, transmission and distribution of electricity and natural gas, the setting up of state-level national energy authorities, regulatory bodies and transmission system operators, and the development of compatible state and regional market action plans.
