03/03/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/03/09
A new law to combat organised crime in Serbia allows the confiscation of property if indictees cannot prove they acquired it legally.
Serbian authorities believe it will deal another heavy blow to criminal groups.
The law became effective on Sunday (March 1st).
Its key innovation is that it places the burden of proof on suspects:
police will not have to prove they acquired property illegally;
instead, indictees must prove they acquired it legally.
Should they be unable to do so, the state seizes the property and the revenues end up in the state budget.
During their trial, indictees will not be able to sell or dispose of it.
The law also blocks them from sending money abroad and from transferring property to their friends and relatives.
It will also apply to cases outside of organised crime, i.e., all acts in which illegally acquired property exceeds 16,000 euros.
Serbian Justice Minister Snezana Malovic believes the law will have a preventive, not only a punitive, effect.
"Criminals will know that they will not be able to enjoy their illegally acquired property upon release from prison," she told Belgrade media.
A new special unit will implement this law.
Italy provided an example of its potential impact on organised crime;
a similar law there prompted the seizure of 4 billion euros last year.
Serbia's Special Prosecutor for Organised Crime Miljko Radovanovic said the law's first target would be members of the so-called Zemun gang, convicted of the March 2003 assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic and numerous other crimes.
The gang stands to lose "money, movable property, valuables, shares, bonds, houses, hospitality and sale venues, office space, and land", he said.
Serbian Police Director Milorad Veljovic said implementing the new law would be "a true test of the state's determination to stand up to organised crime ...
If the state demonstrates power in this matter -- both the interior and justice ministries -- then it is a good sign."
According to Veljovic, several very dangerous criminal groups, mostly involved in drug trafficking, are active in Serbia and making annual profits in the tens of millions of euros.
Veljovic also said the groups laundered their money mostly by buying companies in Serbia or by investing in real estate.
