04/06/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 04/06/09
President Traian Basescu is encouraging Romanians to vote Sunday (June 7th) in the country's second European Parliament (EP) election.
"I would like to tell Romanians their presence at the polling station would mean much more than a simple sign of their sympathy for the political parties.
… The euro-parliamentary elections represent not only an occasion for them to express their sympathy for one party or the other, but a moment when Europe measures the maturity and the devotion of the people to the idea of the EU," Basescu said at a press conference Wednesday.
Following the trend throughout Europe, voter turnout is expected to be dismal in Romania.
A Eurobarometer survey released last month suggests that only 34% of Romanians plan to cast their ballot, a slight improvement from approximately 29% of voters in 2007.
There are roughly 18.5 million registered voters in the country.
"Romanians are not yet aware of the stake these elections carry, unlike most of the Europeans.
That is largely the consequence of the politicians who didn't take enough time among countless typical political attacks to give Romanians at least a general picture of what these elections and the EP mean," said Dan Stancu, head of the foreign affairs department at the daily Evenimentul Zilei.
Romania has 33 MEP seats to fill this year in Strasbourg, two less than in the previous election.
A total of 736 members from the 27-nation bloc make up the EP.
Seen as a dress rehearsal for the presidential election this fall, any buzz about the EP election was widely ignored by locals.
"I'm not going to vote on Sunday," said 24-year-old medical student Eliza Sandulescu.
"Though I'm a member of what they call the next generation, I realised their message during this campaign has got nothing to do with me and my kind.
I didn't find anything European in their attitude.
I'm disappointed and this is my form of protest, ignoring their interests," she said.
"I, for one, don't know much about these elections … [it] hasn't been properly explained and I can't take part in an electoral process as long as I don't understand it," said Dana Mihalache, 35.
A poll by the research institute INSOMAR and Realitatea TV suggests the race is tight down the final stretch.
According to the study, the Liberal-Democrat Party (PD-L) and the Social-Democratic Party (PSD) are neck and neck, each with about 31% of the projected vote.
The main opposition National Liberal Party (PNL) is expected to hover somewhere around 20.2%.
