05/05/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 05/05/09
Romanian football has been tainted by scandal in recent years, and now a new case has implicated high-ranking officials of the sport. 
A first league football club owner, the head of the referees' commission and four referees are on trial for rigging matches. 
If the allegations prove true, they could face prison terms of up to 15 years.
Cornel Penescu, the owner of FC Arges, is thought to have bribed top referees in order to secure favourable outcomes for his team. 
Local government officials have also been implicated, as Penescu was found to be passing bribes in exchange for skipped inspections at his supermarket chain.
Prosecutors say Penescu repeatedly paid Gheorghe Constantin, head of the Central Commission of Referees (CCA), to appoint referees who would fix results. 
Constantin has also been detained in the case.
In addition, the FC Arges owner is thought to have directly bribed four first-league referees to influence match results between October and December of last year.
"Cornel Penescu paid, in two stages, about 70,000 euros … to appoint referees accepted by the first defendant for the matches played by FC Arges during the 2008-2009 season and to promote … a referee favoured by [him]", read a press release issued by the National Anti-corruption Department (DNA) in Pitesti, where FC Arges is headquartered.
The indictment also charges Penescu with paying 3,000 euros to CCA Vice-President Marcel Lica. 
He and two referees were arrested on April 23rd.
The judges rejected all appeals in a hearing last Tuesday. 
The next day, referee Aurelian Bogaciu was also placed under preventive arrest, charged with accepting a 3,700-euro bribe from Penescu. 
Constantin and Lica resigned after the charges were released by the prosecutors.
Caught off guard by the scope of the case, the Romanian Football Federation (FRF) decided to assign referees for the remaining matches this season by drawing lots.
The DNA says it is working with officers of the DGIPI, the Interior Ministry's intelligence service, to uncover details of the Bribe-for-Referees scandal, as the media has dubbed it. 
Investigations suggest the scope of the fraud extends well beyond football.
For instance, Penescu wished to keep his supermarket chain, Pic SA, free of government inspections, so he allegedly bribed the head of the Arges County Consumer Protection Office, Dan Cristian Libertatu, paying him 4,000 euros not to carry out his office's duties.
Libertatu and the middleman who allegedly arranged the transaction are under a 29-day preventive arrest. 
It was surveillance of the middleman's activities, in fact, which led investigators to the surprise discovery that first-league referees were being bribed.
Accounting documents checked by DNA show that the middleman, one of Penescu's managers, withdrew funds after rigged matches in amounts equal to what the bribed referees had been promised in phone conversations.
An earlier investigation into bribery in Romanian football involved the FC Steaua owner, George Becali. 
Last May, a few days before the final stage of the championship match, Becali promised 1.7m euros to a team if it beat Steaua's main rival.
On the day of the match, DNA prosecutors caught an official of FC Steaua carrying a suitcase containing the 1.7m euros. 
The case was never resolved, however.
