04/12/2008
(NATO, AP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, BBC, VOA, International Herald Tribune, HINA, Xinhua, Beta, B92 - 03/12/08)
Albania and Croatia are on track to join NATO by April, the foreign ministers of the 26-nation Alliance said at the end of a two-day meeting in Brussels on Wednesday (December 3rd).
They pledged to support other Western Balkan candidates' reform efforts and to continue assisting the international organisations in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Kosovo.
"Albania and Croatia have already accomplished important reforms," the ministers said in their final communiqué from the meeting.
"Our aim is to welcome the two new members into the Alliance at our next summit" in April, when NATO will celebrate its 60th anniversary.
The top diplomats also urged NATO nations to complete the ratification of Albania and Croatia's Accession Protocols within the next four months, so that they can join the Alliance as its 27th and 28th members.
The ministers reassured Macedonia that it will get a membership invitation "as soon as a mutually acceptable solution" to its 17-year-long name dispute with Greece emerges.
Voicing support for Serbia's Euro-Atlantic integration bid, the final communiqué said "All NATO partnership opportunities for political consultation and practical co-operation remain open" to the country.
It praised Belgrade for delivering former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) but urged the capture of the two remaining fugitives sought by the ICTY, particularly former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic.
Welcoming the progress made by BiH and Montenegro in their co-operation with the Alliance, the statement noted the launch earlier this year of an Intensified Dialogue with the two countries.
It also urged Sarajevo and Podgorica to "maintain [their] momentum" in implementing their Individual Partnership Action Plans.
The ministers, however, voiced deep concern about "the deterioration in the political climate" in BiH in recent months, warning it could jeopardise the country's Euro-Atlantic integration prospects.
They called on the country's political leaders to meet the requirements for closing the Office of the High Representative.
The 26 foreign ministers also pledged the Alliance and KFOR will continue to work with the UN, the EU and other international organisations "to support the development of a stable, democratic, multi-ethnic and peaceful Kosovo".
They called "the prompt deployment" of the EU's justice and police mission, dubbed EULEX, throughout Kosovo "an urgent priority".
The ministers reaffirmed that Georgia and Ukraine will join NATO one day, but stopped short of offering them formal road maps to membership.
NATO also decided on Wednesday to gradually resume low-level contacts with Russia, which it suspended following Russia's August offensive into Georgia.
The ministers also reiterated the Alliance's support for a US plan to build a missile defence shield in Eastern Europe.
