04/02/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 04/02/09
Representatives of six Southeast European states met on Tuesday (February 3rd) in Belgrade and agreed that they need to join forces to accelerate the region's EU integration.
They noted they must overcome bilateral issues, so as to make association with the EU more efficient and to better counter economic challenges.
Their joint declaration also states that the countries of the region should co-operate closely during the global energy and economic crisis.
The Belgrade meeting, apart from Serbian representatives, included officials from Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia, Albania and Montenegro.
Attending were Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Ivica Bocevski, BiH Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations Mladen Zirojevic, Croatian Foreign Ministry State Secretary for European Integration Davor Bozinovic, Albanian European Integration Ministry General Secretary Arben Kasahu and Montenegrin Assistant Finance Minister Milorad Katnic.
The meeting was dubbed "Southeast Europe's European Perspective in Challenging Times -- Confronting the Economic and Energy Crisis".
In their declaration, the participants urged the EU not to neglect the region because of the global economic crisis.
The officials also said the global crisis should not have a negative impact on the transitions of Balkan countries and that it should not affect their European integration.
The six Balkan states called on the EU to keep their interests in mind when implementing the European economic recovery plan.
"The European Commission has prepared a solidarity package for Southeast Europe totaling 120m euros," Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic said, in presiding over the conference.
He added that the European Commission recognises both the importance and problems of Southeast Europe.
According to Djelic, participants in the meeting discussed the possibility of EU banks continuing to support their branches in the Balkans in order to preserve the regional banking sector.
The Balkan states will also apply for certain energy projects because the EU has set aside 3.6 billion euros for that field this year.
The conferees also said that this year, the EU will consider finalising the European integration of countries that had already launched the process -- such as Croatia, opening accession talks with Macedonia and reviewing and replying to Montenegro's EU membership application.
They also discussed the EU's potential response to the membership applications of Serbia, BiH and Albania.
