02/03/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 02/03/09
A spate of violent or sexual crimes in Italy attributed in the last few weeks to Romanian immigrants has reignited xenophobic feelings a year after a similar situation. 
The rape of a 14-year-old girl and the gruesome murder of a block superintendent sparked calls for mass expulsion and a series of violent attacks by far-rightists against members of the nearly million-strong Romanian community in Italy.
In response, the Italian government enacted a controversial decree on February 20th that contains "urgent measures concerning the public safety and the combating of sexual crimes". 
It allows mayors to create civilian patrols.
The political opposition and the Catholic Church, though, denounce the law as an invitation to vigilantism. 
The European Economic and Social Committee also urged Italian authorities to avoid stigmatising all Romanian immigrants because of isolated criminal acts.
The two countries' foreign ministers met on February 23rd to discuss the situation and agreed to adopt a "zero tolerance" anti-crime policy. 
They considered, among other steps, having more Romanian policemen sent to Italy, in addition to the 15 already present.
Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini said that as a sign of the goodwill between the two countries, Romanians convicted of crimes in Italy can serve their sentences in Romania. 
"We believe it is fair that those sentenced ... 
by Italian justice return to their own country to serve their sentence," he said.
Romanian Foreign Minister Cristian Diaconescu agreed on the need for zero tolerance and promised that his country would fully co-operate with the Italians. 
However, he stressed, Bucharest would not sway from its commitment to allow its citizens free movement.
"We will not ... 
take any measure limiting [that right]," he said, explaining that the Romanian people saw it as a hard-won fruit of the victory over communism.
Frattini, a former EU justice commissioner, said anyone coming to Italy from outside the Schengen zone would have to undergo a passport check. 
Those with prior convictions will be unable to enter the country. 
Frattini added that he expects Romanian authorities to notify Italian law enforcement when anyone with a criminal record departs for Italy.
Romanian Interior Minister Dan Nica had his own meeting with Italian counterpart Roberto Maroni. 
On February 26th, Nica said the two had agreed that any Italian or Romanian breaking the law in either country would be prosecuted.
Meanwhile, Romanian Justice Minister Catalin Predoiu remarked that 40% of the suspects wanted by Romanian authorities are in Italy, because extradition is difficult. 
He added there are 1,773 Romanian citizens in Italian prisons whom no court had convicted of any crime.
