03/04/2009
(Bloomberg, FT, AP, AFP, Washington Post - 03/04/09; AP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, Wall Street Journal, TIME - 02/04/09)
World leaders pledged more than $1 trillion to help fight the worst economic crisis in six decades, as they also agreed in London on Thursday (April 2nd) on other measures aimed at bolstering the financial system and restoring growth.
"This is the day that the world came together ... 
with a plan for global recovery and for reform and with a clear timetable for its delivery," British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, the summit host, said.
The summit, he said, marked the first steps towards a "new world order".
The leaders of the world's top industrialised nations and emerging economies pledged Thursday to act together to re-establish confidence, growth, and jobs, as well as to shore up the financial system. 
They also committed themselves to strengthening financial regulation and reforming international financial institutions to prevent a recurrence of the ongoing crisis. 
Furthermore, they also vowed to promote global trade and avoid protectionism, as well as to foster a green and sustainable recovery.
"We believe that the only sure foundation for sustainable globalisation and rising prosperity for all is an open world economy based on market principles, effective regulation, and strong global institutions," the leaders said in their final statement.
The $1.1 trillion package will include providing $500 billion to the IMF -- tripling its resources to $750 billion -- and giving it another $250 billion to issue additional Special Drawing Rights for its member countries. 
The package also envisions a further $250 billion in support for trade finance and $100 billion to enable additional loans by multilateral development banks.
The "unprecedented" plan "will save or create millions of jobs… and that will, by the end of next year, amount to $5 trillion, raise output by 4%, and accelerate the transition to a green economy," the leaders said.
Measures intended to strengthen the financial system envision the establishment of a new Financial Stability Board (FSB), including all G20 nations, the key representatives of national financial authorities, Spain and the European Commission. 
The FSB should work more closely with the IMF to provide early warning of macroeconomic and financial risks and the actions needed to address them.
The world leaders also pledged to crack down on tax havens and hedge funds, as well as to impose tougher rules on credit-rating agencies to preclude conflicts of interest.
US President Barack Obama said the plan could mark "a turning point in our pursuit of global economic recovery". 
He praised "the timeliness and the magnitude" of the leaders' response.
Other leaders, including French President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, welcomed the deal, which exceeded many observers' expectations.
