03/06/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 03/06/09
Although Macedonia scored high on a recent European Commission (EC) assessment, there is speculation that visa-free travel may derail because of other Western Balkan countries. 
According to reports last week, the EU is hesitant to liberalise travel for only one country, as it might disrupt balance in the region.
Macedonia has fulfilled the necessary criteria -- receiving a one on the EC assessment scale. 
Serbia and Montenegro aren't far behind at -- 1.75 -- while Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina both received fours and still need of major reforms.
Sources say the EU may hold off lifting visa restrictions in Macedonia until Serbia and Montenegro are ready to step up to the plate.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and EC Vice-President Jacques Barrot butt heads on the issue.
According to A1 Television in Macedonia, Rehn wanted to include Serbia in the visa liberalisation report, which will be presented later this month, while Barrot says only Macedonia has fulfilled the necessary criteria for visa-free travel.
"I am prepared, by the end of June, before the summer holidays, to give a recommendation for visa liberalisation. 
The commission is preparing the report, which will be presented to the member states, and after that we expect feedback from them," Rehn said.
A final decision is expected later this month, a senior EU official told news agency Makfax. 
Talks are scheduled to resume after the European Parliament elections.
Macedonia's Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Bocevski says next year is "a realistic timeframe" for abolishing visa requirements.
"Macedonia is prepared for visa liberalisation. 
One whole generation of young people in Macedonia grew up behind the Schengen wall. 
Two-thirds of young people have never visited even one country that is part of this Schengen zone," said Bocevski, who also heads the European integration programme in Macedonia.
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski doubts that lagging Balkan countries will be a hindrance.
"According to EU announcements, each case is reviewed individually. 
If other countries vying for visa liberalisation are not ready, I do not expect that Macedonia will wait for others to prepare," said Gruevski.
