02/03/2009
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Mostar -- 02/03/09
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Food Safety Agency has decided to tighten food safety measures.
After the European Commission (EC) issued 35 official warnings of potentially dangerous foods in 2008, the agency unveiled a new strategy.
It intends to test about 4,000 food products this year, the Mostar-based agency announced.
"This analysis will help different institutions to provide their own food evaluation, aiming to protect consumer health," agency director Sejad Mackic said as he presented the agency's plan of activities.
The increase in food controls will cover both the Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska (RS).
Both entities plan to test 2,000 food products each, as directed by the agency, the Institute for Health Protection and the food inspection authorities in RS.
The campaign will last about two months, according to a February 22nd report in the Sarajevo daily Oslobodenje.
In 2008, 4.66% of food items were found noncompliant with safety standards.
In most of those cases, testers found Escherichia coli, staphylococcus or salmonella in the samples.
''We could say that the level of food contamination [in the tested samples] was similar to the one in other countries in our region,'' Mackic said, reiterating the aim of the agency is to continue strengthening control and inspection of food products in the Balkan countries.
Local authorities in BiH admit that, until very recently, they adhered to old regulations passed down from the former Yugoslavia.
''We must test food for potential contamination.
We must be strict when talking about food quality," the agency said.
The new regulations are primarily for consumer protection.
The agency will continue collaborating with EU institutions to exchange information on food safety standards.
In December, Mostar hosted a workshop on the current EU legislation regarding hygienic requirements for food.
The Food Safety Agency was founded less than three years ago.
It employs 30 staff, including physicians, veterinarians, agricultural engineers, economists, lawyers and other related professionals.
