03/11/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 03/11/08
The Serbian Orthodox Church could get a new leader in mid-November, since the ailing 94-year-old Patriarch Pavle -- its head for 18 years -- wishes to resign. 
Patriarch Pavle, one of the Orthodox world's most esteemed leaders, has been hospitalised for a year and thus unable to lead his flock. 
In the war-torn 1990s, he turned the church from a marginalised institution into the one most trusted by Serbian citizens. 
In his absence, certain bishops have even feuded in public.
On October 8th, Patriarch Pavle submitted a written request to resign. 
All Serbian bishops will convene to debate his request. 
Should they accept it, they can name his successor at the same conference. 
The bishops still use a random drawing from among three short-listed candidates' names. 
The church instituted the system during the communist era to block government influence.
However, certain Serbian bishops have voiced doubts about the authenticity of the patriarch's resignation, as he has not made any public pronouncements in the last year. 
An argument over whether his resignation is authentic and whether they should even select a new patriarch is expected at the beginning of their conference.
Belgrade analysts familiar with the church say it is split into two factions -- one moderate, one more conservative -- and add that all social divisions in Serbia find their reflection in the institution.
Hence, Serbian bishops bicker over whether Serbia should join the EU before the Union grants it sovereignty over Kosovo. 
They also clash over canonical matters. 
Thus, a new patriarch could have great sway over the entire Serbian public.
Reportedly, the government has profound interest in the appointment of a new patriarch. 
Certain newspapers have said that the office of Serbian President Boris Tadic is lobbying for Bishop Grigorije, the only bishop to say publicly that war crimes indictees Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic must face The Hague tribunal.
However, Tadic quickly denied he was trying to interfere with church business.
"I have no institutional power to meddle in or influence the appointment of a new patriarch. 
That is a matter for the church," he said.
