03/02/2009
(Blic - 03/02/09;
AP, AKI, DPA, Beta, B92, ANA-MPA, OSCE, Serbian Government - 02/02/09)
Praising Serbia's reform progress, Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis, the current OSCE chairperson in office, voiced support for the country's EU integration during a one-day visit to Belgrade on Monday (February 2nd).
"Serbia plays an essential role in ensuring stability and prosperity not only in the Balkans but also in the rest of the Southeast European region," she said.
"I am impressed by Serbia's progress towards building a democratic, politically stable society."
Bakoyannis also expressed support for the implementation of Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) and Interim Trade Agreement with the EU, as well as for the liberalisation of the 27-nation bloc's visa regime for the country.
Serbia, she said, is "an integral part of the European family".
The SAA will take effect once the EU decides that Serbia has met its conditions for full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Serbia has asked the EU to send a mission to Belgrade to verify its co-operation with the UN tribunal in The Hague.
Belgrade has also asked Greece and other countries to weigh in on Serbia's request to the International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion on whether Kosovo's February 17th unilateral declaration of independence complied with international law.
Bakoyannis, whose country is among the five EU members that have not recognised Kosovo's independence, said Athens is still considering its response.
Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic told reporters after a meeting with Bakoyannis that Serbia would not allow Kosovo to join the OSCE.
"Kosovo will not become an OSCE member," he said, stressing that the OSCE office in Pristina "must continue to perform its activities in a strictly status-neutral manner".
The role of the OSCE mission in Serbia was another issue Bakoyannis discussed with Serbian officials Monday.
She said the mission sought to assist Serbian authorities in their efforts to implement public administration and judicial reforms, upgrade the country's military and harmonise inter-ethnic relations.
Bakoyannis also met with Serbian President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and representatives of the county's civil society groups.
Cvetkovic expressed satisfaction with the government's co-operation with the OSCE mission and voiced support for Greece's priorities as chairman of the 56-nation organisation.
Belgrade was the first leg of Bakoyannis' regional tour.
She visits Kosovo on Wednesday and Albania on February 9th.
Greece took over the rotating OSCE chairmanship from Finland on January 1st and will hand it over to Kazakhstan at the end of its 12-month tenure.
