03/12/2008
(AP, Telegraph - 01/12/08; Javno.hr -- 29/11/08 - 02/12/08)
The head of Croatia's main opposition Social Democratic Party (SDP) condemned the country's authorities Monday (December 1st) over the arrest of a party activist who started a Facebook group critical of Prime Minister Ivo Sanader.
"I [am waiting for Sanader to] say whether he believes this was a good method the police should retain and use, or a precedent that should never happen again," SDP leader Zoran Milanovic said in Zagreb.
Niksa Klecak, 22, the leader of the SDP's Youth Forum in Dubrovnik, is the founder of a Facebook group called "I bet I can find 5,000 people who dislike Sanader". 
Police questioned him Friday after a photo montage showing the prime minister in a Nazi uniform appeared on the group's home page. 
Klecak denied uploading the picture, saying any of the group's 6,500 members could have done it.
Police could not find any evidence the SDP activist possessed materials displaying Nazi symbols -- prohibited under Croatian law -- and released him.
Klecak says the police action was politically motivated and that the local branch of Sanader's Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) was behind it.
Authorities should be able to distinguish between satire and an expression of racism and fascism, said Milanovic. 
Klecak's detention endangers freedom of expression, he stressed, calling for Sanader to condemn it.
The prime minister disagreed, however, saying that playing with the swastika and other Nazi or Ustasha symbols had nothing to do with satire.
"There is no satire with Nazi insignia," Sanader said in remarks to Croatian state-run radio on Monday. 
"Everything that's going on on Facebook with that Nazi insignia is not aimed against the prime minister but against democracy in Croatia."
He also said he had been unaware of actions by police in the case, as he was out of the country when they occurred.
Viewing Klecak's detention as a "notorious abuse of police for political purposes", political analyst Jelena Lovric told the AP it demonstrated the government "cannot influence [the] internet, and that deeply frightens it".
Denying allegations of a political motivation, Croatian police chief Vladimir Faber insisted that the probe had nothing to do with Klecak's political affiliation.
Faber also said police acted in accordance with the law but apologised to Klecak's family for any inconvenience they might have experienced during a search of their flat.
Meanwhile, according to the AP, the number of anti-government Facebook sites rapidly surged at the weekend. 
One such site calling for an anti-Sanader protest later this month has attracted 80,000 members.
