03/11/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 03/11/08
Just before a new progress report on Croatia emerges from the European Commission, two British representatives in the European Parliament -- Geoffrey Van Orden and Roger Helmer -- wrote to EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn to warn him that Croatian authorities failed to efficiently deal with corruption and organised crime.
The EU should not hurry the accession process for Croatia, the UK politicians argued. 
They expressed disappointment "there is no real progress in institutional reform, establishment of the rule of law, creation of an independent judiciary, protection of property rights or prosecution of corruption at the highest levels of government."
"Croatia's government seeks EU accession and billions of euros for reform assistance from taxpayers in European countries. 
It must therefore show substantial results [first]," Van Orden and Helmer wrote.
"The recent troubling trends of Croatia have compelled [us] from the European Parliament to carefully evaluate Croatia's accession process and review the reforms touted by Croatia's government. 
Unfortunately, we are very disappointed by the assault on media freedom and the important right of freedom of expression tragically manifested with the murder of two journalists and the daughter of a prominent Croatian lawyer."
Though reportedly offended by the bluntness of the message, the Croatian foreign ministry said only that the letter did not reflect the official attitude of European institutions. 
The European Parliament's rapporteur for Croatia, Austrian Social-Democrat Hannes Swoboda, similarly told the Croatian weekly Globus the letter did not express the official stance of EU bodies. 
He added it would have no bearing on Croatia's accession process.
According to international media last week, a draft of the EC report says that Croatia is expected to finalise its membership process by the end of 2009. 
The country completed talks with the EU on foreign relations Thursday (October 30th), bringing the number of chapters addressed to four out of 35.
