03/12/2008
(NATO - 03/12/08;
MIA, AFP, Xinhua, Makfax - 02/12/08)
NATO foreign ministers urged Macedonia on Wednesday (December 3rd) to step up its efforts towards resolving its 17-year-old name dispute with Greece in order to join the Alliance.
"We reiterate the agreement of heads of state and government at the Bucharest summit to extend an invitation to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) as soon as a mutually acceptable solution to the name issue has been reached… and urge intensified efforts towards that goal," the ministers said.
Meanwhile, NATO "will continue to support and assist" the Macedonian government's reform efforts, the ministers also stressed in the final communiqué from their two-day meeting in Brussels.
Macedonia's NATO plans have stalled since the Alliance's Bucharest summit last April, when Greece vetoed a decision to invite the Balkan country to join, citing the unresolved name dispute.
Greece fears recognition of the name Macedonia could encourage a territorial claim against its own province of Macedonia.
UN-mediated efforts to solve the name dispute intensified late last year.
But numerous rounds of talks since have failed to produce a deal.
With no settlement in sight, Macedonia's foreign and defence ministers, Antonio Milososki and Zoran Konjanovski, have urged the Alliance to speed up their country's accession.
Macedonia's admission into the 26-nation bloc is "of extreme importance, not only for the future of our country but for the overall stability of the region," media reports Tuesday quoted the ministers as saying in a letter to NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer several days ago.
They, however, believed that "little has been done" since the Bucharest summit "to assess and address all the negative implications" from the decision to postpone a membership invitation.
Milososki and Konjanovski also reassured NATO that their country remains firmly committed to its entry bid, as it believes that "full Euro-Atlantic integration has no alternative".
Last month, Macedonia decided to sue Greece at the International Court of Jusice over its decision to block Skopje's NATO membership, saying this constituted a violation of a 1995 agreement between the two countries.
Milososki and Konjanovski reassured de Hoop Scheffer that the lawsuit would in no way affect negotiations on the name issue.
Macedonia, they said, "remains strongly committed to finding a mutually acceptable solution" that would allow it to "fully integrate into the Alliance in a dignified manner while preserving our national interests".
Macedonia will continue to implement political and economic reforms, they said, stressing Skopje's commitment to the "process of building democracy and a functional multi-ethnic society based on the rule of law, good governance and sustainable economic development".
They also vowed that their country will continue to participate in NATO-led missions and to support international security efforts.
"We are committed to continue to strengthen our already visible participation, including the military one, in NATO-led and other international peace missions, thus acting as a responsible member of the international community, and to further contribute to Alliance interoperability," the ministers said.
