02/12/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 02/12/08
Croatia assumed the presidency of the UN Security Council on Monday (December 1st), a move that officials consider to be the crowning jewel of the country's foreign policy achievements. 
The presidency, which lasts the month, will subject Croatia to many important global challenges.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic will travel to New York to host the security conference in the council that starts on December 9th.
"Every day, people are killed by terrorists and that is the biggest threat to international peace. 
When we work together, things can change and this is why it is really important to initiate the new debate in the Security Council and find the solutions," Mesic said from Doha, Qatar, where he is attending the UN-organised conference on co-operation and solutions to the financial crisis.
Addressing his colleagues on the council, the Croatian permanent representative to the UN, Ambassador Neven Jurica, said that his country recognises the council's primary responsibility -- unique among global bodies -- of maintaining international peace and security.
Members of the council take one-month turns serving as its president in alphabetical order. 
The country's UN ambassador serves as president. 
Members expect the president to ensure the council's proper function by establishing the work agenda and organising meetings.
Unlike the president of the EU, the council president does not take the initiative in debates. 
However, during the term, the president can focus on a specific topic developed in co-ordination with other members of the council.
Croatia is gaining ever more of a voice in the UN, from presiding over the Economic and Social Council in 2002 to chairing and co-chairing various committees, commissions and other panels, including the anti-terrorism committee within the security council.
The country also now participates in ten UN peacekeeping missions throughout the world after having been the recipient of peacekeeping assistance. 
Earlier this year, Croatia announced its candidacy for a non-permanent membership on the security council for the term 2008-2009.
