02/04/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 02/04/09
More than 350 local movie industry professionals attended the third annual Gopo Awards gala -- affectionately termed the "Romanian Oscars" -- in Bucharest last month.
The festive event celebrates the Romanian movie industry's progress during the past year.
Ion Popescu Gopo -- a director who won the Cannes Film Festival Golden Palm for the 1957 animated film "Short History" -- founded the Gopo Awards in 2007.
The Romanian Film Promotion Association organises the event.
Director Nae Caranfil's feature "The Rest Is Silence" -- a story of hurdles in a father-son relationship -- took home nine Gopo Awards, including for best picture and most original screenplay.
Director of Photography Marius Panduru received his second Gopo in three years for best cinematography.
Frenchman Laurent Couson, composer of the Caranfil picture's soundtrack, became the first foreigner to win a Gopo.
"Boogie" -- a story about a man experiencing internal conflict as he reunites with old friends, directed by Radu Muntean -- won four Gopo Awards this year -- for best director, lead actor (Dragos Bucur), lead actress (Anamaria Marinca) and supporting actress (Mimi Branescu).
"Silent Wedding", directed by the renowned Romanian actor Horatiu Malaele, won the best make-up and hair award.
It is a tragicomedy about the effects of collectivism on individual destinies, in which a pair of Romanian newlyweds secretly celebrate their nuptials despite periodic interruptions imposed by national mourning of Stalin's death.
The public's award for best box office success in 2008 went to "Survivor", while the Gopo for best European film distributed in Romania went to Jiri Menzel of the Czech Republic for "I Served the King of England".
Romanian motion pictures have gained acclaim over the past 50 years, a trend that has picked up steam thanks to a gifted younger generation.
Recent successes include a Golden Palm at Cannes for director Cristian Mungiu's "4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days".
However, these filmmakers have no use for the current system of public financing of film projects.
The Romanian National Film Centre (CNC) disburses funding under the auspices of the ministry of culture.
In an open letter to the minister of culture, Mungiu voiced the desire of many to scrap the current system.
He claimed CNC members award funding under the influence of "[outside] pressure, interventions, threats and blackmail" and called for an independent panel that will not be "biased in favour of the older generation" of filmmakers.
Mungiu predicts the film industry's "new wave" could ebb "much too soon" if the "deficiencies of the system go uncorrected".
