01/04/2009
(Blic - 01/04/09;
Reuters, Euobserver, RFE/RL, Beta, B92, MIA, Makfax - 31/03/09)
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Tuesday (March 31st) that the Union might decide this year to scrap visas for some of the Western Balkan countries.
"Maybe this year we will be able to get concrete results," in this area, he told participants at a conference organised by the European Policy Centre, a Brussels-based think tank.
The European Commission (EC) launched visa facilitation talks with Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia last year.
Each country's "road map" of requirements covers four sets of issues:
document security;
illegal migration, including readmission;
public order and security;
and external relations and fundamental rights.
The countries that have made the greatest headway could see removal of the visa restrictions imposed on their nationals by the end of this year, said Rehn.
He said his office would make recommendations "before the end of the Czech EU presidency" on June 30th.
Then the Council of the EU, the 27-nation bloc's main decision-making body, could later in the year decide to lift visa obligations if it considers a country has made sufficient progress.
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia are the countries that have done the most to meet their benchmarks, Brussels-based online news service EUobserver noted.
A qualified majority of EU member states would have to approve the removal of visa obligations on any Western Balkan country.
Addressing EU lawmakers later on Tuesday, Rehn said that the EC wants "to move further" on the issue of visa liberalisation.
"This is very important for the citizens of the Western Balkans," Reuters quoted him as telling members of the European Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee.
He also noted that people from the region are not to blame for current economic problems.
"We must not make EU enlargement a scapegoat for [the global economic crisis], as it does not deserve that and as it is not responsible for our social ills," Rehn stressed.
EU candidate Croatia is still on track to complete its membership negotiations by the end of this year, he said.
But he urged the Croat and Slovenian authorities to adopt a "constructive" approach to expedite resolution of their border dispute.
"Let's stop nationalistic rhetoric [in both countries]," Rehn said.
Macedonia is the only other Western Balkan country to gain recognition as an official EU candidate, but it has never received a date for starting admission talks.
If Macedonia meets the membership criteria, the EC will recommend giving it a starting date for negotiations by the end of 2009, Macedonian state news agency MIA quoted Rehn as saying on Tuesday.
