01/06/2009
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 01/06/09
Tackling war crimes cases in Southeast Europe with a new approach -- including a boost in co-operation and increased information exchanges in the form of region-wide data bases -- was the focus of the third regional conference on war crimes last week.
UN war crimes tribunal chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz, European Commission Delegation to Croatia chief Vincent Degert, Croatian Justice Minister Ivan Simonovic and US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Clint Williamson attended the conference, held on the Croatian island of Brijuni on May 26th. 
State attorneys and prosecutors from Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Macedonia also attended the closed-door discussions.
Although co-operation has improved during last 12 months, participants agreed that new approaches in analysis and information sharing are needed.
One of the key points discussed was the development of data bases that would be accessible to state prosecutors' offices in regional countries. 
However, the logistics must be adapted to adhere to each country's legal standards.
The Croatian state public prosecutor's office demonstrated the data base they've developed.
Conference participants also discussed establishing a public prosecutor to protect the basic human rights of witnesses in war crimes cases.
Participants praised the involvement of Croatian President Stipe Mesic, who attended the forum. 
Brammertz asked him to continue to support and co-operate with The Hague tribunal after his presidential mandate ends.
Participants also agreed on the need for a conference next year to evaluate the success of this year's meeting and to continue working on reinforcing co-operation.
Brammertz will submit his bi-annual report on war crimes co-operation in the region to the UN Security Council later this month.
On the sidelines of the conference, Croatian Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and Brammertz discussed "artillery logs" that The Hague has requested from Zagreb in the trial against Croatian generals Ante Gotovina, Mladen Markac and Ivan Cermak. 
The three have been indicted for war crimes against the Serbs in 1995's Operation Storm.
