02/02/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 02/02/09
Serbia began implementing an Interim Trade Agreement with the EU on Friday (January 30th).
It calls for reducing customs duties on EU products and gradually establishing free trade with the bloc in industrial and agricultural products, over the next six years.
The deal was part of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement signed by Serbia and the EU on April 29, 2008.
Both documents were immediately suspended pending full Serbian co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Belgrade's decision to unilaterally implement its part of the trade agreement is meant to signal the country's commitment to integration, officials say.
This year, Serbia will cut customs fees on raw materials by 70% and on agricultural products by 80% to 95%.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has backed the move, saying the application of European rules brings Belgrade closer to the EU.
Opposition politicians say the threat of lost revenues is too great, especially in light of the global financial crisis.
Former Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, now one of the opposition leaders, says the state will lose approximately 300m euros due to the lower customs duties.
The public, critics argue, will end up paying for the shortfall in the form of increased excise taxes.
Finance Minister Diana Dragutinovic waved off the accusations, noting that the EU has already lifted customs duties on Serbian exports.
"Technically, this is not a unilateral implementation of the Interim Trade Agreement, because Serbian goods have become duty free in the EU market," she said.
Serbia is, however, experiencing a wave of price hikes.
When excise taxes were raised, the cost of gasoline and beer went up, and the same may happen to cigarettes.
After the announced rise in natural gas and electricity prices, National Bank of Serbia Governor Radovan Jelasic said the increase of state-controlled prices could jeopardise the projected 8% inflation for 2009.
Twenty-six EU members voted for implementation of the trade agreement with Serbia, but the Netherlands continues to veto it, saying Belgrade must first hand over top war crimes indictee Ratko Mladic, considered largely responsible for the July 1995 Srebrencia massacre.
