29/09/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 29/09/09
In an attempt to slash government spending, President Traian Basescu called for a referendum Thursday (September 24th) on changing the country's parliament into a unicameral structure and reducing the number of lawmakers by 170.
He is proposing it be held on November 22nd, the same day as the presidential elections.
"I think a unicameral parliament with fewer MPs would better respond to Romania's necessities and there would be many advantages," said Basescu in a televised speech.
"The first and the most important would be that the decisions in parliament would be taken more easily and the parliament would become more effective.
At the same time, state costs would be considerably reduced," the president added.
The measure would also reduce corruption, according to Basescu.
"A unicameral parliament with fewer lawmakers would be an element of cutting corruption:
fewer high-ranking politicians accused of influence peddling.
Last, but not least, this measure could reduce a class of privileged, with special pensions, incomes and state funds at their discretion," he said.
The announcement has shaken Romanian politics, surprising even members of Basescu's own party.
The opposition was quick to cry foul, claiming that the referendum is just a political ploy.
Political analysts agree that the move is strategic.
"Through this proposal, Basescu has clearly an electoral goal in mind.
He seeks to heighten his chances of renewing his presidential term by associating his name with a very popular idea among Romanians, the one of reducing the number of MPs," Florin Ciornei, political editor at local newspaper Evenimentul Zilei told SETimes.
"But renouncing a two-chamber parliament means changing the constitution, a not-so-easy process to carry out," said Ciornei, noting that a successful referendum result does not guarantee the change will go through.
"The results of the referendum are not mandatory for the MPs and it's up to them to bolster a draft on changing the fundamental law.
This requires the approval of at least two thirds of the lawmakers, which is quite unlikely," he said.
According to polls, parliament is the least trusted institution in the country.
