01/05/2009
(UN News Centre - 30/04/09; MIA, Makfax - 29/04/09)
There is generally a high degree of respect for freedom of religion or belief in Macedonia, an independent UN rights expert said Wednesday (April 29th). 
However, she also said there is room for improvement.
"Macedonia is a multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-religious society. 
There is by and large a high level of tolerance in its society," UN special rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief Asma Jahangir said at the end of a visit to the Balkan nation. 
"Nevertheless, some areas of concern remain to be addressed."
During her four-day trip to the country, which included visits to Skopje, Tetovo and Prilep, Jahangir met with numerous government officials, NGO members and representatives of religious communities. 
She will present her findings and recommendations in a report to the 13th session of the UN Human Rights Council in 2010. 
The Macedonian constitution provides for the separation of state and religion.
Many of those she met with, however, indicated that the two main religious communities in the country -- the Macedonian Orthodox Church and the Islamic community -- "wield considerable political influence and are able to make inroads to the Constitutional concept of separation of state and religion".
The UN expert expressed astonishment at religious leaders and politicians' outcry against a recent Constitutional Court decision to restrict religious teaching in primary schools. 
That ruling in no way "impinges upon the freedom to receive religious instruction" outside those schools, the rapporteur noted.
"It is vital that the independence of the judiciary is fully respected, particularly when making decisions regarding religious issues," Jahangir stressed.
She welcomed the changes made to the 2007 Law on Religious Communities and Religious Groups to bring it in line with international standards but noted that the country was still lagging behind in implementing the envisioned reforms.
Viewing the policy of denationalisation of religious communities' assets as a positive step, the UN expert also emphasised the need to resolve pending claims "in a sensitive and transparent manner".
Another issue of concern for the UN expert was instances of incitement of racial or religious hatred.
"These contribute to creating a climate of intolerance and threaten the security of individuals," Jahangir said, calling for prohibition by law of such activity.
Jahangir also voiced disappointment that the authorities "in an otherwise tolerant society" had failed to follow up on complaints about specific cases of incitement.
"Impunity in cases of incitement to religious hatred unfortunately emboldens forces of bigotry," she stressed.
She was optimistic, however, that a continuing debate on freedom of religion or belief in Macedonia "will contribute to a higher level of understanding and respect between different religious communities and individuals, including atheists".
