30/09/2009
(AFP, EFE, HINA, Swedish EU Presidency - 29/09/09; European Voice - 24/09/09)
The political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) remains complicated, so there will be no changes in EUFOR's mandate for the time being, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said on Tuesday (September 29th).
But planning for a transition from the current executive military to a "non-executive" mission tasked with training and preparing the military in the BiH government is under way, he said in Gothenburg.
"We very much hope that this can happen in the near future," Solana told reporters at a news conference wrapping up a two-day informal meeting of EU defence ministers in Sweden's second largest city. 
"But we know that the work in Bosnia and Herzegovina requires some effort and demands that we are vigilant about the domestic political situation."
The Gothenburg talks were hosted by Swedish Defence Minister Sten Tolgfors, whose country currently holds the six-month rotating EU presidency.
French General Henri Bentegeat, head of the EU military committee, echoed Solana's words.
"Security reigns, but the political situation is a nightmare," Bentegeat told reporters on the sidelines of the meeting.
Launched in December 2004, EUFOR initially numbered 6,300 troops. 
It has since been downsized to about a 2,300-strong force, whose main tasks are to prevent a return to violence and contribute to a safe and secure environment on the ground.
An unnamed EU diplomat told reporters Tuesday that the plans were for EUFOR to "fall to 200 or 300 personnel", whose only role would be to provide training and mentoring to the BiH security forces.
"If the EU were to take this decision, it would need numerous guarantees," Bentegeat noted. 
He cited the continuing mutual accusations and lack of co-operation among BiH's Bosniak, Serb and Croat communities as the reason for delaying EUFOR's transformation.
Solana indicated that the EU will revisit the issue after the Peace Implementation Council meets in November. 
The international body overseeing the peace process in BiH is expected to discuss the possible closure of the Office of the High Representative (OHR) and the transfer of its duties to the EU Special Representative (EUSR).
"It will depend on how fast the OHR is transferred to the EUSR to see how we will transfer also the executive mission that we still have from the military to -- what we call -- a non-executive mission," Solana said at Tuesday's joint news conference with Tolgfors.
Last week, High Representative Valentin Inzko, who also holds the EUSR position in BiH, and EUFOR Operational Commander General John McColl briefed EU security officials on the current situation.
Though it is largely stable, European troops are still needed on the ground as a "contingency measure" in the event political tensions should simmer, Inzko said, according to a report the Brussels-based weekly European Voice published on its website last Thursday.
"The policy of the EU is clear," Solana said on Tuesday. 
"We want to see a transfer from the international High Representative to the EU Special Representative, thinking and believing that the best objective... 
that the Bosnia and Herzegovina people may have is to be part of the EU."
