30/11/2009
(Nine O'clock - 30/11/09; AFP - 28/11/09; European Commission, AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, FT, BBC, Euobserver, EurActiv, RFE/RL - 27/11/09)
European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso announced the composition of his next team Friday (November 27th), voicing confidence that the new EU executive will help lead Europe out of the economic crisis during its five-year term.
"On the basis of the nominations by the member states, I have sought to design a college which can generate fresh ideas and new momentum on the biggest challenges we face in Europe today," the former Portuguese prime minister said at a news conference in Brussels.
Barroso, who stepped in as the 11th EC president in November 2004, won the European Parliament's (EP) approval for a second five-year term on September 16th.
"I am confident that this college will be decisive in steering Europe towards recovery and a sustainable social market economy that works for the people," he said. 
One of the key tasks of the so-called Barroso II cabinet "will be to give life to the new opportunities provided by the Lisbon Treaty", which enters into force Tuesday.
The 26 commissioners-designate, including nine women, need to be approved by the EP.
In addition to handling the 27-nation bloc's budget, which amounted to 116 billion euros in 2008, the responsibilities of the commission include the drafting of new legislation, as well as ensuring that EU treaties and laws are observed by member states.
The next EU executive will be made up of representatives of the main political groupings in Europe -- 13, including Barroso, from the conservative European People's Party (EPP), eight from the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party (ELDR) and six from the centre-left Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats (S&D).
Thirteen of the commissioners-designate were members of the outgoing EC, but none will retain their previous portfolios.
Outgoing EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn will take the economic and monetary affairs portfolio. 
His new responsibilities include enforcing EU budget rules and strengthening co-ordination of the bloc's macroeconomic policies.
Rehn would be replaced by Stefan Fuele, the Czech Republic's EU affairs minister and former ambassador to NATO. 
Fuele will be responsible for enlargement as well as the bloc's neighbourhood policy.
Another coveted post is expected to go to Dacian Ciolos of Romania, who has been named as the next agriculture and rural development commissioner, while Bulgarian Foreign Minister Rumiana Jeleva would be put in charge of international relations and humanitarian aid.
Two other Southeast European countries would be represented by women in the new EC. 
Maria Damanaki of Greece has been named as the next maritime affairs and fisheries commissioner, while the outgoing health commissioner -- Androulla Vassiliou of Cyprus – will to switch to education, culture, multilingualism and youth.
