24/09/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --24/09/09
Serbian authorities are considering banning political groups that threaten others, officials said on Monday (September 22nd). 
The catalyst was threats by ultranationalist groups, which prompted the cancellation of Sunday's Gay Pride Parade in Belgrade.
Deputy Justice Minister Slobodan Homen told B92 that authorities plan to ask Serbia's top court to "ban all organisations that voice threats".
Ultranationalist groups Obraz (Honour) and the Serb Popular Movement 1389 opposed the gay march. 
Obraz leader Mladen Obradovic warned that organisers would be responsible for what could happen if it took place as scheduled.
According to local press reports, a group of around 10,000 hooligans had planned to shower parade participants with stones hidden in drain shafts along the parade route.
The groups also planned to attack the Swedish Embassy, which was to host a reception for parade participants. 
Certain members of these extremist groups even wanted to infiltrate the parade, which would allow them to later attack participants directly.
The interior ministry said police could not guarantee the parade participants' safety, and recommended that the parade move from central downtown to Usce Park, near the Danube and Sava rivers, where parade participants could be better protected.
"The interior ministry is obligated to bring attention to the high risk to property and human lives. 
We proposed that a location be chosen which the police will be able to secure, so as not to be responsible for a single human life," said Interior Minister Ivica Dacic.
The organisers refused. 
"The tradition in all major world towns is to hold such events on the main streets, in order to demonstrate that members of the gay and lesbian population are equal members of the society. 
We do not want to walk around some meadow near the river; that would not be the Pride Parade," organisation committee member Majda Puaca said.
Suggesting the different venue indicated "the state has caved in to threats of violence," said organisers.
Serbian Police Chief Milorad Veljovic said on Monday that "stricter measures" would be taken against those who promote violent behavior, noting that 37 people were arrested Sunday after they tried to stage an anti-gay rally in central Belgrade.
Police also said no public rallies would be allowed in downtown Belgrade "in the future", due to security issues.
