29/01/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 29/01/10
Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou's long-anticipated reply to a high-profile letter sent last November by Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan arrived in Ankara on Monday (January 25th).
The five-page letter detailed Athens' long-standing positions on a variety of "thorny" issues while reiterating Papandreou's desire for rapprochement between Greece and Turkey.
He also serves as his country's foreign minister.
In regard to the continental shelf of the Aegean Sea which separates the nations, Papandreou detailed a "laundry list" of conditions -- including respect of territorial integrity, international law and international treaties, as well as bilateral and multilateral treaties.
Athens holds that the most prominent treaty is the International Law of the Sea, ratified by Greece and the rest of the EU.
Turkey, whose EU bid remains under consideration, has not signed.
If the countries cannot work it out themselves, Papandreou has reportedly suggested they jointly approach the International Court of Justice for a solution.
Papandreou also criticised flights over Greek islands by Turkish warplanes -- a longstanding grievance by successive administrations in Athens -- along with oil exploration in non-delineated parts of the Aegean.
As to the decades-old quagmire in Cyprus, the Greek prime minister said the key is for the Greek and Turkish communities on the island to choose a common future "without any foreign interference or pressure".
On Wednesday, Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat announced an extension of the second round of ongoing talks on reunification.
A former US foreign service officer living in Athens -- Brady Kiesling -- said the dialogue is encouraging, but with the current Greek financial crisis, Papandreou has his hands full.
"Erdogan made a sensible diplomatic move to take the public relations ‘high ground’ on a series of issues,” said Kiesling.
“… unfortunately, George Papandreou simply cannot afford to devote enough energy to this specific set of issues.”
