24/09/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/09/09
Professor Borce Davitkovski is one of Macedonia's leading legal experts and dean of the law faculty at the country's biggest and oldest academic institution -- St. 
Cyril and Methodius University. 
He is the author of five law textbooks and over 70 professional papers.
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Davitkovski discusses the effects of reforms on his law school, and in Macedonia under the Bologna system -- which strives to make academic degree standards and quality assurance standards more comparable and compatible throughout Europe.
SETimes: How did the introduction of the credit transfer system in your school affect the quality of studies?
Dean Borce Davitkovski: The change influenced positively the manner of studying by students. 
Simply put, the amphitheatres and classrooms became full again. 
Students study continuously during the entire academic year and participate in training. 
The former ad hoc learning and cramming for exams are over with.
Prior to introducing credit transfers, completing the studies at the law faculty lasted a long time, perhaps seven and a half years on average. 
Now, over 70% of students advance to the next academic year and the period leading to graduation is reduced.
However, a negative aspect of this system is that it does not have the classical oral exams; students can finish the three-year study without saying a word, and get the minimum passing grade only on the basis of written tests, essays and projects. 
This is an insufficient way to express knowledge by a future layer. 
All our efforts are concentrated to overcome this problem on the masters' level and we will constantly emphasise the students' practical knowledge and oral communication.
SETimes: Does the new system make Macedonian students closer to their European colleagues?
Davitkovski: Yes, they can now register or continue their studies at any European or American university. 
Because an established system of studies' evaluation through the credits already exists, diploma validations now take place much faster.
SETimes: Which aspects of the law are the Macedonian students most interested in?
Davitkovski: As a rule, they are interested in courses concerning judicature and classical legal subjects, but lately the law of the European states -- financial law, administrative law, public administration and business law, international law -- have become popular.
SETimes: Has the Law Faculty evidence about how many graduates work as lawyers?
Davitkovski: So far we did not have any legal obligation to collect such information and we do not have the statistics. 
That is why in the law faculty's new acts adopted at the beginning of the academic year foresee forming a lawyers' alumni association made up of our graduates, through which we can find out where they are employed. 
Also, our aim is to engage them to improve the existing and create new study plans and programmes akin to those in the US.
SETimes: Do you have an exchange programmes for students and professors with some of the well-known law schools abroad?
Davitkovski: For over 15 years, we have an established exchange programme for professors and students with the Moscow State University "Lomonosov", which is among the fifth leading European universities. 
We also have established mostly a professor exchange programme with the law faculties of the state universities in Zagreb, Ljubljana, Maribor, Belgrade, Nish, Sofia, as well as in France and the US.
SETimes: Is the best way to improve the quality of higher education through increasing the number of universities, which creates competition?
Davitkovski: We are not afraid of competition but unfair competition from public universities worries us. 
Although there are 12-13 public and several private law faculties, the interest in applying to our school is such that there are three candidates for one available place. 
We will continue to invest in the quality of instruction, especially in the instructors' professionalism and competence, which sets us apart from others which do not have any doctors of law to teach. 
However, the government should seriously consider which public law faculties it will support. 
We compare our school to the top 100 law faculties in the world, and are not worried about the number and quality of competing law schools in Macedonia.
