24/09/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/09/09
EULEX's Police War Crimes Investigation Unit, in collaboration with Kosovo Police and KFOR, arrested four Kosovo Serbs on Wednesday (September 23rd) morning near Gjilane for alleged war crimes committed in April 1999.
A detention hearing is scheduled for Thursday before a EULEX judge.
A fifth person who was detained for obstructing the police operation has been released.
"The charges relate to alleged inhuman treatment;
suffering or violation of bodily integrity or health, application of measures of intimidation and terror, an illegal arrest and detention," said EULEX.
According to local media, the arrested included Svetlana Stojanovic, Dobrivoje Trajkovic, Slobodan and Srecko Martinovic, and Srdan Filic, all from Novo Brdo.
"The accusations have nothing to do with the truth," Vlada Martinovic, whose father and uncle were arrested, told local Radio KIM.
Serbian-based FoNet says Srecko Martinovic was a Kosovo police officer.
The agency also reported that the Serb National Council of Kosovo strongly condemned the arrests calling EULEX's move "scandalous".
Kosovo Serbs in Novo Brdo protested the arrests.
Belgrade-based B92 quoted Stojan Stanojevic, a Serb political leader in Novo Brdo, as saying that the suspects "are innocent" and that "there had been no clashes or attacks on Albanians during the 1999 insurgency."
According to Radio Free Europe, Serbia's Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic asked EULEX "to clarify" the facts on which it based the arrests.
Media confusion over the participation of Kosovo police in the arrests was clarified by police spokeswoman Baki Kelani who was quoted by the daily Express as saying the arrests were made by the force in co-operation with EULEX.
Wednesday's arrests follow a period of mounting tension between EULEX and Pristina over a police protocol signed between EULEX and Serbia.
The protocol is in effect, but talks with Belgrade are expected to continue regarding its implementation.
Meanwhile on Tuesday, the war crimes court in Belgrade acquitted two former Serb policemen, Sreten Popovic and Milos Stojanovic, of torturing three Albanian-Americans brothers who were later killed during the Kosovo conflict, in what is known as the Bytyqi case.
War crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic vowed to appeal the acquittals.
"It was noticed earlier that in cases involving police officers, there is a so-called silent conspiracy.
Other police officers and witnesses do not want to point the finger at their friends," said Vukcevic.
