30/07/2009
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 30/07/09
Despite some political opposition, the move to deploy troops to the NATO mission in Afghanistan is under way. 
Parliament approved on Tuesday (July 28th) a plan to send 40 soldiers to join the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). 
The administration says this is necessary to achieve the country's goal of NATO membership.
"A squad and medical personnel will be sent at the start of next year, while two officers who are due to join the German command are going to leave between September and October 2010," Defence Minister Boro Vucinic said. 
Montenegro will also send troops to missions in Liberia and Somalia.
Meanwhile, Montenegro is to sign a military-technical agreement with one Alliance partner country to provide support for the troops and their transport to Afghanistan. 
Until then, a three-member medical team will leave for Afghanistan in August: one doctor and two technicians.
"It is clear that Montenegro will not contribute to the Alliance in the same way as the US, Germany or France, but it is also certain that, in the range of its capacities, it will adequately contribute," Vucinic told Southeast European Times.
He added that a collective defence system guaranteed by NATO is the best choice for Montenegro.
"For us in the Balkans, there is no more pressing obligation than ensuring peace and stability, that will, at least according to the experiences of new NATO member states, have a positive effect on our economic development, with which we will create a safe investment environment," said Vucinic.
However, the opposition is not happy with the plan. 
"The existing law defines participation in missions on a voluntarily basis, but keep in mind that social problems are significant and it is hard to find jobs. 
Therefore, it is realistic to expect that a certain number of soldiers will decide [to join a military deployment]," opposition Socialist Peoples Party member Predrag Bulatovic told Southeast European Times.
He also added that the government moved too quickly with the decision. 
"Afghanistan is a very risky area and there is a possibility that Montenegro and its citizens may be targeted by the international terrorist organisations."
Preliminary training of 85 soldiers began in Danilovgrad, near Podgorica, last August. 
The US company Military Professional Resources, Inc. 
began an intensive three-month training of soldiers there.
