30/12/2009
(Office of the High Representative, AFP, AKI, Fena, B92, Radio Srbija - 29/12/09; Reuters, AP, RFE/RL, Office of the High Representative - 14/12/09)
High Representative Valentin Inzko slammed the Republika Srpska (RS) parliament on Tuesday (December 29th) for rejecting his decision to extend the mandates of foreign judges and prosecutors working in Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) courts.
The assembly's conclusions "rejecting the implementation of the laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina enacted by the High Representative, are in violation of the Dayton Peace Agreement" (DPA), the international community's top envoy in BiH said in a statement.
It was issued less than 24 hours after the RS assembly approved a text submitted by the entity's government that rejected Inzko's recent decision on the international presence in the BiH judiciary "in its entirety".
The mandate of foreign judges and prosecutors working in the BiH courts was scheduled to expire at the end of the year. 
Following the state-level parliament's failure to either extend their term of office or provide replacements, Inzko took the matter into his own hands to prevent judicial chaos in the country, with hundreds of prosecutions in limbo.
On December 14th, he extended the mandate of foreign judges and prosecutors working on war crimes cases in BiH until December 31st 2012. 
He also decided that the international judges and prosecutors dealing with organised crime and corruption will remain in BiH, but serve as advisers.
Announcing his decision, Inzko said the logic behind it was that "not extending the internationals in the department for war crimes could have serious consequences for the ongoing trials." This, he added, could endanger the closure strategy of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and "most seriously mean that the witnesses would have to repeat their painful testimony once again in front of the accused".
Under the DPA, which ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, the High Representative has overarching powers, including the power to impose laws and fire elected local officials. 
"Republika Srpska must respect the Dayton Peace Agreement in its entirety and must not challenge actions undertaken on the basis of Dayton and UN Security Council Resolutions," Inzko said in his statement Tuesday.
The document approved by the RS parliament the previous night said "there exists no legal obligation to accept and enforce the High Representative's decisions," the AFP reported, quoting Bosnian Serb news agency SRNA.
Addressing lawmakers, RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, who has often challenged the High Representative's decisions and authority, suggested that the question of the international jurists working in BiH courts be put to a referendum in his entity. 
According to him, it could be held in March or April, once the RS Law on Referendum is changed.
"At the moment it is crucial to reject the decisions made by HR Inzko and to confirm our decision on referendum," Sarajevo-based Fena news agency quoted Dodik as saying at the RS parliament's lengthy and heated debate Monday.
The text that lawmakers approved described Inzko's ruling as unconstitutional and anti-Dayton.
The high representative reminded them Tuesday that he is the final authority to interpret the civilian aspects of the DPA, which also obliges parties to "co-operate in the investigation and prosecution of war crimes".
"Conclusions that negate the legal framework regulating BiH judicial institutions, including issues regarding co-operation with the ICTY, are a direct attack to the very concept of the rule of law," Inzko said. 
"In this context it is questionable why the RS authorities feel the need to hold a referendum on whether the RS should observe the rule of law, including co-operation with the ICTY."
