27/01/2010
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 27/01/10
The New Year has brought stricter regulation of Macedonia's open-air produce markets.
The government is now enforcing the Hazard Analysis of Critical Control Points (HACCP) to ensure the safety of animal-based foods sold in the country's "green" markets.
The move apparently sits well with consumers.
"When I buy food, I want to know its origin and whether it was kept in adequate conditions regardless of whether it is in the green market or in a grocery store," said Skopje resident Biljana Geshtakovska.
"It is simple:
we will be protected from buying bad quality food."
So far, about half of independent businesses working with meat, milk and other dairy products -- required by the standards to keep cheese and similar goods refrigerated -- are in compliance.
Less than a fifth of the businesses, officials said, have yet to start the process.
Over 80% of the country's large industrial food producers have implemented the HACCP code.
Business owners who produce, package or serve food produced by animals are legally responsible for implementing the HACCP system.
Last year, the government warned repeatedly that those who do not comply will face possible shut-downs in 2010.
After inspections this year, Macedonia said it temporarily closed 32 food producing enterprises, bakeries and restaurants.
"Penalties will be taken against all subjects who have not started implementing the HACCAP standards, while those who are in the implementation phase will get warnings only," said Marina Popovska-Domazetova, chief of Macedonia's food directorate.
Ekrem Dolek, president of the Green Market Sellers Association, said vendors do not expect to be penalised at present because it is unclear how to fully implement the standards.
"The sale of safe food is a priority for us but I still think that we should agree with the green market organisers as to whom will provide the HACCP system and under what conditions," said Dolek.
Penalties range from 500 to 800 euros for individual vendors, while companies face 2,000 and 5,000-euro citations as well as possible closure for anywhere from six months to two years.
