27/11/2009
By Maria Paravantes for Southeast European Times in Athens – 27/11/09
It's become a battle of words and surveys as the Greek conservative opposition party New Democracy (ND) prepares to choose a new president on Sunday (November 29th).
An estimated 1,500 polling stations will be set up throughout the country.
For the first time ever, non-party members will be able to cast their vote alongside about 4,500 ND delegates, as long as they jot down their name on the party register.
According to the newspaper To Vima, the process could cost close to 2m euros.
Three contenders are vying to succeed Costas Karamanlis, who stepped down after his party lost the October 4th general elections.
One candidate is Dora Bakoyannis, who served as foreign minister in the previous administration.
She is the daughter of a past party president and onetime prime minister, Constantine Mitsotakis, and was mayor of Athens from 2003 to 2006.
Former Culture Minister Antonis Samaras and Thessaloniki prefect Panayiotis Psomiadis are also in the running.
A fourth challenger, former Health Minister Dimitris Avramopoulos, dropped out of the contest on November 2nd, pledging his support to Samaras.
A member of the Mitsotakis administration, Samaras walked out on the party in 1993, in a move that eventually spurred the collapse of the government.
He signed back on with ND in 2004.
Although outgoing leader Karamanlis has called for unity and urged his would-be successors to avoid "deviations and personal attacks", the race has been highly contentious.
Candidates bickered publicly over whether ND should hold a closed party election or open it up to all supporters.
That strife has compounded ND's woes even as it struggles to regain a footing following its bitter loss to George Papandreou's Socialists.
Centre-right contender Bakoyannis has repeatedly stressed the need to revive the party by reaching out to society.
"In a few days we will decide whether we want a ND of yesterday or of tomorrow.
Whether we want a ND of fear or of hope," she said from her hometown of Hania, on the island of Crete.
Samaras, in contrast, is hewing a conservative-nationalist stance, saying the party's first responsibility is to its political base.
"We must reach out to the pure-blooded ND supporter and then look further," he said during a stop in Halkida, stressing the need for the party to return to its roots.
Psomiadis, also on the patriotic/conservative spectrum, says he is being pressured to withdraw from the race to avoid a second round.
But the Thessaloniki prefect says he's here to stay to the end and aims to collect 20% of the votes.
Polling has been inconclusive.
Of two new surveys released this week, each give the lead to a different contender -- Bakoyannis and Samaras.
Party cadres, meanwhile, have been issuing public pledges of support, as a way of influencing voters.
During the campaign, Bakoyannis invited her rivals to a televised debate, but both refused, claiming it would further disenchant voters by sowing additional discord.
