22/09/2009
(AFP, Nine O'clock, Agerpres, Roumanie.com, Mediafax - 22/09/09;
Wall Street Journal, Mediafax, IMF - 21/09/09)
The IMF approved on Monday (September 21st) the immediate disbursement of 1.85 billion euros to Romania, urging the country to pursue further reforms to cushion the impact of the global economic crisis.
The funding comes under a stand-by arrangement endorsed in early May, under which the Washington-based international lender agreed to provide a total of 12.9 billion euros to the Balkan nation over a 24-month period.
Romania received immediately the first tranche of 5 billion euros.
The next instalments, the IMF said, would be made available following quarterly reviews of the government's economic performance under its programme of measures intended to deal with the effects of the global turmoil.
The release of the second tranche was approved following the completion of the first assessment of Romania's performance under the stand-by arrangement, the Fund said Monday.
A team of IMF experts arrived in the country in late July as part of the review process.
Wrapping up their nearly-two week visit to Bucharest, they said the Romanian economy was expected to shrink by more than 8% this year, double the 4.1% forecast in March, when the government sought international assistance to cope with the deteriorating situation.
Jeffrey Franks, the IMF's mission chief for Romania, said Romania faces a "very severe recession" and that it wouldn't be able to finance its 2009 budget deficit, which is expected to swell to 7.3% of GDP, well above the 4.6% target agreed to at the start of the programme.
The Fund said Romania would be allowed to run a higher budget deficit this year and next, but stressed the need for "considerable efforts" to ensure that the revised target will not be exceeded.
A statement, announcing the approval of the first review of Romania's performance, quoted IMF First Deputy Managing Director and Acting Chairman John Lipsky as saying Monday that the economic situation in the country had worsened in the past four months .
"Against the backdrop of a significant deterioration in economic activity since the approval of the stand-by arrangement in May, policy implementation has been strong," said Lipsky.
"The deeper-than-expected economic downturn, however, requires a recalibration of policies so as to strike an appropriate balance between the short-term response to the crisis and the medium-term policy objectives."
He also noted that the revised programme Romania is expected to implement focuses on measures, aimed at securing "permanent reductions in current spending, while preserving capital and social safety net spending".
Lipsky also warned that it is critical that Romania implement further reforms to ensure stronger control over areas that pose the biggest fiscal risk, such as expenditure commitments, pension reform and public entities outside the central government.
"Improved stability in financial markets and declining inflation may provide some room for further easing, but a cautious approach is warranted, given the still high inflation rates and remaining vulnerabilities to external pressures," he stressed.
Lipsky also called on Romania to keep watching for possible "signs of stress in the banking system" that it could face due to the weak economy.
