22/09/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 22/09/09
Combined Endeavour 2009 (CE09), a 15-day international military exercise sponsored by the US European Command, wrapped up last week in Banja Luka.
Five hundred soldiers from 16 NATO countries, as well as about 150 BiH troops, participated in testing the interoperability and compatibility of the NATO and Partnership for Peace (PfP) members' telecommunications systems at the "Kozara" military barracks.
Although BiH was the main site, drills also were held in the Netherlands and Denmark, bringing the total number involved in CoE 2009 to 1,200 soldiers from 37 countries.
BiH Presidency Chairman Zeljko Komsic underscored the importance of hosting the event. 
"The organisation of the exercise is proof of the maturity of the structures that control the BiH armed forces, and also a proof we can participate in the most complex military activities as an equal partner," said Komsic.
Brigadier General Dragan Vukovic, the person in charge of all exercise activities in BiH, explained that this provided "us all an opportunity to get to know each other better, work as soldiers and jointly solve all given tasks".
While the exercises included testing of net-centric capabilities, user-defined common operational pictures, pre-deployment testing and cyber defence, most significantly they included communication standards.
The BiH armed forces participated with several radio and phone systems and demonstrated the equipment's compatibility with all versions of the other participants' technology. 
Colonel Alija Kozljak, head of the BiH military's International Co-operation Team, confirmed that more than 170 tests were conducted, of which 99% were successful.
Leading national and international political and military officials in BiH attended the closing ceremony, including all three members of the presidency, US Ambassador to BiH Charles English and USEUCOM Commander, Admiral James Stavridis.
English confirmed that the exercise underscored BiH's growing military relationship with the United States and other NATO allies.
"From fighting forest fires in Herzegovina, to supporting international missions in the deserts of Iraq and, perhaps soon, in Afghanistan, the brave men and women of the Bosnian armed forces display character and courage of which all citizens of this country can be proud," said English.
Komsic added he is particularly pleased that for the first time, the host country is not yet a full fledged NATO member. 
This was reportedly the first time in the 14-year-long history of Combined Endeavour that it was held outside of Germany.
