28/07/2009
(AP - 22/07/09; AFP - 21/07/09; Politika.bg - 02/04/09; E-vestnik.bg - 01/04/09)
Enver Hoxha, the dictator who ruled Albania for more than 40 years until his death in 1985, is long gone. 
But the hundreds of thousands of bunkers -- one of the most notorious symbols of the Stalinist leader's regime -- are still in place. 
The reason -- their removal is too costly.
Hoxha, who came to power in late 1944, led the Balkan nation into isolation, first from the West, and then from the communist bloc in Eastern Europe, including the former Soviet Union.
His obsession about a potential NATO or Warsaw Pact attack on Albania triggered a large-scale push to defend the country against invasion.
Reports ahead of Albania's NATO entry in April quoted Maliq Sadushi, a deputy defence minister under Hoxha, as recalling that it took experts two years to come up with the formula for the "ideal bunker".
The first thick-walled, domed structures made of concrete and iron popped up in 1968. 
In the following eight years, a network of an estimated 700,000 bunkers mushroomed along Albania's sea and land borders and in its interior.
According to some, there were more bunkers than cars in the country.
Albania never needed to use them, as Hoxha's paranoid fears never materialised. 
Communism in the country of over 3.6 million people ended about five years after the dictator's death, but the hundreds of thousands of ugly, and now mostly abandoned and rundown, bunkers still scar the country's landscape, including its beaches.
In early July, authorities at the popular Adriatic Sea resort of Seman, about 120km south of Tirana, began clearing the area of dozens of Cold War-era fortifications because they are unattractive, but more importantly, pose a threat to tourists' safety.
"People had drowned, were injured, or suffered due to their presence," Seman Mayor Sotir Zarka told the AP last week.
Covered by moss, the derelict bunkers are blamed for the deaths of at least five holiday-makers, including two children and a 25-year-old woman, who drowned last year in pools around the "concrete mushrooms".
"In this condition, they represent a big threat to tourists, and injuries are quite frequent," said Zarka.
Workers pull the bunkers out of the water with the help of an old Chinese-built tank, provided by the army. 
Then, they smash them into pieces, so they are easier to transport.
The dismantling has proved both time-consuming and expensive, as it reportedly costs around 800 euros to get rid of just one.
Argon Loci, a senior adviser to the chief of Albania's army, told the AP that the job is virtually unaffordable for the armed forces.
"If we were responsible for the removal in one area, then many other communities would line up to demand assistance," he said, explaining that they have only provided a tank to Zarka to help his administration clear bunkers from Seman.
The mayor, however, is unhappy with the slow pace. 
Workers managed to dismantle only seven of them in the first two weeks, while dozens more need to go, according to AFP.
"At this rate, the beach at Seman won't be ready before next year," Zarka told the news agency.
