28/12/2009
By Natasa Radic in Zagreb for Southeast European Times -- 28/12/09
Ivo Josipovic, a university professor and a member of the opposition Social Democratic Party (SDP), won the first round of presidential elections in Croatia on Sunday (December 27th). 
Results from the State Election Committee show he got 32.44% of the vote.
Josipovic needed more than 50% to avoid a run-off. 
He and Zagreb Mayor Milan Bandic will now square off on January 10th.
"These results show that the justice has won and that we won together," said Josipovic at his election headquarters, where supporters cheered and chanted his name. 
"There is still work ahead of us but I am sure that we will be able to win."
But Bandic's camp also interpreted the results as a victory, with campaign chief Dusko Ljustina describing it s particularly impressive because Bandic ran as an independent without a party machinery to support him.
The mayor was a Social Democrat but left the party after it became clear he would not be nominated for president.
"Croatia needs a president who is going to be different, who is going to be decisive and capable of doing the work, and who will not be a party puppet," he said, promising a tough race that will galvanize voters.
Judging by first-round turnout, though, apathy may be both candidates' most formidable enemy. 
Across the country, only 44.07% of eligible voters went to the polls Sunday. 
Turnout in Vukovar was a miserable 24.49%, while Zagreb managed 39.12%.
The numbers were even worse in neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina, where 280,000 Croats have the right to vote but only 19% actually did so.
According to Vesna Pusic, the Croatian People's Party candidate, many citizens chose to get their point across by staying away from the polls.
"The voters have expressed their attitude with the decision not to vote, too," said Pusic, who finished in fifth place with 7.3% of the vote. 
"They are telling us, we are disappointed and we don't need you; we want some fundamental changes to happen."
In all, 12 candidates threw their hats into the ring. 
Third place went to the Croatian Democratic Union's Andrija Hebrang, clearly disappointed that he garnered only 12.01%.
Too many candidates in the race diluted the conservative vote, he lamented.
President Stipe Mesic said he will decide who to endorse in the second round. 
The winner will succeed Mesic for a five-year term, becoming the third head of state since Croatia declared independence in 1990. 
He will be sworn in on February 18th.
