26/01/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 26/01/10
The weekend announcement that the Kosovo government -- backed by the International Civil Office (ICO) -- will work to integrate the Serb-majority north with Pristina institutions is being resisted fiercely by Belgrade.
Kosovo's north borders central Serbia and is home to a third of the 130,000 Serbs still remaining in Kosovo. 
The Pristina government holds no authority over northern Kosovo, rather it is run by the institutions of UNMIK and the Serbian government, which Pristina calls "parallel structures".
In an address to the UN Security Council on Friday (January 22nd), Serbian President Boris Tadic called the plan "an unnecessary and dangerous provocation" that jeopardises the fragile stability of Kosovo.
Tadic called Pristina's plan a "final solution" for northern Kosovo, adding that it "will not bring anything good to those living there. 
It will only satisfy the extremists, who want everything that happens in Kosovo to be viewed through the distorted prism of the illegal declaration of independence [of Kosovo]."
News of the plan was reported several weeks ago in the Serbian media and later confirmed by Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and ICO chief Pieter Feith.
The ICO has established nine international groups to help implement the strategy, which aims to make Kosovo institutions functional in an area dominated by those Serb parallel structures.
"We believe that citizens deserve better services. 
We would like to strengthen the rule of law," said Feith on Sunday (January 24th). 
"We believe that the establishment of a municipality in the north would offer more autonomy and rights for communities."
Tadic maintains that the purpose of the strategy is to force Serbs in northern Kosovo to recognise Pristina's independence and called on KFOR and EULEX to protect the Serb community.
Last week, Goran Bogdanovic, the Serbian Minister for Kosovo and Metohija, visited northern Kosovo and met with the heads of Serb municipalities in the region. 
Officials unanimously rejected the plan.
"We will fight to prevent that from happening by using all diplomatic and legal means," said Bogdanovic.
The plan calls for the formation of a Northern Mitrovica municipality and the appointment of a municipal government under the authority of Pristina. 
The same approach would then be applied in other Serb municipalities.
EU officials have said that the strategy is not a Union plan. 
UNMIK was not consulted and has distanced itself from it, officials from Spain, current holder of the rotating EU, were quoted as saying Monday.
