26/11/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 26/11/09
Sponsored by the US Embassy in Macedonia, the American Corner in Skopje brings a bit of the United States to Macedonians.
Through several types of media, members and visitors can access all types of information.
American Corner Skopje Co-ordinator Olivera Trajkova sat down with SETimes correspondent Goran Trajkov to discuss the centre, its mission and the future.
SETimes:
What is the mission of the American Corner in Skopje?
Olivera Trajkova:
The mission of the American Corner in Skopje is to make available all relevant information about the US to members and visitors via books, newspapers, magazines, DVDs and free internet access.
We are bringing American culture and way of life closer to Macedonian citizens.
This is very important, because the majority of the people in Macedonia have never visited the US.
All American Corners throughout the world are a partnership between the American embassy's public affairs office in a country and the host institution where the corner is located.
The American Corner in Skopje is situated in the "Brothers Miladinov" city library, with which we have excellent co-operation.
SETimes:
How is the work of the American Corner organised?
Trajkova:
We work every week day until 8pm and on Saturdays.
More than 3,500 corner members belong to different age and educational groups, but one of our aims is to fulfil all their needs, which is why we organise different programme activities.
The majority of our members and visitors are high school and university students.
About 20% are over 30 years of age and most are employed.
Membership is free of charge and to register one only needs valid ID.
The most important thing for us is to organise a variety of programmes that fit all -- students, young employees, mid-career professionals, children beginning to learn English, but also retired intellectuals who want to continue to learn.
SETimes:
What kind of activities does the American Corner organise?
Trajkova:
We organise different kinds of events including workshops, meetings, exhibits, poetry readings, video showings, speaker programmes.
Usually our members comprise the audience for these events, but they can bring along friends.
Anyone interested can attend.
Peace Corps volunteers have helped us prepare programmes.
They usually hold a conversation hour, which is very popular because it helps members learn English from a native speaker.
Some volunteers also participate in our outreach activities in different cities throughout Macedonia.
SETimes:
Do the American Corners in Macedonia co-operate with corners in the region?
Trajkova:
There are three American Corners in Macedonia -- in Skopje, Bitola and Tetovo.
We communicate and co-operate almost on a daily basis.
The concept of our programming is similar;
sometimes we have different presentations or we exchange the same lecturers and presentations.
The goal is to reach the needs of our customers and members, and to address their queries about American culture and way of life.
We communicate with the American Corners in Kosovo, Serbia, Greece, Croatia, Slovenia and Hungary during training and seminars, which are held annually to improve our skills and exchange ideas;
this is an extraordinary possibility to enrich the choice of activities.
We also keep in touch with our colleagues via a DVC -- digital video connection -- when we inform one another about our most important activities.
SETimes:
What are the American Corner in Skopje's plans for the future?
Trajkova:
Our idea is to organise a regional meeting of the American Corners in Macedonia.
We already have consulted the corners about it and their response was positive.
If everything goes well, sometime in the late spring next year we will host this regional conference.
