26/11/2009
(AFP, Reuters, Bloomberg, FT, The Guardian, BBC, Wall Street Journal, Washington Post, LA Times, EurActiv, Euronews - 26/11/09;
Reuters, DPA, New York Times, The White House, UN News Centre, European Parliament - 25/11/09;
BBC - 24/11/09;
Swedish EU Presidency - 23/11/09)
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and EU leaders welcomed on Wednesday (November 25th) US President Barack Obama's decision to attend the upcoming UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen.
"As more and more heads of state and government confirm their attendance, momentum is building for a successful conclusion to this crucial world gathering," UN spokesperson Farhan Haq said.
Delegations from 192 countries will participate in the December 7th-18th summit in Copenhagen, aimed at forging a new international treaty on reducing greenhouse gases, the major cause of global warming.
The accord would replace the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which expires in 2012.
Announcing Obama's decision Wednesday, the White House said he will go to the Danish capital on December 9th to offer a "US emissions reduction target in the range of 17% below 2005 levels in 2020" and 83% by 2050.
The US president "is eager to work with the international community to drive progress towards a comprehensive and operational Copenhagen accord", it said in a statement.
UN climate chief Yvo de Boer said last week that Obama's presence "would make a huge difference".
Welcoming Wednesday's news, he noted that if the US president announces a target on emissions in the first week of the talks, it would give "a major boost to the conference".
"There is no Plan B for Copenhagen, only Plan A and A stands for Action," Euronews quoted de Boer as saying.
"Unseasonable storms in Asia and Latin America and protracted drought in Africa are already seriously harming people in the developing world."
Senior EU officials, including European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso and Danish Prime Minister Lars Loekke Rasmussen, also welcomed Obama's decision.
"I have made clear that we need as many world leaders as possible.
I hope that others will follow suit," said Barroso.
According to Rasmussen, Obama's visit underscores his "will to contribute to an ambitious global deal in Copenhagen".
The EU agreed last year on a set of rules to reduce CO2 emissions by 20% of 1990 levels by 2020 and has committed to raise that target to 30%, provided a global deal is reached.
The 27-nation bloc's long-term goal is to cut emissions by 80% to 95% by 2050.
Ahead of the Copenhagen summit, EU environment ministers met in Brussels on Monday to finalise the bloc's positions and strategies.
Swedish Environment Minister Andreas Carlgren, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, said after the meeting that the Union is "united and well prepared" to make the summit a success.
"The EU will push for a comprehensive agreement involving all countries," he said.
"All parties must present sufficient offers on emissions reductions and financing.
This applies to both industrialised countries such as the USA and rapidly growing economies such as China.
Copenhagen must also be the starting point for rapid measures against deforestation, and money for this must be made available immediately."
Financing, however, is among the issues that have not been resolved yet.
Therefore, there are doubts that a legally binding agreement will be reached in Copenhagen.
Many believe that next month's summit will serve as a catalyst for a new treaty in 2010.
