26/01/2010
(DPA, European Voice, RFE/RL, B92, Council of the EU, Spanish EU Presidency - 25/01/10)
EU foreign ministers said on Monday (January 25th) that EUFOR troops could remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) after the end of this year if necessary.
Launched in December 2004, the EU peacekeeping mission -- dubbed Operation ALTHEA -- numbered 6,300 troops.
It is now down to about 2,500 with the primary task of preventing the return of ethnic violence.
EU foreign ministers said on Monday that the 27-nation bloc remains committed to maintaining a safe and secure environment in BiH.
Should the situation require, said the ministers during their monthly meeting in Brussels, the EU is ready "to maintain an executive military role to support [peacekeeping] efforts beyond 2010, under a UN mandate".
A dramatic deterioration of the political climate in BiH has hampered plans for further downsizing of the EUFOR force there and for reshaping the mission into more of a mentoring role for the country's own security forces.
Under UN Security Council Resolution 1895 -- passed November 18th 2009 -- the EUFOR mandate was extended for another year.
The "situation in the region continues to constitute a threat to international peace and security", the resolution said.
Praising EUFOR for its "decisive progress" towards achieving its mandate and a significant contribution to stability and security in BiH, the foreign ministers agreed to expand the agency's work to include training of the country's security forces.
The EU diplomats stressed that security reform is key to the overall reform process in BiH.
"The Council reiterated its full support for the European perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina," the statement said, with ALTHEA a key part of the bloc's efforts to support a political process aimed at EU integration.
Reiterating strong support for High Representative and EU Special Representative Valentin Inzko, the ministers urged "all parties in BiH to comply with all decisions taken by him" and stop challenging his authority.
The statement came after numerous attempts by Bosnian Serb politicians to cancel decisions by Inzko, and Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik's repeated threats for a referendum on seceding from BiH.
The statement added, "The EU underlined its commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's territorial integrity and sovereignty in accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement."
EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton is expected to visit BiH sometime in February.
