30/10/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 30/10/09
Radisav Rodic, owner of the daily newspaper Glas javnosti, as well as the tabloid Kurir, was arrested this week along with former Glas javnosti editor-in-chief Slavoljub Kacarevic.
According to the prosecution, Rodic avoided paying taxes on goods, income from capital and other dues in 2001. 
Under the criminal code, "punishment for this crime is up to eight years imprisonment and a fine," a prosecution spokesman said.
Local media reported that Rodic and Kacarevic allegedly evaded about 2m euros worth of state taxes.
The editorial boards of the newspapers, however, claim the arrests are politically motivated and stem from critical articles the paper ran on corruption cases.
"[The arrests are] the continuation of one minister and one party's fight against independent newspapers," newspaper officials said.
Economy and Regional Development Minister Mladjan Dinkic has been a regular target of Kurir, and has sued the tabloid over articles alleging he is a thief and a fraud. 
The minister has been unable to recover damages.
"The tyranny the journalists and editors of Kurir have been exposed to for the past few months continues with the most drastic measures," says a news release from the tabloid.
Rodic's son Aleksandar said that his father was "clean in everything he did".
"We are not afraid. 
We will publish even what we previously did not want to, for the sake of state interest. 
We will explain everything to the people. 
The politicians fear only the public, which is why they wanted to control us and eventually shut us down," he added.
Certain opposition parties, such as the Serbian Progressive Party (SNS) and the Serbian Radical Party (SRS), have accused the government of arresting Rodic and Kacarevic only because they "have a different opinion", stressing that the authorities are abusing the law.
"I would never condone tax evasion, nor will anyone do that, but I have a counter question for you: did you know in 2000, or did those people from the regime in power in 2002 know about these unpaid taxes? 
Were they aware of it in 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006?" SNS party official Aleksandar Vucic asked.
Rodic and Kacarevic are expected to be released by the weekend after questioning.
