29/10/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 29/10/09
From October 18th to the 24th, moviegoers of all ages flocked to see movies during film week in the capital.
Now in its seventh year, the Zagreb Film Festival (ZFF) has become an important part of the regional film scene.
During the event, the four theatres that hosted ZFF were packed.
Audiences enjoyed films, as well as roundtable discussions on current challenges in the movie industry.
Canada's Governor General Michaelle Jean was the guest of honour at the festival, and took part in the panel discussion "Art Matters", where Croatian and Canadian filmmakers discussed the importance of visual art.
Jean also visited with Croatian President Stipe Mesic.
"Zagreb Film Festival features debut, first and second author films, so we like to claim that we turn people to stars.
Or, at least, help them on their way.
It was at our festival that the German feature film 'The Life of Others' by Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck won its first festival awards, both the audience and the jury awards, and it is not seldom that Zagreb audiences are among the first in Europe to see movies that later turn into blockbusters, such as 'Borat', which here had its European pre-premiere," said ZFF director Boris T. Matic.
A Golden Pram award went to Xavier Dolan-Tadros in the feature film programme for "I Killed My Mother".
According to the jury, the film explores family relationships in a sincere and courageous way, navigating the thin line that separates love and hate.
"The film 'I Killed My Mother' is a fresh and touching example of how movies should be made, and an incredible accomplishment for someone so young, therefore, deserving an award," said the jury about the 20 year-old Tadros.
In the short film category, two shared the Golden Pram -- "Missing" by Jochem de Vries from the Netherlands and "Every Day is Not the Same" by Martin Turk of Slovenia.
In the documentary category, "La Vida Loca" by Christian Poveda received a Golden Pram, along with stellar remarks from the jury.
"The director managed to tell an incredible story from within, not as an observer but an insider who cares about his characters.
Since [the movie] presented its characters with a lot of human warmth, we are facing not black-and-white heroes and anti-heroes of the society, but its tragic victims.
This film carved deep into our hearts and will be there for a long time, not as a shocking story but also as a documentary of powerful suspense, drama and rhythm.
Bearing in mind all tragic circumstances surrounding this film, our winner confirms that films can sometimes be more incredible and impressive than real life."
Uros Zivanovic from Croatia won in the Checkered selection, comprised of different film styles, for his movie "Cold Front".
