29/10/2009
(Office of the High Representative, AFP, Fena - 28/10/09)
Speculation about an impending new war in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) are unrealistic, High Representative Valentin Inzko said on Wednesday (October 28th), urging media to stop making "irresponsible" conjectures about a country that has gone through so much.
"The international community has all capacities to prevent any sort of conflict and you can rest assured that it would do so," the Office of the High Representative (OHR) quoted the Austrian diplomat as stressing in an interview with Sarajevo-based daily Dnevni Avaz.
His statement came in the wake of reports, particularly in international media, suggesting that the lack of agreement in this month's two rounds of Western-mediated talks to end the lengthy political deadlock in BiH indicated a growing risk of a new conflict in the country.
"The media often uses sensationalism for one reason or another, but I believe that it is very irresponsible to speculate like that when it comes to BiH," Inzko said. 
"The wounds of this country have still not healed and no one should be opening new ones. 
That is absolutely irresponsible."
Inzko, who also serves as the EU Special Representative (EUSR) in BiH, stressed that Bosnian politicians must show greater responsibility and seek compromises on issues concerning their country's future.
As part of a new international effort to end the political stalemate blocking BiH's Euro-Atlantic integration progress, senior EU and US diplomats met with the leaders of the seven main Bosnian parties twice this month. 
Constitutional reform topped the agenda of the talks at Camp Butmir, the EUFOR headquarters on the outskirts of Sarajevo, which were chaired by Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt and US Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg.
The Bosnian politicians rejected the proposed package of changes to improve the efficiency of the country's institutions and make it a functional state, but agreed to continue the dialogue.
"It is local politicians and local media that will be responsible for the outcome of this process," Inzko said on Wednesday. 
"So, one needs to have political will and create a positive climate for the process to succeed. 
The international community will gladly continue making its contribution to this process."
The EU and the United States have been urging BiH politicians for years to agree on changes to the constitution, which is part of the Dayton Peace Agreement that ended the 1992-1995 conflict, but left the country with one of the most cumbersome systems of governance.
Inzko stressed that constitutional reform is essential for BiH's further progress on its European integration path, as "only a country with fully functioning institutions can be a credible candidate for EU membership."
Bildt and Steinberg said in a statement after the second round of the Butmir talks that the Bosnian politicians had agreed that their country's goal is to join the EU and NATO. 
To make that possible, they must commit themselves to the necessary compromises, the diplomats stressed.
Voicing confidence that membership in the two organisations is also "the genuine wish of the vast majority of BiH citizens", Inzko urged leaders of the country's main parties to redouble their efforts for the Butmir process to succeed.
"It is clear to everybody that membership in the EU and NATO is the only safe way towards a prosperous future for Bosnia and Herzegovina and its citizens," he said. 
"Therefore, I think it is important that the process we began at Butmir continues and I hope BiH leaders will realise how important and significant this is for the future of the country."
Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, who participated in the talks as leader of the Bosnian Serbs' Alliance of Independent Social Democrats, criticised the new Western initiative Wednesday, claiming its aim is to create a state that suits the United States and Europe.
Meanwhile, Party of Democratic Action leader Sulejman Tihic, one of the three Bosniak politicians involved in the Butmir talks, voiced concern that the EU may withdraw from the process, following the Bosnian politicians' rejection of the "EU-US reform package".
