25/11/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 25/11/09
The school year in Serbia kicked off with a slew of fights -- some of which resulted in trips to the emergency room.
Two 17-year-olds reportedly fought in the yard of Nikola Tesla Technical High School in Belgrade.
One of the students was taken to hospital with a severe eye injury.
Later, a brawl erupted at the Beauty Care School, where a seventh grader was hit by a younger classmate who was allegedly trying to steal his mobile phone.
Officials say they are working to make schools safer.
During a recent visit to a Belgrade elementary school, Interior Minister Ivica Dacic announced that his ministry would make sure every school was assigned a policeman.
According to him, this would require the support of the education ministry and local authorities.
"The goal is to establish a better internal control system in schools, including video surveillance and co-ordination with operative police centres at the level of towns and municipalities," Dacic said.
"Trust between students and the police is also important for the reduction of violence in schools."
Education Minister Zarko Obradovic points out that violence is not a problem at most of the country's 1,815 schools, and that parents have no need to worry.
"There is not as much violence in schools as the media would like to present.
There is no violence in the majority of Serbian schools and parents can be absolutely at ease when sending their children to school," said Obradovic, who accompanied Dacic.
The UNICEF programme "Schools Without Violence", which launched in 2005 with the help of the education and interior ministries, is another tool Serbia is using to battle the issue.
Co-ordinator Stanislava Vuckovic told SETimes that the programme is currently being implemented in 165 schools.
"The programme includes more than 110,650 students and 10,460 adults from 60 towns in Serbia," she added.
Vuckovic said the point of the programme is to talk about violence with teachers, students and parents through various workshops, in order to identify and prevent it.
"The most frequent forms of violent behaviour are verbal violence, the spreading of lies and scheming, threats and intimidation," Vuckovic notes.
She adds that the programme has already yielded results, the most visible of which is the fact that violence is talked about and reported more frequently than before.
