21/09/2009
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 21/09/09
As University students in Albania head back to school, numbers show that more of them are choosing the private option.
According to data from the Ministry of Education, the trend of young people going to college has been on the upswing, and stands at a total of 28% in the last four years.
In 2008, about 76% of college students attended one of the country's 11 public universities -- the remainder enrolled in local private colleges, which have flourished in the past five years.
The number of students that attended private schools ballooned from 983 in 2004, to 12,166 four years later.
"Today private universities have a complementary feature in our education system," said Henri Cili, professor at the private European University of Tirana (UET).
Currently there are about 17 private universities in the country, but only four of them are accredited by the state, and are able to hand out official diplomas.
Despite the growing number of students in private schools, Cili explains that most Albanians pick public colleges because they are basically free.
According to Cili, some private universities plan to rally for a bill that proposes a shift in public education financing, so that students will be given money, instead of free school -- this way they can choose the college they want to attend, rather than be steered into the public sector.
Despite optimism of a wider college choice, some education experts call into question the quality of private institutions, and stand behind the public option.
"Public universities do not only have an already long-rooted traditional foundation, but they have high quality and a demanding staff," said a source at the Ministry of Education.
The source went on to say that although private universities have better infrastructure and the latest technology, they lag in other areas, and accept students that get rejected from public schools.
Last January the Albanian government said the country will compile a ranking of the country's colleges, conducted by an experienced international agency.
Cili thinks the ranking will level the playing field and show that private universities can hold their own in the blooming competitiveness of the country's college system.
