28/10/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/10/09
Turkish President Abdullah Gul wrapped up a two-day visit to Serbia on Tuesday (October 27th), during which several economic agreements were signed.
Gul noted that Turkish companies are interested in investing in Serbia, especially in its infrastructure, given Serbia's ideal location in the Balkans.
Bilateral ties are strong, he assured Serbian counterpart Boris Tadic.
"Although we [Serbia and Turkey] do not share a common border, we live as good neighbours," said Gul.
That bond has broader implications, he noted.
"As long as relations between Serbia and Turkey are this good, one should not fear for peace in the region," said Gul.
Tadic added that the two countries share strategic goals.
"We strongly support each other in the process of European integration and co-operate within the Partnership for Peace programme.
We believe that Turkey is one of the most important global factors," Tadic said.
Reiterating that Serbia will never acknowledge Kosovo's independence, Tadic emphasised that Ankara's diplomatic relations with Pristina should not affect Turkish-Serbian relations.
The Turkish delegation to Serbia included members of the business community and road construction experts, as well as experts on transforming military airports to civilian ones.
The Turkish and Serbian delegations signed economic, infrastructure, technical, social and financial co-operation agreements.
Previously, the two countries signed a free trade agreement that will come into effect by the end of this year.
The largely Muslim Turkish delegation also visited the southwest region of Sandzak, home to the largest number of Bosniaks in Serbia.
The delegation conveyed Turkey's readiness to invest in the construction of a highway through Sandzak.
Novi Pazar Mayor Meho Mahmutovic announced that Turkish companies will invest in the town's infrastructure, which is currently in dismal shape.
During Gul's stay, the Serbian Economy Ministry and Turkish company Turker signed a deal on the company's investment in the southern Serbian Bujanovacka Banja spa.
Belgrade has been busy hosting important foreign officials -- US Vice President Joe Biden visited the country in May and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev visited the capital earlier this month.
Serbian officials were in China in August -- a trip that resulted in the signing of a strategic co-operation agreement.
