25/11/2009
(Standart, Focus News Agency - 25/11/09;
Dnevnik.bg, Novinite, Bulgarian Government - 24/11/09;
US Department of State, Novinite, Mediapool - 23/11/09)
The Nabucco and the South Stream gas pipeline projects are part of Bulgaria's policy of diversification of energy supplies, Foreign Minister Rumyana Zheleva said on Tuesday (November 24th).
Sofia is interested in participating in both, she reportedly said during a lecture at the Woodrow Wilson Centre in Washington, adding however that the timetable has not been clarified and both projects remain very much on paper.
Zheleva, who arrived in Washington on Monday to discuss ways to boost bilateral co-operation, also said that Russia, as a key energy supplier, cannot be excluded from talks on a common EU energy security strategy.
Energy and the efforts of the Bulgaria's new centre-right government in the fight against organised crime and corruption were among the issues Zheleva discussed with US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton at the start of her three-day visit.
"We are committed to working bilaterally, as well as within NATO, and through the European Union, and with the important emphasis on all of the issues that are significant to both of us," Clinton said after the talks.
She praised Sofia for its "efforts to root out corruption, to hold people accountable, to end impunity for public officials", as well as for taking steps to bring greater transparency to the energy sector.
Sofia-based daily Dnevnik reported last week that Zheleva would brief Clinton about the progress Bulgaria's law enforcement authorities have made in four cases of high-level corruption.
Speaking after the meeting, Clinton said she and Zheleva had also discussed "economic challenges and the commercial ties that we wish to deepen".
"There is just so much that we see for a positive relationship between the United States and Bulgaria," Clinton told reporters.
Voicing support for Bulgaria's efforts to be included in the US Visa Waiver Programme, she said that this would happen once Sofia meets the criteria established by the US Congress, which are the same for all countries.
"We value Bulgaria as a close partner," said Clinton, adding that her country is ready and willing to help it fulfill the requirements.
Energy problems were again at the focus of Zheleva's talks Tuesday with US Special Envoy for Eurasian Energy Richard Morningstar and Jonathan Elkind, principal deputy assistant secretary at the US Department of Energy.
During that meeting, Zheleva called for an increase in US investments in her country's large-scale energy projects, including the Belene nuclear power plant.
Any concrete forms of US support for, or involvement in, such projects are expected to be discussed during Morningstar's visit to Bulgaria in early December, the Sofia-based Standart reported.
Energy security and Bulgaria's bid to be included in the US Visa Waiver Programme dominated Zheleva's talks with Senator Richard Lugar on Tuesday.
