31/08/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic and Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Bucharest - 31/08/09
Madonna rocked the Balkans this week during the last leg of her 2009 European Sticky and Sweet Tour. 
She performed at Vasil Levski Stadium in Sofia on Saturday (August 29th), Parc Izvor in Bucharest on August 26th and two days earlier at Usce Park in Belgrade.
The singer kicked-off the shows with "Candy Shop", a hit from her 2008 album "Hard Candy", after an opening set by British DJ Paul Oakenfold.
Tamara, a die-hard fan, came all the way from Moscow to see the pop diva. 
"This is the fifth time I've seen Madonna; I follow her on tour wherever I can. 
She's unique and special," said Tamara.
At her next stop in Bucharest, Madonna took the stage for about 60,000 screaming fans.
"Hello Romania? 
Are you ready? 
I've never been here before. 
So I'm very happy to be here and I love you," said Madonna. 
In Bucharest, the so-called "Material Girl" delivered a message of tolerance, which was not well received.
"We're all the same," she said. 
"I've been paying attention to news reports and it's been brought to my attention that there's a lot of discrimination against Roma and Gypsies in general in Eastern Europe. 
And I feel very sad because I don't believe in discrimination against anyone. 
We believe in freedom and equal rights… Let's not forget that!"
The fans booed her call, an episode largely covered by the international media. 
Some Bucharest fans complained about the flawed organisation of the show. 
Those in the last rows said they could not hear or see much because the stage screens were too low and the sound was too faint, while others complained of dust in the park.
Overall however, fans enjoyed a number of Madonna's biggest hits, including "Vogue", "Music", "Ray of Light", "Frozen", "4 Minutes", "Holiday", and "Into the Groove".
Madonna also paid tribute to Michael Jackson, singing some of his hits, while her background dancers reenacted his legendary dance moves, such as the Moonwalk.
The concerts wrapped up with "Give It 2 Me", another hit off her 11th studio album "Hard Candy".
