26/10/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 26/10/09
During a daylong trip to Bucharest on Thursday (October 22nd), US Vice President Joseph Biden commended Romania's efforts to become a full fledged democracy and a committed US partner.
Speaking to political science students at the University Central Library, nearly destroyed during the country's 1989 revolution, Biden spoke highly of Romanians' struggle for liberty.
"When the Iron Curtain was lifted, the wall fell in Berlin, in their places grew democracy, a democracy that you've deserved for a long time. 
The story of freedom, your story, is one of the greatest achievements in modern history," said Biden.
"You have begun to realise those dreams that only the bold imagined 20 years ago, a Europe whole and free, anchored in the European-Atlantic alliance institutions of NATO and the EU," the vice president added.
He emphasized that countries such as Romania provide an example to others struggling to become democratic. 
"You can help guide Moldova, Georgia, Ukraine along the path of lasting stability and prosperity. 
It's your time to lead. 
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus can benefit from your personal experiences … you are the good example; you've delivered on the promise of your revolution. 
You are now in a position to help others do the same," he said.
Biden sent a direct message to the young audience. 
"Be like those in '89. 
Be bold. 
Exercise your leadership. 
You have a history and you have a tradition. 
You can make a gigantic difference. 
And we'll stand with you," he said.
Biden was joined on stage by his daughter, Kathleen, and his granddaughter, Finnegan, who he introduced to the audience.
Earlier in the day, during a joint press conference with President Traian Basescu, Biden said Romania supports the new US anti-missile system. 
"This phased, adaptive approach the US is proposing, it has adapted its design to meet the growing threat to Europe, with a proven technology that will cover more of Europe, including Central Europe, more effectively than the previous approach," Biden explained.
He also wished Romanians well in the presidential campaign that kicked off the following day, and said he was envious it lasted only 30 days, unlike in the United States.
Biden also met with outgoing Prime Minister Emil Boc and opposition leaders -- Mircea Geoana of the Social Democrat Party, and Crin Antonescu of the National Liberal Party.
From Bucharest, Biden headed to Prague, the last stop on his three-day regional tour of Central and Eastern Europe.
This was Biden's trip second to Romania. 
He visited the country a decade ago as head of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
