27/08/2009
(Focus News Agency, Novinite - 27/08/09; RFE/RL, Eurasianet, TDH, Turkmenistan.ru - 26/08/09; UPI - 25/08/09; Trend News Agency, Business New Europe, UPI, Zaman - 24/08/09; Transitions Online - 14/07/09)
Energy co-operation, including the Nabucco gas pipeline project, was among the issues Turkmen President Gurbanguly Berdymukhammedov discussed with his Bulgarian counterpart, Georgi Parvanov, during his visit to Sofia on Thursday (August 27th).
The two leaders signed a joint statement after the talks, vowing to work towards enhancing bilateral co-operation in the economic and energy fields, as well as in the fight against terrorism and drug trafficking.
Bulgaria "expressed its support for Turkmenistan's efforts to create a basis for sustainable transit of energy resources", Sofia-based Focus News Agency quoted Berdymukhammedov as saying after the talks.
"We agreed to co-operate in constructing common enterprises and establishing permanent economic relations," the Turkmen leader added.
Parvanov told reporters after the meeting that Bulgaria is ready to buy 2 billion cubic metres of natural gas from Turkmenistan. 
But the key question, he noted, concerned the routes along which the gas would be transported to Bulgaria.
Bulgaria is part of two pipeline projects. 
One is the EU and US-backed Nabucco, which is designed to carry natural gas from Middle Eastern and Caspian fields to Europe, while bypassing Russia.
The other is the South Stream pipeline project between Russia's energy giant Gazprom and Italy's ENI. 
It would bring Russian natural gas to the continent via Bulgaria and the Balkans.
Bulgaria's new government said it will review all energy agreements that the previous Socialist-led coalition cabinet signed with Russia. 
It has indicated it may put the construction of the Belene nuclear power plant and the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline on hold.
A decision by Sofia to freeze its participation in South Stream and the other energy projects would deal "a fatal blow to all of Russia's long-term energy plans and strategy in Southeast and Central Europe and the Mediterranean region", Russian news agency Regnum said in a report last month.
One of the key problems the Nabucco project has faced is securing the needed gas supplies. 
Azerbaijan, a major natural gas supplier, signed a joint declaration with Georgia, Turkey and Egypt in support of the pipeline during a mini-EU summit in May, which gave a boost to the long-delayed initiative.
Then, on July 13th, the energy companies of the countries participating in Nabucco -- Austria, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and Turkey -- signed an intergovernmental agreement in Ankara, giving a further push to the project. 
Meanwhile, Turkmenistan, which did not sign the May declaration, pledged to provide an unspecified amount of natural gas for the project.
"The results of an independent audit carried out last year and recent discoveries made by our geologists once again show the world community what huge gas reserves our country possesses," Czech-based Transitions Online quoted Berdymukhammedov as saying in July. 
"This makes it possible for us to carry out certain work related to the implementation of various projects, including the Nabucco project."
Construction of the 3,300km pipeline is scheduled to begin in 2011 and be completed by 2014. 
Initially, it would have the capacity to carry 14 billion cubic metres of gas to Europe annually, which should grow to 31 billion cubic metres of gas annually by 2020.
Berdymukhammedov, who arrived in Sofia on Thursday, heads to Turkey later in the day. 
His talks with officials in Ankara are also expected to focus on energy issues, including the Nabucco project.
