27/08/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 27/08/09
A smoldering conflict between the Roma and Magyar communities in a Transylvanian village was extinguished last month by an agreement signed by the two sides.
Tensions rose after a July 9th dispute between a Roma and a Magyar at a local bar in the village of Sancrainei in Harghita County. 
The Magyar man was stabbed and the Roma was taken into custody.
Police explained that the Roma suspect had been released temporarily pending a medical certificate attesting to the victim's wounds. 
The suspect was later preventively detained for a month.
Accusing authorities of reacting impassively towards what they describe as the Roma's aggressiveness, a group of more than 150 ethnic Magyars took to the streets and set fire to the yard of a Roma family. 
Police and gendarmes were quickly mobilised to maintain peace.
A mediation commission was subsequently established -- composed of local and county officials, a delegation representing local Magyars and one representing the Roma. 
The discussions resulted in a statement signed by the two communities outlining a series of obligations to be observed by the Roma. 
Sancrainei Mayor Szekely Erno was urged to discuss the agreement with the Roma minority and to be more active in ensuring interethnic harmony in the village.
Erno notes that the conflict between the two communities, which number around 2,400 Magyars and 200 Roma, started long ago. 
However, he said he is convinced similar incidents won't occur again. 
"The two parties laid [down] their dissatisfactions and we reached a reconciliation agreement," he said.
The National Council for Combating Discrimination said it condemns the incidents in Sancraieni and asked local authorities to take concrete preventative measures.
In June, a similar situation occurred in Sanmartin, a village just a few kilometers from Sancrainei. 
Two Magyars were physically assaulted by a group of Roma after the Magyars were asked to take their horses off private Roma pastures. 
In retaliation, the Magyars set fire to three huts and broke the windows of some houses in the Roma quarter.
Around 230 Magyars in Sanmartin are now under criminal investigation following the attacks. 
The head of the county council, Borboly Csaba, confirmed that "several hundred inhabitants" were summoned for hearings, an action "without precedent in Romania". 
The prosecutors postponed the hearings until September 17th.
Csaba blames the heightened tensions on the media and NGOs, which he says distorted the scale of the conflict.
But not everyone agrees. 
"People resort to such solutions when they distrust the authorities. 
There are many interesting theories as concerns the Roma problem, but in practice, the solutions are few and ineffective," said Marko Bella, leader of the Democratic Union of the Romanian Magyars.
