28/08/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 28/08/09
A Greek pilot lost his life Thursday (August 27th) when his aircraft crashed during efforts to contain a blaze on the Ionian island of Kefalonia. 
The plane was among dozens deployed to fight wildfires that have ravaged parts of Greece, mostly near Athens.
Colonel Stergios Kotoulas, 55, was flying an antiquated PZL-M-18 Dromader which had reportedly logged more than 4,700 hours of flight time. 
It was the first fire-related death in the country this year, and comes amid ongoing controversy over whether Greece's fire fighting fleet is being adequately funded and maintained.
Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis and President Karolos Papoulias expressed their grief and condolences to the pilot's family, saying that he had lost his life while trying to carry out a difficult task. 
Meanwhile, the opposition Panhellenic Socialist Party (PASOK) lashed out at policies it says were responsible for the rash of fires.
"The 2009 fires have to become the red line for the state and the citizens," PASOK leader George Papandreou said. 
"These most recent disasters should mark the end of an era and of a development model that states that anything that won't become cement will turn into ashes."
The blazes, which broke out more than a week ago in areas north of Athens, have now mostly been contained. 
Earlier this week, Karamanlis visited the main fire fighting base in Elefsina in order to thank the crew. 
His government thanked foreign countries -- including Cyprus, France, Italy and Turkey -- that have aided the effort.
Power has been restored in most areas, and traffic has been flowing smoothly again as affected roads are re-opened.
The impact, nevertheless, will be felt for a long time to come. 
It spells additional pressure for Karamanlis's government, which has only a one-vote majority in parliament and is now fending off accusations of incompetence and neglect. 
The number of firefighting planes in operation is the same as in 2007, when scores of people perished in catastrophic fires around the country.
Moreover, many of the planes are decades old, and critics say they are obsolete and dangerous to fly. 
Thursday's crash was reportedly due to a technical malfunction.
Each time a wave of fires breaks out, it alters the environment in ways that make future blazes even more likely. 
According to experts, this summer's disaster will raise the average temperature in downtown Athens by almost one degree Celsius over the course of the next few years. 
Some of the forests that were burnt are not capable of rejuvenating.
