28/08/2009
(Euractiv, eKathimerini, AP, DPA, Euronews, Xinhua - 28/08/09;
AFP, DPA, Deutsche Welle, Euronews, ANA-MPA, ERT, Turk.net, Zaman, Sofia Echo, Novinite - 27/08/09;
AP, AFP, Politiken.dk - 26/08/09;
NATO -- 25/08/09 - 28/08/09)
NATO's new secretary-general, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, urged Greece and Turkey this week to improve ties, stressing that their ongoing disputes are impeding the Alliance's efforts in Afghanistan and Africa by putting ground troops at risk.
"I do not think we could allow a lack of security because of all these political disputes -- we have to find pragmatic solutions," Rasmussen said Thursday (August 27th).
Cyprus is at the core of tensions between the two neighbouring nations, both NATO members.
Ankara does not recognise the Greek Cypriot-run part of the ethnically divided Mediterranean island, which joined the EU in May 2004, minus its Turkish Cypriot-controlled north.
In response, Turkey has prevented Cyprus's inclusion in strategic co-operation between the EU and NATO, thus making it impossible for the Alliance to ensure adequate protection for the 27-nation Union's trainers in Afghanistan.
"At the end of the day, the lack of security agreements might put our personnel on the ground at risk...
It is a subject of real concern to me," Rasmussen said.
The former Danish prime minister, who was sworn in as the Alliance's 12th secretary-general on August 1st, voiced hope before the start of his trip Wednesday that he will see an improvement in the ties between the two key NATO allies during his term.
"While these are bilateral issues, the effects of these tensions are felt far beyond, NATO-EU relations being the most obvious," he said.
In Athens, Rasmussen held talks with Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis, Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and Defence Minister Evangelos Meimarakis.
Aside from the relations between Greece and Turkey, other topics included the situation in Afghanistan, the process of formulating a new NATO doctrine and the Alliance's relations with Russia, according to Greek news agency ANA-MPA.
Greek officials also briefed Rasmussen on the ongoing UN-mediated negotiations on resolving the country's name dispute with neighbouring Macedonia.
After wrapping up talks in Athens on Thursday, the NATO chief left for Turkey, where he met with President Abdullah Gul.
Rasmussen later talked with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
He urged Rasmussen to work to improve NATO's dialogue with the Muslim world.
While condemning acts of terrorism conducted in the name of Islam, the Turkish prime minister took the opportunity to call on the West to show greater respect for Muslims and to push his country's EU bid.
"If the European Union desires to be a global actor, the home for an alliance of civilisations, then Turkey must take its place within the Union," the AP quoted him as saying.
Rasmussen urged Turkey to play a bigger role in the fight against terrorism, as well as to contribute more troops to the Alliance's International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan.
The Turkish ISAF contingent currently numbers about 730 soldiers, operating in Kabul and the surrounding area.
Rasmussen also urged Turkey to consider bigger involvement in efforts to rebuild the impoverished, war-ravaged Asian nation's educational system.
