25/02/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 25/02/10
About 200 children in Serbia are diagnosed with cancer each year. 
A new facility in Belgrade will allow the young patients to receive treatment surrounded by close family, following a model developed in other European countries.
Parents' House opened in the Serbian capital as part of the Belgrade Institute for the Mother and Child on February 4th. 
The facility will accommodate young cancer patients and their parents from around the country for the duration of the treatment.
Unlike often sterile hospital environments, the House is decorated with pictures and drawings, and filled with toys. 
A corridor connects it to the healthcare facility. 
The children are provided quality care during long and arduous periods of therapy.
Irina Ban, head of the Association of Parents of Childhood Cancer Patients Zvoncica, told SETimes that the newly-opened facility will solve a big problem for parents, who, up till now, were forced to rent costly nearby apartments while their children were being treated.
"As if the hardship they were facing was not enough, they often had to take loans or even suspend treatment because of money problems to rent an apartment," said Ban, whose son was successfully treated for leukemia.
She noted that children receiving cancer treatment need parental love and a family environment to offset the shock and fear of often invasive treatments.
"A smile has the power to heal. 
This house brings a smile to one's face and the treatment of malignant diseases in children will certainly be more successful in such an environment," Ban said.
She added that the Parents' House in Belgrade is the first of its kind in the region. 
Similar facilities exist in Split and Sarajevo, but are not connected to hospitals.
The Belgrade facility boasts 12 suites -- eight to accommodate children and their parents and four for doctors and other professionals. 
It has a living room for children to play, a kitchen, dining room, laundry rooms, and is walking distance from the hospital.
The construction and funding of the Parents' House in Serbia was initiated by the head of the Serbian Health Insurance Bureau, Svetlana Vukajlovic, and backed by the Belgrade city administration.
"The construction of the Parents' House shows that good and humane ideas can bear fruit. 
I hope that this initiative will be an incentive to others for some future major actions," Vukajlovic told SETimes.
Vukajlovic said there are plans to build a second Parents' House to accommodate parents and young patients at two other healthcare institutions in Belgrade.
