26/02/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 26/02/10
Following a reported police attack on a Sarajevo television reporter, the OSCE issued a statement saying that "threats and physical assaults on journalists" are on the rise.
Such violence and threats against the media, the OSCE said, "are increasingly treated as occurrences deserving little reaction".
The report on the status of the media in BiH was issued on Tuesday (February 23rd) and is titled "BiH Media and Media Regulators Under Pressure".
That pressure has been catalogued since 2006 by the Association of Journalists in BiH, which keeps track of incidents against reporters. 
The group says that in the past four years, there have been 52 reported cases of general threats and pressure against journalists; 22 physical attacks and eight death threats. 
Six of the death threats, the group said, occurred in 2009.
The OSCE report follows a February 6th incident in which local Zenica IC TV reporter Osman Drino, 34, said he was beaten by four police officers.
No official action has been taken against officers named in the alleged attack. 
They have been identified as Jakov Kelava, Semsudin Saric, Halid Arnaut and Zakir Brkic. 
The investigation is continuing.
Drino was allegedly accosted by police after reporting from a women's basketball tournament in Zenica.
According to reports, after the game police were aggressively searching an official of the Celik team, identified as Senaid Mujezinovic. 
Drino said that when he tried to tell police that Mujezinovic was a club official, he was attacked, searched and taken into custody by officers from Zenica's Crkvice police station.
Drino told SETimes that after the incident, an examination showed he had a broken arm. 
He says he is currently on medical leave from the television station. 
After investigating the incident, police authorities concluded, "there are no grounds to institute a procedure against the police officers involved."
The OSCE called that incident and others like it "worrying", adding that they "impact on the freedom of press and media regulators and the availability of quality information to BiH citizens".
The Association of Journalists of BiH, of which Drino is a member, lodged an immediate protest with police authorities after the incident at the basketball game.
"We believe that this ruthless attack against journalist Drino [contradicts] all professional police work rules in BiH," the complaint said."... 
and because of this we expect an adequate response by the competent authorities at the Zenica Police Administration."
Zenica Canton Police spokesperson Fahrudin Becirovic told SETimes that Drino was searched and apprehended because he did not have his national ID card or a press card on him.
Association of Journalists in BiH Secretary-General Borka Rudic told SETimes that her group is not satisfied with the results of the preliminary investigation, noting that Drino intends to sue the police.
Rudic said that in 1999, a Free Media Help Line was established for journalists, providing them with free legal aid offered by experienced attorneys. 
The Help Line was first established by the OSCE and has been run by the Association of Journalists since 2004.
