25/02/2010
(Dnevnik.bg - 25/02/10;
AFP, Reuters, DPA, Bloomberg, MTI, UPI, Sofia News Agency, B92, RIA Novosti - 24/02/10)
Eleven Central and East European (CEE) countries agreed on Wednesday (February 24th) to set up a north-south-east gas system that would help both diversify supply sources and routes, as well as beef up energy security in the region.
The new arrangement was proposed by Hungarian Prime Minister Gordon Bajnai during an energy security summit in Budapest.
The meeting ended with the signing of a joint declaration by the participating states, including Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia and Slovenia.
The document called for the establishment of the "North-South-East gas supply triangle" as suggested by summit host Bajnai.
The Nabucco natural gas pipeline would form the eastern corner of the triangle, while the liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal on the Croatian island of Krk and another in Poland would represent its southern and northern corners, respectively.
A planned central European gas line, known as the North-South Energy Corridor, would link the three corners, according to Reuters.
"We signed a joint declaration that states that energy security is a highly important task for the signatory states," Bajnai said at a news conference, describing the document as a milestone in regional energy co-operation.
"It is a very broad and strong co-operation to ensure that fewer people have to endure sleepless nights or freezing temperatures because of any energy crisis in the region," he also noted, in an apparent reference to the gas crisis early last year triggered by a price dispute between Russia's Gazprom and Ukraine.
Attending the meeting were the prime ministers of the Czech Republic, Poland and Slovakia -- the other three countries in the Visegrad Four group, currently chaired by Hungary -- and by their Bulgarian, Croatian, Romanian and Serbian counterparts.
Austria, BiH and Slovenia were represented by government officials at the forum, which was attended also by International Energy Agency Executive Director Nobuo Tanaka and US Special Envoy for Eurasian Affairs Richard Morningstar.
The signatories "express their support to strengthen co-operation in further integrating their gas networks and diversifying routes and sources of supplies", Reuters quoted the Budapest summit declaration as saying.
Participants agreed to support an LNG terminal in Romania's Constanca and similar projects in the wider Black Sea region.
Bajnai said he believes the new projects could be completed in 2014 or 2015.
The declaration also called for speedier implementation of the Nabucco project, a rival to the Russian-backed South Stream project, whose construction is scheduled to begin by the end of 2011 and is expected to be completed in 2014.
According to plans, the pipeline will carry up to 31 billion cubic meters of Iraqi, Turkmen and Azeri natural gas along a 3,300km-long route.
It runs from eastern Turkey to a distribution hub in Austria via Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary, bypassing Russia.
Tanaka told Hungarian news agency MTI that Nabucco would be a better solution for improving energy security in Europe than South Stream.
At Serbia's request, an appendix was included in the declaration, saying that some of the participating states, including Hungary, will join the South Stream project as well.
