24/02/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 24/02/10
After years of foot-dragging over the issue, the Romanian government has decided to declassify nearly 8,000 documents related to the toppling of Nicolae Ceausescu's communist regime and the bloodshed that followed.
The cabinet made the decision during a session on February 10th, after the defence ministry cleared the move.
The so-called "revolution files" had been classified previously as a state secret.
According to the ministry, however, they no longer pose a threat to national security.
Besides the 7,617 files being made available now, an additional 2,684 were declassified in mid-January.
Over 1,000 other documents still remain classified, but the defence ministry said it will examine their contents and will declassify any related to the 1989 events.
All of the declassified documents will be published in Romania's Official Gazette.
The decision comes six months after the European Court of Human Rights (CEDO) ruled that a copy of the whole revolution file -- which contains around 1,200 volumes of documents -- should be submitted to an organisation known as "21 December 1989".
The group, founded in January 1990, is comprised of members who participated in the uprising against Ceausescu, which turned bloody as police opened fire on the crowds.
It claims to have solid proof that more than 1,000 people were murdered by the authorities.
Association head Teodor Maries is the plaintiff in the CEDO case.
He has been on a hunger strike to protest the prosecutor general's office refusal to follow the CEDO verdict.
The prosecutor general's office has been reviewing the events for 20 years, but so far has only sentenced two former generals for their involvement in the massacre.
Maries told Southeast European Times he welcomes the latest decision.
"Though it came a little late for us, who have waited for 20 years for light to be shed on those tragic events, these documents are welcomed by us," he said.
"Whatever the documents are, technical or not, they contain precious information concerning the repression structure involved in the murders that took place in December 1989," Maries said.
The files, he added, will help identify "who gave the orders, what the orders were, what arms they used against the revolutionaries".
Maries says he has received assurances that the rest of the classified documents be also released.
He plans to end his hunger strike when the declassified documents are published in the Official Gazette.
