24/12/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 12/24/09
Romanian Prime Minister Emil Boc was reconfirmed on Wednesday (December 23rd) as the head of a new coalition government.
By a vote of 276 to 135, parliament gave the thumbs up to his team of 15 ministers, many retaining their jobs from the previous cabinet.
In comments afterwards, Boc pledged to undertake measures that were "not necessarily popular, but badly needed".
"It is not necessarily a moment of joy, but of responsibility and work," he said."It is a new partnership between the government and parliament, which I think Romanians will benefit from.
People are tired of speeches and expect us to do the right thing for the country.
"But we have to be aware of this:
before faring well, we will fare a little badly," he cautioned, warning 2010 could be difficult despite forecasts of modest economic growth.
President Traian Basescu, fresh from his own re-election earlier in the month, swore in the government following parliament's approval.
He voiced hope that it would succeed in alleviating the country's economic crisis.
The cabinet's first move, taken Wednesday evening, was to approve a draft state budget for 2010.
Boc says he hopes parliament will endorse it by mid-January.
Budget approval is a key condition for receiving further disbursements from an IMF loan, which has been put on ice for months due to the country's political stalemate.
With 240 seats, four above the threshold for a majority, the new coalition government's parliamentary majority is a fragile one.
Faced with opposition from the Social Democrats and the Liberals, Boc's Democrat-Liberals had to team up with the Magyar-oriented UDMR, other minority representatives in parliament, and the bloc of independent MPs.
UDMR has three portfolios in the new cabinet -- Culture, Health and Environment -- while the independents will be represented by Gabriel Oprea, who now heads defence.
Despite their parties' stance, 36 Social Democratic and Liberal MPs joined in endorsing the government Wednesday, apparently out of fears that Romania was otherwise headed for early elections.
Boc has been at the helm in one way or another since December 2008.
He first led a coalition government together with the Social Democrats, but they withdrew this fall as the presidential election approached.
The prime minister then headed an interim administration until it was toppled by a no-confidence vote.
