24/07/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/07/09
Several key recommendations were part of the EULEX report on Kosovo's rule of law institutions -- the Justice, Police and Customs sectors -- that was presented to the government Thursday (July 23rd) in Pristina.
The document is comprised of more than 2,500 assessments by EULEX monitors and advisers over the past six months.
More than 70 far-reaching proposals have been made to form "the focus of EULEX attention in the future".
EULEX deputy head Roy Reeve, who presented the report, said some of the recommended measures are short term and some are longer term.
"We will be using this report for a very detailed discussion later this month," he said.
The report is the first from EULEX since it became fully operational a few months ago.
EULEX has made about 30 proposed recommendations for change concerning the Kosovo Police (KP), such as "the need for sustainable staffing for the KP IT/Communications systems, to the need to introduce 'intelligence-led' policing throughout the organisation".
"The Public Prosecutor's Office and [the police] must work closely together in reducing the high levels of serious crime, and actively targeting organised crime groups and corruption," EULEX said in the report.
The mission said the judiciary is not yet an independent function.
"There is hardly any system in place to protect Kosovo judges in court, outside the court and after work hours," the report said, adding that there are no institutionalised mechanisms in place to follow up on incidents in which prosecutors have been exposed to outside pressure.
"EULEX will be looking at a range of measures to bring about change:
from the need to significantly increase the number of females and non-majority communities' representatives throughout the judiciary to the need to ensure its de jure independence.
There is a daunting array of reform effort required, and at the heart of the EULEX concern is the need to enhance public confidence by reducing the vulnerability of judges and prosecutors to pressure and corruption."
The report also contained recommendations for the customs sector.
"The Kosovo customs training plan is covering introductory, professional and technical training, but more specialised areas of law enforcement and prevention are not extensively covered," the report said.
"Kosovo institutions should support EULEX in order to improve the image of the judiciary and the prosecutor's office," political analyst Driton Lajci told Kosovo public broadcaster RTK, adding Kosovo institutions should not intervene in the work of the judiciary and prosecutor's office.
The government has not yet officially commented on the report.
