17/09/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 17/09/09
Croatia's pro-smoking lobby scored a victory last Thursday (September 10th), when parliament adopted an amendment to the controversial smoking ban. 
The amendment allows smokers to light up in designated sections in cafes, as long as they have a proper ventilation system, and post visible signs that warn of the dangers of smoking.
Restaurants, hospitals, schools, offices, and bars do not fall under the umbrella of the amendment, and smoking is still prohibited in those areas.
The amendment comes after an uprising of cafe and restaurant owners who claim their businesses have nearly collapsed since the law, one of the most restrictive smoking bans in Europe, was implemented in May.
During the warm summer months, smokers often step outside for a puff, but with winter right around the corner, coffee shop owners forecast an ominous downturn in business.
A petition against the ban was started almost immediately after the law passed, and the government took note. 
The new proposal was drafted with the assistance of the tourism ministry, the guild of coffee and restaurant owners and government officials.
Relieved cafe owners hope the more liberal law will bring smokers back into their establishments.
Zeljko Strizic, a coffee shop owner on the coast, says that with the new amendment, his business has a future. 
He is starting to implement changes in his 70 square metre cafe to separate the smokers from the non-smokers, and has already purchased a "smoking kills" poster.
Health Minister Darko Milinovic, a staunch supporter of the smoking ban, rejected media speculation that the government made changes to the law due to pressure from the cafe owners' guild, whose business dropped as much as 75%.
"We will still work hard in order to preserve the health of the citizens and this decision was not made under any pressure," said Milinovic, adding that smoking poses a serious problem in Croatia as more than 13,000 die annually due to smoking-related illnesses.
One out of three Croatians smoke.
