24/07/2009
(AFP, Reuters, AP, DPA, Bloomberg, Sofia Echo, Novinite, Dnevnik, Mediapool, BNN - 23/07/09)
Bulgarian Prime Minister-designate Boyko Borisov presented the country's new government on Thursday (July 23rd), less than three weeks after his centre-right Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB) won a landslide victory in the July 5th parliamentary elections.
He submitted his list of 16 ministers at a special ceremony Thursday.
"I accept the cabinet composition and structure proposed by Mr. 
Borisov," President Georgi Parvanov told reporters.
Borisov will have two deputies -- his close ally and GERB Chairman Tsvetan Tsvetanov and World Bank economist Simeon Djankov. 
They will also head the interior and finance ministries, respectively.
Tsvetanov, a former police chief with an 18-year service record at the interior ministry, faces a host of urgent tasks in the wake of several police protests over low pay and poor working conditions and in view of GERB's campaign promises to fight corruption and organised crime.
Djankov, who joined the Bank in 1995 to become its chief economist for finance and private sector, is expected to move quickly to revise the country's budget and cut expenditures, as well as consider the need for a standby arrangement with the IMF to cushion the impact of the global economic crisis.
Rumyana Zheleva, 40, who won re-election as a member of the European Parliament (MEP) in early June, will serve as foreign minister, but only until October, when Borisov plans to nominate her as Bulgaria's next European commissioner. 
She says a top priority will be polishing her country's image with the EU, which froze over a half billion euros in assistance funding last year, citing cases of fraud and irregularity in the management of European taxpayers' money.
Local media speculated on Thursday that she will be replaced by Defence Minister-designate Nikolay Mladenov after she moves to Brussels.
Borisov was praised for picking prosecutor Margarita Popova as his justice minister. 
Her nomination has been reportedly welcomed by Brussels. 
She has been serving as spokeswoman to Chief Prosecutor Boris Velchev since 2006.
The current economy and energy ministry will be restructured to take the former state tourism agency into its fold. 
One of the biggest surprises was the nomination of EVN Bulgaria electricity utility chief Traycho Traykov as head of the new mega-ministry.
Borisov's proposed cabinet also includes Sofia Deputy Mayor Yordanka Fandukova, who will head the education ministry and the mayor of the town of Vratsa, Totyu Mladenov, who will fill the top seat at the labour and social policy ministry.
The others include Bozhidar Nanev at health, Miroslav Naidenov at agriculture and food industry, Rossen Plevneliev at regional development, Nona Karadjova at environment and Alexander Tsvetkov at transport, communications and information technologies. 
Bulgarian sculptor Vezhdi Rashidov will head the culture ministry, while Svilen Neykov will fill the seat at the new sports ministry.
Borisov's only controversial nomination is that of historian Bozhidar Dimitrov as minister without portfolio in charge of Bulgarians abroad. 
Dimitrov has a past as a collaborator of the communist-era state security service.
Parliament is expected to approve the new cabinet Monday with the support of the Order, Law and Security party and the ultra-nationalist Ataka (Attack) party.
