25/08/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 25/08/09
The 6th annual Anonimul International Independent Film Festival was held from August 10th to the 16th at Sfantu Gheorghe in Danube Delta.
"With all this anonymity, the idea of prestige is starting to shape up -- prestige as a sum of words such as discretion, passion, consistency, even modesty and generosity.
I hope that is the direction in which this festival is heading," Marcel Iures, esteemed Romanian actor and president of the festival, said on opening night.
Day screenings were held at the local Green Village resort cinema, and were only for ticketholders, but at night, films were screened free-of-charge at Dolphin Camping on a "huge open-air screen", according to the Anonimul website.
This year's top prize, the Anonimul Trophy, went to Romanian director Andrei Gruzniczki for his film "The Other Irene", the story of a widower coping with the distant relationship he had with his wife before she allegedly committed suicide.
The film features a slew of young actors, including Andi Vasluianu, Simona Popescu and Dragos Bucur.
Before heading to Anonimul, "The Other Irene" won the Romanian Days Award for the Best Feature at this year's Transylvania Film Festival.
Along with the trophy, Gruzniczki received nearly 2,100 euros.
Other winners included director Tudor Giurgiu of Romania, who took home the Audience Award for Best Fiction Short for "Oli's Wedding".
The Audience Award for Best Animation Short went to German directors Mathias Bruhn and Christian Asmussen for their work in "Post!".
Turkish director Hasan Gunduz won the Ovidiu Bose Pastina Award for his work in the film "Shame".
The directors each received about 700 euros along with their awards.
This year's event was the first in Anonimul history where the winners were chosen exclusively by the audience.
The feature competition included seven films, while the short film competition had 24 short fiction films and 18 short animations.
The festival also hosted a section called "Eco Docs", which featured films about environmental issues.
On August 18th, Anonimul kicked off a follow-up to the awards ceremony, which included a series of film screenings, including the remake of the 1972 movie "Sleuth", which was directed by Kenneth Branagh, and starred Michael Caine and Jude Law.
