17/09/2009
(Irish Times - 17/09/09; AFP, AP, Reuters, B92 - 16/09/09; AP, AKI, DPA, VOA, Office of the High Representative - 15/09/09)
Hundreds of Bosniaks protested in Sarajevo on Wednesday (September 16th) against the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia's (ICTY) decision to grant early release to former Bosnian Serb President Biljana Plavsic.
Once dubbed the "Iron Lady" of the Balkans, in February 2003 Plavsic was sentenced to 11 years in prison for her role in a campaign of persecution against Bosnian Muslims and Croats during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
She surrendered to The Hague-based tribunal in January 2001.
Under a deal with prosecutors, she agreed to plead guilty to one of the eight counts in her indictment, charging her with crimes against humanity. 
In return, the seven other charges against her, including genocide, were dropped.
Citing her good behaviour and "substantial evidence of rehabilitation", the ICTY ruled on Tuesday that Plavsic, who has served two-thirds of her term, should be released from the Swedish prison, to which she was transferred in June 2003. 
Bosnian Serbs welcomed the UN tribunal's move.
"Despite all the injustices that she has been facing during the past years, we hope that on October 27th Biljana Plavsic will be free, at Belgrade airport where we will prepare her a warm welcome," the AFP quoted Svetozar Mihajlovic, a member of a committee advocating her pardon, as saying Wednesday.
Meanwhile, about 200 relatives of the thousands of Bosniak victims joined the protest in Sarajevo to vent their anger at the UN judges' decision.
"It might be in line with international law, but it has nothing to do with justice," the AFP quoted Murat Tahirovic, head of an association of Muslim and Croat war camp prisoners, as saying.
Members of an association of mothers whose children were among the up to 8,000 Bosniak men and boys killed in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre also expressed their outrage at the UN judges' decision.
"They don't think about the blood of so many of our children, whom we are still digging out of mass graves," Kada Hotic, a mother still searching for her son's remains, told Reuters.
Plavsic is the most senior politician from the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s to have expressed remorse and acknowledged responsibility for atrocities committed during the conflict in BiH. 
She was a close ally of former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic, whose war crimes trial is expected to begin next month.
Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, who visited Plavsic in the Swedish prison Wednesday, caused a public outcry last week by denying that Bosnian Serbs were behind some of the massacres in the 1992-1995 conflict for which they are held responsible.
The heads of OSCE and Council of Europe missions in Sarajevo, including international community High Representative Valentin Inzko, condemned those remarks.
"Any attempt to change the established historical record of war crimes is unacceptable and inexcusable," Inzko said in a statement Tuesday.
