23/02/2010
(European Commission, Reuters, The Sofia Echo - 22/02/10)
The European Commission (EC) decided on Monday (February 22nd) to propose extending the EU's preferential trade regime for the Western Balkans until 2015.
"The aim of this proposal is to ensure that Western Balkan economies continue to benefit from an unlimited duty-free access to the EU market for nearly all products originating in these countries and territories," the commission said in a statement. 
"Together with the bilateral agreements in place, these trade preferences support economic integration with the EU and hence foster political stability and economic progress in the entire region."
An agreement allowing the Western Balkan countries to export their industrial and agricultural products to the EU market without customs duties or limits on quantities was first signed in 2000. 
Only wine, sugar, baby beef and certain fish products enter the bloc's common market under preferential tariff quotas.
The deal covers all countries participating in the EU Stabilisation and Association Process -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia. 
It was renewed in 2005 and is due to expire on December 31st.
Kosovo is the only one among the seven that has not signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) or an Interim Agreement (IA) on trade and trade-related matters with the EU yet.
The EC said its decision to propose a further extension of the trade preferences was to prevent harming the affected countries' economies.
"A stop of the trade preferences risks having negative consequences on the overall economic performances of the Western Balkans, with repercussions on their domestic reform processes," it noted in the statement.
The duty-free regime has contributed to an increase in regional exports to the EU by roughly 8% per year, according to EC statistics. 
In 2007, the bloc was the region's largest trading partner for both imports and exports, which stood at 61.3% and 63.2%, respectively.
In 2008, EU goods exports to the Western Balkans totalled 32.5 billion euros, while imports from the region amounted to nearly 14 billion euros. 
Machinery, textiles and clothing, agricultural products and chemicals were the bulk of EU imports from the Western Balkan countries.
Monday's proposal, which must be approved formally by the EU Council of Ministers and the European Parliament before it enters into force on January 1st 2011, has two aims, the EC said.
The first is "to allow all Western Balkan countries to further benefit from the preferential trade regime, where this is more beneficial than the treatment foreseen in the SAAs or IAs", said the statement. 
The second goal is "to further allow the customs territory of Kosovo to benefit from the current duty-free, quota-free treatment for almost all its exported products", except those that are subject to quotas.
