23/02/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 23/02/10
The Social Democratic Party (PSD) meets on Tuesday (February 23rd) for the first time under the chairmanship of the newly elected chief Victor Ponta.
He won the PSD chairmanship Saturday, beating out incumbent Mircea Geoana, by a vote of 856-781.
The 1,700 delegates also picked the 15 party vice-presidents.
Ponta, 38, a prosecutor by training and a parliament member since 2004, joined what appeared to be a tight race only a few days before the congress. 
The vote was called by major voices within the party after Geoana's failure to beat incumbent Traian Basescu in December's presidential runoff.
Two important contenders, Miron Mitrea and Cristian Diaconescu, withdrew from the race during the congress, saying their candidacies risked splitting the party. 
Their move paved the way for the Geoana vs. 
Ponta final.
"I believe PSD has … a new chance to show it can make changes; it can accept an irritatingly young president elected in a democratic vote and who has the power to represent the alternative," Ponta said after the results were announced on Sunday.
Analysts don't see a quiet future for the young leader.
"As it happened in 2005, when Mircea Geoana took over PSD, Victor Ponta won this position not thanks to a reformist wave inside the party or an authentic desire for change, but due to pragmatic behind-the-scenes games performed by members from the old ranks, such as Iliescu, Mitrea and [former Prime Minister Adrian] Nastase," Silviu Sergiu, senior political editor with the Romanian daily Evenimentul Zilei, told SETimes.
"Even if they gave him their whole support at the congress, they won't let Ponta pull all the reins in the party, but will try instead to consolidate their influence. 
For Ponta, it is crucially important … to move away from the party's past," Sergiu added.
"I, for one, doubt the new leader will openly challenge them for a very simple and solid reason: for now, his support in the executive branch of the party is quite feeble since more vice-presidents elected on Saturday are loyal to Mircea Geoana," he concluded.
