22/10/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 22/10/09
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn presented in Brussels last Wednesday the new European Commission (EC) report on Macedonia, assessing the country's progress towards kick-starting its EU membership negotiations.
"Now we can recommend the opening of negotiations for membership", said Rehn.
The positive recommendation comes after the EC said Macedonia "has made satisfactory progress in fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria", according to Rehn.
Macedonia "achieved convincing progress and substantively addressed key reform priorities".
However, Rehn underscored a "key" part of the report that called for good neighbourly relations -- including a mutually acceptable solution to the longstanding name dispute with Greece, under UN auspices.
"I hope the Skopje government will understand this message as a strong encouragement to finally solve the name dispute," he said, characterising the need for a solution as "more substantial and more urgent than ever before for the good of the country and its European future".
After hearing the positive news, Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski called this a "historic day for Macedonia and its citizens".
He said this achievement came as a result of "past efforts by the government, as well as the citizens and all political parties".
Gruevski also said the government is devoted to working to maintain good neighbourly relations.
"Macedonia actively and constructively continues with the talks under UN guidance to come to a mutually acceptable solution," he said.
President Gjorge Ivanov called the recent developments a "success story, which is very important for the perspectives of Macedonia".
Next, the EC report will be forwarded to the EU Council of Ministers, who will then determine when the negotiations will begin.
Swedish Ambassador to Macedonia Lars Freden expressed satisfaction with the EC decision, but also said he hopes a solution to the name dispute will come about soon.
"The only discussion that remains now is the one connected with the name dispute, not about the benchmarks," said Freden.
While some Macedonians were jubilant, many were cautious about the news, saying recognition from Brussels should come as a result of hard work, not as a means to influence the outcome of a bilateral dispute.
