21/01/2010
(DPA, Kathimerini - 21/01/10;
ANA-MPA, Sofia News Agency, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, DPA, RTTNews, MIA, Makfax, Emportal - 20/01/10;
AFP, FT - 19/01/10)
Bulgaria is losing 3m euros a day as a result of a blockade by Greek farmers at the countries' common border, officials in Sofia said on Wednesday (January 20th).
Protesting the thousands of euros in unpaid EU subsidies and demanding a boost in income, the Greek farmers began blocking major national highways and border crossings last Friday with tractors and other heavy machinery.
Struggling to deal with a major economic crisis and under strong EU pressure to reduce its budget deficit, Greece's socialist government has rejected the farmers' demands for new subsidies worth about 1 billion euros.
On the sixth day of the protest, traffic along about 20 important highway junctions in northern and western Greece -- including the main highway linking Athens with the port city of Thessaloniki -- was disrupted Wednesday.
Hundreds of trucks remained stranded at Promahonas-Kulata and Exohi-Ilinden, the two key crossing points between Bulgaria and Greece.
On Tuesday, the Bulgarian government set up a "crisis task force" including three ministers -- Traicho Traikov of economy, Alexander Tsvetkov of transportation and Miroslav Naidenov of agriculture.
Reporting to parliament Wednesday, Traikov said losses incurred by Bulgaria from failed exports stood at an estimated 2.5m euros per day.
The tourism sector was losing about 500,000 euros daily and transport companies about 150,000 euros per day.
Traikov, who met on Wednesday with Greek Ambassador to Sofia Danae-Magdalini Koumanakou, said authorities would wait to see what steps Athens takes before filing a complaint with the EC and requesting compensation.
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov reportedly called European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso on Tuesday to complain, suggesting Sofia might request compensation.
"Many EU directives are being violated," Sofia-based daily Dnevnik quoted Borisov as saying.
"This is not Bulgaria's problem and there is no reason why this country should bear the brunt of the problem."
He then discussed the issue in a phone conversation with Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou on Wednesday, telling him that in addition to general turmoil, the small Bulgarian producers and stockbreeders were bearing the brunt of the daily losses.
"Papandreou understands this, and the conversation was in a friendly spirit," Borisov was quoted as saying later.
"The Greeks are hoping to solve this entire issue by the middle of next week."
Greece's socialist government has blamed the country's previous conservative administration -- led by former New Democracy (ND) leader Costas Karamanlis -- for the farmers' problems.
"We understand the farmers' problems ...
were accumulated by the previous bad management, but what we do not understand is the manner through which they are trying to solve them,"
Greek Agriculture Minister Katerina Batzeli told reporters after an informal cabinet meeting on the matter.
"The government and the citizens understand the difficult situation, which should be dealt with [using] logical arguments."
