22/02/2010
(Reuters, DPA - 19/02/10;
Standart, Dnevnik, Focus News Agency, The Banker -16/02/10;
Bulgarian Energy Holding, National Electric Company, State Energy and Water Regulatory Commission)
The State Energy and Water Regulatory Commission (SEWRC) in Sofia is expected to decide on Monday (February 22nd) if it will award Gazprom Marketing & Trading a 20-year licence to trade energy in Bulgaria.
The company, which applied for the permit in August, has provided a guaranteed deposit of about 75,000 euros and its bid meets the Bulgarian legal requirements.
Established in 1999, the London-based power trader already operates in a number of European countries, including Britain, the Czech Republic, France, the Netherlands, Poland and Switzerland.
Last year it obtained a Romanian license, Bulgarian dailies reported.
If the company is awarded a license from SEWRC, it will be able to effectively enter the Bulgarian electricity market within two months, media reports quoted company representative Bogdan Preda, as saying.
Initially, it would be selling 50 million MWh of electricity per year, but its ambitions are for sales to eventually reach 350 million MWh annually.
Gazprom Marketing & Trading has not identified the power generation companies it would be buying the electricity from or the customer groups it would target.
But, Preda did not rule out the possibility that the company will compete for a share on the Bulgarian market with the current electricity distributors.
In 2005, Bulgaria privatised seven power utilities, selling three in the western part of the country to the Czech Republic's CEZ, two in its northeast to Germany's E.ON and two in the southeast to Austria's EVN for a total of 693m euros.
Each of the three companies was granted a 30-year license.
They are the authorised public suppliers of electricity to households and enterprises with up to 50 on staff and an annual turnover of less than 10m euros.
Together, they serve more than 5.6 million end customers.
There is also a Bulgarian company, whose license covers the distribution of electricity on the territory of the northern Black Sea resort of Zlatni Piasatsi (Golden Sands) only.
The electricity market in Bulgaria was fully liberalised six months after the country's EU entry in January 2007.
In 2008, there were 56 companies licensed to trade on the Bulgarian electricity market, with 20 of them active traders, SEWRC said in a report to the European Commission last year.
One of the key actors is the National Electric Company (NEK).
It is one of the eight companies incorporated in the state-owned Bulgarian Energy Holding (BEH) that was set up in September 2008.
Other BEH subsidiaries include the Balkan nation's only nuclear power plant in Kozloduy and its biggest natural gas distributor, Bulgargaz.
NEK is the owner of 29 hydroelectric and pumped-storage plants, with a total installed capacity of 2,563MW in the generating mode, and 943MW in the pumping mode.
Its main activities include generation and transmission, centralised purchase and sale of electrical energy, supply of electrical energy to customers connected to the transmission network, as well as import and export of electric power.
NEK sells electricity to large consumers connected to high voltage networks on the basis of bilateral contracts concluded at freely negotiated prices.
One of the largest electricity producers in Southeast Europe, Bulgaria is also a traditional net electricity exporter to countries in the region, including Greece, Macedonia, Serbia and Turkey.
