22/10/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Camp Bondsteel, Kosovo -- 22/10/09
The Croatian military contingent (HRVCON), part of the NATO-led peacekeeping Kosovo Force (KFOR), successfully completed a three-month rotation earlier this month, and a second contingent recently began a four-month tour.
As the latest member of NATO, Croatia joined KFOR last July. 
The contingent is comprised of a helicopter detachment with 20 flying and ground personnel and two Mil Mi-171 Sh 'Hip' transport helicopters. 
The unit is detached from a multi-role helicopter squadron based at Lučko Heliport, near Zagreb, and deployed at Camp Bondsteel near Ferizaj/Urosevac.
Squadron commander Major Michael Krizanec met with SETimes at Camp Bondsteel a couple of days before the completion of the rotation, and expressed satisfaction with the way the Croatian Air Force was deployed in the NATO operation.
"Different multi-national task forces within KFOR have their own aviation elements, but we are subordinated directly to the KFOR headquarters in Pristina," Krizanec told SETimes. 
"Our basic task is the very same that we have in Croatia -- transport of troops and material. 
And we are doing it all over Kosovo."
KFOR's basic mission is to provide a safe and secure environment for everybody in the country. 
KFOR's commander, Lieutenant General Markus Bentler of Germany, has KFOR's tactical and operational reserve forces under his direct command, and HRVCON is very often engaged in different exercises that involve these forces. 
Usually, this means rapid air insertion and extraction of crowd and riot control (CRC) units, which are trained and ready to react if a violent incident erupts.
"Every KFOR unit that worked with us expressed its satisfaction with our performance," said Krizanec. 
"With total capacity of 24 troops, our Mi-171Sh helicopters are the largest in KFOR. 
These are our brand new Russian-made helicopters that were equipped with some Western avionics, which make us capable to fly in any weather, day or night, also in civil air traffic controlled international airspace. 
Professionally, we have been gaining our experience in many NATO and Partnership for Peace exercises since 2002, so there were no new things for us in KFOR, so far."
The security situation in Kosovo is mostly calm, and there are no major threats to KFOR personnel.
There is a small Croat population in the villages of Janjevo and Letnica, and Croatian helicopter crews usually go there every Sunday to attend Mass and to bring food to the villagers.
