22/07/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 22/07/09
A picturesque town at the foothills of Mount Galichica next to Lake Prespa, Resen is known for its apple orchards and magnificent scenery.
Resen is also a unique artistic centre, host to one of the world's professional ceramics colonies.
It was founded in 1973 by two renowned art professors who wanted to popularise Macedonia's centuries-old tradition of pottery.
Every August for the past 36 years, the Resen ceramics colony has invited up to ten artists for a unique three-week fellowship.
They typically create three to five ceramic pieces, which become a permanent part of the colony's art collection.
"The fact that there is nothing around you except your colleagues makes you feel calm, relaxed and inspired," said Macedonian artist and colony participant Sonja Pankova.
The Resen colony is unique in that "it is the only colony in the Balkans with its own exhibition," said art director Mitko Nonevski.
Artists in the Oteshevo studios are supplied with clay, different glazes, whetstone and modern kilns, where temperatures can reach 1,000 degrees Celsius.
"We have an opportunity to create using Resen and Veles clay, which is a new experience.
It is of a special quality and is unavailable in Slovenia," explained Slovenian artist Niko Zupan.
Over 800 pieces have been created, and are exhibited at Resen's downtown Niyazi Bey Chateau, which to many is itself an artistic treasure.
Ottoman overlord Niyazi Bey built the structure in the early 1900s after being awestruck by a French castle on a postcard he received.
Tourists visiting Macedonia, and especially nearby Ohrid, can travel to Resen through the scenic Mount Galichica for an artistic infusion.
Just few miles from Resen is Oteshevo -- a tourist settlement on Lake Prespa -- where the colony's studios are located.
Don't be surprised by the stylized pelican street sign, the colony's unofficial symbol;
pelicans in Macedonia exist only at Lake Prespa.
While in Oteshevo, you should also try swimming and sunbathing at the lake, which has a different feel from the usual sea beaches.
A tasty meal at the Fishermen's Village restaurant (Ribarsko selo) is a must.
If you are unable to make the trip, Resen's pottery is also on display in travelling exhibitions in Germany, Italy, Turkey, South Korea, Croatia, Serbia, Bulgaria and Greece.
