21/10/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 21/10/09
During Dmitry Medvedev's daylong visit to Belgrade on Tuesday (October 20th), the Russian president vowed to back Serbia regarding Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence, discussed energy arrangements, and dished out a loan worth approximately 671m euros, which will be pumped into Serbia's faltering economy.
"We received a positive answer from the Russian president and government to our request for credit support to Serbia during the global financial crisis, for which we express our gratitude once again," said President Boris Tadic.
The particulars of the loan have not been released; however, about one fifth of the money is slated to help close the growing budget gap. 
Tadic called the loan "strategically important for Serbia at this moment".
The countries also plan to do some business together, as Russian gas company Gazprom is geared to invest over 25m euros in the construction of the Banatski Dvor underground gas storage facility. 
Gazprom and Serbian gas company Srbijagas also signed documents on the founding of joint companies to build a South Stream gas pipeline section through Serbia, as well as the modernisation of Banatski Dvor. 
Gazprom will hold a 51% stake in the companies, while Srbijagas will have 49%. 
A delegation of approximately 50 businesspeople accompanied the president.
Addressing the Serbian parliament, Medvedev stressed that Moscow is not against the Western Balkans' EU enlargement. 
"It is essential for Russia that the integration of new members into the EU ... 
does not harm our co-operation with them," said Medvedev.
"I am confident that we are capable of building relations based on partnership and mutual respect, within the integration processes we have chosen," he said.
Regarding Kosovo, Medvedev said his country will continue to support Serbia in its efforts to defend sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
Tadic thanked Russia for its position on Kosovo, and reaffirmed that Serbia will never recognise Pristina's independence. 
He added that Serbian authorities will await the opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on the legality of Kosovo's independence.
Speaking on the importance of Medvedev's trip, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said it was an historic visit. 
"All Western Balkan countries are on the path of EU integration, but only one of them has this kind of relationship and mutual support with Russia, and that is Serbia." Jeremic added that Russia's support makes Serbia "the centre of the region".
The Serbian and Russian presidents also attended the celebration of the 65th anniversary of the liberation of Belgrade in WWII, when the Russian and Serbian armies together breached German resistance.
