15/09/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/09/09
About 1,000 people gathered in Pristina on Monday (September 14th) to protest a recently signed protocol between EULEX and Serbia on police co-operation.
Over 22 NGOs led the demonstration, including Vetevendosje (Self-determination), a local group that opposes UN administration in the country.
The demonstrators gathered in front of the Kosovo government building and the EULEX police headquarters, demanding that EULEX leave Kosovo and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci resign.
"They are not politicians, they are hostages of the international community," said protestor Avni Zogiani of the anti-corruption NGO "Cohu" (Wake up!), referring to the country's leadership.
"If the Kosovo institutions were functioning, we would have no reason to protest," explained Driton Tali, a member of parliament who took part in the demonstration.
The protestors carried Albanian flags and placards critical of EULEX and the Kosovo government.
EULEX explained in a press release the protocol is an important step in strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo.
To bring criminals to justice, the press release stated, "evidence needs to be shared and exchanged throughout the region, and mechanisms need to be established to facilitate this." It assured that "Kosovo police will be heavily involved in the information exchange."
Elsewhere Monday, Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, called on Pristina authorities to support the signing of the EULEX-Serbia agreement.
According to him, the police protocol serves Kosovo's long-term interest.
"Therefore, we expect Pristina authorities to support this agreement, which aims to strengthen control and security in the Kosovo territory," Bildt said.
However, Vetevendosje leader Albin Kurti accused EULEX of being nothing more than UNMIK under a different name.
"EULEX looks at us as a massive gang that has to be disciplined," said Kurti.
He explained that EULEX does not have a clearly defined deadline to leave Kosovo, and is not accountable to Kosovo's institutions.
"Kosovo is only sovereign abroad, in embassies.
In Kosovo, it's not sovereign because it has EULEX behind it," Kurti said.
Kurti cautioned that two additional protocols -- on customs and justice -- will be worse for the country than the one signed last week, but warned Monday's protest will not be the last.
In August, similar demonstrations organised by Vetevendosje resulted in 28 damaged EULEX vehicles.
The Kosovo government wrapped up two bilateral agreements with the United States on Monday.
Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni and US Ambassador to Kosovo Christopher Dell signed an agreement that secures $13m in assistance for the development of Kosovo's rule of law.
The foreign ministry quoted Dell as saying the agreement is of particular importance and is signed between two sovereign states.
Thaci, President Fatmir Sejdiu and Dell also signed the very first bilateral agreement concerning economic assistance to improve Kosovo's infrastructure, economy, transportation and education.
Sejdiu pledged that Kosovo is determined to use every bit of it responsibly.
