21/10/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 21/10/09
A decision by leaders in Kosovo and Macedonia to resolve their remaining border issues and establish formal diplomatic ties has been hailed internationally as a boost to regional stability. 
However, not all are happy about the agreements.
Macedonia's opposition parties have come out against the newly demarcated border line, and residents in some of the ethnic Albanian villages located along the boundary are angry.
On Tuesday, villagers in Debellde -- on the Kosovo side -- staged a protest, complaining that some of their land still remains within Macedonia under the deal. 
They removed the recently placed border stones and chanted slogans accusing Kosovo politicians of failing to defend their interests.
In Macedonia, meanwhile, the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) and Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) accused the government of undermining a 2001 border agreement reached by the late Macedonian President Boris Trajkovski and Serbia's head of state at the time, Vojislav Kostunica. 
The agreement pre-dated Kosovo's declaration of independence from Serbia.
Opposition MPs claim the government has ceded excessive amounts of Macedonian territory, more than allowed for by law.
"It is clear that the border is changed significantly," LDP Vice-President Andrej Zernovski said.
Objections are also being raised on procedural grounds. 
The LDP says such changes require approval by two-thirds of parliament, and that a citizens' referendum should be held. 
Instead, the agreement was backed by 72 members of the 120-seat parliament. 
The opposition is threatening to file suit at Macedonia's constitutional court.
According to SDSM leader Branko Crvenkovski, the deal was in "clear violation of the constitution and the rule of law".
"Given away are 300 metres which is more than the allowed 150," Crvenkovski said. 
"With this agreement, Kosovo gains 130 hectares while Macedonia gains 140 from Kosovo. 
It is not about a demarcation but about exchange of territories."
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski has dismissed the accusations. 
"Never and at no price would I sign something by which we'll lose even one single millimetre," he declared. 
"We will become the first country of the former Yugoslavia to have all borders firmly recognised. 
After this, not a single border issue will remain open."
US Ambassador to Macedonia Phillip Reeker, Swedish Ambassador Lars Freden and EU Representative Erwan Fouere have praised Pristina and Skopje for taking a positive step forward.
The border deal demonstrates "great responsibility, leadership and wisdom", Reeker said.
On Tuesday, Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu said his country would establish an embassy-level diplomatic mission in Skopje. 
The announcement came in an official decree, issued after consultations with Prime Minister Hashim Thaci.
