17/06/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 17/06/13
More than a decade after the last of the fighting, there remains a massive backlog of war crime cases in the countries of the former Yugoslavia.
Experts and officials of humanitarian organisations say there are ways to speed up the prosecution of these cases, such as inclusion of more local judges and prosecutors, establishment of special courts for war crimes and better protection of the witnesses who fear testifying in such cases.
Bekim Blakaj, head of the Humanitarian Law Centre in Pristina, which monitors war crime trials in Kosovo, recommends the establishment of a special court and a special prosecutor's office. 
Blakaj told SETimes that even if such institutions cannot be created, a special department for these cases would do the job.
"That would speed up the proceeding of the war crime cases and the judges would be specialised and increase their professional capacities to deal with only these cases in particular," Blakaj said.
Sian Jones, a researcher with Amnesty International, told SETimes there are considerable barriers to war crime prosecutions in the region.
"The system of witness protection remains inadequate in both Serbia and Kosovo, which deters witnesses from coming forward to testify," Jones said.
Blakaj agreed, adding that that witness' refusal to testify is one of the main reasons why prosecutions are slow.
"This is because of fear. 
The implementation of the law for the protection of the witnesses would have an impact in the motivation of the witnesses to testify in front of the courts," Blakaj told SETimes.
Laws in Serbia and Kosovo provide protections for witnesses, but some experts said more could be done.
Simo Vaatainen, a former chief of the victim and witness protection unit of the international criminal tribunal at The Hague (ICTY), last year advocated a broader "holistic approach which encompasses support and protection for witnesses and victims from the very start of an investigation until the end of the trial and beyond."
Vaatainen recommended giving judges more power to offer protections and to order that witnesses be removed from courtrooms "where proximity to the defendants is so stressful it jeopardizes the hearing of evidence."
Amnesty International said fewer than 40 cases were prosecuted by UNMIK international prosecutors in Kosovo from 2000-2009. 
There has been an increase in the number of prosecutions since EULEX took responsibility in 2009, but there are still many pending cases.
Blakaj said more Kosovo judges and prosecutors should become involved in war crime cases rather than leaving the responsibility to their international counterparts. 
EULEX has an executive mandate to prosecute war crimes in Kosovo, but Blakaj said, "the international judges and prosecutors are few in numbers to deal with all the war crime cases."
The prosecution of war crimes in Serbia has been limited by the capacity of prosecutors and the War Crimes Chamber in Belgrade, said Amnesty International's Jones.
"On a positive note, increased cooperation between EULEX and the [Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor] has led to prosecutions in significant cases," Jones told SETimes.
While progress is slow, it does exist.
On June 7th in Pristina, a mixed panel of EULEX and Kosovo judges delivered guilty verdicts to three former KLA fighters for the beating and torture of Kosovo Albanian civilians who were illegally detained under suspicions of disloyalty to the KLA in 1998 and 1999. 
Among the defendants was Latif Gashi, a Kosovo Democratic Party member of the Kosovo Assembly. 
EULEX prosecutor Charles Hardaway said this was the last piece of a case that finally came to a conclusion.
"It must be clear that the KLA was not on trial here, the defendants were. 
It is paramount to understand that guilt is individual, not collective and the court rightly found that these individuals committed unlawful actions. 
It is important to emphasize that the defendants committed these crimes against fellow Kosovo Albanians. 
Many of the detainees at Llapashtica were mistreated terribly, and even though many years have passed since these dreadful events occurred, it is still vitally important that the victims and their families receive justice. 
And I believe justice for them has been delivered," Hardaway said.
Sonja Biserko, head of the Helsinki Committee in Serbia, has a different view, telling SETimes that transitional justice is impeded when states do not accept responsibility for war crimes.
"The court in Serbia is far away from the goals that have been set up. 
The state strategy is focused on perpetrators and avoiding any responsibility of state of Serbia and its institutions, especially police and military. 
The lack of political will to proceed with trials has an impact on the process of transitional justice," Biserko said, adding that the Serbian position is that Serbia was not at war and that crimes committed by Serbian citizens are not inspired by the state.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) National War Crimes Strategy provides a framework for addressing the country's backlog of cases.
BiH has delivered 250 final and binding verdicts on war crimes between 1995 and 2012. 
Judicial officials aim to reduce the number of war crime cases by 50 percent over a five-year period
"In that regard, employment of a certain number of judges and prosecutors is planned, as well as other financial support to the judicial institutions," Marina Bakic, a spokesperson with the BiH Ministry of Justice, told SETimes.
The ICTY has been dealing with high-profile war crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and has worked to help the local judiciaries to handle additional cases.
"The work undertaken by local courts in the former Yugoslavia has been extremely important in complementing the work of the Tribunal. 
… The Tribunal has facilitated many capacity building and peer-to-peer exchanges with domestic judiciaries to enable them to familiarize themselves with the ICTY experience in handling complex war crimes cases, as well as the Tribunal's jurisprudence and approaches to criminal procedural issues," Magdalena Spalinska, the Tribunal's spokesperson told SETimes.
The ICTY has transferred the cases of 13 lower- and mid-ranking individuals to the judiciaries in the former Yugoslavia. 
The Tribunal also handed over a large number of files from cases that it investigated for further processing at the national level, she added.
Betim Musliu, a researcher of the Kosovo Law Institute, said prosecuting war crime cases depends on securing the necessary evidence and testimony, which can be a complicated process.
"However, the good thing is that war crimes never get old and the judicial procedures for war crimes can be initiated any time that the necessary proofs and evidence are secured," Musliu told SETimes.
Amnesty International's Jones said politics often stands in the way of justice.
"In both Kosovo and Serbia there is a lack of political will to support the investigation and prosecution of war crimes, Jones said. 
"... 
It derives from the failure to deal with and take responsibility for the past, and in part because many of those in positions of power, authority or responsibility were engaged in the armed conflicts or are politically close to those who were in power during that period."
How rapidly do you think war crimes cases should move through the court system once charges are brought? 
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
