21/12/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 21/12/09
A new traffic safety law with tougher rules for drivers and pedestrians alike took effect as of December 10th in Serbia.
Under the law, demerit points will be handed out for traffic violations. 
A driver who gets 18 demerit points will have his or her license temporarily revoked.
Roads will be monitored with the help of new video surveillance equipment, and the use of mobile phones while driving is prohibited. 
The cell phone ban also applies to pedestrians crossing the street.
The blood alcohol limit was reduced from 0.5% to 0.3%, and a level of 2% and above will result in an arrest and possible jail time.
The speed limit was also scaled back from 60 km/h to 50 km/h, and a helmet law was introduced for cyclists and motorcycle riders.
Drivers under the age of 18 will be issued a learner's permit, which will require them to have a passenger with at least five years driving experience in the car with them at all times. 
Drivers holding the permits are required to be off the road from 11pm to 5am.
According to police reports, 756 people were killed in traffic accidents in the first 11 months of this year. 
The most common causes were excessive speed, driving under the influence and running red lights. 
Last year, the number of people killed in road accidents totalled 897.
"The law itself will not reduce the number of accidents and victims, but its implementation will. 
That implementation must not be selective but must refer to every single article of the law," Traffic Safety Committee chairman Damir Okanovic told SETimes.
"Tougher penalties are important, but the drivers' training is more important, so they understand the importance of following traffic rules. 
For example, why is the speed limit in a populated area 50 km/h, and how important is that for their safety," he added.
Serbia's Minister of Interior Ivica Dacic warned his friends and family not to call him if they commit traffic violations because they will not be granted special privileges.
Drivers have about a three week grace period to adjust to the new regulations. 
Police will issue warnings and inform drivers of the new provisions until January 1st, after which violators will be penalised.
Police will not be able to charge fines on the spot, but instead will issue payment orders. 
Fines will range from around 30 to 500 euros and will be doubled if a child under 12 years of age is present.
According to World Bank estimates, Serbia spends about 2.3% of its GNP on road accidents. 
The new law is modelled after Germany's, which cut its traffic accidents and violations in half.
