19/02/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 19/02/10
Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou and Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin have given strong support to a long-awaited oil pipeline on the drawing board since the early 1990s, said diplomatic sources in Athens on Wednesday (February 17th).
The pipeline is expected to run from the Bulgarian town of Burgas on the Black Sea to Alexandroupolis in the northeast Aegean, bypassing the Bosporus Straits. 
Sources in the Greek foreign ministry blamed the most recent delays on "foot-dragging" by the new government in Sofia.
Papandreou, who also serves as Greece's foreign minister, told reporters after his meeting with Putin that Russia and Greece want to build the pipeline quickly. 
To succeed, they need the full co-operation of Bulgaria, where local authorities have expressed environmental concerns about the project.
Elected officials, NGOs and environmental groups in Alexandroupolis have long expressed such fears, particularly the risks of a maritime spill. 
Alexandroupolis lies just west of the Maritsa-Evros River delta, a large tract of wetlands protected by the international Ramsar Treaty of 1971.
Panpandreou said environmental concerns were a project priority for both Greece and Russia.
Last week, municipality and prefectural officials in Alexandroupolis signed a contract with the local Democritus University for a committee to monitor the validity of environmental and scientific surveys linked with the pipeline's construction and operation.
Papandreou told Russian reporters that all procedures necessary to begin construction -- including environmental impact reports -- should be completed over the next six month.
The pipeline's design is based on a trilateral agreement signed in March 2007 in Athens by Putin, then Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis and former Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergei Stanishev. 
At the time, a cost of 700m euros was projected for construction.
It will be approximately 280km long with a capacity to transport 35 million tonnes of crude oil per year and an option to add an additional 50 million tonnes in the future. 
Under the 2007 deal, Russia holds 51% of the project company while Greece and Bulgaria will own 24.5% each.
The pipeline will mostly pump crude oil from Russia and the Caspian Basin in Kazakhstan -- arriving on tankers from Novorossiysk -- between Burgas and Alexandroupolis.
In a related development, Papandreou said Greece and Russia are close to signing a contract to name an Athens-based company to co-ordinate construction of Greece's portion of the South Stream gas pipeline. 
South Stream is a large energy project -- heavily backed by Moscow -- which bypasses the Ukraine.
Bulgaria, another South Stream partner, has suspended its participation in favor of an alternative pipeline running from Samsun on Turkey's Black Sea coast to the southern oil terminal of Ceyhan.
Each project competes for the same Russian and Kazakhstan oil that is only enough for one of the pipelines -- not both -- said Alexei Kokin, an oil analyst at Metropol.
Though Russia and Turkey agreed to step up efforts to build the Samsun-Ceyhan pipeline at a meeting between Putin and his Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan last month, some analysts said Moscow prefers the Balkan route.
