14/09/2009
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 14/09/09
EULEX peacekeepers on Friday (September 11th) signed a protocol with Serbia's interior ministry, paving the way for co-operation in the fight against organised crime and trafficking.
The document has angered Kosovo Albanians, who say Kosovo's sovereignty is being violated.
But EULEX insists there is nothing political behind the deal.
"The arrangements on police co-operation with Belgrade are of a technical nature," the mission said in a press release.
"They aim at fighting organised crime and smuggling.
This will be to the benefit to all the people in Kosovo."
In order to bring criminals to justice, evidence must be shared and exchanged through the region, and mechanisms must be established to facilitate this, EULEX said.
"The Kosovo police will be heavily involved in the information exchange," it added.
The protocol has the full support of the 27 EU member states and is considered an important step forward in improving rule of law in Kosovo, the mission said.
Most Kosovo Albanians remain unconvinced, seeing it instead as a nod to Belgrade at the expense of their newly-independent state.
The leadership in Pristina has made no secret of its opposition.
On Friday, President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci issued a muted statement, noting that Pristina was not part of the deal.
The arrangements will not have any impact on the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kosovo, they insisted.
Activist groups were less circumspect.
A group of NGOs responded to Friday's signing with a promise to stage a rally on September 16th.
"Together, we will say no to the violation of Kosovo's sovereignty.
This is a no to EULEX, not to the EU," they said in a joint statement.
On Monday, US Ambassador Christopher Dell urged the leaders, institutions and people of Kosovo to focus on the state-building process, rather than becoming entangled in issues such as the police co-operation protocol.
The document is potentially very useful, he said.
"Kosovo is a sovereign state," Dell said.
"Can't we just accept that Kosovo is a state and move on?"
