20/10/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 20/10/09
The European Commission (EC) last week gave a thumbs-up to Serbia's implementation of European standards on the road to EU membership and called on the Union to implement its Interim Trade Agreement with Serbia.
Serbia signed the accord and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU in April 2008. 
Both agreements were suspended pending Serbia's full co-operation with The Hague tribunal. 
Currently, the only EU member blocking the Interim Trade Agreement is the Netherlands, which demands that fugitive Ratko Mladic be apprehended and extradited.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Serbia "has done a good and serious job in co-operating with The Hague tribunal and in meeting its obligations regarding the war crimes".
He added that Serbia "has demonstrated a will to come closer to the EU by implementing provisions of the interim agreement with the EU and by carrying out essential reforms".
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic called the EC report "good news" that would significantly shorten the EU candidate status for Serbia. 
According to Cvetkovic, the 2009 EC report is the most favourable one thus far.
Branko Ruzic of the Socialist Party of Serbia described the report as "a positive message and an encouragement for Serbia in the further process of the integration process, affirming the Serbian government's commitment on the path to the EU".
Serbia, however, still has some work to do. 
The country must take a more constructive stance on Kosovo, pass the Vojvodina Statute, combat corruption and crime, continue with judiciary reforms, enhance the rights of minorities, and help bring those that attack journalists, human rights activists and members of the gay and lesbian population to justice.
Tomislav Nikolic, leader of the Serbian Progressive Party, also noted that European officials reprimanded Serbia's excessive budget spending, adding that if the trend continues, "Serbia will be heavily indebted with no advantage of becoming an EU member."
Tanja Miscevic, head of the Serbian EU Integration Office from 2005 to 2008, also expressed restraint in assessing the report.
"The EC report should be read as a guide for further actions, that is, indicating what else must be done to ensure that we successfully finish what we started."
