14/09/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 14/09/09
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and her Slovenian counterpart Borut Pahor reached an agreement Friday (September 11th) on how to proceed in the ongoing border dispute between the two countries, opening the doors to Croatia's EU accession bid.
After almost a year of frozen talks, Slovenia and Croatia overcame political hurdles on the border dispute in the Piran Bay area, and agreed to reopen dialogue.
"The Slovenian government will propose to parliament's foreign policy and EU affairs committee that Slovenia withdraw its blocking of Croatia's EU accession negotiations," the two leaders said in a statement after the meeting.
Kosor immediately sent an official fax to Sweden, current holder of the rotating EU presidency.
"No document or unilateral move after June 25th 1991 -- when the two countries declared independence from the former Yugoslavia -- has any legal effect in the settlement of the border dispute, either at an arbitration court or during the EU accession negotiations," the letter said.
"This is a win-win situation," Kosor said, adding that she is very happy with the agreement.
"This represents a success and victory of dialogue in the best interest of the two countries and its people."
By sending the letter to the Swedish presidency, Croatia hopes to make up for lost time, and that Stockholm will organise an accession conference and start negotiating by the end of the month or in early October.
Pahor said both countries are ready to find a solution by way of a bilateral agreement or under the EU umbrella.
The breakthrough was welcomed by all EU member states, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and the United States.
Sweden announced that it is ready to facilitate the technical details of the process, raising hopes that talks can successfully wrap up by mid 2010.
"Prime ministers Kosor and Pahor have shown European leadership in breaking a difficult deadlock," Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt said, adding that the agreement "underlines the strength of the European integration process and the virtue of dialogue.
It will promote regional stability and serves as a model for the Western Balkans as a whole."
