18/01/2010
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 18/01/10
As promised, Macedonian authorities have been strictly enforcing a prohibition on smoking in public places since January 1st, drawing the ire of local businesses that are afraid for the bottom line.
"For the time being, the patrons respect the law because of the high fines…But turnover has gone down," the owner of popular Skopje cafe-bar Play told Southeast European Times.
Lower earnings could lead to fewer jobs, restaurateurs warn.
An estimated 17,000 people out of 2.1 million in Macedonia either work directly or are dependent on the restaurant/cafe business.
On Friday, many establishments plan to shut down for a 24-hour protest, said Ognen Cigovski, president of the Macedonian Chamber of Cafe Bar and Restaurant Owners.
His association wants the law amended to allow smoking and non-smoking sections, and is seeking to meet with officials to find a solution.
The government, however, is standing firm.
"Macedonia is not the first and will not be the last country to decide on complete implementation of a smoking ban in public places," said Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Pesevski.
Members of the public appear to be complying.
The government conducted 1,350 inspections of restaurants, cafe bars, pubs and clubs across the country and found only two violations, in the towns of Kumanovo and Gostivar.
The individuals involved were fined on the spot and the businesses received citations.
Fines range between 150 and 300 euros for individuals and 2,500 to 4,500 euros for businesses.
Businesses that repeatedly breach the law can be closed for up to 30 days.
Inspectors also conducted 208 inspections in public enterprises and local government offices and did not find a single violation.
However, they issued 19 citations for failure to put up "smoking prohibited" signs.
"The law is good and shouldn't be changed," Skopje resident Zoran Stefanovski told SETimes.
"Several days ago I was having lunch with my family at a restaurant, and we really enjoyed it because there was no smoke.
Smoking should not be allowed in places where people eat."
Smokers believe the law is too strict.
Olivera Pankova believes "European laws" should be adapted to the local mentality, and the government must now allow smoking-only cafes.
"If there are cafe bars for smokers, then non-smokers could decide to enter such bars or not," she said.
Opposition MPs Vlado Buckovski and Gorgji Orovcanec began collecting signatures in parliament to initiate a procedure to amend the law.
"We don't have anything against this law but we think that it is too restrictive and that Macedonia should apply the Austrian model," said Buckovski, referring to the model by which cafe bars of over 100 square meters can secure smoking sections for smokers, and owners can apply for a license if they decide their establishment should include smokers.
