20/07/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 20/07/09
Many human rights issues still fester in Macedonia. 
Without an anti-discrimination law in the country, adequate and equal representation of community members is not fully realised, Macedonian Ombudsman Ixhet Memeti said in an interview with Southeast European Times.
Southeast European Times: What is the situation with human rights and freedoms in Macedonia?
Ixhet Memeti: The number of complaints received in 2008 that somewhat differ from the number of complains in previous years show that citizens' rights are still violated in great numbers. 
A high number of complaints indicate that citizens lack confidence in the legal system for institutions. 
There is still much to be done in raising the awareness for the respect of human rights among the decision makers.
SETimes: How well do you co-operate with institutions or organs of state administration where the citizens are submitting complaints?
Memeti: Co-operation has generally improved, but ... 
co-operation is improved only formally, through submission of responses from the institutions. 
It is another issue how much their responses are grounded and relevant.
SETimes: You are the only institution that monitors discrimination, adequate and equal representation of community members according to the Ohrid Framework Agreement. 
How is this process realised, and is the state administration accepting of such a course of action?
Memeti: The principle of adequate and equal representation of community members is not fully realised, the process is slow and the public enterprises and funds are not respecting this principle. 
Discrimination is a delicate issue. 
Over the years in which we have called for the need for an anti-discrimination law in Macedonia, it is still difficult to recognise discrimination and ensure a legal framework for victims' protection, although obvious discrimination in several complaints was successfully resolved.
SETimes: Last year, the Council of Europe Committee against Torture said that prisoners in Macedonia are tortured. 
What do you think about this?
Memeti: Our institution noted several cases of torture in the penitentiary-correctional and educationally-correctional institutions, which we investigated and, based on our findings, submitted criminal charges against the perpetrators. 
Our preventative activity has significant importance -- such as regular visits to such institutions -- which we will intensify since -- according to the Law for Ratification of the Optional Protocol for the Convention against Torture -- the ombudsman has the role of the National Preventive Mechanism in Macedonia.
SETimes: What should be done to improve prison conditions?
Memeti: Concrete state activity is needed to overcome prison system weaknesses, not just in word, but action. 
Over the years, I pointed out the substandard prison conditions in my annual reports which are in direct violation of prisoner's rights; still, no positive action has been taken upon my recommendations.
SETimes:You co-operate with other ombudsmen in the region. 
Where would you place Macedonia in comparison with other countries in Southeast Europe in relation to human rights protection?
Memeti: I think that we are not much different from other regional countries that went through a transitional period as we did. 
Other countries are facing the same issues in solving public administration and protection of citizens' rights problems.
SETimes: Macedonia is the last country in the region without an anti-discrimination law. 
Do you think this will change in the future?
Memeti: [A few months ago], there was a public debate in the parliament about the anti-discrimination draft law. 
I hope that the process [of adopting the law] will speed up and we will finally have a legal framework to solve this issue. 
Although the citizens have trouble identifying discrimination and human rights violations, we all know that it exists in our society.
