19/02/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 19/02/10
Ivo Josipovic was sworn in Thursday (February 18th) as the third president of Croatia since the country declared its independence.
The ceremony was organised on St. Mark's Square in the old town section of Zagreb..
Josipovic took the presidential oath before a thousand guests and ten fellow presidents from Southeast Europe.
He was accompanied by his wife and 18-year-old daughter.
"I will humbly serve my people and our beautiful homeland," said Josipovic.
"I joined the presidential race because I had a vision of Croatia that will be a European, modern and prosperous country."
To achieve this, the new president said, justice and reform must become the foundation for a "new and better society".
"I will do as much as I can to help speeding up with the reform processes so that Croatia can become an EU member as quickly as possible," Josipovic said.
Figthing corruption while leading Croatia into the EU are priorities he will never tire of working for, said Josipovic in his inauguration speech.
A law professor and composer, Josipovic had long been on the sidelines of Croatian politics and belonged to the Social Democrat Party before his election in early January.
State law requires the president of Croatia to be independent of any political parties.
Although much of the president's office in Croatia is ceremonial, Josipovic has enough political power to play a significant role in foreign policy, the military and issues of national security.
Josipovic said he will work to build good relations with neighbouring countries, saying it was in Croatia's strategic interest to get along with other Balkan countries.
That challenge was highlighted by the absence at the inauguration of Boris Tadic of Serbia.
Tadic was the only president from Southeast Europe who refused Josipovic's invitation, saying he would not attend if the president of Kosovo -- Farmir Sejdiu -- was present.
Looking to the future, Josipovic said, "we shall build a country based on knowledge, new technologies and sustainable development.
In our country, all the citizens of Croatia will feel as citizens of Europe and of the world."
Before Josipovic, Stjepan Mesic was president for a decade.
Mesic spearheaded many reforms and remains a charismatic leader.
Josipovic is seen more as an intellectual figure, known for putting in long hours on the issues.
