20/07/2009
(Bloomberg, Mediafax, Wall-Street.ro, HotNews - 17/07/09;
World Bank - 16/07/09;
IMF - 10/06/09)
The World Bank approved a 300m-euro loan to Romania on Thursday (July 16th) to help mitigate the impact of the global turmoil.
World Bank Country Manager for Romania Benoit Blarel said the funding would underpin the implementation of measures envisioned in the government's anti-crisis programme.
Its aims are "to strengthen public expenditure management, to cushion the impact of the crisis on the poor and vulnerable, and to minimise risks of a domestic financial sector crisis by addressing current and potential vulnerabilities", he said.
The loan, extended for 14 years, with a 13.5-year grace period, is the first of a proposed three-part Development Policy Loan (DPL) programme that could total 1 billion euros, the Bank explained.
The next two tranches of 360m euros and 340m euros, respectively, are expected to be approved by the middle of next year, Wall-Street.ro reported.
"Tackling the structural reform agenda is particularly important since strengthening the resilience of the economy will better position Romania to resume and sustain high growth over the medium-term," programme task leader Swati Ghosh said.
Romania experienced robust economic growth for eight consecutive years, but as the financial crisis started spreading across the globe last fall, things took a sharp turn for the worse.
A drop in domestic demand led to a slowdown in real GDP growth -- from an average of 9% on an annualised quarter-on-quarter basis during the first three quarters of 2008 to a 13% decline in the fourth quarter, the IMF said in a report last month.
The downward trend continued in the first quarter of this year.
"Export growth has also turned sharply negative, but imports have dropped even more steeply, beginning a rapid correction in the current account deficit, which halved during January and February compared to the same period last year," the report noted.
In March, Romania approached the European Commission (EC) and the IMF with a request for multilateral financial support to help the country ward off an economic crisis.
An IMF-led 24-month rescue loan package totalling 20 billion euros was eventually approved.
It was agreed that the Fund would provide close to 13 billion euros and the EU -- another 5 billion euros.
The remainder would be covered by loans from the World Bank and other international institutions.
The DPL programme will support reforms aimed at improving public financial management, as well as strengthening social protection and the financial sector, the Bank said in a statement Thursday.
The government is expected to take initial steps on public sector pay reforms, as well as measures to introduce more stability, predictability and transparency in public spending.
The programme will also support actions to improve fiscal management in the education and health sectors, as well as reforms aimed at strengthening the resilience, functioning and stability of the financial sector.
