20/02/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 20/02/06
In what the EU has signaled is a crucial milestone along the path towards integration, Macedonia will elect its fifth parliament since gaining independence in 1991, this year. 
Brussels will be watching carefully to see if the poll is free, fair and largely free of the irregularities that have marred past votes.
Conducting fair and democratic elections is one of the preconditions for the start of negotiations for EU membership. 
In December 2005, Macedonia became an official candidate for entry into the EU, but the actual launch of talks hinges on meeting the required criteria. 
The European Commission (EC) has adopted a zero tolerance policy towards election incidents and irregularities, in large part because of the mixed assessment OSCE monitors gave to the last round of voting.
"During all rounds, group voting and proxy voting remained quite widespread, in particular in western and northwestern areas of the country, where women were effectively disenfranchised. 
This trend disproportionately affected women in minority communities," the final OSCE/ODIHR report on the March and April 2005 vote concluded. 
In its recommendation section, it emphasises that "group voting, proxy voting and other practices that may inhibit the ability of women to exercise their right to vote should be strongly discouraged".
Cultural analysts have argued that the issue mainly stems from patriarchal family traditions in predominantly Muslim parts of the country. 
The authorities in Skopje believe they can improve the situation by boosting the participation of women on election boards, and there have been proposals to make this legally binding.
Another serious problem relates to the approximately 150,000 registered voters who live abroad. 
They are eligible to vote, but only if they come back to Macedonia to do so. 
In previous elections, the losing parties and candidates have routinely claimed the expatriate voting process is riddled with fraud. 
It can be hard to sort out the truth of these allegations. 
Nevertheless, the ruling and opposition parties have agreed to work together to clean up the voter's lists, with expert assistance. 
Voters residing abroad will be listed separately. 
The main section of the voter's lists will also be updated to eliminate cases of duplicate registration and similar problems.
The OSCE/ODIHR report also touched on this issue in its recommendations. 
"Consideration should be given to amend the legal framework for voter registration in regard to citizens residing abroad. 
While all available options to enfranchise citizens should be considered, it is equally important to reduce significantly the possibilities for abuse," it said.
OSCE monitors were also concerned about outbreaks of fighting among rival party activists in some localities, cases of stolen or damaged ballot boxes, and intimidation of election officials. 
Although such incidents did not greatly affect the election results, since voting was repeated in such cases, they did cast a shadow over the process and create an impression of abuse and irregularity.
One way of preventing such occurrences is by ensuring that perpetrators are held accountable and that courts respond swiftly. 
In the last elections, violations decreased between the first round in March and the second round the following month. 
That may have been the result of action taken by the authorities to prosecute offenders -- more than ten people were tried and sentenced for serious breaches of the rules.
In line with the recommendations of ODIHR, a few major reforms have been or will be made in terms of election bodies becoming independent. 
The State Election Commission has become a fully independent body with its own budget and professional staff. 
Changes in selection of judges participating in election administration have also been made in order to reduce political influence.
The ruling coalition and opposition parties are sharply at odds over one proposed reform, however. 
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski's government would like civil servants, rather than party representatives, to serve on election boards. 
The selection would be made through a draw. 
Parties would still have a role, but only as election monitors. 
The opposition VMRO-DPMNE has attacked this proposal, however, arguing that it would introduce a pro-government bias into the election boards. 
Buckovski says the model is similar to ones used in other European countries, such as Sweden.
In any case, Macedonia's political leaders will need to forge a consensus on a reform package that ensures the upcoming vote meets international standards. 
As has happened several times since it gained independence, Macedonia is at a crossroads. 
Should the elections go wrong, the EU will not start the membership negotiations. 
A country in great need of progress and foreign investments cannot afford that.
