06/09/2004
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 06/09/04
One-digit inflation rates have become a general feature of European transition economies.
This is good in itself, and also an advantage for the transition countries which have joined, or wish to join the EU.
An important question, however, is whether low inflation rates will be maintained over the longer run, in view of EU requirements.
According to one line of reasoning, a trade-off exists between growth and inflation in transition economies because of the so called Balassa-Samuelson effect.
Within this context, it is worth examining a relatively new monetary policy regime known as "inflation targeting" (IT).
The countries that have pioneered this system include New Zealand, Canada, Chile, Israel, the United Kingdom, Australia and Sweden.
During the late 1990s, it was adopted officially by the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary.
Under IT, the central bank manages monetary policy instruments with the direct goal of containing inflation over the medium term.
Inflation becomes the overriding goal of monetary policy.
All the other indicators (output gap, money stock growth, the exchange rate) become auxiliary variables;
the central bank takes them into account only if this information helps improve its inflation forecast.
These forecasts are contingent upon the central bank's view of the transmission mechanism, the current state of the economy and a planned path for the instrument.
Complex econometric modeling and statistical inference-building based on high-quality data and economic information is needed in order to produce reliable forecasts.
A subjective assessment of the inflation path may be included also.
From the implementation point of view, a basic prerequisite for inflation targeting is the central bank’s full autonomy.
The relevant price index must be defined;
in general, it is a traditional consumer price index.
Countries adopting IT must then choose the target and range, and the bank must decide which instruments it wants to utilise.
In recent years, central banks all over the world have chosen to have a say regarding short-term interest rates, mainly through reverse-repo operations carried out in the money market.
Many influential economists argue that inflation targeting rules out an inflation bias because the central bank has a single goal under this regime:
price stability.
Thus, there can be no conflicts of interest between multiple objectives, such as the standard conflict between inflation and economic activity.
The policymaker’s accountability should be quite high under IT since performance can be directly measured, for instance by the deviation between actual inflation and the target.
However, the benefits theoretically arising from IT may not be so easy to achieve, particularly within the context of less-developed transition economies.
The European Central Bank (ECB) has decided not to adopt monetary targeting, since in a new economic environment -- one characterised by a wide heterogeneity among member countries, with new monetary institutions and a money market in ongoing development -- it is impossible to infer, from scarce data, a reliable money demand function.
Like the United States, the European Monetary Union aims to address a variety of threats to price stability, including exceptional events such as deflation, war, terrorist attacks, import price shocks or stock market crises.
In developed countries, adoption of IT implies that the central bank has the technical ability to make a reliable conditional forecast of inflation, and can adapt its instruments in order to bring the forecast close to the target.
All the benefits which derive from IT in terms of accountability and credibility stem from these conditions.
However, obtaining a reliable conditional forecast is a very difficult challenge, one which the ECB itself has not undertaken.
What if the forecast is wrong?
The relationship between the instruments is generally assumed to be known;
but is this relationship carved in stone for a developing economy with significant structural fragility?
The overall performance of the IT group of countries is not very conclusive.
A series of studies indicate that inflation targeting has, on the whole, proved to be a successful policy.
It appears that IT reinforces accountability, credibility and resilience to external shocks, and helps high-inflation countries reduce inflation to normal levels.
At the same time, these studies demonstrate that inflation in IT countries is not lower than in non-IT countries.
In transition economies the experience is mixed.
Central banks in these countries have often missed inflation targets by a large margin.
In the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, progress with disinflation has been good, but the persistence of a relatively high level of uncertainty makes it difficult to predict inflation over the medium term, as required by the IT approach.
This is not a minor shortcoming.
It provides a lesson for other transition economies which are thinking about adopting IT.
For IT to prove beneficial, the proper conditions must be fulfilled, or the central bank risks losing credibility.
There is a significant possibility of making the wrong forecasts and missing inflation targets.
Thus, it is not advisable to adopt a rigid framework for monetary policy management if the criteria for smooth functioning of the system are not being met.
Furthermore, as recent data shows, inflation in almost all the Central and Eastern European countries has been following a downward trend, irrespective of the choice of monetary arrangements and regimes the central banks of these countries have employed.
If sensible domestic fiscal and monetary policies are being pursued, there are no reasons to think disinflation should not continue in the absence of a genuine IT regime.
