20/08/2009
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Split -- 20/08/09
Southern Croatia hosted the annual knight competition in Sinj on August 9th, called Alka, to celebrate the 1715 military victory over Ottoman forces nearly 300 years ago.
The competition, now in its 294th year, featured participants on horseback, decked out in full knight regalia, who tried to snag a three-ring set (alkas) with their lance.
Alka attracted nearly 10,000 visitors, and the eye of the foreign media.
''We are proud of keeping the tradition that long and there is no doubt people of Sinj will continue to take care of the Alka in the future.
… We would like to bring tourists in throughout the year to visit Sinj, learn about the Alka, enjoy it, see the area, enjoy our cuisine,'' said Alka Duke Ivan Cikara.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic and Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor were on hand for the event, as was the visiting Swiss Guard -- recruited by organisers to make the event more international in scope.
''We want to connect with similar associations abroad.
The historical Swiss Guard unit 'Societe des Vieux-Grenadiers' were our guests in Sinj this year and we were very glad about it," said Stipe Jukic , president of the Alka Knights' Society.
This year's winner, Ante Zorica, hit the Alka's centre in all three races -- a rare achievement that left spectators in awe.
''I'm so happy with the result.
This is a dream come true.
My family members used to win in the past at this game, but this is me doing it, and I have a special feeling,'' said Zorica, who continued the tradition of his Uncle Ivan's victory 20 years ago.
''Ante did it in a magnificent way.
It was amazing.
Three times hitting the middle in three races does not happen that often.
In the nearly three-centuries-long tradition of Alka, it happened just a few times,'' said Ivan Zorica.
A large number of foreign visitors are expected to turn out for Alka's 300th anniversary in 2015.
Authorities plan to organise a film festival in co-operation with Eugene Chaplin -- son of the legendary actor and director Charlie Chaplin -- who was introduced to Alka this year.
