20/08/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/08/09 Photos by Nikola Barbutov
In 1965, during construction of the Djerdap Hydroelectric Plant, workers unearthed remnants of an ancient settlement, Lepenski Vir.
"The people of Lepenski Vir were hunters and gatherers.
The first farmers appeared a little after those oldest inhabitants of this region," says Vasoje Vasic, museum curator.
The site, which sits close to the Iron Gates Gorge, consists of one large settlement and ten satellite villages.
In 1967, archaeologist Dragoslav Srejovic founded the Lepenski Vir Museum.
It is closed this summer due to renovations funded by the National Investment Plan, and is set to reopen by the end of the year.
"The museum will welcome visitors with a whole new look, new contents and modern video and audio presentations.
Apart from the museum, which will present the authentic environment, hearths and shrines of prehistoric communities, a gallery will also open, where visitors will be able to see many more exhibits than before," Vasic told SETimes.
He also says the area will be transformed into an ethno park, which will allow tourists to view artefacts in an authentic setting.
There are plans to build a camp on the bank of the Danube, as well as a science station.
In addition to Lepenski Vir, eastern Serbia has plenty of natural resources that attract tourists.
Majdanpek, about 30km from Lepenski Vir, and 190km from Belgrade, is known for its ore, especially gold.
The Majdanpek Tourism Organisation offers the experience of gold washing -- the oldest craft in the region -- on one of the nearby banks of the Rajkova Reka, Paskova Reka or Mali Pek rivers.
Just 3km from Majdanpek is the Rajkova cave.
It was named after Duke Rajko, who, according to legend, robbed Turks by day and hid stolen treasures in the cave by night.
The cave was first explored by Serbian geographer Jovan Cvijic in 1894.
Today it is fully accessible to tourists and speleologists.
Limestone ornaments and glittering crystals created by nature over millennia decorate the cave walls.
More than 2,300m of canals snake through the cave -- about 600m of which are available to tourists.
