19/10/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 19/07/09
Yugoslavia is no more, but some occasions still revive a sense of unity among its former citizens. 
On Friday (October 16th), people from Skopje to Zagreb put their differences aside to commemorate the life of pop legend Tose Proeski, who died in a car crash two years ago.
Proeski achieved much during his brief life. 
Born in the small mountainous town of Krusevo, central Macedonia, he gained fame not only as a singer and pop icon, but also as a humanist and role model for young people.
He sought to unite the Balkans with music, building a cultural bridge not only among the former Yugoslav republics but also with other nations in the region, such as Bulgaria. 
He won every possible music award in the Balkans and was preparing to conquer the European media market.
Although his English-language album is still unreleased, he retains his place in the hearts of millions, as a recent 24-hour TV special demonstrated.
The programme was broadcast by the Serbian satellite channel TV Plus Svet, watched around the Balkans and popular among younger generations. 
SMS messages broadcast during the programme came from Macedonia, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Slovenia, Croatia, Bulgaria, as well as from expatriates in Western Europe and Australia.
Though sorrowful, the messages also highlighted the late singer's ideals: peace, solidarity and unity.
"The whole Balkans loves you," viewers wrote. 
"Tose has awakened the best in us, united our nations again."
Meanwhile, the International Tose Proeski Fan Club organised memorial gatherings across the region. 
Mourners assembled in Skopje's main square and at the city's St. 
Kliment Ohridski Church.
Outside Macedonia, gatherings were held at the Ss Cyril and Methodius Greek-Roman Catholic Church in Zagreb, St. 
Annunciation Orthodox Church in Dubrovnik, and at churches in Belgrade, Novi Sad, Banja Luka, and even Frankfurt, Germany. 
Also marking the occasion, 15 marathon runners set off from Nova Gradiska to Krusevo on Friday.
"We are happy that Tose managed to unite quality people even after his death. 
These are friendships for life," Sladjana Popovic, the fan club co-ordinator, was quoted as saying. 
The club organises charity campaigns and donates musical instruments in Tose Proeski's honour.
Proeski died near Nova Gradiska, Croatia. 
He was a passenger in a car that crashed into the back of a truck. 
He was given a state funeral in Macedonia, attended by the country's top political leaders. 
The singer was only 26.
