19/10/2009
(Wall Street Journal, AP, Reuters, DPA, ANA-MPA - 19/10/09;
B92 - 17/10/09;
Reuters, DPA, Xinhua - 16/10/09)
Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou won his first vote of confidence in the early hours Monday (October 19th) following a three-day parliamentary debate on his government's policy programme.
The 160 lawmakers representing Papandreou's socialist PASOK party in the 300-seat legislature supported the cabinet's four-year reform plans.
The remaining 140 deputies from the four opposition parties -- New Democracy (ND), the Greek Communist Party, the Left Coalition and the right-wing populist Popular Orthodox Rally (LAOS) -- voted against the government.
After more than five years in opposition, PASOK won a decisive victory in the October 4th snap general elections, promising changes to revive ailing economy.
"The situation of the economy is explosive," Papandreou said in his first address to parliament as prime minister, as he presented his government's programme at the start of the debate Friday.
"The situation of the state, public administration and our democratic institutions [is] disheartening.
The budget has derailed as never before."
Greece is facing its first recession since 1993, as its economy is expected to shrink by between 1% and 2% this year, according to Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou.
Its swelling budget deficit is likely to exceed 10% of GDP, more than three times the 3% of GDP ceiling set for the 16 EU countries in the Eurozone.
Unemployment has also risen, as some key sectors, such as tourism, have been hit by the global turmoil.
In his speech, Papandreou accused the previous ND government of having nearly doubled the country's debt from 160 billion euros to almost 300 billion euros in the past five years, as well as of having "created 700 new state agencies and 470 commissions, most of them useless".
PASOK has promised a spending package to stimulate the slowing economy, as well as to curb the country's widening budget deficit and contain public debt.
"We are in an emergency situation, everyone must understand that," Reuters quoted Papandreou as saying.
"There will need to be spending cuts at every ministry."
He said the government plans to increase the public investments programme to 4% of GDP in the 2010 budget and to keep increasing the funding for such activities, which would eventually reach 5% of GDP by the end of the government's four-year term.
Papandreou also vowed to keep his campaign promise of above-inflation salary and pension increases and that the tariffs charged by public utilities will not rise next year.
"We guarantee the continuous increase of funding for education to a target of 5% of GDP," the prime minister said, promising also that funding for the health care system will grow by 1% of GDP within the government's term.
He also pledged a crackdown on tax evasion and to step up the fight against corruption.
Papaconstantinou said the government might need to consider borrowing money by the end of the year to secure the needed funding for public sector wages and pensions, the AP reported.
"It will be difficult, no doubt about that, but I am optimistic," Papandreou said at the end of the debate late Sunday.
"Over the next four years, we will give our best.
This is the mandate we were given by the people and this is the confidence that I am asking of you."
