18/02/2010
By Blerta Foniqi Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 18/02/10
Across Kosovo on Wednesday (February 17th), the public celebrated their second year of independence from Serbia with parades and speeches.
The capital, Pristina, was filled with crowds waving the blue and yellow national flag.
There were also sporting events and an evening concert in Mother Teresa Square downtown.
"Kosovo is our state and we should work for the stability and the prosperity of this state," said Maxhun Kelmendi, a Pristina resident who turned out for the festivities.
Kelmendi told Southeast European Times that being a citizen of Kosovo means working to make the country better.
"Kosovo has made much progress," said Kelmendi.
"But of course we can't stop."
Kelmendi's wife, Magbule, is optimistic.
Holding flags of both Kosovo and Albania, she said "I am very happy today ...
I am sure that on our next birthdays, we will have made more progress."
"I am a citizen of Kosovo, but my nation is Albanian," said Magbule, explaining that the majority of Kosovo's citizens are, like her, Albanian.
Yet, 24 months after declaring its independence from Serbia, Kosovo's national identity remains a delicate subject.
"I think that we should have our [unique] identity," said Jashar Morina, a teacher living in Pristina.
"If we participate in the future at the Olympics or [international] football games, we should take our blue flag."
As for Kosovo's economy two years after independence, many are disappointed.
"For me the situation is the same as before the war," said pensioner Rushit Kelemendi.
"I don't have money and life is so difficult.
But I hope that maybe one day it will be better."
Serbs in Kosovo see things differently.
Dragana Todorovic wants to see Kosovo's return to Serbian control.
"We lived very well before the war and of course the Albanians had it better than now," she said.
But Mira Lepic, also a Serb, said it's time to accept the current situation and bring about full integration.
"We are citizens of Kosovo and we should work for our prosperity," she said.
In a speech marking the anniversary, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said every citizen and family in Kosovo should be celebrating with great pride, noting "values and respect for the past, commitment for today's work, and [a] vision for the future".
Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi said Kosovo is making great steps in strengthening the judicial system and the equality of all citizens, while working towards an improved economy and better international relations.
Countries around the world congratulated Kosovo on its anniversary, including the United States.
"This is an occasion to celebrate Kosovo's development as an open, unitary, and pluralistic republic and its commitment to deliver on the promise of democracy for all of its people," said Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton.
