16/11/2009
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/11/09
Voters cast their ballots across Kosovo on Sunday (November 15th) in the country's first elections since declaring independence.
According to unofficial results, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) won 20 out of 36 municipalities.
The Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) mayoral candidate Isa Mustafa won in Pristina.
In Gjakova's mayoral race, Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) candidate Pal Lekaj came out on top.
However, most municipalities will head to a second round of voting on December 13th.
According to the Central Elections Commission (CEC), 45% of voters cast their ballot.
A low percentage of the Serb population took to the polls, as Belgrade urged a boycott of the elections.
The vote went smoothly, CEC head Nesrin Lushta told a press conference Sunday night.
Local media reported that six people were arrested in Mitrovica for obstructing the elections process -- their political affiliation is unclear right now.
A delegation led by European Parliament member Doris Pack monitored the elections.
Pack and US Ambassador to Kosovo Christopher Dell visited voting centres in Gracanica, a suburb of Pristina, with a large Serb population.
"I am happy that the Serb citizens did not respond to Belgrade's request to boycott this process, but they have shown they are ready to become part of the democratic institutions of Kosovo," Dell told local news agency Telegrafi.
European Network of Election Monitoring Organisation (ENEMO) head Darko Aleksov and Democracy in Action, a coalition of NGOs, also had a close eye on the elections.
Democracy in Action said some problems popped up in various municipalities, but nothing severe enough to undermine the vote.
ENEMO is expected to make its first public assessment of the elections late Monday.
After voting in Pristina, Thaci told media that Sunday's elections marked a historic day in the country.
"We are testifying today that our country has deserved the independence, that our citizens have deserved the independence, the democratic order and the European perspective," said Thaci.
