19/08/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 19/08/09
Croatia came down with a serious case of U2 fever earlier this month, when the Irish rock quartet invaded the city for two sold-out concerts.
Over 120,000 fans squeezed into Maksimir Stadium on August 9th and 10th to see one of the biggest rock 'n' roll groups in modern history.
The concerts lasted for more than two hours, with U2 playing hits from over the past few decades, such as "Sunday Bloody Sunday", "The Unforgettable Fire", "Pride (in the Name of Love)", "Where the Streets Have No Name" and "With or Without You".
U2 frontman Bono quoted a line from Croatian poet Ivan Gundulic's Dubravka, singing "Oh, beautiful, oh dear, oh sweet freedom", at the end of "Miss Sarajevo".
"Thank you for hosting us in this beautiful country.
Thanks also to those of you who came from other parts of the region.
This is a beautiful country, and you are a beautiful people," said Bono.
According to sources, 40,000 U2 fans travelled from abroad for the concert, filling hotels and packing cafes.
According to estimates, during the 48 hours of U2 pandemonium, more than 8m euros were pumped into the hotel, restaurant, transportation and ticket industries.
The cheapest tickets in the house cost about 35 euros, but if fans wanted to get more up close and personal with the band, tickets around the so-called "red zone" -- the rotating stage designed for their 360 Tour -- were almost ten times more expensive at about 300 euros.
"We have worked very hard to ensure that U2 fans can purchase a great priced ticket with a guaranteed great view," said band manager Paul McGuinness on the 360 Tour website.
The concert series marked the band's first performance in Croatia, and it's second in the Balkans.
They played Sarajevo in 1997.
Bono stopped the U2 motorcade to sign autographs and show some love to his adoring fans.
One of them, 19-year-old Matea Ivanovic from Bjelovar, got to hug the singer.
"It has been an amazing experience," Ivanovic said.
