15/01/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 15/01/10
The Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) reached a long-awaited verdict last month in the cases of Jakob Finci and Dervo Sejdic against Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Finci is a prominent BiH politician, a popular personality and leader of the country's Jewish community.
He is the director of La Benevolencija, a Jewish charity and the head of the state Civil Service Agency.
Sejdic is an activist of the Roma Council in BiH.
The binding verdict declares the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina to be discriminatory against citizens who do not belong to one of the three constituent peoples of the country:
Croats, Serbs or Bosniaks.
The verdict also calls for harmonisation of the constitution with the basic principles of the European Convention on Human Rights.
Finci and Sejdic argued that the constitution -- as well as the 2001 Election Law -- bars certain citizens from running for high elected office solely because of ethnic origin.
The offices of president and the House of Peoples of the Parliamentary Assembly were mentioned as legally off-limits to certain ethnicities.
The complaint was filed in 2006.
The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is embodied in the 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement signed by BiH, Serbia and Croatia, was considered the best compromise reachable at the time.
It declares the essential peoples of BiH to be Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs, thereby precluding "others" from taking senior posts in the government.
The term "others" covers a large number of ethnic minorities, including the Roma, believed to number up to 70,000, the country's largest minority.
The Jewish population is said to be just over 1,000.
BiH has about 15 other ethnic minorities:
Albanians, Montenegrins, Czechs, Italians, Hungarians, Macedonians, Germans, Poles, Romanians, Russians, Rusyns, Slovaks, Slovenes, Turks and Ukrainians.
The "others" category also lists people who prefer not to identify with any specific group and call themselves "Bosnians".
Reacting to the verdict, Finci noted that political leaders in BiH agree that the constitution needs reworking to become in line with the European Convention on Human Rights.
The ECHR verdict, he said, serves as "instruction in terms of direction they need to pursue".
Finci also noted that no country has yet to reject an ECHR decision because it would lump them in with nations where the rule of law does not hold or is ignored.
Fadila Memisevic, chair of the Society for Threatened Peoples for BiH, described the ruling as the "first successful step towards removal of the apartheid system established in the Dayton [Accord]".
