17/07/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 17/07/09
The Kosovo government on Wednesday (July 15th) approved a decision to move forward with construction of the Kosova C, or Kosova e Re, coal-based power station -- the biggest investment in Kosovo in decades.
The announcement came a day after German energy company RWE AG withdrew its 3 billion-euro bid to build the plant. 
The company said it was dropping out of the tender due to "issues of complexity and the level of maturity of the project".
RWE AG was one of four international companies expected to bid on building the plant, rehabilitate an old plant and open a new lignite mine.
The three remaining shortlisted companies are Czech and US consortium CEZ/AES, a consortium of Italy's Enel and the Greek-American Sencap.
The project is expected to add 2,000MW to the country's power capacities and hopes to attract 3.5 billion euros in foreign investments.
"The power plant will secure enough and stable energy for the local consumers and the international export. 
Kosova e Re will be built using the newest technology .... 
it will meet the European standards, environmental and social, and it will establish a new technological standard in our region," Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said.
The new power station will start with an output of 1,000MW in the first phase, and will be built near the existing Kosova B power station.
The Kosova B power plant will be renovated and prepared for production. 
The other existing power plant, Kosova A, will be closed by the end of 2015, its energy production replaced by output from the Kosova e Re plant.
The government will also continue with the reconstruction and privatisation of the Kosovo Power Company, KEK, as well as with other investments to produce alternative energy.
According to a study of Kosovo's mines and minerals done by Italian company Osservatorio Balcani, the country has an estimated 11,500 to 14,000 million tonnes of lignite coal.
A donor's conference will be scheduled for the fall -- dedicated to raising money to support the country's energy sector -- with the support of USAID, the World Bank and the European Commission.
"The reformation of the energy sector will promote the rapid economic growth and will accelarate the membership of Kosovo into the EU," Thaci told reporters in Pristina after the government announced its new plans.
The idea has been met by some with resistance. 
Forumi 2015, an NGO, has raised a number of environmental issues. 
"Bearing in mind the toll that existing power plants have taken on the environment, the planned installation of new capacity must go hand-in-hand with efforts to improve the current environmental situation," it said in a statement.
"The exploitation of lignite is a capital-intensive undertaking, and -- beyond its environmental impact -- exacts a heavy price in terms of land use, demographic movements, settlement relocation, water consumption, and damage to agricultural sector."
However, the NGO acknowledges Kosovo "cannot build a bright future without developing its energy sector. 
As Kosovo is rich in lignite, it is only natural that the country relies on this resource for its future development."
