10/09/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 10/09/09
Police arrested Karray Kamel bin Ali, aka Abu Hamza, arguably the most notorious Islamic terror suspect in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), early last month.
The alleged jihadist was found after failing to return to prison on July 27th from a short leave to visit his family.
He was on the run for about two weeks.
Hamza, 43, is serving nearly four years for armed robbery, domestic violence and threatening a prosecutor.
"Karray Kamel bin Ali's escape is an outrage that again shows the serious systemic flaws in the penal systems in BiH," said Raffi Gregorian, deputy high representative in BiH.
"Problems with the penal system are manifold and well known, and Kamel bin Ali's escape is just the latest in a long litany of problems that the authorities, and FBiH Minister of Justice Felix Vidovic, have failed to address over a period of several years."
UN Police Commissioner Stefan Feller also thinks there are holes in BiH's penal system.
"It is time to engage in a constructive dialogue on the review of shortcomings of the penitentiary system in BiH.
[The] EU Police Mission will continue to assist the process."
It is standard for Bosnian prisoners on good behaviour to be granted a short leave annually, as long as they have served at least two-thirds of their sentence.
However, many wonder how Abu Hamza, deemed a national security threat, was allowed to roam free.
Some speculate that Almir Dzuvo, director of the BiH Intelligence-Security Agency (OSA) and Tarik Sadovic, the recently dismissed minister of security, were tipped off about Abu Hamza's escape plans.
According to rumours circulated by local media, inmate Ramiz Agusevic leaked the plans to the two high-ranking officials, who were also allegedly aware of preparations for major terrorist attacks in the country by former members of the al-Mujahideen unit.
According to media reports, Agusevic submitted a written statement detailing the plans.
While in prison, Hamza allegedly had access to a cell phone and the internet, and was allowed to socialise with Abduladhim Maktouf, who was serving time for abducting at least two civilians of Croatian origin.
Maktouf's sentence was up in June.
After his release, he left the country.
Hamza is no stranger to prison, as he was sentenced in absentia to 12 years behind bars in his native country of Tunisia, and served a seven-year sentence in 2000 after being apprehended for the murder of a fellow al-Mujahideen combatant.
Hamza is considered no small fish in terrorist circles, and has been dubbed extremely dangerous by multiple intelligence services, including the CIA in the United States.
He was earlier suspected of plotting attacks in Italy.
