17/12/2009
By Esra Erduran for Southeast European Times in Ankara – 17/12/09
Tensions arising from a decision by Turkey's top court to shut down the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP) reached a peak on Tuesday (December 15th) when the owner of a store in the southeastern city of Mus shot three demonstrators to death and injured four others.
According to police, more than 500 people had gathered in the main street of the city to protest the DTP closure, throwing stones at police and local businesses.
Shop owner Turan Bilen reportedly fired his rifle when the crowd broke the windows of his store and set his car on fire.
Police and protestors have clashed during previous protests in cities around the country, particularly in eastern regions where the population is overwhelmingly Kurdish.
Tuesday's incident fuels worry about the possibility of violence as outraged Kurds square off against Turkish nationalists.
"There are some problems experienced in some places but these problems are not general," Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said after the Mus shootings.
"These problems can be corrected with national unity and fellowship as a part of democratic initiative process.
We will overcome these problems with people, not with leaders."
State Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arınc called for public calm.
"There might be some circles who want Turkey in such a chaos.
Security forces should detect these and prevent such provocations while people should be cautious and patient about various different provocations," he said.
Sırrı Sakik, a member of the now-defunct DTP, who represents Mus in parliament, said the court decision has fed tensions.
"We were convicted for supporting the peace.
Turkey would not be at this point if the democratic ways were not blocked.
Government is to blame for this process," he said.
Fellow MP Nuri Yaman agreed.
"We have said this problem should be solved by dialogue but they have ignored our existence.
The government should have been more cautious," he said.
Meanwhile, Mus deputies from the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) described the protests as provocations and called on people to exercise common sense.
The AKP has been taking blame from all sides -- Kurds angry over the closure, nationalists angry over the Kurds, and the secularist opposition.
Critics say the court decision was political and could spell the end of the government's much-heralded democratic initiative process.
Before the ban, the AKP had come under fire for not providing enough details about the process.
As the political quarrel rages on, police in the southeastern city of Agri reported on Wednesday that various searches turned up equipment and materials used for producing Molotov cocktails.
Eight people were taken into custody.
