10/09/2009
(Zaman, Turk.net, Washington Times, Focus News Agency - 10/09/09;
AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, FT, BBC, Times Online, New York Times, Euronews, Hurriyet, Sabah, Turk.net - 09/09/09)
More than 30 people have died in northwestern Turkey after two days of torrential rains triggered flash floods that turned roads into rivers and left hundreds of houses, offices and vehicles submerged.
Floods in the centre of Istanbul and the city's districts of Catalca, Silivri and Ikitelli claimed 26 lives, the Anadolu news agency quoted Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan as saying Wednesday (September 9th).
Another "five citizens died in the northwestern province of Tekirdag.
Currently, nine people are reported missing", he told reporters in Istanbul.
The city has not seen this much rain in about 80 years.
Turkish daily Hurriyet quoted Erdogan as saying that the government would provide nearly 1.4m euros in emergency aid to deal with damage caused by the floods.
Hundreds of rescue workers and firefighters, six military helicopters and 30 inflatable dinghies took part in a major operation to save lives in and around Istanbul on Wednesday.
In the industrial Ikitelli district, about 20km from the Bosporus Strait that divides the European and Asian parts of Turkey, some people had to be picked off rooftops.
Others had sought refuge atop stranded cars.
At least seven of the victims in Istanbul were said to be truck drivers, asleep inside their vehicles in a parking lot, when floodwaters swept past.
The dead also included seven women who drowned inside a shuttle service van that had just brought them to work at a textile factory in the Halkali district.
"There was no escape other than the back door, and it was stuck by the pressure of the flooding water," Istanbul Governor Muammer Guler told reporters.
According to him, in addition to those killed or missing in Istanbul, 20 people were injured as a result of the floods.
Bulgarian Foreign Ministry spokesman Dragovest Goranov said on Thursday that a Bulgarian hitchhiker had died in the floods and that Sofia remains unaware of the fate of a truck driver who went missing.
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF-Turkey) said in a statement Wednesday that the floods were the result of global warming, but criticised authorities for failing to take preventive measures.
"Despite the fact that we [Turkey] are among the countries most affected by climate change, the relevant authorities are not taking the necessary precautions precipitated by this change onto their agendas," Turkish daily Zaman quoted the NGO as saying in a statement.
Other experts and government officials cited infrastructure problems as the reason for the heavy damage and casualties.
"In the past, people illegally constructed buildings in unsuitable areas.
But recently the municipality also began to construct under and over the ground," Mucella Yapici, an architect from the Chamber of Architects' Istanbul branch, told Hurriyet.
She also called on Istanbul Mayor Kadir Topbas to take immediate steps to ensure that all policies and construction plans that do not protect the land are cancelled.
Some insurers estimate the cost of the damage in Istanbul at between 48m euros and 55m euros -- others believe it could exceed 100m euros.
"There is huge damage to infrastructure," Procurement Minister Mustafa Demir said.
"We need to be more careful when designing infrastructure and cities."
Meanwhile, meteorologists predict more powerful rains for northwestern Turkey this week, which could raise the death toll.
