16/07/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski and Svetla Dimitrov for Southeast European Times -- 16/07/09
Citizens of Serbia, Macedonia and Montenegro are a step closer to being able to travel to EU-member countries without a visa.
The EC on Wednesday (July 15th) gave a thumbs-up for visa free travel in the three countries, and said that restrictions are expected to be lifted by the start of next year.
"Our proposal brings truly good news to the people of the Western Balkans, in particular to the citizens of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, of Montenegro and Serbia.
I know how much visa free travel means to them," EU Justice Commissioner Jacques Barrot said after the announcement in Brussels.
According to EC officials, Serbia and Montenegro have made "important progress" in the visa liberalisation process, but have to fulfill "all remaining open benchmarks".
Officials in Belgrade called Wednesday's decision "great news", but noted that work remains.
"This is a decisive step in our struggle for the white Schengen, [but] we mustn't rest on our laurels, as this proposal now goes in two directions," Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic stressed.
"It's up to us to continue the reforms, to finish what we began so superbly and to ensure for our citizens that visas are abolished 17 years after their introduction," said Djelic.
Macedonia, on the other hand, has met all the requirements for visa free travel.
"We will continue with our dedicated work for receiving a positive progress report by the European Commission [this fall] and getting a date for the start of accession negotiations, as well as for accomplishing better life for every citizen," Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said.
"It [visa liberalisation] will mean a further Europeanisation of the civil societies in the Western Balkans," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said, calling the day "important" for the Balkan region.
The only hurdle left on the road towards visa liberalisation is the approval of EU-member states in the Schengen zone -- a decision that is expected later this year.
The EU launched a visa liberalisation programme last year with all Western Balkan countries not on the Schengen list.
Kosovo was excluded because it is not yet recognised by all 27 member states.
The conditions for this include introducing biometric passports, strengthening border controls, reinforcing institutional framework for a more efficient fight against organised crime and corruption, as well as improving external relations and fundamental rights.
