17/12/2009
By Harry Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 17/12/09
The Greek government beefed up security around the country this month amid fears that massive riots would break out, on the first anniversary of a police shooting that left one teenager dead.
"Some people were preparing a new kristallnacht," said Citizen's Protection Minister Michalis Chryssohoidis earlier this month, conjuring up images of the infamous 1938 anti-Jewish Nazi pogrom.
Despite the elevated security, three days of clashes with riot police resulted in smashed storefronts, nearly 140 arrests, about 1,000 people temporarily detained for ID checks, 30 injured police officers, and a dozen injured demonstrators.
Although the riots were violent, they were not as intense as last year, when the fatal shooting of 15-year-old Alexis Grigoropoulos sparked an unprecedented uprising that resulted in property damage exceeding 1 billion euros.
This time, the presence of up to 12,000 riot police in downtown Athens was a major factor. 
Police had marching orders from the new PASOK government to employ a "pro-active stance" to suppress rioting. 
This directive, despite government and police denials, resulted in profiling to intercept troublemakers.
The appeals for non-violent protests by virtually all political parties and by Grigoropoulos' mother -- Jina Tsalikian -- in memory of her son, also trickled down to the streets. 
Party-affiliated youth and union groups appeared to be more vigilant in keeping demonstrators calm and unaffected by "anti-state" and self-styled anarchist groups that caused much of the devastation last year.
The avoidance of a repeat December uprising proved a success for the recently elected government of George Papandreou, at a time when EU and finance markets are deeply concerned about Greece's double-digit budget deficit and ballooning public debt as a bona fide threat to euro-zone stability.
The ordered crackdown by tough-talking Chryssohoidis brought kudos from parties to the right of the ruling PASOK and howls from the left.
One leftist party leader went as far as to call the police action paidomazoma (child snatching).
"We know very well what frightens the two-party governments [in Greece], which is none other than last year's December uprising and the mass neo-popular movement, one which is growing, thus blocking the neo-liberal advance," said Alexis Tsipras, young leader of the small Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA), in criticising the government.
