16/12/2009
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/12/09
Since the process to privatise Kosovo's Brezovica Ski Centre began in 2006, it has faced a slew of challenges.
"The Kosovo subsidiary of the Serbian Chamber of Commerce claims that the company is owned by Belgrade-based Inex-Interexport, and that Serbia has to do more in order to preserve the assets of its company in Kosovo," Tanjug news agency reported late last year.
According to UNMIK, the privatisation was launched by both the Kosovo Trust Agency and the Serbian Privatisation Agency.
"In order to reduce political tension and wait for the resolution of Kosovo status", the privatisation was postponed, according to the UNMIK sponsored TV show Danas & Sutra.
Kosovo Privatisation Agency's Board of Directors Chairman Dino Asanaj sat down with SETimes to discuss opening the country's premiere ski resort to investors.
SETimes:
What are the Brezovica Tourist/Ski Centre privatisation procedures?
Dino Asanaj:
The Privatisation Agency of Kosovo uses the spin-off method.
Essentially the assets of the state-owned enterprise (SOE) are transferred to a NewCO [new company].
This way it sets the assets free for immediate investments.
Old liabilities and claims are dealt with during the liquidation of the SOE [old company].
SETimes:
Would you invite foreign investors to come, compete and invest in these facilities?
Asanaj:
Up-to-date registered investors in the agencies' database are at about 8,482.
Out of these, 3,014 are pre-qualified, such as local and international investors.
Notably, over 30% of the total proceeds [sales] from privatisation are from foreign investors.
In this particular case, the 'target group' of potential investors will be those with expertise in the particular operation of this enterprise.
SETimes:
How important is the privatisation for Kosovo?
Asanaj:
SOE Brezovica Tourist/Ski Centre is located in the Shterpce/Strpce municipality in the southwestern corner of the Gjilan/Gnjilane region.
The neighbouring municipalities are Prizren, Suhareke/Suva Reka, Ferizaj/Urosevac and Kacanik.
The SOE Brezovica Tourist/Ski Centre is the only winter tourism centre in Kosovo having exceptional natural conditions for skiing.
The enterprise currently employs 225 people who are mainly working in hotel facilities.
Due to the fact that similar facilities do not exist in Kosovo, there are no significant local winter tourism competitors, especially as far as skiing is concerned.
The facility has all the prerequisites to become the best recreation/ski resort in this part of the Balkans.
It provides attractive views from the Sharr Mountain range and offers excellent climatic conditions enabling skiing from November to May.
Marketing efforts are very limited, as the main activity consists of direct personal contact with customers.
The resort currently needs a marketing plan, and extensive promotion, in order to capitalise on available development opportunities.
