10/06/2013
By Paul Ciocoiu and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Bucharest and Belgrade -- 10/06/13
Discrimination, hate crimes and nationalistic rhetoric are still prevalent in several regional countries, Amnesty International noted in its annual human rights report.
"The State of the World's Human Rights" covered the human rights situation in 159 countries and territories based on feedback from the agency's country offices and the regular field visits and reports.
In Romania, the report noted the discrimination against the Roma community. 
The Roma population is 3.2 percent, the second-largest ethnic minority in the country after Hungarians.
"In October, the Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities of the Council of Europe stated that Roma children were still being placed in schools for children with disabilities, in separate schools or in separate classrooms," the report stated.
It also reiterated that local authorities continued to forcibly evict and relocate Roma to inadequate and segregated housing.
"Such [Amnesty] reports hardly have an impact on Romanian authorities, unlike the situation in Western societies, but their main role is to send alarm calls," Gelu Duminica, executive director of the Impreuna (Together) Agency for Community Development, a Roma NGO, told SETimes.
"The main alarm bell now is that anti-immigrant and anti-Roma speeches are about to explode amid the economic crisis in Europe and the forthcoming European Parliament elections. 
Unfortunately, Roma people are visible enough in such situations, even in Romania where such speeches always find followers because of the excessively politicised society," Duminca said.
But Duminica added that it would be a mistake to say the overall Roma situation in Romania hasn't changed: "Their situation has changed at the same pace changes have occurred in the majority of society."
Other countries in the region were also called to task for their treatment of the Roma population.
In Belgrade, more than 1,000 Roma were forcibly evicted in April.
"The Serbian government is flagrantly violating international law by allowing Belgrade city authorities to carry out this eviction," said John Dalhuisen, Amnesty International’s Europe and Central Asia director.
"People are coming up to us with tears in their eyes, asking us what they should do and where they should go," an Amnesty International observer present at the eviction stated.
Between January and October, approximately 15,000 Serbian citizens, mainly Roma, claimed asylum in EU countries, the report noted.
According to Danilo Curcic, a legal analyst at Praxis, an NGO in Belgrade that aims to promote, protect and improve human rights, the poor economic situation in Serbia was the main reason such a large number of Roma claimed asylum in the EU.
"But broadcasting the news that the biggest number of Serbian citizens who are asking for asylum are Roma, and putting them into separate group … could be really dangerous and cause negative connotation, discrimination or even some violence," Curcic told SETimes.
The most violated Roma rights in Serbia are basic economic and social rights, especially the right to adequate housing and to personal documents, Curcic said.
A better approach by social institutions, especially with those who have been rejected when they asked for asylum, would help solve the problem, he added.
The Amnesty International report also mentioned discrimination faced by the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community in several countries.
In Serbia, the Belgrade Pride Parade was banned once again in October.
"[Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender] minority members are still among the most discriminated social groups in Serbia. 
A number of factors contribute to such climate, starting with the still dominant patriarchal authoritarian mentality, lack of political culture and numerous negative stereotypes and prejudices through inadequate and discriminatory educational content in the textbooks," Serbian Commissioner for Protection of Equality Nevena Petrusevic told SETimes.
Petrusevic said there is not enough education on human rights, tolerance, diversity and equality. 
She added that although Serbia has clear laws guaranteeing human rights and prohibiting discrimination, these laws are often not enforced effectively and consistently.
The report mentioned significant steps in Serbia, including recent amendments to the Serbian Criminal Code, which introduced the offence of hate crime; the decision of the Constitutional Court that the prohibition of the LGBT parade in 2012 was unconstitutional; and the announcement of the adoption of the National Strategy for Combating Discrimination.
But in Macedonia, according to Amnesty International, the government failed to amend the 2010 Anti-Discrimination Law to include protection for the LGBT community.
"Homophobic remarks made in October by the minister of labour and social affairs were followed by an attack on the NGO-run Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender support centre," the report said.
The Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Macedonia reports an increase of hate crimes in the country, especially against minority communities and the LGBT population.
"We are witnessing that recently the hate speech starts to generate hate crimes. 
Even our own activists were attacked. 
And usually these crimes are camouflaged under the general term 'violence'," Uranija Pirovska, director of the NGO, told SETimes.
Other minority groups also faced problematic relationships with the majority.
In Macedonia, the relations between the Macedonian and ethnic Albanian populations deteriorated, the report said. 
The organisation noted that in February, an off-duty Macedonian policeman shot and killed two ethnic Albanians in Gostivar. 
Several reportedly ethnically motivated attacks took place in March, in Tetovo and Skopje.
In May, 20 ethnic Albanians were arrested in raids after the killing of five Macedonian men at Smilkovci Lake, outside Skopje. 
Five men were charged with murder and terrorism. 
Thousands of Albanians protested against the arrests and the authorities’ depiction of them as terrorists.
The Ohrid Framework Agreement closed some of the sensitive interethnic relations, but it also opened some new issues, said Petar Atanasov, a professor at the University St. 
Cyrill and Methodius in Skopje. 
There is more work to be done in improving relations, especially between the two largest communities, Macedonians and Albanians.
"We rarely communicate between each other. 
We have examples of a typical ghetto division because children of one ethnicity don't learn the language of the other. 
We live one next to another, instead of one with another," Atanasov said.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the report drew attention to the rise of nationalistic rhetoric by political parties, while the progress in the prosecution of crimes under international law remained slow during 2012.
"Many civilian victims of war were still denied access to justice and reparations," the report said, adding that "around 10,000 people who disappeared during the 1992-1995 war were still unaccounted for."
Amnesty International called on BiH to adopt legislation protecting the rights of victims of torture and sexual violence during the Bosnian conflict, and recognise the right to reparations and access to adequate healthcare services to overcome post-traumatic stress disorders.
"People who suffer the consequences of torture should not be divided. 
They need strong support from community to exercise a right that belongs to them by law," said Vesna Karajlic, a psychologist who daily works with victims of torture.
"There is no strategy that in a comprehensive and systematic way approached the regulation of respective and collective material and immaterial reparation. 
This shows that rights of victims of torture are non-existent ," Andjelko Kvesić, president of the Croatian Association of Prisoners, told SETimes.
Correspondents Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo and Biljana Lajmanovska in Skopje contributed to this report.
Do you see human rights violations in your city? 
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
