09/09/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 09/09/09
Serbia's faltering economy is struggling with the challenges of the global economic crisis, making the country's recent negotiations with the IMF even more crucial. 
The talks, which lasted for several days, wrapped up with partial success in Belgrade earlier this month.
The IMF approved the increase of the Serbian budget deficit from 3% to 4.5% of GDP this year, but Serbia will have to meet several conditions before it can use the remaining 1.2 billion euros left from the arrangement struck with the IMF in March.
Serbia has already withdrawn almost 800m euros from the loan, and had hoped to extract an additional 700m euros to finance its budget deficit -- which is expected to total 1.4 billion euros.
Whether Belgrade will be able to use the rest of the money will be decided after a new round of talks scheduled for October.
Economy Minister Mladjan Dinkic said that in the meantime, Serbia will withdraw about 400m euros this month from a separate IMF fund for recession-hit member states. 
Dinkic said the funds would be used to help with the budget deficit.
IMF Mission to Serbia chief Albert Jaeger said the institution requires the administration to cut public spending.
It involves "reforming the state administration, pension system, education, health care, and more efficient work of state-owned companies and local self-governments," Jaeger said after talks with Serbian officials.
He said that in October, Serbian officials will have to present clear plans for spending cuts if they want to successfully re-open the credit arrangement with the IMF. 
Jaeger noted, however, that the country has stabilised its financial market and downsized the payment deficit.
Local economist Sasa Djogovic described the outcome of the talks as "buying time" for the government, because it currently lacks a clear plan to cut spending.
"Unfortunately, we received this second IMF visit only with an idea, which existed before, but without any precise calculation, and now the IMF has given us another month and a half to find that calculation," Djogovic told Belgrade media.
Serbian businesspeople and pensioners were able to breathe a sigh of relief after the talks, because the IMF dropped a proposal to raise the VAT and reduce pensions and salaries in the public sector.
Jaeger said that the IMF had proposed an increase of Serbia's VAT, which is currently 18% on all goods and services, to cover the burgeoning budget gap. 
However, Serbian officials said a radical overhaul of the public sector -- including the state administration, education and health sectors -- would make up the difference instead.
"The authorities have considered tax increases as unacceptable, and instead proposed to undertake a more ambitious and comprehensive strategy of multi-year spending reforms," Jaeger said.
For the time being, there is no clear plan for how many people will have to leave the targeted sectors, but the unions fear thousands will be dismissed.
