15/02/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/02/10
The government of Kosovo has invited EULEX to begin talks about establishing a wide-ranging task force focused exclusively on organised crime and political corruption.
The offer was confirmed by EULEX spokesperson Karin Limdal on Thursday (February 11th).
That same day, the Kosovo daily Koha Ditore reported that the idea was discussed in meetings of the Joint Co-ordination Board for the Rule of Law, chaired by EULEX chief Yves de Kermabon and Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci.
The task force would be composed of local and international prosecutors, as well as a range of police officers.
"I believe this group will be established very soon," said Kuci.
"It will have full financial and physical support."
The task force idea appears to be a response to the most recent meeting of the International Steering Group (ISG), which asked for quick progress in fighting such high-level crime in Kosovo.
In a report after its February 8th meeting in Vienna, the ISG said it believes "Kosovo urgently needs to make further progress in the fight against corruption, organised crime [and] establishing the Rule of Law, including in northern Kosovo."
Laura Pula, a Kosovo prosecutor in the Pristina District Court, fully supports the idea, saying it is "more than important" -- it is crucial.
"We don't have it;
other [countries] in the region have it.
Based on their experiences ...
they have achieved results," Pula told SETimes.
"The security has to be enhanced for those people who will be part of it;
they will need more protection [because] they will work with very delicate cases."
Pula said the number of prosecutors should not only be increased, but those on the task force should be specialists assigned to specific areas such as corruption, drugs or human trafficking.
And, she warned, if the identity of prosecutors and detectives working on specific cases is not protected, their lives will be in danger.
"It should not become publicly known which prosecutor is working on what case," she said.
The Kosovo "Civil Society" group is especially in favour of the task force and its eventual success.
"We consider that corruption and organised crime are the main threats for Kosovo today," the group said in a February 9th statement.
"They are damaging the institutions of the country and our society in general, hindering the economic revival and touching the fragile democracy of Kosovo ...
systematically and for sure, they are damaging our European future."
