15/07/2009
By Ilija Djordjevic for Southeast European Times in Mitrovica – 15/07/09
Thousands of bikers from Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina arrived on June 28th in Mitrovica for a biker parade and humanitarian effort in Kosovo. 
Leading the convoy was Belgrade's Harley Davidson Club (HDC) President Milic Radevic, with Serbian rock musician Bora Dordevic riding on the back of his bike.
Radevic, whose club organised the bike rally, told Southeast European Times that around 1,000 bikes gathered in Belgrade to head for Mitrovica on Vidovdan -- a popular Serbian holiday.
The parade of bikers drew crowds from their homes to watch something rarely seen in their city. 
The event took place amid the tensions over Kosovo's future, especially over the future of Serbs in independent Kosovo.
"This is an enormous bike group, emotionally charged … We brought presents for the orphaned children, for this is also our humanitarian mission," said Radevic.
"The bikers are the last ones to disappoint you. 
These guys are good and polite. 
In the West, you'll frequently see similar groups but with criminal intent. 
That's not the case with our bikers," he added.
Mitrovica, an ethnically-divided city in Serb-dominated northern Kosovo, is refusing to recognise Kosovo's independence.
Slavisa, a Belgrade biker and first-time Mitrovica visitor, said that he has wanted to visit for a long-time, and in a modest way, support those that live there.
Djordje David, a rock musician and a Harley Davison Club biker, told <i>SETimes</i>."I feel at home here. 
I have friends, good pals here. 
I think that here still live those that think with their hearts … The 'first league champions' of Serbian rock music came with us. 
Riblja Corba, Djordje David, and the Gang Group will perform in concert, as will the YU Group, Partybreakers, Far, King's Apartment … all first-rate musicians of homemade rock 'n' roll."
Hard rock resounded late into the night, along with the revving of engines, but no one was complaining.
One Mitrovica resident said, "The whole city came alive."
