15/07/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 15/07/09
After years of negotiations, leaders from five European countries signed the Nabucco pipeline agreement in Ankara Monday (July 13th).
The document puts the wheels in motion for a major US and EU-backed pipeline that will transport Caspian and Middle Eastern gas to Europe, and reduce the EU's dependence on Russia.
"As of this moment, Turkey is an important partner in the EU's energy policy.
Even solely looking from the point of energy, it is clear that Turkey should become an EU member," said Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
He and counterparts from Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania signed the deal with European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso.
The pipeline will cost nearly 8 billion euros.
Construction is scheduled to wrap up in 2014.
"I believe that with the arrival of the first gas -- and some experts have said this will be as early as 2014 -- this agreement will open to door to a new era between the EU and Turkey," Barroso was told Turkish daily Today's Zaman.
The Nabucco consortium is equally owned by oil and gas companies in the transit zone -- Austria's OMV, Hungary's MOL, Bulgaria's Bulgargaz, Romania's Transgaz, Turkey's Botas, and German energy giant RWE, the last to be green-lighted.
Turkey's signing is seen by many as a way to kick-start its troubled EU accession talks.
One opponent of Turkey's membership bid, Austria, now works closely with Ankara on the Nabucco project.
"What we are witnessing today is a powerful illustration of the strategic bonds between Turkey and the EU," said Barroso.
"This agreement could -- in the months and years to come -- open the door to a new era in the relationship between the European Union and Turkey, and indeed beyond.
Energy can help to establish new structural links between Europe, Turkey, the Caspian Sea States and Central Asian States."
"Gas pipes may be made of steel, but Nabucco can cement the links between our people," he added.
The EU is largely dependent on Russia for energy and natural gas -- a trend member states are trying to change.
Many countries in southeastern Europe face gas shortages almost every winter due to rows between Russia and Ukraine.
