16/12/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 16/12/09
Late last month, Serbia's Special Prosecution Office filed an indictment against Bosnian gang leader Darko Elez for a number of crimes. 
He and five others are charged with extortion, drug trafficking, illegal possession of arms, document forgery. 
Elez faces the additional charge of inciting murder.
The indictment also charges the six with assisting those wanted by the police to escape from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to Serbia. 
An investigation in BiH is under way, though the group has not yet been formally charged. 
Bosnian officials are co-operating with the Serbian authorities.
Police detained Elez and his cohorts in September. 
The operation against one of the best-organised criminal gangs in the region resulted from months of co-operation between the police forces of Serbia and Republika Srpska, according to Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic.
Criminal organisations have the illusion of being stronger than the state and think they can undermine its authority, Dacic said at a two-day ministerial conference on combating organised crime, held in Belgrade just weeks after the arrests.
The action sends a "clear message to all criminal groups that police forces being from different states is not an obstacle for fighting organised crime," Dacic told participants.
Along with regional interior and justice ministers, European Commission Vice-President Jacques Barrot and high representatives from the police force, justice and prosecutors from 16 countries, representatives from the Council of Europe, Europol, Eurojust and Interpol attended the conference.
Creating a united front among Western Balkan countries was a major focus of the discussions.
"Organised crime seriously threatens economies of the Western Balkan countries and their efforts to respond to global challenges," Barrot told the attendees.
"As these countries do not have sufficient capacity to respond to cross-border challenges alone, the EU and its member states will entirely support regional and international co-operation and development of efficient means necessary," he said.
Serbia is now seeking to follow up on the Elez arrests and beef up its capacity to tackle criminal gangs. 
The Special Court in Belgrade continues to detain suspects, as the Special Prosecution Office against Organised Crime in Serbia launched an official investigation.
According to local media reports, the police operation against Elez prevented several planned assassinations of businessmen and police officials in both Serbia and RS. 
They even suggest that members of Elez's group were linked to the notorious Zemun Clan, which allegedly plotted to assassinate RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik.
