15/07/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 15/07/09 Photos by Tomislav Georgiev
Nestled on an ancient lake and surrounded by mountains, Ohrid is a unique getaway.
Art historian Sir Herbert Reed called Ohrid a "bridge of European art" between the Byzantium and the Renaissance.
Visitors flock to Ohrid's two dozen medieval churches, admiring the architecture and fresco-painting masterpieces.
Roman Emperor Justinian established the Ohrid Archbishopric or Justiniana Prima, making Ohrid an early ecclesiastical and literary centre.
The landmark churches -- St. John Kaneo, St. Sophia and St. Panteleimon -- are definitely worth a visit for a glimpse into history and beauty.
The Samoil Fortress, with its towering walls, is a must-see.
Many of Ohrid's cultural landmarks are right below the fortress.
The ancient amphitheatre serves as the venue for the annual Ohrid Summer Festival of theatre and music, and other events.
Closer to downtown there are statues of the city's patron saints, St. Clement and St. Naum, the latter located in a church bearing his name.
But perhaps the best known landmark is the three-story Robev House, which best exemplifies 19th century Macedonian architecture.
Today the house is a museum that exhibits Macedonian artefacts.
The region's mild continental climate -- between 25 and 30 degrees Celsius -- attracts visitors to Ohrid's beaches.
The Gradishte and Ljubanista beaches are outside the city, but within the city's reach are Metropol and Granit.
Many visitors choose to take a ferry ride across Ohrid Lake, which is famous for its tasty trout.
Some search the lake for fresh water pearls.
Numerous restaurants offer local and international culinary specialties ranging from stuffed grape leaves to rare meats.
Ohrid also has a night life to offer.
One can start the evening in the city's cafes or the Old Bazaar walkway, and end the night in any of the numerous clubs and discotheques.
There are daily flights from Skopje -- and other Balkan capitals -- to Ohrid's St. Paul airport, but many choose a more scenic two-hour car/bus route.
