15/10/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/10/09
Kosovo has one of the largest youth populations in Europe, and an ever-increasing number of children are attending schools and universities this academic year.
According to the latest figures published in the Kosovo media, nearly half a million youngsters attend school -- 36,000 for the first time. 
In all, 20 new schools opened throughout Kosovo this year, and 22 more are being constructed.
"The new school year began with new school buildings, with modern buildings like this one, finished buildings, or ones being finished, all over Kosovo, in order to continue our extraordinarily important investment … in the future of our children," Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said at the ceremony opening a school in Suva Reka.
He added that the investment in education is an investment in real economic development and the creation of new jobs.
Subsequently, the government offered those attending 1st to 9th grades 320,000 textbooks and other supplies free of charge. 
Thaci also promised his government will boost salaries for teachers and professors, as education is a priority for his government.
According to the daily Express, over 10,000 first-year students began attending classes at Pristina University. 
Despite objections, the university expects 3,000 more students than planned.
Minister for Education Enver Hoxhaj defended the decision to approve the extra enrolment by arguing that the number of students does not necessarily relate to the quality of education, which has been a concern for many professors.
<i>Express</i> also reported that Hoxhaj will double, or even triple, the positions for students in disciplines like philosophy and education.
To make things easier for the institutions, the education ministry signed agreements last week with several municipalities in Kosovo to offer schools financial autonomy. 
The reforms will be funded by the government, the Institutional Development of Education and the World Bank.
Under the agreements, schools in Pristina, Prizren, Peja, Gjakova, Ferizaj, Mitrovica, Theranda, Kline and Shtime will be free to make decisions on spending public money, as well as budget and grant management.
"With this, our schools will change in content, form, and school management. 
Schools with the new curriculum will be integrated, which will ensure better conditions for students and at work, for teachers," Hoxhaj said.
