15/10/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 15/10/09
To better address the current global challenges, South East European Co-operation Process (SEECP) members need to develop a common vision for the future, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu told participants of an informal SEECP ministerial meeting in Istanbul at the weekend.
Underlining the strong political determination of the participating countries to transform the Balkans into a region of stability, Davutoglu proposed four major goals.
"These goals are reaching political stability, realising economic interdependence with key projects, enhancing cultural harmony ...
and finally, developing a regional area of co-operation, which would become one of the main pillars of our common home Europe, European and Euro-Atlantic structures," he said.
Davutoglu hosted the October 9th and 10th meeting as Turkey continues its chairmanship of the SEECP.
Regional industry and cultural ministers are expected to meet in the coming months to discuss more detailed projects.
One of them, according to the Turkish foreign minister, is to create a Balkan village that will reflect common cultures and enhance "regional consciousness".
On the economic front, talks will focus on energy and infrastructure projects, liberalisation of trade and support for investments.
The Istanbul meeting also marked a first trilateral meeting among Turkey, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Davutoglu said his meeting with his counterparts from those countries was significant.
"Years after the sad experiences of the 1990s, we are sitting together;
this is very important for us.
We would like to work together in order to develop a better climate among different ethnic and regional groups in Balkans and make peace and tolerance dominant in our region."
Also in attendance was new Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Greece, George Papandreou.
During a sideline meeting with Davutoglu, Papandreou expressed support for Turkey's EU process.
The two also briefly discussed the Cyprus issue, which may potentially block Turkey's membership negotiations.
"Turkey and Greece can make serious contributions to ongoing talks in Cyprus for a comprehensive settlement.
Achievement of that goal would bring positive results for both people, Turkey, Greece and the EU," Davutoglu stressed.
Established in 1996, the SEECP has become the most important co-operation mechanism in the Balkans, reflecting the understanding of "regional ownership" of the Balkan countries.
SEECP participating states are Turkey, Albania, BiH, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania and Serbia.
Turkey assumed the chairmanship in June.
