12/11/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 12/11/09
In a breakthrough move in Greek education reform, the government is planning to grant graduates of private colleges in the country the same professional rights as their counterparts from state universities, in accordance with EU law, government sources said on Wednesday (November 11th).
The move will eliminate the threat of the imposition of a 600,000-euro fine, followed by daily 15,000-euro penalties from the Union.
According to local media, Education Minister Anna Diamantopoulou was given a two-month grace period to conform to an EU mandate that graduates of foreign colleges be granted the same professional status as those from regular universities.
Diamantopoulou has reportedly said that finding a solution to the standoff with private colleges is a priority for the ministry.
She expressed concerns about the looming fines from Brussels during a meeting with university deans Wednesday.
She appealed to the academic community to unite to deal with the strong reactions the recognition of private colleges is likely to provoke.
"We must put in place strict criteria for the inspection of private colleges," National Technical University of Athens Constantinos Moutzouris told Kathimerini.
"Otherwise we cannot proceed with a new legislative framework," he added.
For years, Greece's educational system has been under pressure to recognise degrees from private schools.
Currently, Greece only recognises diplomas from public colleges.
Deree College, the largest private higher educational institution in Greece, a division of American Colleges of Greece, offers a curriculum that is recognised by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges.
Some bosses would rather hire a Deree graduate because he or she may have more experience adapting to a multi-national work environment.
Although a diploma from Deree may help a potential employee get a foot in the door, the degree is null and void according to the Hellenic National Academic Recognition Information Centre and Greece's public sector.
"A full recognition of out-of- state higher education degrees in Greece, in my opinion, can only benefit the society.
It will meet a huge demand for higher education, strengthen the country's role as a cultural and educational centre in Southeast Europe, and help the state universities to modernise and be competitive," Deree College graduate Konstantinos Diakoumis said.
