08/09/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 08/09/09
A new public information law passed on August 31st has journalists' associations up in arms. 
They say it is anti-European and aims to suppress media freedom.
The legislation has also caused a rift within the ruling coalition. 
Two members of the coalition -- United Serbia and the Socialist Party of Serbia -- refused to vote for it in parliament. 
It finally passed with support from the opposition Liberal Democratic Party.
At issue are provisions imposing severe penalties for various journalistic infractions. 
These include failing to publish a masthead, describing someone as a criminal if no valid legal verdict has been handed down, or violating the rights of minors. 
Media organisations that run afoul of the law could face million-euro fines.
Proponents say the legislation is needed to bring order to the Serbian media sphere, but critics charge that political considerations were at work. 
The main political party pushing for the law was G17 Plus -- whose party head Mladjan Dinkic is frequently targeted by Serbian tabloids.
Journalists argue that the media could have been regulated under existing laws, and that those drafting the new law did not consult them.
It is ironic, they say, that politicians who fought for media freedom during the regime of Slobodan Milosevic would propose such legislation, while the Socialists whom Milosevic once led oppose it.
Signing the law, President Boris Tadic said it was needed in order to meet European standards. 
According to the Independent Journalists' Association of Serbia, however, the law is actually at odds with those standards.
The OSCE Mission to Serbia, meanwhile, has voiced concern over the matter. 
Mission Chief Hans Ola Urstad said that the stipulated fines "are too high for the situation in Serbia and can lead to auto-censorship and the shutdown of certain media".
Prominent domestic NGOs, such as the Belgrade Centre for Human Rights, have sided with the journalists. 
"The opportunity was missed both due to weakness within the judiciary and due to propensity of the people in power or close to power towards using media at a poor professional level when it suits their narrow interests," the NGO said in a statement.
