13/01/2010
(Freedom House, Reuters, AFP, CNN, RFE/RL, VOA - 12/01/10)
For the fourth year in a row, setbacks in political rights and civil liberties in 2009 outweighed improvements of freedoms around the world, the US-based democracy watchdog group Freedom House said in its annual survey released Tuesday (January 12th).
"This represents the longest continuous period of decline for global freedom in the nearly 40-year history" of the Freedom in the World report, said the group, which this year covered 194 countries and 14 territories.
The number of electoral democracies dropped from 119 to 116 last year to reach the lowest level since 1995, the report said, while noting declines in democratic freedom in 40 countries in Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and the former Soviet Union.
"The decline is global, affects countries with military and economic power, affects countries that had previously shown signs of [potential] reform, and is accompanied by enhanced persecution of political dissidents and independent journalists," said Arch Puddington, the group's director of research.
"To make matters worse, the most powerful authoritarian regimes have become more repressive, more influential in the international arena, and more uncompromising." Freedom House has issued its annual assessment of the state of political rights and civil liberties in the world since 1972.
To assess performance, the group examines electoral processes, political pluralism and functioning of government as well as freedom of expression, freedom of association and the rule of law.
Based on their scoring of performance on a seven-point scale, with 1 representing the most free and 7 the least free, each country and territory is assigned to a broad category status of Free, Partly Free, or Not Free.
The few bright spots included notable gains in 16 of the 194 countries, with Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia among those showing improvement.
"Five countries in the western Balkans experienced gains for freedom during the year," the report said.
"The most notable improvements occurred in Kosovo, which advanced from Not Free to Partly Free status after holding elections that were deemed to be in compliance with international standards and strengthening the protection of minority rights."
As for Montenegro, the successful organisation of the March parliamentary elections, progress in adopting anticorruption legislation and an overall stabilisation allowed its score on civil liberties to improve from 3 to 2 and its status to improve from Partly Free to Free.
Croatia and Serbia improved their political rights rating by one point each, from 2 to 1 and from 3 to 2, respectively.
Croatia's gain was due to improvements in the country's treatment of minority Serb and Romany communities.
The health of a stable multiparty system was also noted.
As in last year's survey, the number countries assessed as Free stands at 89, representing 46% of the global population.
Seven Southeast European countries -- Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Greece, Montenegro, Romania and Serbia -- belong to that group.
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and Macedonia are placed among the 58 Partly Free countries, accounting for 20% of all people in the world.
The number of the Not Free countries increased by five.
It now includes 47 countries, accounting for 34% of the global population.
More than half of these people live in China, which also belongs to this group.
