14/07/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 14/07/09
En route to the Mirusha Waterfalls, we drove about an hour outside of Pristina towards Peja, and parked on the side of the road by a restaurant called Guri i Zi, or The Black Stone.
We wandered into the forest on foot because the road to the waterfalls was too weather-beaten.
Down the bumpy, rutted road in the middle of the trees, blue, black and white butterflies fluttered over our heads, and rested briefly on green leaves.
Nightingales sang in the sunlight.
The sound of our footsteps caused lizards to scurry from their shady spots.
"People say there are snakes here, they come under the sun and change color," said my good friend Bujar, as he navigated the way to the waterfalls.
I didn't see any snakes slithering by my feet, but I kept my eyes peeled.
We crossed a wooden bridge, over the peaceful Drin River, and came upon a small café with tables under the trees.
The owner, Riza, sat in the shade, smoking a cigarette and sipping coffee.
"You're going to the waterfalls… It's hot now, you should have come early in the morning," said Riza.
We had a drink at the café, and continued on our hike, as the sound of the crashing waterfalls became louder and louder.
Finally we came to a clearing, where waterfalls cascaded down, and children played in the cool water, giggling and shouting -- their voices echoing.
Two small wooden cafes on either side of the small river are only open during the summertime.
"It's not one, there are three [waterfalls] … and there is a cave there, with Illyrian graffiti…it has been left to the mercy of time … nothing has been done to it," said café owner Fetah Halili.
"Once, the waterfalls had no water;
you can't believe how scary it looked like here, you could hear every single sound echoing in the emptiness," said Fetah.
The cafes see a steady flow of traffic at the weekends, mainly those that want a cup of coffee or a refreshing Birra PEJA -- the local beer.
"Many come from KFOR during the weekends," said café co- owner Ilir Halili.
We finished our coffees and trekked back to the car.
"You would get lost here if you don't know which way to go, or if you don't have somebody to guide you … but if you come once, it's easy to remember," Bujar said.
