14/07/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skope -- 14/07/09
At about 8:20am on May 19th, Sasko Kedev, a Skopje cardiologist and former VMRO-DPMNE presidential candidate, reached the nearly 8,850m summit of Mt Everest -- the tallest peak on earth.
Kedev's expedition included David William Hamilton and Arthur Hamish Fulton from Britain, Neill Philip Johanson from Australia, Carsten Bennike from Denmark and a slew of experienced Nepalese mountaineers, such as sherpas Pasang Tenzing and Ang Dorjee, who reached the summit for the 13th time.
Climbing down, it took Kedev about eight hours to reach the nearest camp, which is approximately 8,000m above sea level.
Kedev, 47, described the expedition as a personal adventure, but said he hoped that his conquest might shine a light on Macedonia.
"I hope I have given a small, perhaps a tiny however important contribution to promoting our small but very typical, very strong and very traditional country in the world," said Kedev.
The former politician trained for nearly two months in Nepal to become acclimised, the physiological adaption the body must go through to withstand such a high altitude.
Before scaling Everest, he climbed Aconcagua, the tallest mountain in South America (6,962 m), McKinley in Alaska, the tallest mountain in North America (6,194 m), Kilimanjaro, the tallest mountain in Africa (4,600 m), and Matterhorn in the Pennine Alps (about 4,474m).
In 2004, Kedev took on Branko Crvenkovski for president, but lost.
Born in Stip, he holds a PhD from the Institute for Heart Disease at Ss Cyril and Methodius University. 
Kedev served as the team doctor on the Everest climb.
Two Macedonian nationals climbed Mount Everest before him: Bitola-native Dimitar Ilievski-Murato, who made it to the summit in May 1989, but died in an accident returning to base camp, and Gligor Delev who scaled the mountain in May 2007.
Located on the border between Nepal and Tibet, Everest is called Sagarmatha (goddess of the sky) in Nepal, or Chomolungma (goddess of the universe) in Tibet.
The name Everest was taken from British surveyor-general in India, Sir George Everest in 1865.
