07/09/2009
(Various sources)
The 4th Annual Conference of the Meeting of the Alb-Science Institute (IAS) took place from August 30th to September 2nd at the University of Tetovo in Tetovo.
The conference, "Albanian scientists in the streams of worldwide science", focused on the experiences of scientific institutions in Albania, Macedonia and Kosovo that seek ways to better co-ordinate, as well as increase efficiency and productivity.
The conference was broken into sections such as Albanology, legal sciences, agricultural and environmental sciences, economic sciences, natural sciences, medicine and health science, engineering sciences and information technology (IT), social sciences and international projects.
The IAS hosts annual meetings to "present and promote the most current findings of its members and non-Albanian researchers, scientists and experts, as well as to strengthen the co-operation among Albanian scholars living all over the world," said its website.
Three other IAS annual conferences were held previously in Pristina and twice in Tirana, once in 2006 and again two years later.
Founded in 2002 by Nicholas Qafoku PhD, the current director of the NPO.
"During the period January 2005 - November 2006, a group of Albanian academics living abroad [members of Alb-Science Forum] worked intensively to develop a platform and establish the Alb-Science Institute," said the group's website.
The IAS is made up of Albanian Diaspora scholars, mostly educated and trained abroad, that volunteer to join forces with their colleagues living in Albania, Macedonia and Kosovo to "contribute towards social and economic progress" in the region.
According to their website, some of the goals of the institute are to "support the development and the improvement of the educational system at university and post-university level", "o", and "t".
The group releases three publications:
"Out -- Approaching Science", "Acts -- Proceedings of the International Annual Meeting of Institute Alb-Science", and the "Albanian Journal of Legal Studies".
