14/12/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 14/12/09
The prime ministers of Turkey and Macedonia reiterated their countries' close ties during a meeting in Ankara earlier this month.
"Turkey is Macedonia's best supporter and friend," Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said at the end of his December 5th visit.
In the past 18 years, since Macedonia's independence, the two countries have forged a tight bond.
Even though they are not in the same geographical neighbourhood, their closeness has been solidified by the support Turkey has given to Macedonia in a number of historical milestones.
Turkey was among the first countries to recognise Macedonia's independence.
It is a strong supporter of its NATO membership bid and has defended the country's position in the ongoing name dispute with Greece.
"Leave Macedonia to be called Macedonia," Erdogan said during the talks with Gruevski.
He added that Macedonia has met all the conditions for joining the Alliance.
Both officials attended a Turkish-Macedonian business forum in Istanbul.
Erdogan called on more than 200 Turkish companies to invest in Macedonia and benefit from the favourable conditions the country offers.
"We want to see Turkish-Macedonian businesspeople working hand in hand in such regions.
We have always encouraged trade with Macedonia and will continue to do so," Erdogan said.
Trade between the two countries amounts to around 225m euros annually.
Participants at the conference discussed ways of boosting this level to as much as triple the current figure.
Gruevski invited Turkish companies to take part in the plans to build a combined central gas plant, two hydroelectric plants (Chebren and Galishte), and the Vardar Valley project on/along the Vardar River on European Corridor No 10.
One major Turkish investment in Macedonia is the reconstruction and expansion of Skopje Airport.
Turkish company TAV is overseeing the project, which is expected to launch in February.
Discussions on strengthening relations also touched on the bilateral Strategic Co-operation Agreement the two countries signed in November.
The agreement envisions co-operation in the defence, culture, education, industry and military fields.
The prime ministers also discussed their aspirations for EU membership.
Turkey has started negotiations for membership, however, it faces difficulties imposed by Cyprus.
Macedonia has not been able to get a negotiation starting date because of the name dispute.
Both prime ministers said it was a joint aim of the two countries to further meet the criteria for EU membership.
"Our countries know that on the way to the EU, there can be rises and falls, as well as quick and slow steps," Gruevski said.
