15/04/2013
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 15/04/13
As Balkan nations navigate economic uncertainty and strive to strengthen citizens' quality of life, several governments have implemented strategies to combat one of the root causes of poverty:
the high rate of students who drop out of school.
Across the region, thousands of students do not complete their schooling, especially at the secondary school level.
Education officials say high dropout rates result in a lack of return on public investments and create a barrier to economic growth, employment, productivity and competitiveness.
When dropouts search for work, they face questions about their skills, which lead to fewer job opportunities, poverty and social exclusion.
The number of school dropouts in Bulgaria has dropped by nearly 50 percent in the last four years, and the nation's education ministry has proposed a new programme to reduce the rate of premature departures from the education system by 2020.
In the 2011-2012 academic year, 4,761 Bulgarian students left school, down from 8,820 in 2008-2009.
Various measures, backed by hundreds of millions of euros from the national budget and the EU, have contributed to the decline.
More than 80 million euros were spent between 2007 and 2010 to secure a daily snack and a glass of milk or tea for students in the first to fourth grades and for those in preparatory groups and classes during school days.
More than 14 million euros were set aside for 2012-2013 to provide transportation for nearly 63,000 students living in remote areas or in places where local schools have been shut down.
A total of 563 schools were closed between 2005 and 2009 due to demographic, social and economic problems, compared to 119 during the past four years.
"Unemployment, low incomes, declined standard of living and poverty place many children in a difficult situation, leading to an increased risk of dropping out of school," the Bulgarian Education Ministry said in the strategy.
The main goal is to reduce the share of 18- to 24-year-olds who have not finished secondary education and are not in education or training, to no more than 11 percent.
In 2012, dropouts accounted for 12.7 percent of all Bulgarians in that age group, slightly lower than the EU average of 12.9 percent.
In 2011, nearly half of all Bulgarian citizens and 52 percent of children were at risk of poverty or social exclusion, the EC said in its most recent quarterly review of the employment and social situation in the country.
The education ministry said a growing number of students leave school because their families moved abroad.
Unemployment and economic hardships have forced many Bulgarians to seek job opportunities in other EU nations.
Katya Dimitrova, principal of the Petko R. Slaveykov secondary school in Vidin in northwestern Bulgaria, said children in such families often face serious educational difficulties following their return home.
"We now have two families back from Greece," she told SETimes.
"Based on their age, their kids should be in the sixth grade, but the requirements are that we place them in the fifth.
Their knowledge does not correspond to that level however.
So, we'll have to make sure they get extra help to be able to catch up."
Across the region, the dropout rate among Roma children is especially high.
Data from Roma NGOs and political parties in recent years shows that 90 percent of Roma children are enrolled in primary school.
However, only about 40 percent finish, and no more than 20 percent are enrolled in secondary schools.
"Roma children have particularly low chances of completing secondary education in Central and Eastern Europe," the UN Education, Science and Cultural Organisation said in its 2012 Education for All Global Monitoring Report.
According to that study, "only 6 percent of Roma aged 14 to 18 are enrolled in secondary education in Bulgaria, and less than 7.3 percent in Romania."
Todor Valchev, a 30-year-old Bulgarian Roma, and Rambo Rushidov, a 25-year-old Roma from Macedonia, both had to leave school after completing their primary education because they had to help their families.
"Both my parents were unemployed, so I had to work to earn some money," Valchev told SETimes.
"I have a younger sister, who also left school.
She got married."
Rushidov, who has three children, told SETimes he is "not sure whether they will go to school if the situation in which the Roma live does not change."
Macedonia's National Employment Strategy for 2011-2015 envisions two new Roma information centres and scholarships for 2,400 Roma students annually.
In Serbia, the statistics are also worrisome:
85 percent of the Roma community leave school prematurely and do not have an elementary education.
The education ministry has introduced Roma assistants in schools to help the children in their studies, interaction with classmates and in overcoming the language barrier.
"It is every parent's obligation to enroll their child in school and to provide him or her with a chance to be educated.
Roma children are enrolled in schools and they start attending classes, but after a while we lose them," Serbia's Assistant Education Minister Zoran Kostic told SETimes.
He said that the ministry, in association with the EU, has launched education projects for youths older than 15 who have not completed their elementary education.
"We are enabling basic education and literacy, but also providing an opportunity for learning a craft.
This is a great chance to allow for a better life for those people through education, for greater chances of employment and a way out of poverty," Kostic said.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), where secondary education is not compulsory, more than 46 percent of Roma students drop out before graduating.
Almost 32 percent of BiH primary school graduates (ages 6 to 15) do not continue their education in a secondary school.
Although the country has almost achieved universal primary education, the percentage of children not enrolled in primary school, 4 percent in 2011 according to a UN Developmental Programme report, has been growing in recent years.
In the absence of national dropout prevention programmes, the country's 14 different ministries of education each take different approaches.
Those include warning parents and subjecting them to minor offence proceedings for not enrolling their children.
Džemaludin Čaušević primary school in Sarajevo is one of the only schools that offers part-time classes for students of all ages.
"It's been hard work because we didn't have a curriculum from the ministry, so we had to create it ourselves," Hasa Albinovic, the school's director, told SETimes, adding that about 80 percent of the participants are Roma.
"We think it's an important for all schools to work toward the inclusion of this marginalised community.
"The Roma often aren't well included in the school culture, and when they are they still face other barriers to staying enrolled," she said, mostly citing the socio-economic circumstances that make school attendance a low priority for many Roma families.
"They have large families and often no jobs, no homes, no health insurance," she said.
The school receives no financial support from the government, aside from two recent grants from the mayor's office.
In 2010, UNICEF launched a campaign for the prevention and reduction of non-attendance and school dropout levels in 38 Romanian schools.
By the end of the first year, 60 percent of the children at risk of dropping out had improved their attendance.
In half of the participating schools the dropout rate declined by 15 to 40 percent compared to the preceding two years.
Those results encouraged UNICEF to expand the programme in 2011 into another 103 schools.
More than 50,000 students were included in the organisation's Let's Go to School campaign.
World Vision, a Christian humanitarian organisation focused on child well-being, has operated in Romania since 1990, working with more than 350,000 children and adults.
"World Vision Romania will continue to support the access of children in the rural areas to quality education," Daniela Buzducea, advocacy director at World Vision Romania, told SETimes.
"Additionally, the foundation aims to start piloting a mechanism for the prevention of school dropouts, by bringing together all the relevant local educational and social actors:
school, family and social services."
Correspondents Menekse Tokyay in Istanbul, Bojana Milovanovic in Belgrade, Eliza Ronalds-Hannon in Sarajevo, Gabriel Petrescu in Bucharest and Klaudija Lutovska in Skopje contributed to this report.
What is the best strategy for convincing students to complete their secondary education?
Share your thoughts in our comments section.
