07/09/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/09/09
A crowded tourist boat sank on Saturday (September 5th) at 10:33am in Lake Ohrid, killing at least 15 Bulgarian nationals onboard who were travelling to St. 
Naum Monastery.
Among the dead was the mother of two small boys, Maria Dimitrova, 32, from the village of Anton, about 80km east of Sofia.
Six people were injured, but are expected to recover.
The Macedonian Interior Ministry said the reason for the disaster was a broken cable on the rudder, which caused the boat to turn sharply to the left and capsize. 
It took approximately three minutes for it to sink.
The vessel Ilinden, registered to carry a maximum of 43 passengers, was reportedly overloaded. 
According to the Ohrid Lake Master's Office, 56 people were on board.
The 23-year-old boat captain, Sotir Fileski, was initially thought to have died, but was later found to be among the injured survivors being treated at a local hospital. 
He has been taken into custody pending an investigation.
At the time of the accident, the Ilinden was about 250 to 300m offshore, where the water is about 6 to 7m deep. 
Boats in the surrounding area immediately came to help rescue survivors.
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski visited the scene, as did a Bulgarian government delegation led by President Georgi Parvanov. 
The two heads of state visited the surviving Bulgarian tourists, who were later flown home on a special flight.
Macedonian Minister of Transport and Communications Mile Janakievski has submitted his resignation, but it is not clear whether Gruevski will accept it. 
EU security chief Javier Solana extended his condolences to the families of those killed in the tragedy.
The Macedonian government declared a national day of mourning Sunday. 
Bulgaria is observing one Monday; all cultural and sporting events are cancelled, and flags are lowered to half-staff.
The Ilinden, built in Germany in 1924, was originally used for military purposes. 
The ship was last remodeled in 1979.
SETimes correspondent Svetla Dimitrova contributed to this report.
