14/07/2009
(AFP, DPA, Sofia Echo, Novinite, Dnevnik, BTA, BNR - 14/07/09)
Bulgaria's 41st National Assembly held its first session Tuesday (July 14th), nine days after the parliamentary elections in which an opposition centre-right party defeated the Socialists and their partners in the ruling tripartite coalition.
Under the constitution, the inaugural session was opened by the oldest member of the new legislature, Andrey Pantev, of the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP).
After the new members of the 240-seat assembly were sworn in, Tsetska Tsacheva of the Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB), which won 116 parliamentary seats on July 5th, was elected speaker in a 227-0 vote, with three abstentions.
The 51-year-old lawyer from the northern town of Pleven thus became the first woman to ever take the post.
"What people expect from us is more work and, most of all, self-discipline," Tsacheva said in her first address.
Parliament also voted in six deputy speakers -- one from GERB and one from each of the other five parties that passed the 4% threshold for entry in the legislature.
They include Luchezar Ivanov from GERB;
Georgi Pirinski from the BSP-led Coalition for Bulgaria, the second biggest parliamentary force with 40 seats;
Hristo Biserov from the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), which has 38 seats;
and Pavel Shopov from the 21-seat ultra-nationalist Ataka party.
The two right-wing formations, the Blue Coalition (15 seats) and the Order, Law and Justice Party (ten seats), are represented by Ekaterina Mihailova and Atanas Semov, respectively.
In this first session, the MPs also appointed a temporary commission to draw up rules of the new assembly.
Tsacheva, who took over the presiding chair from Pantev once she was elected, told lawmakers that outgoing Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev has submitted the government's formal resignation.
By law, the cabinet will continue performing its duties until a new government is approved by parliament.
Later Tuesday, President Georgi Parvanov is expected to ask GERB's informal leader, Boyko Borisov to form Bulgaria's next government.
Borisov has said that he will be ready with the new cabinet by July 27th.
He has confirmed his plans of appointing World Bank anti-crisis expert Simeon Djankov as finance minister and his close ally and formal GERB leader Tsvetan Tsvetanov as interior minister.
Deputy Sofia Mayor on education policies Yordanka Fandakova is expected to head the education ministry.
The new government needs the support of at least 121 MPs to be approved.
Borisov has not ruled out the possibility of forming a minority cabinet.
Addressing parliament Tuesday, Tsvetanov said that GERB would act on its election promise to fight corruption and work to restore Bulgarians' confidence in the country's judiciary and legislature, stressing that any attempt to circumvent the law would be punished.
"GERB won 116 seats which, in a 240-seat parliament, is not enough for a stable majority," he said in his address.
"What we will offer is a political project for the European development of Bulgaria which everyone is welcome to support, except for the parties in the incumbent ruling coalition."
Tsvetanov also noted that his party will soon present a memorandum for political support to the new cabinet, whose top priorities will include limiting the impact of the global crisis, revising the 2009 budget and strengthening administrative efficiency.
