12/01/2010
(Various sources -- 23/12/09 - 10/01/10)
Bulgarian authorities have arrested a number of members of the country's under world in recent weeks, hoping to stem crime as well as criticism that their efforts against lawlessness and corruption are ineffective.
The highest-profile suspect is Krasimir "The Big Margin" Marinov, detained hours after the mafia-style execution on January 5th of Bobi Tsankosv, 30, a controversial former radio show host with ties to the mob.
Four days later, the Sofia City Court ruled that the alleged organised crime boss, charged with ordering the murder, must remain behind bars until trial.
If convicted, Marinov could face life in prison.
Police are still searching for his brother, Nikolai "The Little Margin" Marinov, who went into hiding following Tsankov's murder.
The US Embassy in Sofia reports approximately 140 "contract killings" in Bulgaria from 1993 through 2008.
Another dozen or so are believed to have been committed last year.
Only a few of the cases have ended in convictions.
Following publication of his book, "The Secrets of the Gangsters", Tsankov gave two lengthy interviews in November for Nova television's tabloid show "Goreshto" [Hot].
Tsankov spoke openly about his close ties to prominent mobsters.
He also wrote a series of articles on Bulgarian crime syndicates for the Sofia-based Weekend newspaper and was planning to publish a second book, reportedly about drug trafficking.
Tsankov said he had received threats from drug kingpin Stefan "Sako" Bonev in November.
Bonev was free at the time on a 3,000-euro bail.
Sofia City Prosecutor Nikolai Kokinov confirmed that Tsankov contacted him in November to complain about threats.
"He then offered his services and started visiting [the city prosecutors in] Sofia and providing information about certain cases," Kokinov said in an interview with Bulgarian National Radio.
The information Tsankov disclosed "voluntarily" during meetings with prosecutors was "serious and valuable", said Kokinov.
Tsankov's co-operation, he added, coincided with a feeling of anxiety among Bulgarian gangsters because of beefed-up anti-crime efforts.
"For months now criminals [have felt] pressured," he said.
"Their space is shrinking and gangsters become bolder and more ruthless.
They are nervous and feel restricted because they can no longer obtain the money they are used to."
As part of an operation last month dubbed "The Insolents", police busted a high-profile organised crime group believed to be behind more than a dozen kidnappings over the past two years.
More than 20 people were arrested during raids in December.
Revelations made by the gang's leader -- Ivaylo "Yozhi" Evtimov -- during interrogation reportedly led to the discovery of the remains of two criminals missing for months.
The bodies were unearthed in a mountainous region near Sofia.
About three weeks ago, Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov admitted that people within his government are believed to be helping organised crime groups.
Borisov stressed the need to purge government of such collaborators.
"The system leaks and has to be cleaned out, and the only way to do that is by removing inside people," Bulgarian daily Dnevnik quoted him as saying.
