13/07/2009
(Kathimerini - 13/07/09;
AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, Sky News, Euronews, BBC, ANA-MPA - 12/07/09)
Greek police cleared out an illegal migrants' camp in the western port city of Patras on Sunday (July 12th).
The camp, set up around 13 years ago, was being used mainly by Afghans.
"This has been a successful and effective, even if late, demolition," Patras police chief Thanassis Davlouros said.
The camp population had reached up to 1,800 several months ago.
With no running water or proper hygiene facilities, it raised health issues and was becoming a growing source of concern among Patras residents.
Migrants stayed at the camp while preparing to sneak onto ships bound for Italy and other parts of Western Europe.
The number of people living in the makeshift camps has reportedly shrunk in recent months following large-scale arrests and measures by the port authorities to halt the illegal boarding of Italy-bound ferries.
Many occupants are said to have abandoned the site around April, after hearing that authorities planned to close it down.
The operation was launched around dawn Sunday.
Around 80 officers and riot police moved in as bulldozers razed the camp.
Only a makeshift mosque and a tent used by volunteer doctors were left intact.
The authorities said they discovered a total of 44 minors, who were taken to a special centre in northern Greece.
Fifteen people found to possess legitimate documents were moved to a local hotel and another 15, who had no travel documents, were detained and taken for questioning.
"All legal procedures and measures concerning the future of these people have been taken," Euronews quoted Davlouros as saying.
He also told Reuters that the immigrants found during the raid were "mainly Afghans".
While the operation was still in progress, a large fire broke out in the camp and firefighters were called in to prevent the blaze from spreading to nearby buildings.
Local media reports said the reason for the incident was unclear, and that the authorities had previously removed propane canisters from the area.
The blaze caused no injuries.
Meanwhile, ATMs, four cars belonging to state organisations and the entrance of a court building were also torched.
Authorities say the incidents were the work of self-styled anarchists who support the immigrants.
According to Greek news agency ANA-MPA, a second makeshift camp, inhabited by immigrants from African countries mainly, was also raided by police in Patras later Sunday.
An unspecified number of people found to lack legitimate travel documents were detained.
Greece has often been criticised for its treatment of illegal immigrants.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), other international organisations and rights groups have also been urging the country to ensure better conditions at reception facilities for immigrants.
