13/07/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/07/09
The Serbian government earlier this month dismissed Marko Jaksic, director of the regional hospital in Mitrovica.
According to an UNMIK bulletin posted on July 3rd, anonymous sources told Pristina daily Koha Ditore that Jaksic obstructed Serbian officials and is suspected of involvement in an attack against two Serbian ministers who recently visited Kosovo.
The paper also notes that Jaksic is a member of the Serb National Council, chairman of the Association of Serb Municipalities and Settlements of Kosovo, and alleged leader of "The Bridge Watchers", a gang of Serb vigilantes with a history of violence.
However, Jaksic, a member of former Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), accused the government of dismissing him because of his political opinions and pressure from the international community.
"I am a member and senior official of the Democratic Party of Serbia and that is one side of the medal.
The other side of the medal is that I assume foreigners have put a lot of pressure in order to, as they say, dismiss those so-called extreme Serbs, and I think that is the essence of the political context of my dismissal," Jaksic told Radio KIM from the Serb enclave of Caglavica.
Milan Jakovljevic, a member of Tadic's Democratic Party (DS), will take over as hospital director.
The Kosovo government does not fully control northern Kosovo, where Serbs make up a majority of the population.
Hospital and school officials in those regions are still appointed by the Serbian government, which finances the institutions and Serb municipalities.
The Serbian Radical Party (SRS) and the DSS, who hold the reins in northern Kosovo, are in opposition with the DS and the ruling coalition in Serbia, as well as against co-operating with EULEX.
According to Jaksic, the EULEX stations mean that Kosovo is an independent state.
He said Serbs are OK with paying customs duties, but only to the Serbian government.
In protest of customs control stations at the Jarinje and Brnjak border crossings in northern Kosovo, local Serbs organised roadblocks, a manoeuvre Belgrade fiercely opposed.
Serbian Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic demanded that the roadblocks be removed, but to little avail.
A group in the Leposavic municipality last month stoned a car transporting the minister, but he was not injured.
The attackers remain unknown according to Belgrade-based Radio and TV network B92, however the radical 1389 Movement "took responsibility" for the attack.
Bogdanovic said that the Serbian government "will no longer tolerate such excesses".
A source from the Ministry for Kosovo told  Southeastern European Times that the Serb leaders from northern Kosovo, by constantly confronting EULEX, are not working to the benefit the Serb community.
The same source said that, unlike the Serbs in northern Kosovo, their compatriots in the rest of Kosovo live surrounded by Albanians and in very difficult conditions and hence cannot win much by taking on EULEX.
