13/10/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 13/10/09
The global financial crisis hit Croatia's schools hard, resulting in a newly imposed tightening of the state budget. 
For the first time, parents of primary and secondary school children have to purchase textbooks. 
The books were previously state supplied and free of charge.
Depending on the age of a child, parents also spend in the ballpark of 100 to 250 euros per child in additional school expenses.
Only children whose families fall below the poverty level and children of war veterans are excluded from the textbook rule.
"The tax payers again have to pay more than projected because of somebody's bad decisions. 
It is not fair that we have to spend extra money for something that was earlier guaranteed by the state," says Sanja Omazic, a shopkeeper from Zadar, and mother of a first grader.
The current recession forced about 550,000 Croatian students to buy textbooks this year.
In an attempt to help each other out, local families organised a second-hand textbook market, where older textbooks from previous school years were available to those in need.
Such unprecedented solidarity yielded tremendous results. 
Only parents who could not find the required books started queuing up in front of nearby bookshops.
Textbooks were state subsidised in the past, costing the country about 76m euros annually.
As each new school year allows for a different curriculum, teachers who create the lesson plans decide on the textbooks for that year as well. 
Such an approach complicates the process for parents.
Violeta Nikolic, the head of a Rijeka-based elementary school, thinks it is good to have diversity in the school curriculum, and for teachers to have more options in selecting the best textbooks for their classes.
Pero Lucin, a well-known expert on education, disagrees and says if there is a choice for teachers, it should be restricted to only a few per subject.
Meanwhile, free-of-charge sites like www.trebamknjigu.com, which started last July, serve as pools for second hand textbooks, helping to alleviate the current textbook crisis in Croatia.
