12/01/2010
(Irish Times, Cyprus Mail, Financial Mirror, Zaman - 12/01/10; AP, DPA, BBC, CNA, Famagusta Gazette, Hurriyet, World Bulletin, Makfax - 11/01/10; UN News Centre - 07/01/10)
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat opened the first of two rounds of UN-backed peace talks on Monday (January 11th), aimed at ending four decades of division in Cyprus.
During six daylong sessions -- three in the first round, closing Wednesday, and another three opening on January 25th -- the two leaders will discuss issues including governance, power-sharing, the economy, and matters involving the EU.
Property rights, one of the thorniest issues in the negotiations, is on the agenda for discussion before the second round of talks ends January 27th.
The process will be followed by a two-month break preceding the April presidential election in the northern Turkish region of the island. 
Talat is running for re-election and progress is critical to his bid. 
The talks are being held at the residence of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's Special Representative in Cyprus, Taye Brook Zerihoun.
After his nine-hour meeting with Talat on Monday, Christofias told reporters that the discussion focused on various aspects of governing Cyprus.
"We both made the point that nothing is agreed or will be agreed until everything is agreed," said Christofias, stressing that neither he, nor Talat will walk away from the talks. 
"Let us hope that at the end of the day we will have more convergences, which is the common aim."
The last attempt to negotiate a solution to a divided Cyprus ended in failure in April 2004, when Greek Cypriot voters overwhelmingly rejected a UN-sponsored reunification proposal. 
A majority of Turkish Cypriots voted in favour of the plan.
In May 2004, only the internationally recognised Greek-run part of Cyprus joined the EU, thereby representing the whole country. 
Ankara alone recognises the Turkish-controlled part of Cyprus.
The peace process remained deadlocked until September 2008, when Christofias and Talat launched a new round of direct, UN-sponsored negotiations amid high hopes that an agreement would be reached by the end of last year.
But after the 60 meetings, a deal remains elusive.
Ban expressed hope that the two leaders will be able to agree on the critically important issues and "make significant progress".
"As Secretary General, I have expressed my firm commitment and willingness and readiness to engage myself whenever the time is appropriate," Ban said on Monday, according to Cyprus News Agency.
Before the talks began, the Turkish Cypriots submitted proposals on governance and power-sharing, which the Greek Cypriots flatly rejected as "unacceptable".
"These proposals cannot form the basis for discussion," Greek Cypriot government spokesman Stephanos Stephanou said on Sunday.
Leaked to the press last week, the Turkish Cypriot proposals are said to include separate rights to sign international agreements and control of Cypriot air space.
A poll conducted last month suggested that Talat will be defeated by hard-line Turkish Cypriot Prime Minister and leader of the National Unity Party (UBP) Dervis Eroglu. 
Pushing for a continuation of the division of the island along ethnic lines, the UBP has suggested that a two-state model is the only basis for a solution.
