11/01/2010
By Natasa Radic and Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Zagreb and Pristina -- 11/01/10
Outgoing Croatian President Stipe Mesic is asking Serbia to stop fostering "unrealistic dreams" that the breakaway state of Kosovo will return to Serbian control.
In a visit to Pristina on Friday (January 8th) -- where he met with President Fatmir Sejdiu -- Mesic said it would "be good to stop stirring up unrealistic dreams".
In short, Kosovo's independence will not be reversed.
He also urged Belgrade to stop calling on the Serb minority in Kosovo -- which declared independence from Serbia in February of 2008 -- to boycott state institutions and elections.
"It would be good to stop suggesting [that] Kosovo citizens of Serb nationality refuse co-operation, and in that way, deprive themselves of the right to decide the way they live," Mesic said in a speech to parliament.
"The recognition of the independent Kosovo was not an act against anyone but the recognition of the political reality in the region."
During his visit, the last before President-elect Ivo Josipovic takes office, Mesic stressed his goal to strengthen relations between the two countries while promoting stability throughout the region.
Mesic pointed to work that needs to be done in building democracy while fighting corruption and organised crime.
In Pristina, Sejdiu awarded Mesic the Golden Medal of Independence, given to those who have made a special contribution to the freedom and the independence of Kosovo.
Sejdiu said the Croatian president has been, and remains, a friend of Kosovo.
"I have had the special privilege to have President Mesic as a personal friend and closely co-operate with him in a very important period for our country," said Sejdiu.
"That's why, in this solemn occassion, I want to express my appreciation and the appreciation of the people of the Republic of Kosovo."
Croatia recognised the independence of Kosovo on March 19th 2008, about a month after the nation declared itself independent of Serbia.
The acknowledgement threw Croatia's relations with Serbia into turmoil.
