11/01/2010
(Blic - 11/01/10;
Tanjug, B92, Radio Srbija, Fena - 10/01/10;
Beta, B92, Radio Srbija, MIA - 09/01/10;
Office of the High Representative, Fena - 08/01/10)
Calling for reconciliation among all Balkan countries, Serbian President Boris Tadic said on Saturday (January 9th) that the future of the region lies within the EU.
People throughout the Balkans, he said, should follow a policy of respect for different identities and national interests if any progress is to be made.
Tadic made his remarks during a visit to Banja Luka, the second largest city in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He was there to commemorate the 18th anniversary of the founding of the Republika Srpska (RS), the Serb-run republic established after the Dayton Peace Agreement ended the three-year conflict in the area.
At the same time, the accords established the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH).
"I think that after the conflicts in the 1990s our peoples need reconciliation and that this hand of reconciliation can be established as a symbol of our joint future and as a shared value," said Tadic after the ceremony.
"I am convinced that only this kind of policy can lead us to a future membership in the EU together, under whose roof we will live as good neighbours and good friends."
Tadic again acknowledged the crimes committed by Serbian forces and individuals during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s, and said he wanted to "send a message of peace to the entire region".
He added that he would be pleased to see other countries follow Belgrade's example and apologise for their own part in war crimes.
Speaking to Radio Television Republika Srpska (RTRS), Tadic said that the Serbian parliament must adopt a resolution condemning the 1995 massacre in Srebrenica, where up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys were methodically executed.
This would not only meet Serbia's obligation to the UN war crimes tribunal, but allow the country to defend its own victims.
A country that recognises the suffering of others and respects other nations' victims, he said, can gain credibility for its national policies on the international stage.
Tadic was quoted by the Belgrade-based B92 media outlet.
His call for a resolution on Srebrenica is supported in principle by Serbian opposition parties, according to Belgrade-based daily newspaper Blic.
Whether it will pass parliament or not, the paper noted, depends on the wording of the document.
Voicing support for the geographical and political integrity of the FBiH, Tadic stressed that his country will not interfere in its neighbour's internal affairs.
"I think that everyone needs to contribute to lowering political tensions in Bosnia and Herzegovina," Serbia's Beta news agency quoted Tadic as saying.
"Serbia will never do anything to destabilise Bosnia."
