13/08/2009
(eKathimerini - 13/08/09;
ANA-MPA, AP, Reuters, UPI, DPA, Makfax, Sofia Echo, Novinite, Dnevnik, Focus News Agency - 12/08/09;
US Department of State - 27/02/09)
Greece said on Wednesday (August 12th) it had confiscated nearly half a tonne of cocaine in one of the biggest drug seizures ever recorded in the country.
Officials said that a team of special anti-drug police discovered 447kg of cocaine during a raid on a freighter from Bolivia anchored at the country's main port of Piraeus, near Athens.
Wrapped in 400 packages, the drugs were hidden inside a ship's container filled with scrap aluminium.
The vessel, reportedly bound for Bulgaria, was raided last month following a tip from the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).
Greek media reports cited officials as saying that the cocaine originated in Bolivia, the third largest cultivator of the coca bush following Colombia and Peru, according to the UN Office on Drugs and Crime's World Drugs Report 2009.
The Greek economy and finance ministry's financial crimes service (YPEE) said in a statement that this was the biggest cocaine seizure in Greece and one of the biggest in Europe.
Reports also quoted Greek authorities as saying Wednesday that following a long surveillance operation, they had busted an international drug-trafficking ring involved in the case.
Five people -- a Bulgarian national and four Greeks, including one of the suspected masterminds of the operation, a customs broker and two women -- were arrested in Athens and Greece's second largest city, Thessaloniki, according to the finance ministry statement.
The Bulgarian suspect was reportedly supposed to receive the cocaine shipment in Thessaloniki, where he had established a company.
The value of the seized cocaine was at least 10m euros.
Authorities also seized a large sum of cash, including 75,800 euros and $3,214, as well as 37 SIM cards from undeclared card cell-phones, a luxury jeep and import documents.
Members of the trafficking ring reportedly used the same channel a month ago to smuggle 100kg of liquid cocaine hidden in wine bottles, which were seized by the Greek authorities.
That shipment was also destined for Bulgaria.
Bulgaria is a transit country for heroin and cocaine, as well as a producer of illicit narcotics, according to the 2009 International Narcotics Control Strategy Report (INCSR), issued by the US State Department's Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs in February.
Last year, Bulgarian authorities seized a total of nearly 1,300kg of heroin and only 9kg of cocaine.
Greece is a gateway country for the transit of illicit drugs and contraband and is part of the traditional "Balkan Route" for drugs flowing from drug-producing countries in the east to drug-consuming countries in Western Europe, according to the INCSR.
Greek authorities seized a total of 29.5kg of cocaine in different operations in April 2008.
Earlier the same year, they provided intelligence to the DEA that helped the French Coast Guard seize 3,210kg of cocaine.
