13/08/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 13/08/09
According to a recent UN Development Programme (UNDP) report, Kosovo Albanians consider unemployment and poverty the main threat to the country's stability, while a majority of Kosovo Serbs listed worsening interethnic relations as the most hazardous.
But the organisation also noted "the satisfaction level with the governing institutions of Kosovo has increased as compared to the April 2009 report," as well as the approval ratings for both the president and the prime minister.
"The June 2009 poll results show that approximately 53% of survey respondents were satisfied with the work of the government of Kosovo, an increase of some 15 percentage points," the organisation said.
According to the UNDP survey, dubbed The Kosovo Early Warning System Project, KFOR "has seen an increase in its satisfaction level ...
standing now at 74%".
The NATO force had previously seen declining popularity levels, during the period from October 2008 to April.
"Satisfaction with the work of EULEX has continued to sharply increase," the survey also said.
"Since April 2009, it increased by some 16 percentage points, standing now at 55%." Meanwhile, satisfaction with the work of UNMIK “increased in June 2009, after having reached the lowest approval rating of only 16% in April 2009 poll results, standing now at 28%".
According to the findings, approximately 46% of Kosovo citizens think the country's media is not free.
"This trend is particularly high amongst Kosovo Serbs, over 70% of whom believe that the media is not free.
More than half of respondents, across all ethnicities, believe that the media is controlled by the government.
Almost a quarter of Kosovo Serbs believe that the media is controlled by the international community," the UNDP said.
Another part of the survey dealt with "the willingness to work with those of a different ethnicity", for which the organisation said "two contrasting statistics emerged."
"Whilst the June 2009 poll shows that the portion of Kosovo Serbs willing to work with Kosovo Albanians has significantly decreased to 29% from 48% in April 2009;
for Kosovo Albanians, the indicator has seen an important increase from 33% in April 2009 to 48% in June 2009."
Security indicators have also shown that the most common threats to family security, despite ethnic background, are theft, robberies, and murders.
When it comes to corruption, Kosovo Power Company and the Kosovo Privatisation Agency continue to lead the polls in being perceived as having "large scale corruption", according to the survey, followed by Kosovo courts, customs, and central administration.
The survey is co-funded by USAID and UNDP.
A total of 1,290 respondents sat down for face-to-face interviews.
UNDP said 829 Kosovo Albanians, 233 Kosovo Serbs and 228 respondents classified as other minorities participated in the survey.
Mytaher Haskuka, head of the Policy Team that presented the poll data, suggested that while some of the trends can be attributed to seasonal variations, the level of change in some areas suggest that real changes are being registered and monitored across the population.
