12/10/2009
(FT, DPA, Fena - 11/10/09;
Euronews, Beta, B92 - 10/10/09;
AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, RFE/RL, Fena, AKI - 09/10/09)
High ranking EU and US officials met with the leaders of seven of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) political parties on Friday (October 9th) to discuss ways to break the political deadlock blocking the country's progress towards EU and NATO accession.
"We have come here … in order to say to the leaders of Bosnia that now is really the time to join the rest of the region in moving forward with European, Euro-Atlantic integration," Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt told reporters after the meeting.
Bildt, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, and US Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg led the talks at Camp Butmir, the EUFOR headquarters on the outskirts of Sarajevo.
They were joined by EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, High Representative and EU Special Representative (EUSR) in BiH Valentin Inzko, and his predecessor, Slovak Foreign Minister Miroslav Lajcak.
Constitutional reform was one of the key issues discussed with leaders of the main parties representing the Bosniak, Croat and Serb communities Friday.
Sulejman Tihic of the Party of Democratic Action, Haris Silajdzic of the Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Zlatko Lagumdzija of the opposition Social Democratic Party represented the Bosniaks in the talks.
Bosnian Croats were represented by leaders of the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Croatian Democratic Union 1990, Dragan Covic and Bozo Ljubic.
Milorad Dodik, the leader of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), and Branislav Borenovic of the Party of Democratic Progress represented the Bosnian Serbs at Friday's meeting.
For years, the international community has been urging BiH politicians to agree on changes to the constitution that will improve the efficiency and functionality of the country's extremely cumbersome system of governance.
The Dayton Peace Accord, which ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, left the country divided into two highly autonomous entities -- the Muslim-Croat Federation of BiH (FBiH) and the Serb-run Republika Srpska (RS) -- each with its own government and parliament.
In addition, there is a national parliament and government, and a tripartite presidency, whose members represent the three main ethnic groups.
"All three ethnic groups would have to compromise to create a workable future constitution," Steinberg said Friday.
"No one is going to achieve their maximalist objectives."
In 2006, Bosnian politicians agreed on a package of constitutional changes, aimed at strengthening central institutions and improving their efficiency, but they were never adopted.
The Bosniaks are pushing for the abolition of the two entities, so that the country can enter the EU as a unified nation.
The Bosnian Croats, who generally support that idea, insist however that they should get their own region in the event the country's ethnic division is preserved.
The Bosnian Serbs are staunchly opposed to any steps towards curbing their entity's substantial autonomy, let alone its abolition.
Dodik, the RS prime minister, has been repeatedly threatening since 2006 to call an independence referendum or -- more recently -- to end his entity's co-operation with the federal institutions.
"We are not interested in the constitutional changes," he told Belgrade-based B92 Television on Saturday, adding that BiH "is demonstrating its failure with the fact it came as a result of efforts of the international community to sustain it as a state".
Due to steadily rising nationalist rhetoric in BiH over the past three years and the growing political tension among the country's main ethnic groups, the implementation of EU-required reforms has stalled.
Hence, the country has failed to make much headway on its accession path since 2008, when it made its first major step towards eventual membership by signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Brussels.
"You need to take decisions that are necessary in order to make it possible for you to apply for membership with the EU," Bildt said on Friday.
"We don't want Bosnia and Herzegovina to be left behind" the rest of the countries in the region.
"The EU is a union of sovereign democracies, not a union of semi-functioning semi-protectorates," Bildt said Thursday.
"It is up to the Bosnian politicians to take their country from a semi-protectorate to sovereign democracy."
Speaking after Friday's meeting, the international diplomats said there would be a new round of talks in the same format on October 20th.
By then, the BiH politicians would try to reach a compromise on their country's future in order to revive its EU integration process.
