10/11/2009
(Washington Post, Independent, Nine O'clock - 10/11/09; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, FT, BBC, CNN, France 24, RFE/RL, VOA, Dnevnik.bg - 09/11/09)
World leaders and thousands of people gathered in the centre of the German capital Monday (November 9th) to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall, one of the most significant events in modern history.
Erected in 1961 to prevent East Germans from fleeing into capitalist West Berlin, the 155km-long concrete wall was a harsh symbol of the Cold War and the ideological divide in Europe for nearly three decades. 
While thousands managed to overcome the massive structure put in place by the communist regime, at least 136 people were killed in the so-called "death strip" between the main barrier and a second one further inside East Berlin while trying to escape into the free West.
The surprise fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9th 1989 heralded the collapse of communism across Eastern Europe and the end of the Cold War. 
It also paved the way for Germany's reunification on October 3rd 1990.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who herself grew up in communist East Germany, was among the thousands to cross the much-despised barrier on the night it collapsed. 
Addressing a crowd of 100,000 people and world leaders at Berlin's Brandenburg Gate, she called November 9th 1989 an "epic" moment in history and "one of the happiest" in her life.
"Together we brought down the Iron Curtain and I am convinced this can give us the strength for the 21st century," said Merkel. 
"Our good fortune obliges us to take on the challenges of our time."
Leaders of the 26 other EU nations, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev, former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, former Polish President Lech Walesa and former Hungarian Prime Minister Miklos Nemeth were among the leaders attending the ceremonies in Berlin. 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton represented the United States.
Earlier in the day, Merkel and Gorbachev shared an umbrella as they crossed the steel bridge at Berlin's Bornholmer Strasse, site of the first checkpoint to open on the historic day 20 years ago. 
According to Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, the German chancellor told her companion that he had made the fall of the wall possible because he "courageously let things happen".
Two years before that defining moment for Europe, US President Ronald Reagan urged Gorbachev to "tear down this wall" in an historic speech he delivered in Berlin in June 1987.
The man who would eventually become the last leader of the Soviet Union said on Monday that, back in 1989, neither he, nor Germany's then-Chancellor Helmut Kohl foresaw such a quick turn of events.
"My clairvoyant skills and those of Kohl were up to nothing then. 
We did not think the wall would fall so fast," the AP quoted Gorbachev as saying at a news conference Monday.
In a video message, US President Barack Obama said he would always remember the images of people tearing down the barrier.
"There could be no clearer rebuke of tyranny, there could be no stronger affirmation of freedom," he stressed.
At the culmination of celebrations Monday night, a symbolic 2km-long wall made of 1,000 foam-plastic 2.5m-high dominoes, decorated by artists and students from Germany and around the world, was toppled.
Meanwhile, Berlin's State Opera orchestra, headed by renowned conductor Daniel Barenboim, entertained the crowd at Brandenburg Gate with pieces from Beethoven and Wagner.
