09/11/2009
By Maria Paravantes for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 09/11/09
New Greek Culture and Tourism Minister Pavlos Geroulanos announced late last month that the ministry has a slew of projects in the works, such as combating theft and the illicit trade of antiquities, bringing home the Parthenon Marbles, and promoting cultural programmes like the annual Athens Festival and Thessaloniki Film Festival.
Addressing parliament for the first time, Geroulanos said the country needs to tap into its cultural resources.
"There's not much money in culture," he said, "but there is plenty to be gained."
He spoke primarily of utilising Greek history, contemporary art, culture and traditions -- including the Mediterranean diet, which focuses on the eating patterns of countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea -- as well as the country's natural beauty to promote alternative forms of tourism.
Geroulanos said he would continue in the footsteps of the late, and much-loved, socialist Culture Minister Melina Mercouri, whose vision was to see the Parthenon Marbles returned by the British Museum, where they are currently housed. 
There was a special gallery built in the Acropolis Museum, inaugurated last June, to display the monuments.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited the Acropolis Museum on Wednesday (November 4th).
Geroulanos also invited film industry professionals to suggest ways to improve the annual International Thessaloniki Film Festival, which serves as a springboard for emerging film makers from Southeastern Europe. 
The 50-year-old competitive festival, this year under the title "Why Cinema Now?", takes place between November 13th and 22nd in the port city of Thessaloniki and is a leading film event in the Balkan region.
Geroulanos also made mention of the 54-year-old Athens (and Epidauros) Festival, which annually features international music, theatre and dance events. 
The festival has suffered in the last several years from organisational setbacks -- the latest of which was when theatre unions threatened to cancel the event last May.
"Serious efforts are being made," the minister said, "but we must find ways to further promote the festival as it is held during Athens' tourist season."
He failed however to refer to the National Opera, which is in debt.
