12/08/2009
(AFP, AP, Xinhua, Focus News Agency, B92, Makfax, European Commission - 11/08/09; ISN Security Watch, IMF - 29/07/09)
The European Commission (EC) approved a 39m-euro grant for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Tuesday (August 11th) to help ease the impact of the global financial crisis.
A portion of the aid package "will support the development of small and medium sized enterprises and provide significant investment in infrastructure in the transport, environment, and energy sectors", the EC said in a statement. 
Another part will go to BiH's Deposit Insurance Agency, to help prevent deposit outflows due to the financial crisis.
The programme endorsed on Tuesday "will trigger substantial loan financing from the international financial institutions", such as the EBRD and the European Investment Bank, the EC added.
The grant is part of the 89m euros set aside for BiH this year under the EU's Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (IPA).
Brussels promised on Tuesday to provide additional assistance this fall to help BiH continue implementing critical institution building reforms. 
That funding will also come under the IPA programme, under which the country is to receive a total of nearly 84m euros for transition assistance and institution building this year. 
Another 5m euros will underpin initiatives in the area of cross-border co-operation.
Last year, the allocation of pre-accession assistance for BiH totaled nearly 75m euros. 
The amounts earmarked under the IPA facility will grow steadily over next three years -- from 106m euros in 2010 to 110m euros in 2012.
Real GDP growth in the country in 2006 and 2007 stood at 6.9% and 6.8%, respectively, before dropping to an estimated 5.5% last year, according to the IMF. 
Last month, the Washington-based institution forecast a 3% contraction in BiH's economy for this year.
"The negative fallout from the global crisis started to become increasingly evident in late 2008," the IMF said in a statement last month, announcing the approval of a 1.2 billion-euro stand-by arrangement for BiH.
As a result of the global turmoil, stock market indices fell, international reserves began to decline and bank credit growth was brought to a standstill. 
Construction activity faltered and many companies began to lay off workers.
Despite a decline in revenues, fiscal policies were loosened in 2008. 
Expenditures rose sharply, driven by increases in wages and social benefits, as well as excessive spending on war veterans and the disabled in the Federation of BiH (FBiH), largely for partisan reasons.
"As a result, the general government deficit widened to 4% of GDP from a near-balance in 2007," the IMF said, expecting the budget gap to swell further to an estimated 4.7% of GDP this year.
A report by Fund staff released on July 29th described the financial position of Republika Srpska (RS) as "comfortable". 
The FBiH, however, "faced a fiscal crisis".
Two days after the stand-by arrangement's approval, BiH's central bank received the first tranche of about 205m euros -- one-third of it for RS and the remaining two-thirds for FBiH.
The RS government was allowed to withdraw its share of the loan, while the Federation's access to its portion of the money hinges on implementing major budget reforms.
On Tuesday, FBiH Finance Minister Vjekoslav Bevanda said the salaries of cabinet members and their advisers will be cut by 50% as of next month, in line with a recently adopted law on reducing government spending. 
The move will bring state officials' wages back to their levels in December, when the Federation prime minister was paid 900 euros a month, while lawmakers and ministers received about 800 euros.
Despite the entity's fiscal problem, their salaries almost doubled in January this year, when a new law entered into force.
