11/02/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 11/02/10
Relations between Turkey's pro-Islamic government and the secular army have entered a new era with the annulment of a controversial protocol that had allowed the military to take action without permission from civilian authorities.
"Officials from [the military and the interior ministry] came together and have jointly annulled the protocol," Interior Minister Besir Atalay announced on February 4th, Anatolia news agency reported.
Signed in 1997 between the general staff and the interior ministry, the Military-Police Security Co-operation Protocol, or EMASYA, was considered one of the most effective tools for the military's intervention into politics.
In extraordinary situations, such as social unrest spreading to more than one province, the military was allowed to intervene without waiting to be called on by political authority. 
Annulment of this policy followed recent coup allegations against the military based on the "Sledgehammer Action Plan", which was published in the media.
According to reports, the plan was formulated by the Istanbul-based 1st Army in 2003, just months after the Justice and Development Party (AKP) came to the power. 
The military allegedly planned to provoke the Muslim population by bombing mosques and use the protocol to quell the ensuing riots.
The military denied the accusations and condemned those who believe that the army would bomb Turkish houses of worship. 
"I curse [those who make these assertions]," Chief of General Staff General Ilker Basbug told reporters.
The annulment of EMASYA, however, is seen as a first step in a plan to limit the military's role in politics.
"The annulment of Article 35 of the internal service law of the Turkish Armed Forces (TSK) and the rewriting of the National Security Policy Paper (MGSB) are on the list," wrote the Radikal newspaper on Friday (February 5th).
While Article 35 gives the military the authority to protect secular order and national unity without the staging of coups, the MGSB gives the army the superiority to determine threats against the country.
Both the EMASYA and the TSK's internal service law have been under EU scrutiny.
In an EU progress report on Turkey last year, officials noted "No change has been made to the Turkish Armed Forces Internal Service Law or to the Law on the National Security Council.
"These define the roles and duties of the Turkish military and grant the military wide room for manoeuvre by providing a broad definition of national security. 
The 1997 EMASYA secret protocol on security, public order and assistance units remains in force." Unclear, however, is how to ease tensions between the government and the military.
"Since the AKP has formed the government, the civilian-military row has been escalating. 
The military doesn't like the AKP. 
They are suspicious of the party and wanted to block it. 
Likewise, the AKP tried to keep the military in the barracks," veteran columnist Mehmet Ali Birand wrote in the daily Posta last month.
