11/02/2010
(People Net, Web-inco.net)
The EU People programme -- along with the Seventh Framework Programme and Marie Curie Actions -- is funding a range of opportunities for working scientists to return to and remain in Europe. 
The projects offer financial assistance in training, mobility and career development.
Marie Curie Actions aims to increase the ability of researchers to move freely between countries while providing training and career development for those who take jobs abroad. 
Areas of study are chosen by applicants.
A website devoted to research policies in the Western Balkans -- wbc-inco.net -- said the objective of the Marie-Curie International Reintegration Grants is to make Europe a more attractive place for advanced study for scientists who have done their work overseas for at least three years.
The site details how to apply for the grant. 
"Researchers from EU member states or associated countries who have at least four years full-time postgraduate research experience or a doctoral degree, and who have benefited from a Marie Curie training and mobility action for at least 18 months are eligible for participation in the programme."
The goal is take the knowledge these people have gained from institutions in other parts of the world and "transfer" it back to Europe, according to the site.
Applications are submitted in conjunction with a prospective host institution in Europe. 
Priority will be given to researchers who have not yet worked in Europe in their chosen field.
Grant proposals are selected in an open competition. 
Selection is done through independent peer review, a transparent process using predetermined criteria.
The reintegration grant is a flat-rate contribution towards project costs. 
These may contribute to the salary costs of the researcher or other staff employed for the project, travel costs, consumables, patent costs and publication costs.
If an application is successful, the EC establishes an agreement with the researcher's host institution. 
An employment agreement follows, with the institution -- from universities and scientific centres within the EU or an associated country -- paying the researcher's salary.
There are currently 12 countries participating in the programme: Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Israel, Switzerland, Croatia, Macedonia, Serbia, Turkey, Montenegro, Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
