09/07/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade- - 09/07/09
Jelena Markovic, 20, won this year's Miss Serbia title on Monday (July 6th) and will go on to represent the country at the Miss World pageant in Johannesburg, South Africa, in December.
"I did not expect [to win] the title because many beautiful and smart women were competing," she said.
Markovic, a native of Pozhega, competed against contestants from across Serbia at Belgrade's Sava Centre. 
Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic and Sports Minister Snezana Samardzic-Markovic attended the event.
Vesna da Vinca, owner of the "Mis JU" company, which organises the Serbian pageant, responded to critics who suggested the new Miss Serbia may not measure up.
"We chose the right girl and I believe she has a great chance at the selection for Miss World. 
She is highly polished and a wise woman," said da Vinca. 
"During the preparations … we assess according to different criteria."
Those preparations this year took place on Mount Kopaonik, one of Serbia's main tourist centres. 
The contestants spent nearly a month there, practicing choreography and stage acts.
This year's pageant also followed a bit of a sports theme. 
The University Olympics -- popularly named Universiad -- is concurrently taking place in Belgrade; student athletes from over 140 countries take part in the event.
The pageant jury also included some well-known Serbian sports personalities, including basketball player Vlade Divac and national soccer team coach Radomir Antic. 
Contestants seemed to have the sports bug as well; most said tennis player Ana Ivanovic is their role model.
Markovic is currently attending Belgrade Law School, but is keeping her career options open. 
She told the pageant jury that "judging by my schooling, one might think I will become a lawyer, [but] I would actually like to become a journalist."
Markovic is convinced she will be a good ambassador for Serbia at the Miss World pageant.
"I will justify the expectations of the citizens of Serbia, [and] will think up an original presentation with which I will show that women in Serbia are beautiful and smart -- they have all the qualities of a complete woman."
However, organiser da Vinca added a dose of reality. 
"Lobbying is needed, and the state should get involved. 
The world's choice does not depend on beauty alone, and goes outside the framework of that which I as a private sector person can do."
Last year's Miss World pageant also took place in South Africa. 
Miss Russia, Ksenia Sukhinova, was crowned Miss World 2008 in the event that was televised to over 2 billion people in 130 countries.
