11/12/2009
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 11/12/09
Amid public insults and accusations, the gap between the government and the country's opposition widened to record levels in Albania, sparking concern abroad.
On Wednesday (December 9th), Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt called on Albanian authorities and political parties to immediately address the ongoing political crisis.
"The political condition in Albania requires fast dialogue for the country to move forward. 
This message is important for Tirana", Bildt said. 
However, the opposition, led by the Socialist Party (SP), stands firm in its boycott of parliament due to numerous alleged irregularities in the June 28th elections.
"We will not enter parliament until all conditions for it to be considered a legitimate … place where Albanians are being rightfully represented are met," SP leader Edi Rama said.
Albania's opposition parties support the SP's demand that the ballots, voter lists and related documents at polling stations where the alleged irregularities took place be made public.
But the government of Prime Minister Sali Berisha says co-operation with the opposition can only take place within parliament. 
Berisha reiterated that the June elections were "the most transparent process the country ever had".
Although the government accepted a parliamentary investigation into the elections, it has refused to allow the ballots to be opened, saying such an act would be illegal.
The opening of ballots is not covered under any existing law, and would require majority support in parliament.
"I am open and co-operative … but forget about ever changing the court decisions of this country, or violating state law," Berisha said in response to Rama's demands.
Communication between the two leaders deteriorated in past weeks to below the belt personal attacks.
Berisha characterised the opposition's refusal to return to parliament a "personal boycott" by Rama because "he cannot accept that he lost the elections."
Rama, calling Berisha a "mentally disabled person", said he will not back down, and promised future protests until early elections are held.
Both leaders have different modi operandi. 
Rama uses street protests and his local authority against government decisions to cut municipality funding.
Berisha, through his majority in parliament, passed an anti-mafia law last week, believing it would serve to attack business groups that, according to him, stand behind the SP and Rama. 
He described the opposition as "the most dangerous mafia clan in the Balkans", and called a number of its deputies oligarchs.
President Bamir Topi's offer this week to negotiate a solution has fallen by the wayside, as have previous attempts by former Prime Minister Ilir Meta.
