10/12/2009
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/12/09
The International Court of Justice (ICJ) continued to hear oral arguments this week concerning the independence of Kosovo.
Debate centres on whether the fledging country's declaration of sovereignty falls under international law, whether Serbia's territorial integrity has been violated, and whether UN Resolution 1244 allowed for the possibility of independence.
On Wednesday (December 9th) Kosovo received support from France, Jordan and Norway, a day after the United States did so.
Russia presented the opposing view.
Declaring independence did not violate the principle of territorial integrity, permanent UN Security Council member France said, because that principle applies only to relations between countries, and not between countries and entities.
Norway's representative, Rolf Einar Fife, reminded the court that his own country unilaterally dissolved its union with Sweden in 1905, and said declarations of independence are not, in themselves, "the object of regulation by public international law".
He described Kosovo's proclamation of sovereignty as "a statement of democratically elected leaders, on par with that of members of a constituent assembly, whose explicit aim is to represent the will of the people."
Jordan, meanwhile, argued that neither Serbia nor Slobodan Milosevic's Yugoslavia could be considered the legal heirs of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and thus did not have de jure authority over Kosovo.
On Tuesday, the United States and Russia presented contrasting stances.
US representative Harold Hongju Koh said Kosovo's declaration was in line with UN Resolution 1244, which he said "anticipated, without predetermining, that independence might be an appropriate outcome for Kosovo's future status".
The resolution said "absolutely nothing about the territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia beyond the interim period", Koh said.
Moreover, he added, the resolution specifically avoided any suggestion that Kosovo was part of Serbia, as distinct from Yugoslavia.
Siding with Serbia, Russian representative Kirill Gevorgian denied that the people of Kosovo have ever been "recognised as a self-determination unit".
Resolution 1244, he argued, could not be construed as allowing "secession of a part of a sovereign state".
Indeed, Gevorgian said, that was one of the reasons Russia voted for the resolution.
The interim period for Kosovo, he added, "is still ongoing".
A total of 30 states, in addition to Kosovo and Serbia, will have submitted oral statements by Friday, when this part of the trial ends.
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia, China, Spain, Cyprus and Brazil are among those agreeing with Serbia, while Albania, Austria, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Burundi, Denmark, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands and Saudi Arabia have spoken up in defence of Kosovo's independence.
On Tuesday, Croatia became the only former Yugoslav nation to weigh in on the issue during the oral proceedings.
It argued that Kosovo enjoyed strong autonomy within federal Yugoslavia and that Belgrade's claim that it represented the successor to federal Yugoslavia was "without legal basis".
