11/08/2009
By Brian Salmi for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 11/08/09
The need for high quality, independent journalism in the region will assure the survival of the Balkans Investigative Reporting Network (BIRN), says the organisation's founder, Gordana Igric.
"Of course BIRN will survive," Igric told Southeast European Times.
"The global economic crisis has made things difficult but we survived worse times.
In 2005 [when BIRN was formed] we had high operating costs, but not a lot of grant money, over a prolonged period.
We survived that and we will somehow survive this," she said.
Although the organisation has an arm that operates as a commercial business, the bulk of BIRN's work is done by its non-profit sector, which is bankrolled by close to a dozen philanthropic institutions -- including the Rockefeller Brothers Fund and the Balkan Trust for Democracy -- and European governments, The Netherlands and Norway.
Igric says Balkan-based NGOs do not get long term funding commitments from donors, so she and her colleagues are constantly searching for new benefactors and ways of making money.
BIRN hopes to derive revenue from subscriptions to the premium section of one of its websites (balkaninsight.com) and Igric is hopeful that BIRN Regional's cornucopia of experts can be engaged by private clients.
Pristina Insight, a bi-weekly newspaper, is 100% financed by donors, but the weekly Belgrade Insight is covering 60% of its production costs through advertising revenue.
Igric believes her Belgrade paper, "can survive on its own, once the economy recovers".
Independent journalism in the Balkans is still a work in progress.
According to Freedom House, an international organisation that "promotes free institutions", Slovenia is the only country in the region where a free press exists.
All other Balkan countries were rated "partly free".
Freedom House's 2009 annual report noted that journalists in the Balkans are frequently threatened with violence -- reporters in Bulgaria and Croatia were murdered in 2008 -- and media organs across the region routinely practice self-censorship.
"All significant numerical changes of press freedom in the Balkans were negative" in 2008, the organisation said.
Igric agrees that the quality of journalism "is not great".
But all is not bleak, she insists.
"There are more serious players in the market.
Investors are coming from abroad and they are offering better pay," Igric says.
