09/10/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 09/10/09
Leaders and policymakers from 186 countries gathered in Istanbul on Tuesday (October 6th) and Wednesday for the IMF-World Bank annual meetings, aimed at seeking "exit strategies" from the global economic turmoil.
Discussions on reforming the IMF, the world's biggest lender, and the social impacts of the financial crisis, were the major topics.
The IMF policy steering committee agreed on bold reforms that would transform the Fund with a new mandate to be more effective in preventing financial crises, to put more trust in borrowers and give more voting power to under-represented countries.
The Istanbul decisions also foresee more flexible credits to developing countries and new multilateral surveillance in the global financial system.
The Fund failed to prevent the global financial crisis, and had long been criticised by borrower countries who say the IMF was ignoring its larger role in the global financial system, as well as the social responsibilities of their national governments.
IMF Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn has admitted past mistakes, but said the Fund has also learned lessons from history.
The IMF's active role and global co-operation prevented the world from a far worse crisis, and leaders should now seize the opportunity to change and shape a post-crisis world, he said.
"All nations need to adapt and change, and the IMF must change too," Strauss-Kahn said.
Huge protests in Istanbul streets
While a record number of participants were discussing new policies during the meetings, thousands of protestors took the streets in Istanbul, protesting IMF policies.
Anti-globalisation and anarchist groups from Europe joined the Turkish protestors, and in some places demonstrations turned violent, with minor radical groups smashing bank windows and stoning security forces.
Police used tear gas and detained dozens.
Turkey has been the IMF's biggest borrower this decade, drawing about 28 billion euros, but the Fund is highly unpopular in Turkey, with trade unions and politicians blaming the organisation for imposing policies that cuts jobs and social benefits.
Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has been negotiating with the IMF for more than a year for a follow-up agreement, but has yet to reach a deal.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said this week that an agreement for a 7 billion-euro loan will be concluded soon.
Erdogan, who hosted the meetings in Istanbul, pointed out some of the social impacts of the global crisis and called for world leaders and policy makers to turn the 21st century into a period of opportunities rather than a period of new challenges.
Warning of instability
As part of the Istanbul meetings, the IMF announced its new projections for the world economy, which showed that the recession is coming to an end.
Recovery will likely be slow and fragile, with continued risks of growing unemployment and poverty.
According to the Fund's projection for emerging European economies, the category in which most of the South European countries are analysed, the 2009 growth rate will be -6.6%, but it is expected to grow to 1.7% in 2010.
However, Strauss-Kahn warned that many countries will experience rising unemployment through 2010.
In low-income countries, 90 million people are expected to be pushed into extreme poverty.
"With weak social safety nets, we are talking not only about higher unemployment or lower purchasing power, but life and death itself.
If we do not act, we could see social unrest, political instability, or war," he told meeting participants.
