09/12/2009
(UPI, Zaman, Anadolu Agency - 09/12/09;
AFP, Reuters, DPA, FT, Bloomberg, Euobserver, CNA - 08/12/09)
A new hurdle emerged on Turkey's path towards EU membership Tuesday (December 8th).
Cyprus indicated it would block the opening of five new chapters in Turkey's accession negotiations, unless Ankara meets some yet unspecified conditions.
"We will be setting conditions for the opening of the chapters," Cypriot Foreign Minister Markos Kyprianou said after a two-day meeting with top diplomats in Brussels, adding that Nicosia is not seeking to "stop the Turkish accession process".
Turkey must bring its laws in line with EU standards before the country is able to join the 27-nation bloc.
Ankara has opened 11 of all 35 negotiating chapters so far, with one provisionally closed.
EU leaders froze eight others in December 2006 over Turkey's failure to open its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot ships and planes.
Prior to the launch of its accession talks, Turkey signed a deal extending its customs agreement with the EU to all its new members, including Cyprus, which joined the bloc in May 2004, minus its Turkish-run north, which is recognised by Ankara alone.
Turkey has been insisting that it will only open its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels once the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community ends.
Cyprus has already put conditions on the opening of the energy-negotiating chapter.
The five new policy areas added to the list Tuesday include:
free movement of workers;
judiciary and fundamental rights;
justice, freedom and security;
education and culture, and foreign, security and defence policy.
The EU foreign ministers indicated on Tuesday that the eight chapters frozen three years ago will remain off limits for Turkey until it ends its trade embargo on Cyprus, but gave the green light for the opening of talks on environmental policies later this month.
The EU nations "note with deep regret that Turkey, despite repeated calls, continues refusing to fulfil its obligation" under the so-called Ankara Protocol of 2005, the DPA quoted the ministers as saying in a joint statement.
That refusal "will have a continuous effect on the overall process in negotiations".
But the diplomats hailed Turkey's reform progress in areas, including the judiciary, civil-military relations and cultural rights, as well as its "significant diplomatic efforts" towards normalising relations with Armenia.
Welcoming the government's recent moves aimed at improving the rights of the country's sizable Kurdish minority, they also urged Ankara to take "concrete measures guaranteeing all Turkish citizens full rights and freedoms".
The message sent to Turkey struck the right balance, outgoing EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said.
The fact that a new chapter is to be opened before the end of this year indicates that Turkey's accession process "is on track", the AFP quoted him as telling reporters in Brussels on Tuesday.
In response to the EU diplomats' decision, the Turkish foreign ministry issued a statement Wednesday describing as "unfair" their demand that Turkey honour its commitments, while the EU itself has failed to fulfil a pledge it made in April 2004 to remove the "blockade" on the Turkish Cypriot community.
