08/10/2009
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European in Tirana, Albania -- 08/10/09
After a wave of criticism, the Macedonian Academy of Arts and Sciences (MANU) will cease distribution of its "Macedonian Encyclopedia", and will correct several sections in the two-volume publication. 
The decision was issued earlier this month after bitter reactions were voiced over "incorrect" statements in the books.
"Approaching once again the subject of the history of Albanians in the territories they live … should be done in accordance with the world known historical facts," the Albanian Academy of Science (ASC) said in an official reaction Monday (October 5th).
"We understand that each historian has the right to have their own views, however incorrect facts and absurdities are intolerable for the Academy of Science," the ASC said.
The encyclopedia describes Albanians as "mountain people" and says the nation descended in Macedonia together with the Ottoman Empire in the 16th century.
The ASC says these views are nationalist, and called on their Macedonian colleagues to reconsider the publication for the sake of "truth in history and good neighbourhood relations".
Albanian historian and politician Sabri Godo has called the publication "a harsh hit for Albanians" that "menaces the efforts for co-existence among Albanians and Macedonians".
Meanwhile, the Centre for Albanian Studies in Tirana said that "[these] unscientific methods" are undermining the bridges of friendships and interethnic solidarity that Balkan people are trying to build.
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha fiercely criticised the publication at a press conference late last month, saying the encyclopedia was "absurd and unacceptable".
"They [Macedonians] are in search of an identity, while Albanians are not. 
Albanians have been living here for ages; they have suffered a lot, but never for not having their identity," Berisha said.
Foreign Minister Ilir Meta reiterated Albania's constructive position in the region and the support it has given Macedonia's efforts to join NATO and the EU.
The sections on Albanian-Macedonian relations, Albanians in Macedonia, Ali Ahmeti, aggression over Macedonia, the National Liberation Army and Gonxhe Agnesë Bojaxhiu will be revised, the MANU presidency said.
