10/08/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje-- 10/08/09
Macedonia hosted a batch of exciting concerts recently that packed stadiums and concert halls across the country.
Jazz guitarist George Benson performed on July 25th at the Antique Theatre in Ohrid. 
The show was part of a project by Macedonian concert organiser Avalon Production called Culture Shock, which also brought Talking Heads frontman David Byrne to Universal Hall on July 7th, and will bring Canadian jazz artist Diana Krall to Skopje this November.
Mellowing a bit from rock anthems like Byrne's popular 1983 song "Burning Down the House", Italian composer Ennio Morricone opened the 49th annual Ohrid Summer Festival on July 12th at the Antique Theatre with the Budapest Symphony Orchestra.
Morricone, 80, wrote scores for films like "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly", "The Untouchables" and "Lolita", among others, and has won numerous awards, including the Honourary Academy Award in 2007 for his contributions to film music.
"I'm proud that I was honoured to open the Ohrid Summer Festival. 
I'm very satisfied that I'm here. 
I don't want to give compliments, but right after I crossed the border, I noticed that Ohrid is a special town," said Morricone at a press conference.
This year's festival, which includes a slew of concerts, exhibits and theatre performances, will wrap up on August 20th with a special performance by the United Europe Chamber Orchestra.
Guitar legend Carlos Santana rocked Skopje's local City Stadium on July 10th, a few days before the Summer Festival kicked off.
Nearly 15,000 fans came to see Santana, spending about 25 euros a pop for the cheapest seats in the house.
Also on July 10th, as part of a concert series called OFFest, New York punk rock legend Patti Smith headlined at Universal Hall, making her Balkan debut.
Although summer is winding down, the Macedonian concert series isn't.
The Skopje Jazz Festival is scheduled for this autumn, which will be headlined by American jazz pianist Chick Corea.
"The leading jazz music journal … last year again proclaimed Mr. 
Corea as the best jazz musician. 
He will come with the trio composed by another two famous jazz musicians and his close associates from the time of the group 'Return to Forever' -- bass guitarist Stanley Clark and drummer Lenny White. 
This strong trio … will play most of the famous songs of 'Return to Forever' in acoustic and electric variant," said festival spokesperson Kostadin Surbanovski.
