10/08/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 10/08/09
Relations have soured between the Austrian power utility company EVN -- owner of Macedonia's power supply grid -- and its partner, the local power generating company "Elektrani na Makedonija" (ELEM).
Last April, a Skopje court ordered EVN to pay ELEM close to 200m euros in unpaid debts. 
EVN officials called the decision "scandalous" and appealed the following month.
The firm also launched proceedings against Macedonia at the International Court of Arbitration in Washington.
EVN officials argue that the 2002 bilateral agreement between Austria and Macedonia, signed to protect and promote investments in both countries, has been violated. 
"We received the [court] invitation and are getting ready to answer," Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski confirmed.
EVN entered Macedonia in 2006 and acquired the country's distribution company "Elektrostopanstvo na Makedonija" (ESM), now known as EVN Macedonia. 
The acquisition came as Macedonia's state-owned power monopoly was split into a power generation unit called ELEM, the distribution unit ESM and a transmission company.
The sale took place during the previous, Social Democrat-led government led by then prime minister Vlado Buckovski. 
He says relations between the two sides were clearly defined.
But according to the current deputy prime minister, Zoran Stavrevski, EVN failed to meet its obligations under the acquisition agreement, which called for investing 96m euros in the infrastructure grid during the following three years to prevent energy loss and improve electricity services.
Macedonia, he said, honoured its part of the deal by delivering ESM to EVN and paying 22m euros when it was later determined that the balance reported initially was too low.
The agreement stipulates that in case the monies were not invested, the parties have a right to an independent audit. 
The government commissioned Ernst & Young, which determined EVN invested 23m euros. 
However, the funds came from bills paid by consumers, and not as a separate investment by the company as stipulated in a provision of the sales agreement.
EVN says its actions were in line with the Share Purchase Agreement. 
The company insists it has fulfilled its investment obligation and says it is ready to have the case arbitrated in front of international forums.
It says it has been the target of "many discriminatory actions and constantly mounting pressure", especially since the Gruevski administration took office.
Austrian officials, meanwhile, are blaming the Macedonian judiciary. 
"Having in mind the importance and the format of the EVN investment in Macedonia, I would kindly ask to consider the situation very seriously," Foreign Minister Josef Proll sent a letter to Stavrevski. 
"I would like to assure you that I am very interested in seeing improvement of the situation immediately."
