08/07/2009
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 08/07/09
The ruling Democratic Party (DP) will again head the government after joining forces with the small left-wing coalition Socialist Movement for Integration (SMI).
The SMI won four crucial seats in the June 28th parliamentary elections.
The agreement, forged on Saturday (July 4th), was approved by the SMI at an extraordinary party conference Tuesday.
"Taking into account the economic crises that the country is going through and evaluating the importance of political and institutional stability … with historic and patriotic responsibility I accept the invitation," SMI head Ilir Meta said after the agreement.
Based on preliminary results, the SMI seats -- added to the DP-led coalition of the Alliance for Change's 70 seats -- give the coalition more than the 71 seats required to form the government.
The opposition coalition Union for Change, led by Edi Rama's Socialists, won 65 seats.
Prime Minister Sali Berisha of the DP said the new government will be called the "integration government" and will focus on Euro-Atlantic accession -- a priority for both the DP and SMI.
"Let's be realistic, this is the most appropriate option for the country:
to have a solid, efficient and strong government and a solid opposition also," Berisha said.
A coalition with the Socialists would have given the country a government that was too fragile, Meta said.
According to local media, he wants SMI members serving as parliament speaker and at the helm of two ministries.
Rama called the agreement the most "disgusting deal" in the latest 18 years of democracy in Albania.
"While the efforts to count every opposition vote still continue, Ilir Meta hurried to become a crutch for the fallen prime minister, holding up the government of Gerdec, as he used to call it just six days ago," Rama said Saturday.
The Central Election Committee (CEC) has not yet announced its official results.
Due to several cases of conflict, the official results may be far off.
One of the hottest debates is concentrated in the region of Fieri, where the vote counting process is being scrutinised.
On Monday, the SP threatened to ignore the final results if it is not declared winner in the region.
Preliminary results suggest the SP got nine seats, followed by the DP with six.
