06/11/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 06/11/09
President Traian Basescu nominated Liviu Negoita, mayor of one of Bucharest's districts, for prime minister Friday (November 6th). 
Negoita, a member of the Liberal Democratic Party (PDL), said he wants a coalition government and promised he would start consultations on forming his team so he can send his proposed list of ministers to parliament Monday.
Time is of the essence, he indicated. 
"Romania needs financing and must follow through with its agreements with the IMF, World Bank and the European Commission," Negoita said.
Basescu said he chose the mayor because he wanted to meet the requirements of the parliamentary majority, which has been insisting on its own nominee -- Sibiu Mayor Klaus Johannis.
According to Basescu, Negoita, like Johannis, was re-elected mayor last year with 80% of voter support. 
The president reiterated his opinion that the country should be ruled by a political government, rather than one made up of technocrats, as the parties supporting Johannis have been insisting.
Basescu's first choice, Lucian Croitoru, was rejected by a vote of 250 to 189 in parliament Wednesday.
Of the 14 ministers proposed by Croitoru, only two were supported. 
In a speech before that vote, Croitoru, a former representative to the IMF, warned the country badly needs 3.5 billion euros by the end of the year.
"Postponing the reforms makes the financial needs of the Romanian state go up to 5 billion euros for the same period, if neither the EU nor the IMF will grant the remaining shares. 
Thus, the political instability leads to a 1.5 billion-euro hike in state costs," said Croitoru.
In a recent statement, the IMF said it is halting a third disbursement of 1.5 billion euros until the deadlock ends.
The political bickering carries an obvious electoral burden as neither of the two sides, Basescu and the parliamentary majority, are willing to cave before presidential elections later this month.
"Basescu literally tried to force this government through, as happened in the first case, certain he would secure the necessary votes. 
He is now playing his chances; he is imposing and is not mediating. 
Forcing the Social Democrats out of the ruling coalition backfired on him and he's trying to catch up with the decrease in popularity," political analyst Dan Pavel told SETimes.
"We won't see the end of it anywhere before the outcome of the presidential elections. 
And if Basescu comes out the winner, we may go to early elections," he added.
Prime Minister Emil Boc, whose cabinet was toppled amid a crisis in the former ruling coalition, will stay in power for the time being.
