08/10/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 08/10/09
The presidency of the Macedonian Academy of Arts and Sciences (MANU) sacked Macedonian encyclopedia chief editor Blaze Ristovski and his team on Wednesday (October 7th), after he publicly refused to resign.
At Wednesday's session, the academy's presidency said that a new editorial board, which will make corrections, should be established within a month. 
The new team will include respected representatives of minority communities.
The original version sparked an angry reaction among Albanian intellectuals and politicians inside Macedonia, Albania and Kosovo. 
Some took to the streets, over the way the Albanian community was portrayed in the encyclopedia.
Their ancestors, for example, were described as 16th century settlers to Macedonia known as "Shiptari" or "mountain people". 
In addition, Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) leader Ali Ahmeti is described as an asylum seeker, a person with a controversial role domestically and internationally, and a war crimes suspect.
Ristovski said he expected reactions, but said "objectivity and scientific facts are invested in the creation of this monumental work."
MANU announced yesterday that the new editorial team will "replace existing texts which are unacceptable from a scientific and a wider societal aspect with new ones".
MANU also added that "competent authors should be involved in writing the new texts … including renowned scientists belonging to the non-majority ethnic communities in Macedonia," as well as the Albanian Academy of Arts and Sciences in Tirana.
While the Albanians were outraged, a widespread feeling among Macedonians is that the encyclopedia -- in the words of Academy fellow Vlado Kambovski -- is "a national, cultural and scientific achievement of the highest order". 
Backers say it is being put down for political reasons.
MANU initially decided to pull the encyclopedia from book shelves to amend the disputed parts. 
However, tensions ensued after Ristovski announced "the disputed entries will not be pulled out but will be made more precise by adding more explanatory words."
The DUI's Ahmeti asked that the encyclopedia be recalled and rewritten. 
He also demanded that Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski distance himself from it, and that the government acknowledge the controversial entries.
Prior to firing Ristovski, the MANU presidency met with Gruevski and Ahmeti.
"Ristovski has no credibility to remain in this position and he needs to be recalled," a DUI official was quoted as saying.
Meanwhile, Albanian student demonstrations in Tetovo kept the heat on the Macedonian government, fueled by fiery speeches from Kosovo and Albanian politicians and intellectuals. 
In the midst of the protests, a Macedonian flag was even reported torched during a football match in Pristina.
The US and British embassies also criticised the encyclopedia over assertions that their special forces had trained Albanian National Liberation Army insurgents in the 2001 conflict in Macedonia, calling the claims groundless and unacceptable.
The encyclopedia is a project of MANU's Lexicographic Centre. 
Over 250 academy members, university professors and researchers created the two-volume encyclopedia over the course of seven years. 
It covers 9,000 people, concepts and events from all time periods within the geographical boundaries of Macedonia, from prehistoric to contemporary times.
