08/12/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 08/12/09
The EU will start implementing the Interim Trade Agreement with Serbia next month, as the Council of Ministers on Monday (December 7th) said Belgrade authorities are co-operating with The Hague, and carrying out key European reforms.
The Serbian government has been unilaterally implementing the agreement since last January, as a demonstration of its commitment to European integration.
Serbia signed the Interim Trade Agreement and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) in April 2008, but the agreements were immediately put on hold because the Union said Belgrade was not co-operating sufficiently with The Hague. 
However, after the arrest of indictee Radovan Karadzic in July of that year, all EU members except the Netherlands were in favour of unblocking the agreements with Serbia.
The Netherlands agreed to launch implementation of the Interim Trade Agreement after Hague tribunal Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz told the UN Security Council on December 3rd he was satisfied with the co-operation of Serbian authorities.
At a meeting of EU foreign ministers, Brammertz said "the Serbian authorities have done and are doing everything they can" to co-operate. 
However, the Council of Ministers decided to keep pressure on Serbia, so the country will continue to work with The Hague, and hand over the two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.
EU foreign ministers agreed to bring the issue of ratifying Serbia's SAA back to the table next June.
"Both the annulment of visas and unfreezing of the Interim Trade Agreement show that we are a country with higher credibility in Europe and the world, a country seen by international investors as a safer destination for the placement of their capital and creation of new jobs," said Serbian President Boris Tadic.
He also said the government will wait for the right time to apply for EU membership because the country does not want to face rejection by Brussels.
The former head of the Serbian EU Integration Office, Tanja Miscevic, said unblocking the agreement is very important because it showed that the EU "accepts Serbia as a partner and recommends it to others for co-operation".
Serbian economists say the agreement will not benefit the country immediately.
