06/01/2010
(Zaman - 06/01/10; CNN Turk, Reuters, The Sofia Echo, Sega, Zaman - 05/01/10; Euobserver, Dnevnik - 04/01/10)
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu on Tuesday (January 5th) warned that Sofia's reported intensions to seek compensation for people displaced in early 20th century could harm bilateral relations.
"Continuing friendship between Bulgaria and Turkey is in the interest of both countries. 
It would be of great benefit if statements that would harm this friendship are avoided," Davutoglu told a joint press conference with his visiting Brazilian counterpart, Celso Amorim.
Davutoglu was responding to Bulgarian Minister without Portfolio in charge of Bulgarians abroad Bozhidar Dimitrov, who said Sofia intends to seek compensation of about 14 billion euros for the property of its citizens who were forced to leave Turkey in 1913.
"Turkey is surely able to pay this sum, after all, it's the 16th largest economic power in the world," EUobserver quoted Dimitrov as telling the Sofia-based daily 24 Chasa in an interview Sunday. 
"One of the three conditions of Turkey's full membership in the EU is solving the problem of the real estate of Thracian refugees."
Sofia may block Turkey's EU membership bid unless it pays, the EUobsever reported on Monday.
In October 1925, the Treaty of Ankara was signed, addressing the rights of migrants from the two countries. 
Bulgaria's parliament ratified it in May 1926, but it was never implemented.
Veselin Ninov, of the Bulgarian government's press office, told EUobserver that under the 1925 treaty, the Turkish government must compensate for the immovable properties of Bulgarian refugees. 
Noting that the issue was "more historical than political", he confirmed that his country might indeed resort to its right as an EU member to block its southern neighbour's accession progress if the issue is not resolved.
"There is such an option," Ninov told EUobserver. 
"But this is just one of many other conditions of Bulgarian support for Turkish membership. 
There are also issues relating to energy and water management projects."
The issue of the rights of the Bulgarian Thracian refugees was also mentioned in a resolution of the European Parliament (EP) on May 21st, 2008.
The EU legislature said it expects Turkey to "refrain from any threats against neighbouring countries and resolve all outstanding disputes peacefully in accordance with the UN Charter, other relevant international conventions and bilateral agreements and obligations; in particular, invites the Turkish authorities to enhance, in the spirit of good neighbourly relations, the dialogue with Greece (e.g. 
on the Aegean continental shelf) and Bulgaria (e.g. 
on the property rights of Bulgarian Thracian refugees) in order to resolve all outstanding bilateral issues".
A project focussing on properties of the Bulgarian Thracian refugees, whose heirs number about 800,000 people, was launched later that year. 
However, many of them do lack notary deeds or other legal evidence of relatives' immovable properties.
A joint Bulgarian-Turkish intergovernmental working group that was established last year is now handling the dispute, and the issue is expected to be one item on the agenda of talks during Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov's upcoming visit to Ankara.
