07/10/2009
(MTI - 07/10/09;
AFP, Budapest Times, MTI, TASR, The Slovak Spectator, MRT, Hungarian Foreign Ministry - 06/10/09)
The Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia, known as the Visegrad Group, voiced their support for the Euro-Atlantic integration of the Western Balkan countries, during a meeting of their foreign ministers in Budapest on Tuesday (October 6th).
"Euro-Atlantic integration played a crucial role in the transformation of Central Europe," the ministers said in a joint statement after the talks, adding that they "wish to see the enlargement policy fostering stability and prosperity in the same manner in the Western Balkans".
The Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia, known also as the Visegrad Four (V4), joined the EU in 2004, along with six other East and Central European nations, and all are members of NATO.
Hungary, which currently chairs the V4, is due to take over the six-month rotating EU presidency from Belgium on January 1st 2011 and pass it on to Poland on July 1st the same year.
Sweden, whose six-month turn at the helm of the bloc ends on January 1st 2010, will be replaced by Spain.
"The Visegrad Group stands ready to promote the integration of the countries of the Western Balkans throughout the next presidencies of the EU, including the handling of their membership applications," the foreign ministers said in the statement.
But they also stressed that the applicant countries' accession progress is in their own hands and depends on their efforts in implementing EU-required reforms.
"Only a positive avis, including a satisfactory track record in implementing Stabilisation and Association Agreements, would speed up the integration process," the ministers said.
The Western Balkan countries, they added, should keep this in mind in considering when to submit their official EU membership applications.
The top diplomats of the four former communist states also promised to assist the EU hopefuls in preparing for eventual entry into the bloc.
"The Visegrad countries offer their help and recent expertise in drawing-up and implementing integration strategies, including the effective utilisation of pre-accession funds provided by the EU," the statement read.
The Western Balkan countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia -- are all in different stages of the accession process.
Croatia, the most advanced among them, is expected to join the EU in 2011.
This, the V4 foreign ministers believe, "will give further impetus to the process of integration and encouragement to the applicant countries to carry out reforms".
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia will come a step closer to the EU in just a few months, as their citizens will be able to travel visa-free to the bloc's member nations as of January 1st.
That is "a testament to the fact that efforts made for meeting the conditions bring tangible results", the foreign ministers said.
Citing Serbia's improved co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the V4 also voiced support for the speedy enforcement of the EU's provisional trade agreement with Belgrade.
They also urged all political parties in BiH to work together to meet the requirements for the transition from the Office of the High Representative (OHR) to the EU Special Representative (EUSR).
"V4 countries support the continuous presence of EUFOR in BiH and recommend maintaining its current mandate until the OHR-EUSR transition is completed," the statement said.
"They highlight the importance of reforming the constitution and reaffirm that only Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole has the perspective of EU membership."
The V4 foreign ministers concluded their meeting Tuesday with an informal working lunch with their counterparts from Albania, BiH, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia.
