07/10/2009
By Marina Roganovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 07/10/09
Montenegro's attempts to reform its educational system by integrating the pan-European Bologna Process are plagued with problems, according to one of the country's most outspoken citizens.
"The main principles of the Bologna Process are great, but if applied under the current conditions they will only result in Frankenstein," University of Montenegro political science professor Milan Popovic told Southeast European Times.
According to the European Commission website, "the three priorities of the Bologna Process are:
Introduction of the three-cycle system (bachelor/master/doctorate), quality assurance and recognition of qualifications and periods of study."
"Bologna must be implemented in realistic conditions.
We are understaffed and don't have enough space," Popovic said.
"It is normal for one professor to have 30 students [per class].
This number can even go up to 50, and I can even handle 100 students.
However, one professor with 300 students is extremely difficult.
It's a crime against education," said Popovic.
Dragan Koprivica, a professor at the Faculty of Philosophy in Niksic, agrees that it is very difficult for a professor to "make contact with 300 or 500 students and give them all a lot of attention".
"It has become easier for students," said Koprivica.
"There are one semester subjects, instead of two or even four-semester.
Students also have tests during the semester, although that can be almost impossible for a professor."
Montenegro has been a member of Bologna Process since 2003.
Before Bologna was introduced in Montenegro, students took only one exam per course, per year, usually an oral final.
There were no other tests during the school year.
Bologna changed that;
now some students don't even need to take the final exam.
"I think that is a good thing;
if a student works hard and collects enough points during the semester, he can pass the subject without taking the final exam," said Koprivica.
Popovic agrees that a student should be able to collect points during the semester, but he believes that in some colleges, an oral final is a must.
"Students in the political science college will need to speak in their future jobs.
It is wrong not to teach them how to speak and not to grade them through oral exams," he said.
A recent graduate from the University of Montenegro's International Relations Programme, Milena Miskovic, agrees.
"I like the idea of Bologna.
It gave us a chance to work for our grade throughout the year.
Bologna has resulted in an improved graduation rate."
Nemanja Djuraskovic, a current student of the University of Montenegro's Economy programme is not completely on board.
"[Bologna] requires a lot of work;
I have to study every day, so it is taking a lot of my time.
However, that can also be a good thing, because I am never behind in my studies."
