05/11/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/11/09
After months of limbo, the Serbian government and the IMF on Tuesday (November 3rd) defined the conditions for continuation of the Fund's 2.9 billion-euro loan to the country.
Belgrade had taken the first 788m-euro installment when talks on further use of the arrangement fell through in September.
The standstill was sparked by the Fund's dissatisfaction with Serbia's budget projection and planned public spending cuts.
The government was given a month to prepare for the second "test", but negotiations on the proposed pension system reform proved difficult.
However, they wrapped up successfully this week after an agreement was added, to the relief of pensioners.
Pensions will not be reduced in 2010, while in 2011, they will rise according to the country's economic growth.
Deputy Prime Minister Jovan Krkobabic says Belgrade has pledged to finalise the entire proposal for pension system reform by March 2010, incorporating IMF suggestions.
"Beneficial pensions, beneficial years of work, pensions acquired according to special terms and other rights that place other workers doing full service in an unequal position will be given special attention," Krkobabic said.
He added that the idea of women retiring at the same age as men has been dropped.
In Serbia, men retire at age 65, whereas women stop working at 60.
Serbia has also agreed to keep salaries in the public sector frozen in 2010 and set the overall deficit next year at about 1.3 billion euros -- around 4% of the GDP.
IMF Mission to Serbia chief Albert Jaeger said that the Fund agreed to Belgrade's proposals, after the Serbian government presented a strategy for reducing the deficit and reforming the public sector and pension system.
However, Jaeger added that implementing the strategy would be "a great challenge" for the government.
The IMF mission says Serbia's GDP is expected to drop by 3% this year -- better than previously forecast.
"The GDP's decrease in Serbia has been reined in, unlike in other countries in the region," an IMF official said.
Due to public spending cuts, the government will also be forced to make unpopular moves, such as dismissing an estimated 9,000 state administration and local government employees.
Despite all that, forecasts regarding the recovery of the Serbian economy are still not positive.
Economic adviser Bosko Zivkovic told the Belgrade media that "there is not a single fundamental change" that suggests the economy is recovering.
Asked about next year, Zivkovic said he'd be satisfied if 2010 did not turn out to be worse than 2009.
