05/01/2010
By Marina Roganovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 05/01/10
Orthodox Christmas differs from the non-Orthodox, Western Christmas in two primary ways -- it is celebrated on January 7th, and it does not involve a great deal of spending.
"Yes, we all feel the effects of the economic crisis, but I don't need to spend all that much money on Christmas. 
My family will gather and we will enjoy the holiday together, like we do every year. 
That is what Christmas is all about," said Jasna Krivokapic of Niksic.
Marko Bulatovic, owner of a toy store in Podgorica, reported no significant increase in sales. 
However, Bulatovic did say, "Montenegrins are slowly starting to adopt the custom of exchanging gifts on both Christmases, particularly for children."
Fewer Montenegrins have the disposable income required to purchase presents for loved ones than in the five economic boom years that preceded 2009. 
The country's Institute for Employment reports that the unemployment rate continued to rise for 16 consecutive weeks at the end of the year. 
Approximately 29,870 unemployed people were registered with the agency at the end of December, representing 11.31% of the country’s workforce. 
Minister of Finance Igor Luksic told reporters the unemployment rate "is expected to remain flat at 10.5% to 11% in 2010, or see a marginal increase".
However, the government predicts a slight recovery and economic growth in the New Year. 
In a press release, immediately preceding the December 17th announcement of the 2010 budget, Luksic said "The Montenegrin government sees the country's economy expanding by 0.5% in 2010, after an expected contraction of 4% this year."
Central Bank chief Ljubisa Krgovic was a little more pessimistic about the decline of GDP, predicting it would be 5% in 2009.
An obvious sign of the economic troubles is that Budva was the only city to host a free outdoor concert to ring in 2010, as opposed to at least a half dozen towns that did so last year.
Montenegro's entertainment venues had to try harder to attract New Year's Eve celebrants. 
Most of them offered unlimited food and drink for a set price, whereas last year they got away with the traditional free glass of champagne at midnight and appetizers earlier in the evening.
The tactic worked, at least in Podgorica's Pub 111, where locals drank and danced the night away. 
Astrologically inclined Suzana Ostojic said, "I lost my job two weeks ago, but I went and partied anyway, because I really think that this year will be a better trip around the sun than the last year. 
I'm a Leo and a Tiger and 2010 is going to be my year!"
