08/12/2009
(AP, Bloomberg, Zaman, RFE/RL, Famagusta Gazette - 08/12/09;
Reuters, AFP, DPA, Washington Post, Wall Street Journal, BBC, RFE/RL, VOA - 07/12/09)
US President Barack Obama and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan agreed on Monday (December 7th) that Iran's nuclear programme is one of the most important issues on their agendas, but differed on how to approach the problem.
During talks with six major world powers on October 1st, Iran accepted in principle an agreement calling for it to send its low-enriched uranium abroad for processing into nuclear fuel, but then backed out of the deal.
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said recently that there would be no further negotiations with the West on the issue and that Tehran was planning to build ten more enrichment plants.
Iran has been told that it has until the end of the year to accept the agreement brokered by the International Atomic Energy Agency or face additional UN sanctions.
"I indicated to the prime minister how important it is to resolve the issue of Iran's nuclear capacity in a way that allows Iran to pursue peaceful nuclear energy but provides assurances that it will abide by international rules and norms," Obama said after his meeting with Erdogan.
"Turkey can be an important player in trying to move Iran in that direction."
Turkey is ready to do whatever it can to achieve a "diplomatic solution" to the dispute over Iran's nuclear programme, Erdogan said.
He told reporters later that his country, which currently holds a seat on the 15-nation UN Security Council, "can play the role of a negotiator or a mediator", but dismissed the need for new sanctions against Iran.
"As long as Iran is willing to increase its nuclear capability for civilian purposes or peaceful purposes, we will never have a negative approach towards this demand," Erdogan said.
But he also stressed that Turkey does "not want to see a country in our region possessing nuclear weapons and we want the countries in our region that have nuclear weapons to be rid of them".
NATO's efforts in Afghanistan were another issue of mutual concern.
"I thanked Prime Minister Erdogan and the Turkish people for their outstanding contributions to stabilising Afghanistan," Obama said.
Turkey, which has contributed 1,700 non-combat troops to the international NATO-led force, took command of peacekeeping operations in Kabul last month.
Erdogan said his country could train 12 Afghan Army battalions a year and will provide financial resources for reconstruction efforts.
The fight against terrorism, including ways to boost co-ordination between Washington and Ankara in their joint efforts against the separatist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), was also a focus of the talks.
"We reaffirmed the shared commitment to defeat terrorist activity regardless of where it occurs," said Obama.
"I expressed condolences to the prime minister and the Turkish people for the recent terrorist attack that was taken there and pledged US support in trying to bring the perpetrators of this violence to justice."
Seven Turkish soldiers were killed in an attack Monday, while patrolling in the country's eastern region of Tokat, where both PKK and leftist militants are active.
