06/10/2009
Analysis by Harry Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens – 06/10/09
PASOK pummeled the ruling centre-right New Democracy (ND) party led by Costas Karamanlis in Sunday's (October 4th) snap election.
Now PASOK, led by George Papandreou, must turn its attention to relations with two of its neighbours -- Turkey and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, as Greece calls it.
"Papandreou has a much more global outlook and wants a bigger role [for Greece] in the EU," political analyst Giorgos Kyrtsos said on Monday.
PASOK will most likely stay the course with the former government's agenda regarding the name dispute with Macedonia, according to Kyrtsos. 
Athens has been pressing for its neighbour to add a geographical qualifier, such as "north", to its name in all international relations.
According to Kathimerini columnist Paschos Mandravelis, however, the Macedonian government is unlikely to accept this demand. 
Some experts believe the thorny and often esoteric name issue could become the fly in the ointment as far as the region's European integration is concerned.
Kyrtsos also said that there will be no major shift in the country's policy towards another EU hopeful, Turkey. 
The emphasis will remain on making sure Ankara meets its accession requirements.
Papandreou has sharply criticised Greece's former government, pointing a finger at former Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis for "relinquishing" Greece's veto power to halt Turkey's EU bid after the country refused to meet certain criteria.
However, Kyrtsos believes that Papandreou's government will continue to say "yes" to Turkey's EU journey, knowing that others in the European community are saying "no". 
In reality, accession for Turkey is not expected anytime soon, and Greece has little to lose by taking a conciliatory stance.
Asked about PASOK's landslide victory, Kyrtsos said he and other analysts were surprised the party won by such a large margin. 
"Greek voters sent a message that they want a fast-paced and effective government," he said.
In terms of other parties, the biggest winner was the right-of-centre Popular Orthodox Rally (LAOS) party (5.63% and 15 MPs), which is known for taking tough stances on national issues.
Kyrtsos noted that whereas the party and its founder, former ND deputy and one-time MEP Giorgos Karatzaferis, include certain "ultra-conservative" elements, it is a mostly populist, flexible and opportunistic political vehicle.
