07/08/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 07/08/09
Facing the worst financial crisis since the end of the conflict in the 1990s, Croatia's parliament passed the so-called "crisis tax", which took effect August 1st, and will run until the end of next year.
Aimed at kick-starting the economy, the tax is being applied to wages, pensions and other earnings, including dividends and profit shares.
The value added tax (VAT) also increased from 22% to 23%. 
Monthly net incomes ranging from about 409 to 819 euros will be taxed at a rate of 2%, while those making more will be taxed at 4%.
Net dividends and profit shares will be taxed based on the same system.
The government plans to fine both individuals and businesses that evade the new levy.
New Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor rallied support for the tax and higher VAT, which is estimated to pump nearly 600m euros into the budget, saying it "would keep Croatian heads above the water and help Croatia not to drown in the debt".
"Tackling the economic crisis is my government's priority," she said. 
Despite efforts by the government, some speculate the new tax might be too little too late, and that the IMF might have to step in.
Croatian National Bank (HNB) Governor Zeljko Rohatinski says cutting costs would have been a better plan to help weather the economic storm, such as delaying major construction jobs like the monumental Peljesac Bridge project in southern Croatia.
President Stipe Mesic also has doubts, and plans to ask the constitutional court to take a close look, as he believes there are holes in it.
"If the same tax rate is applied to a person who earns 3,000 kunas [about 409 euros] and to one who earns twice the amount, they are not equal," said Mesic.
The opposition is up in arms over the new duty.
"This tax proposal is actually a tax on bad government. 
It only shows that the government still has no idea how to emerge from the crisis and only wants to stay in power," said Social Democrat Party president Zoran Milanovic.
