07/12/2009
(Novinite, Dnevnik - 06/12/09;
Standasrt - 05/12/09;
Reuters, AFP, Sofia Echo, Novinite, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, Focus News Agency, Bulgarian Government - 04/12/09)
Voicing support for Bulgaria's efforts to become a key player in European energy policies, US Special Envoy for Eurasian Energy Richard Morningstar said on Friday (December 4th) that the steps Sofia is taking will help it achieve greater energy independence.
"You have the right approach.
We see and appreciate your efforts," the US diplomat told Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov.
"You have a strong character and the will to help Bulgaria achieve a leading role in the region's energy policies."
Borisov's centre-right government, which took office in late July, has been reviewing several major energy deals the country's previous Socialist-led coalition cabinet struck with Russia last year.
They include the agreements on Bulgaria's participation in the South Stream gas pipeline and the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline projects, as well as construction of the Belene nuclear power plant.
Speaking at a business event in Sofia after his meeting with Borisov, Morningstar voiced support for Bulgaria's decision to review its energy policies.
"Bulgaria is doing a lot of the right things right now," the envoy said.
"Russia is a reality.
Bulgaria has to talk to the Russians.
Bulgaria has to talk about South Stream, no way to avoid that."
In addition to South Stream, Bulgaria is one of the five European countries involved in the EU-sponsored Nabucco pipeline project, designed to transport Caspian and Middle Eastern natural gas via the Balkans to Europe, while bypassing Russia.
Expressing its interest in both gas pipeline projects, Sofia has indicated its priority is Nabucco.
"We can't come here and tell Bulgaria what's in Bulgaria's interest, nobody can," Morningstar said.
"Bulgaria does recognise and does see its interest to diversify routes and sources of supply."
During the talks, Borisov said that while the energy deals the previous government signed with Russia are financially unfeasible, Bulgaria would have to pay huge penalties if it decides to pull out of them.
"Politics are embedded in them, regardless of my efforts to avoid them and talk just financing and business," the Sofia News Agency quoted Borisov as saying.
"The matter is the political significance of those projects.
Nabucco is a priority for the European Union, while the Russian South Stream is moving forward very quickly and many European countries are joining it almost daily."
Borisov pledged on Saturday to make public the agreement on the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline to show how damaging it is.
"The contract is not profitable for Bulgaria and does not protect its national interests," he said during a visit to the Black Sea city of Burgas, adding that the agreement does not even envision the possibility of any of the partners withdrawing from the project.
During his official visit, Morningstar also met with President Georgi Parvanov and Economy and Energy Minister Traycho Traykov.
Some US companies are interested in joining Bulgarian nuclear energy projects, Morningstar said after his talks with Parvanov, citing as examples the construction of a nuclear waste depot or a link between the gas transit systems of Bulgaria and Turkey.
