07/12/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 07/12/09
With partial results showing incumbent President Traian Basescu holding a narrow lead, Romania's Social Democratic Party (PSD) is raising accusations of fraud.
Exit polls had suggested Mircea Geoana would become the new head of the country, and the candidate rushed to deliver a fervent victory speech.
But with 99.5% of the ballots counted, the Central Election Bureau released partial results Monday (December 7th) showing Basescu has secured a second five-year term.
According to those results, he has 50.33% of the vote, compared to 49.66% for his challenger.
Almost 80% of votes cast abroad went to Basescu.
Turnout was 59.9%, marking an increase from the first round, where it was 53.5%.
Sibiu Mayor Klaus Johannis, tapped by Geoana for prime minister, said he is withdrawing from consideration.
"My road ends here," he told a press conference Monday, terminating a coalition deal between the PSD and his Liberal Party.
The Social Democrats, however, are in no mood to concede defeat.
They have already instructed their representatives not to endorse the final results, and are threatening to file a suit at the Constitutional Court.
"Our conviction is Romanians voted for Mircea Geoana but Traian Basescu's state apparatus is trying to impose the latter as winner in a fraudulent manner," PSD campaign co-ordinator Liviu Dragnea.
By law, the results can be appealed before the Court within three days of the election.
If fraud is proven, and it is found to have impacted the final result, the runoff would have to be repeated on December 27th.
An OSCE report on the voting, released Monday, concluded the second round was conducted fairly.
The run-off "confirmed the positive aspects noted during the first round, in particular the overall compliance with OSCE commitments and other international standards for democratic elections, the respect for fundamental political freedoms, the competitive campaign environment and the efficient administration of the election."
Romania, which is undergoing a severe economic crisis, has been denied its latest IMF disbursement because of the lack of a stable government.
In October, a minority government led by the Democratic-Liberal Party was toppled in a no-confidence vote brought about by the PSD and the Liberals.
Basescu's new PM-designate was then rejected by the opposition, plunging the country into a political crisis.
The Democratic-Liberals said on Monday they would convene over the day to start discussions and political negotiations in order to form a government swiftly.
The main option for a political compromise seems to be an agreement with the National Liberal Party.
