04/01/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 04/01/10
In an effort to battle piracy in Romania, courts have started prosecuting people for downloading music and movies illegally.
Last summer, a member of the file sharing network DC++ was ordered to pay a fine of 3,000 euros in civil damages for illicit file sharing.
The Romanian Music Industry Association (AIMR) said the defendant would pay for 296 pirated music products.
A slew of investigations has followed.
Last July, AIMR inspectors helped police search the apartments of two suspects in Bucharest who posted music files and movies online and allegedly created and pirated discs.
In Brasov, a 20-year-old student is being investigated on charges of copyright infringement, while Buzau County is prosecuting its first case of digital piracy against an internet provider.
Previously, such offenders received a slap on the wrist, and paid mere administrative fines.
AIMR Public Relations Officer Alina Ovesea told SETimes that during the first half of 2009, the association was a civil party in as many as 123 criminal cases of physical piracy, such as bootlegging CDs and DVDs, and digital piracy, totalling damages of 300,000 euros.
AIMR is now working on a project to channel users to websites where they can download music legally and avoid prosecution.
Ovesea said AIMR will release a brochure, which will list free and paid sites where users can download music.
Also, Romania will try to adopt a system where network users are warned if they are downloading illegally.
"People have started to react after the measures we took.
We noticed a part of the users have withdrawn files from such networks, worrying they might be the next target.
So, there's a feeling of visible awareness among them," said Ovesea.
AIMR will continue to monitor file-sharing networks and has dispatched inspectors to the field to supervise markets, street commerce and specialised shops in search of pirated material.
Moreover, AIMR and the Romanian Office of Intellectual Property plan to conclude an agreement that will regulate the dissemination of copyright-protected music and movies.
A code of conduct is also envisioned, and websites that adhere to it will bear a stamp of approval.
However, until these measures are in place, AIMR has started to pay visits to high schools in Bucharest to warn students against piracy.
The battle will not be won overnight, but with new regulations in place, the wheels are in motion to deal a serious blow to piracy in Romania.
