06/07/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/07/09 Photos by Nikola Barbutov
From 1804 to 1813, under the leadership of Karadjordje Petrovic, Serbia started mounting serious resistance to the Ottoman Empire and began restoring its statehood. 
Karadjordje is known in history as the leader of the first Serbian uprising in 1804.
He established a fortified town at Topola and gathered an army for the fight against the Ottomans. 
Today, two centuries later, one can visit his stronghold, house and church.
More then 100,000 tourists visit the site each year, a guide from the Topola's tourist organisation, Lidija Krstic, told Southeast European Times. 
"Most of our visitors are children on organised school trips … Topola is a place where children can learn a lot about Serbian history," she said. 
Many of the foreign tourists are diplomats and ambassadors who want to boost their knowledge about the country.
Karadjordje's uprising did not meet with long-term success. 
He and other rebel leaders were forced to flee to the Austrian Empire in 1813, when the Ottoman Empire launched a massive assault.
His grandson, King Petar I, began reconstructing the town upon the family's return to power in 1903, and today the town stands as a historical museum devoted to the first uprising. 
Visitors can see Karadjordje's cannon, sabers, swords, firearms and flags.
The Legacy House of Petar is a grand complex at the top of Oplenac Hill. 
It spans 142 hectares and includes the Church of St. 
Djordje, the house where Petar monitored work on the mausoleum's construction, a house for the royal wine maker and the Royal Wine Cellar.
The church is home to a stunning mosaic, spanning 3,500 square metres with 40 million multicoloured glass cubes in 15,000 different shades.
Petar's house, built next to the mausoleum, is a museum today, exhibiting personal items of the royal family. 
The most valuable exhibits are icons from Mount Athos monasteries and a tiara that belonged to Queen Marija, wife of King Aleksandar I. 
Visitors can also see portraits of royal family members.
The Wine Maker's House was built in 1911 for the "keeper" of royal vineyards. 
After World War II and the exile of the Karadjordjevic family from Serbia, the building served as the Museum of the People's Fight for Freedom. 
Today it hosts cultural events and a permanent exhibition of renowned painter Nikola Grahovac, who spent three decades of his life in Topola and was a big donor to the Legacy House.
Our last stop is the Royal Wine Cellar. 
The Royal vineyards used to span about 50ha. 
The entire legacy house used to live off the production of wine from the Royal cellar, built by Aleksandar in 1931. 
Today it is a museum exhibiting old equipment, wine presses and barrels dating back to the 1930s.
Although Topola represents a tumultuous period in Serbian history, the town today exhibits an aura of peace. 
Residents are very proud of their town -- any one of them could be your guide through Topola's sites and historical importance.
