04/01/2010
(Croatian Times - 04/01/10;
FT, Reuters, DPA, Javno.hr - 03/01/10)
In a move as surprising as his abrupt resignation about six months ago, former Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader announced on Sunday (January 3rd) his return to politics.
Sanader, 56, cited "personal reasons" as he officially stepped down as head of government and leader of the centre-right ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) on July 1st, naming his deputy, Jadranka Kosor, as his successor in both posts.
"I fully activate my role as the honorary president of the party," Reuters quoted him as saying at a news conference in Zagreb on Sunday.
"The reason is not the government's work, which I fully support, but the poor result of the party in the presidential election."
Andrija Hebrang, the HDZ nominee, finished third in the December 27th election, with 12% of the vote.
Ivo Josipovic of the opposition Social Democratic Party (SDP) and Zagreb Mayor Milan Bandic will face each other in the runoff on Sunday.
"HDZ is not a party that gets only 12% of the vote but is a winning party," Sanader said.
Acknowledging he was partly responsible for the HDZ's "worst result" since its founding in 1989, he said his decision to quit politics last summer was "totally wrong".
He noted that he is also planning to regain his seat in parliament.
Sanader told reporters Sunday that the main reason for his resignation was that he "was not ready to sell Croatia's territory" to resolve his country's border dispute with neighbouring Slovenia, so that it could join the EU.
Kosor, Croatia's first woman prime minister, inherited a number of challenges as she replaced Sanader on July 6th, including dealing with the impact of the global financial and economic crisis and unblocking , Croatia's EU membership negotiations.
Zagreb's talks with Brussels remained frozen for months over the border dispute with Slovenia, which blocked the opening and closure of new negotiating chapters.
An arbitration agreement signed in early November put Croatia back on track in the accession process.
It is now expected to wrap up its EU entry talks by the end of June and join the Union as its 28th member by 2012.
Kosor has also taken steps to strengthen the fight against organised crime and corruption, a key EU requirement, and has encouraged law enforcement agencies to investigate the involvement of powerful HDZ members in suspicious deals.
Sanader denied on Sunday any involvement in a number of political scandals in which his name has surfaced, including allegations that he was paid a large commission from Austrian Hypo Alpe Adria Bank in return for helping it start operations in Croatia.
Media reports said his return to politics could topple the HDZ-led coalition government.
Darinko Kosor, leader of the Croatian Social Liberal Party (HSLS), warned that his party could leave the ruling coalition if Sanader and his supporters within the HDZ launch an attack against the government.
"We have nothing against Sanader reactivating his political engagement, since this is in accordance with the law," he was quoted as saying Sunday.
"However, it is completely unacceptable that the former prime minister, who left his post and his people in time of crisis, makes a comeback by gathering a group of parliament members in an attempt to affect decisions of the government, coalition and the majority of representatives."
