06/08/2009
(Zaman, Wall Street Journal - 06/08/09; AP, Reuters, VOA, Xinhua - 05/08/09)
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan met with representatives of the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP) on Wednesday (August 5th) to discuss a government initiative aimed at resolving the long-standing Kurdish problem.
Turkish Kurds account for up to a fifth of the country's population of nearly 77 million people and are its most sizable ethnic minority. 
Living predominantly in Turkey's impoverished southeast, they have been fighting for greater autonomy and more rights since 1984, when the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) launched an armed insurgency against the government. 
The 25-year-long conflict has left more than 40,000 people dead, most of them Kurds.
"Our nation wants unity, co-operation and solidarity. 
It wants the mothers' tears to stop. 
It wants there to be no blood and death," Erdogan said following his talks with DTP leader Ahmet Turk at parliament Wednesday.
Others attending the hour-long talks included Interior Minister Besir Atalay, the co-ordinator of the government's Kurdish initiative, and two senior members of the DTP, which has 21 representatives in parliament.
Previously, Erdogan had been resisting meeting with the pro-Kurdish party because of its refusal to denounce the PKK as a terrorist organisation, as it is considered by Turkey, the EU and the United States. 
The DTP faces possible closure over its alleged links to the militant group.
"We are happy and hopeful that an environment of dialogue has been ensured," said Turk, welcoming Wednesday's talks.
"We have made clear our thoughts on the process that will include opinions of every part of society and will ripen with time," he said.
While no details of the government's Kurdish initiative have been disclosed, foreign ministry spokesperson Burak Ozugergin told reporters Wednesday that his ministry is contributing to plans to introduce a series of reforms giving more rights to Kurds.
According to Turkish media reports, the new initiative would likely envision arrangements for the return of some of the thousands of ethnic Kurd refugees who fled the country, and have been living at a camp in northern Iraq.
Analysts believed Erdogan's meeting with Turk took place in anticipation of the "roadmap" for a solution to the Kurdish issue that Abdullah Ocalan, the PKK's imprisoned leader, is expected to announce next week. 
Reports said this would likely happen on August 15th, the 25th anniversary of the start of PKK's armed campaign for self rule.
Deniz Baykal, the leader of the main opposition Republican People's Party, criticised Erdogan's move, accusing him of making concessions to the rebels.
