05/10/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens – 05/10/09
Fresh from what appears to be a decisive victory in parliamentary elections on Sunday (October 24th), the leader of Greece's left-wing PASOK party is promising voters a political sea change.
"The only compass on our road ahead will be the citizens and only the citizen," said George Papandreou, who is now poised to become Greece's next prime minister after two previous defeats at the polls. 
"We have a big responsibility to change the course of the country. 
We know that we can do that."
While polls going into the vote had consistently shown PASOK leading the ruling New Democracy (ND) party, the leftists faced the possibility of difficult coalition negotiations if the margin of victory was too small. 
That is no longer a problem for Papandreou, however, as voters have given his party a comfortable, ten-seat majority in Greece's 300-seat parliament. 
Official results show PASOK with 44% of the vote -- nearly 10 percentage points higher than ND. 
Voter turnout was at about 70%.
Taking the hit for his party's loss, Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis said he plans to resign from his post.
Analysts say the result is a personal triumph for Papandreou, son of former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, as he was able to step out of his family's shadow and embark on his own political path. 
It will also answer critics within his own party, some of whom had urged him to step down after his previous two unsuccessful campaigns.
The latter, in 2007, was PASOK's worst defeat in almost 30 years, and veteran party member Evangelos Venizelos questioned his ability to lead. 
This time around, Papandreou ran on a ticket with young candidates who lacked political experience, but were highly educated.
Though he has finally gained the prize that so long eluded him, Papandreou now faces what could well be an even more formidable set of challenges.
Greece is in deep financial trouble due to the world economic crisis, and is in conflict with the EU over its budget deficit. 
Brussels has even warned the country could be put on probation.
Papandreou says he will begin by splitting the economy ministry into two divisions -- finance and economics -- and tasking financial experts with focusing on specific problems.
On the international front, meanwhile, the new government will likely hold to the course. 
Hopes are high, however, that Papandreou's longstanding relationship with Turkish President Abdullah Gul might improve relations between Athens and Ankara.
The two collaborated on relief efforts when earthquakes rattled the region in 1999. 
Soon after, military exercises for both nations were cancelled, and a dialogue was opened.
Regarding the longstanding name dispute between Athens and Skopje, UN envoy Matthew Nimetz is optimistic that a resolution is in sight, and is looking forward to working with the new cabinet.
Commenting on the election results, Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said that Skopje seeks a constructive solution to the row.
