06/07/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 06/07/09
Having lost income for six months, shopkeepers applaud the Constitutional Court's decision to lift a ban on Sunday shopping. 
The limits, introduced in January, were lifted after the court's June 19th ruling.
Constitutional Court President Jasna Omejec explained that under the ban "the freedoms of entrepreneurs were limited … and that it did not necessarily protect the workers' rights".
Stores had been forced to close on Sundays since January 1st. 
As sales plummeted, retailers hit by the economic crisis filed a lawsuit.
The court ruling "is extremely important in time of crisis when we expect good summer season results," said Dubrovnik shopkeeper Djivo Curlica.
Crowds rushed to shopping malls and stores nationwide on the first shopping Sunday in June, buying everything from groceries to shoes before the 2pm closing.
"I'm sorry for those that have to work Sundays, but Sunday is the only day when I can shop, as I work week days," said Davorka Maricic, a Zagreb resident.
Businesses in tourist hot spots had argued the restrictions undermined the country's appeal to visitors. 
Foreign cruise ships arrive in the Dubrovnik area on Sundays and thousands of passengers disembark for the day. 
Under the ban, they could not even purchase souvenirs.
The Croatian Chamber of Crafts, which had earlier appealed to the government not to curtail Sunday shopping, published a report detailing the economic impact. 
"By May, 2,874 working posts were closed and small shops lost 17% of income," Chamber President Boris Vukelic said.
He warned that "the owners of small, family shops are largely hit by the ban ... 
Croatia should follow EU regulations enabling small shops to decide how and when to work. 
This could help them survive facing hard times."
The court ruling, however, may not be enough to relieve the plight of small businesses floundering at a time of worldwide economic crisis. 
The first Sunday shoppers rushed to big malls and supermarkets, bypassing small neighbourhood shops.
