06/07/2009
(FT, BTA, Sofia Echo, Dnevnik - 06/07/09;
Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, BBC, Novinite, Sofia Echo, Mediapool - 05/07/09;
Bulgarian Central Election Commission)
Fresh from their victory in Bulgaria's parliamentary elections Sunday (July 5th), Boyko Borissov and his centre-right Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB) are vowing to step up reforms.
Borissov warned, however, that there will be no quick fix to the various problems the country is facing.
"We cannot be expected to work miracles in the next six months, and we haven't promised any such thing," the Sofia mayor told a news conference, stressing that his party's programme is a four-year one.
He voiced hope that Bulgaria would soon be able to regain access to EU assistance funding, frozen because of sluggish efforts in fighting crime and corruption.
Borissov, 50, also pledged that his government would prosecute any cases of corruption that took place during the outgoing government's four-year rule.
"Those who have stolen should be very afraid ...
The thieves will go to jail," he said.
Despite a larger margin of victory than polls had predicted, GERB fell several seats short of an outright parliamentary majority in the 240-seat legislature.
It now plans talks with other right-of-centre parties, most likely beginning with the Blue Coalition, which won 6.73% of Sunday's vote and will have 15 seats.
Blue Coalition co-chairmen Martin Dimitrov and Ivan Kostov have already said they are ready to give Borissov their support.
"The Blue Coalition will guarantee the majority in parliament and a government that will bring changes to Bulgaria," they told reporters Monday.
"We will not haggle over ministerial portfolios," Kostov stressed.
Based on 100% of the ballots, the Central Election Commission said Monday that GERB took 39.7% of the proportional vote, entitling it to 90 parliamentary seats.
It also won 26 of all 31 mandates distributed separately via majority vote and is thus set to have 116 representatives in the new assembly.
Two of the parties in the outgoing tripartite coalition government -- the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) and the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) -- trailed far behind GERB, while the third, the National Movement for Stability and Progress, did not even pass the 4% threshold for entry in parliament.
The BSP, with 17.7%, will have 40 parliamentary seats.
The MRF won 14.5% of the popular vote and five individual seats and will thus have 38 representatives in the new assembly.
The ultranationalist Ataka (Attack) party ended fourth with 9.4% and 21 seats, ahead of the Blue Coalition and the Order, Law and Justice Party.
Turnout was 60.2%, exceeding the 55.8% recorded in the 2005 parliamentary elections and the 37.5% in last month's European Parliament elections.
