05/02/2010
(Various sources -- 03/02/10 - 04/02/10)
Kristalina Georgieva -- Bulgaria's nominee to be the new EU Commissioner for International Co-operation, Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Prevention -- is expected to be approved for the post following a flawless performance at her confirmation hearing before the European Parliament (EP) on Wednesday (February 3rd).
"For those in need around the world, this is the most important portfolio," she said in her opening remarks at the three-hour session. 
The 56-year-old scholar and economist pledged to become "the voice of the voiceless" within the European Commission (EC).
Georgieva has served as vice-president and corporate secretary of the World Bank Group since March 2008. 
She was nominated to EU commissioner post about three weeks ago, after Bulgaria's original candidate, Rumiana Jeleva, withdrew her candidacy amid allegations concerning personal integrity and competence. 
Jeleva was later cleared but decided to resign from all government posts.
Georgieva told EP members that if approved, she would first address the EU's response to last month's earthquake in Haiti.
"Haiti starts from scratch, but not alone," said Georgieva. 
"If I am confirmed, it will be my immediate duty to make sure we Europeans bring to Haiti the best our Union has to offer."
Other priorities include ensuring a more effective use of resources and improving the co-ordination and effectiveness of actions by the EU so European citizens feel "proud of their support for humanitarian aid and disaster response".
Georgieva noted the need for better co-ordination within the EU itself, as well as between humanitarian and military organisations to maintain respect for international humanitarian law. 
She said there is also a need to prepare for the humanitarian impact of climate change and the creation of an EU-wide "voluntary humanitarian corps" by 2011.
"At the heart of humanitarian aid lies its neutrality and care for people who need help," the EP website said, quoting Georgieva's response to a question about aid to Sudan or Ethiopia. 
"We should never allow humanitarian aid to be captured by those who abuse power."
Nirj Deva, a British Conservative, asked Georgieva if she was prepared to fight against vested, parochial interests operating throughout the EU.
"Yes, sir," she answered promptly, cheering the audience at the packed EP meeting room.
Georgieva's calm, self-assured performance during the grilling was often interrupted by applause.
"It was a pleasure to speak with you," German conservative Birgit Schnieber-Jastram told her after the hearing, while British Labour member Michael Cashman praised Georgieva's "impressive intellectual capacity".
Dutch member Thijs Berman, of the EP's Socialists and Democrats, one of the political groups most strongly opposed to the Jeleva nomination, also gave Georgieva high marks for her performance.
"We thought she had all the competencies and qualities required to do the job very well," said Berman. 
"She showed full mastery of the subject and she was a good communicator. 
It was a great relief."
In Sofia, Prime Minister Boyko Borisov rated Georgieva's performance as perfect. 
President Georgi Parvanov voiced confidence that the nominee would "be contributing successfully for expanding the EU's role in international co-operation, humanitarian aid, and crisis response".
The EP is scheduled to vote on the entire EC on Tuesday. 
If approved, Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso's new team will take office the following day.
