05/08/2009
(AFP, AP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, FT, Euobserver - 05/08/ 09; AFP, Reuters, Bloomberg, BBC - 04/08/09)
The EU and the United States expressed concern Tuesday (August 4th) about the mounting tension between Georgia and Russia ahead of the first anniversary of the brief conflict between the two former Soviet republics.
"The EU urges all sides to refrain from any statement or action that may lead to increased tensions at this particularly sensitive time," the presidency of the 27-nation bloc said in a statement.
US President Barack Obama "discussed the situation in Georgia and the need to decrease tensions in the region" during a telephone conversation with his Russian counterpart, Dmitry Medvedev, who called to "wish him a happy birthday", the White House said in a statement.
The conflict between Russia and Georgia erupted last August, following sporadic clashes between their forces and a Georgian army offensive to regain control of its Moscow-backed breakaway region of South Ossetia. 
The following day, Russia launched a massive military action, including air raids on Georgian territory, well beyond South Ossetia's borders.
An EU-brokered cease-fire put an end to the war five days later. 
But Russia was allowed to permanently deploy thousands of soldiers to both South Ossetia and Abkhazia, another Georgian breakaway province.
Shortly after the conflict, Moscow recognised the two disputed regions as independent states. 
Nicaragua later became the only other country in the world to do so.
In recent days, Georgia and South Ossetia have been trading accusations about shellings and other provocative actions on both sides of their administrative border.
Georgia said two or three rocket-propelled grenades were fired at the village of Kvechi in an attack from the South Ossetian territory late Monday. 
South Ossetia, for its part, claimed its village of Ortev had been the target of a Georgian mortar attack.
The EU presidency's statement noted Tuesday that the bloc's monitoring mission (EUMM) has "seen no evidence so far to confirm mutual accusations of shellings".
On Tuesday, Russia placed its 7,000 troops based in South Ossetia on high alert.
Concerned by the move, Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili urged the EU and the United States to help defuse tension in the region.
"The latest (Russian military) manoeuvres are worrying," the AFP quoted him as telling French radio station RTL on Tuesday. 
"They refuse to respond to calls from European observers and unfortunately the media in Moscow are announcing a situation of imminent conflict. 
Despite all that, I am confident that Europe and the United States will send a clear message [to Moscow]."
Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman Andrei Nesterenko said the move to put soldiers on high alert was sparked by Georgian "provocations" and was aimed at thwarting more violence.
"The most important thing now is to prevent escalation and not to allow skirmishes to grow into bigger clashes," he said.
US Vice President Joe Biden called Saakashvili later Tuesday to discuss the situation in the region and "reiterated US support for Georgia's democracy", the White House said.
Both the EU and US leaderships urged all sides to stick to the established crisis management mechanisms, such as the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism, stressing that international monitors must be given full access to both sides of the South Ossetian administrative boundary line.
