02/10/2009
(AP, AFP, DPA, Beta, B92, Blic, Serbian Government - 01/10/09;
Reuters, DPA, BBC, Euronews - 29/09/09)
President Boris Tadic called for decisive action Thursday (October 1st) in the fight against violence in Serbia, where attacks against foreigners and members of minority groups have increased in recent weeks.
"The fight against violence is a priority and more important than European integration and every other issue in Serbia today, because violence can lead to fascism," the president said.
Tadic made that statement at Belgrade's Republic Square, as he placed flowers and lit a candle in memory of a French soccer fan, whose death prompted a march against violence in the Serbian capital Thursday.
More than 5,000 people joined the march, which was organised by the Youth Coalition Against Violence.
The group read out a declaration at the rally that called for decisive steps against violence and swift prosecution of hooligans who threaten or physically attack members of minority groups.
Brice Taton, 28, arrived in Belgrade to watch the September 17th match between Toulouse and Partizan Belgrade.
He was attacked and severely beaten by a group of hooligans just before the event.
Taton, who sustained multiple head and chest injuries, died on Tuesday.
"I see an unbroken thread between the violence that happened in the 1990s, the brutal crimes across the former Yugoslavia, support of the strikes by the special operations units, political language which incited hatred towards so-called traitors and the constant search for enemies in society," Belgrade-based Beta news agency quoted Tadic as saying.
Ten people are in custody in connection with Taton's beating, and police are searching for two other suspects.
Serbian prosecutors have indicated that they would demand maximum sentences for Taton's attackers.
"This is no longer attempted murder, it is first-degree murder and the penalty for this crime is up to 40 years in prison," State Prosecutor Slobodan Radovanovic said following Taton's death.
Prosecutors are planning to submit a motion to ban the fan groups of three soccer clubs with track records of violence, including Partizan, prosecution spokesman Tomo Zoric said on Thursday.
"These are organisations that have certain hooligan insignia.
These are not fans, but criminals that commit crimes," he said.
