04/12/2009
By Baris Yilmaz for Southeast European Times -- 04/12/09
Switzerland's decision Sunday (November 29th) to ban the construction of minarets in the country sparked criticism from local Muslims and those living abroad.
In a triumph for the right-wing Swiss People's Party (SVP), approximately 2.67 million voters hit the polls, passing the ban with a 57.5% majority.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay called the ban "discriminatory".
"We all have an interest in showing that this impression is false and in the long-term, even dangerous," said Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt.
Turkey, whose population is predominantly Muslim, reacted as well.
"Such basic rights cannot be an issue of a referendum… these are rights coming from birth. 
I am speaking as the prime minister of a country, of a civilisation, that proved mosques and synagogues can co-exist on the same street for centuries," Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan told his Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party.
"It is incomprehensible that while we are restoring such temples, [the Swiss] are taking such steps."
Egemen Bagis, Turkey's chief negotiator in accession talks with the EU, noted "Switzerland is not an EU member. 
If it were, it would have been forced to maintain the EU standard."
The Swiss government defended the referendum, calling it an "action not against Islam or Muslims", but against Islamist extremism.
But that wasn't enough for the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
"This unfortunate [Swiss] decision is against basic freedoms and values of humanity. 
Values like multiculturalism, tolerance and respect for human rights are also important for social harmony and peace," the ministry said in a statement.
Turkish media also bashed the ban. 
A headline in the daily Takvim read, "Where is tolerance?" Vatan, another newspaper in the country, read, "Europe is embarrassed"
The referendum doesn't affect existing minarets in the country, or hinder Muslims from practicing their religion, however, many experts have spoken out against it, saying it violates religious freedoms.
Riza Turmen, a former judge at the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR), told Turkish media that a religious community can only be restricted if it threatens peace.
"In this case there is no such threat. 
States cannot ban opening worship places… On the other hand, minarets are integral parts of mosques. 
So in fact, the ban is practically on opening new mosques," said Turmen.
Head of the Swiss Green Party, Ueli Leuenberger, pledged to support appeals against the ban.
"It's extremely important," he told AFP. 
"For Switzerland... 
but also at the European level when you see the reactions of populist parties and the extreme right, who are celebrating and taking the Swiss example to launch campaigns against Muslims in their countries."
About 90% of the 400,000 Muslims living in Switzerland are from Kosovo and Turkey.
