21/11/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 21/11/05
By recommending candidate status for Macedonia, the European Commission confirmed once again that the EU has not forgotten the Balkans. 
In addition to its avis on Macedonia, released on 9 November, the Commission also published regular annual reports on the candidates Turkey and Croatia and the acceding countries Serbia-Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania, as well as the province of Kosovo.
During a visit to Macedonia a year ago, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said the European family of peoples would not be complete if it does not include the countries in the Western Balkans. 
At the time, he pledged that Macedonia would be assessed by the Commission fairly, thoroughly and objectively.
Twelve months later, Rehn told the Macedonian Parliament: "I bring you that assessment. 
It gives a thoroughly researched and carefully weighed analysis of the progress made by the country -- as well as of the weaknesses which remain to be addressed before the country can make further progress towards the EU."
Rehn outlined Macedonia’s achievements -- including the establishment of a functioning democracy with stable institutions, progress made in implementing the Ohrid Framework Agreement, steps towards police and judicial reform, constitutional changes meant to improve the judiciary's independence and efficiency, and efforts to harmonise Macedonian legislation with the EU acquis.
He also noted that low inflation, balanced public finances and only modest levels of public debt signal a macroeconomic situation which provides a sound basis for economic development.
At the same time, the commissioner pointed to areas where improvement is needed. 
Elections have been marred by irregularities, institutional weaknesses exist, and corruption pervades many areas of economic, social and political life. 
Citizens await significant socioeconomic progress and a rise in their living standards. 
And the process of reforming the police and judiciary must continue to go forward.
Despite these challenges, Rehn agreed with Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, who said the country has received a "one-way ticket" to eventual EU entry.
The commissioner next visited Tirana, where he presented the progress report on Albania. 
Since 31 January 2003, the country has been negotiating a SAA with the EU. 
"I know that people in the Western Balkans have been worried by the debate in the EU about enlargement this year. 
But I can assure you that the door to Europe is still open to you," Rehn said in an address to the Albanian Parliament. 
He brought good news about the SAA, confirming that negotiations are nearly complete.
"Our conclusion is that Albania has now made sufficient progress to allow the proper implementation of its future SAA," Rehn said.
At the same time, he stressed that the road to the EU is a challenging one, and there are no shortcuts. 
Real reform is essential -- to the economy, the public administration, and many other institutions, he said. 
In particular, Albania needs to show significant results in fighting corruption. 
Cases must be dealt with firmly, but strictly according to the rules, and independent of party affiliation, Rehn said.
Other challenges for Albania include developing the administrative capacity to apply EU rules properly; developing a functioning market economy; and improving standards for elections.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), meanwhile, has taken a major step forward with the new EC progress reports. 
Noting progress in several key areas, the Commission has recommended the opening of talks on signing an SAA.
Judicial restructuring, defence reform and an overhaul of the police system have all moved forward, and co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal has improved significantly, the EC found.
At the same time, the progress report warned, BiH and its reform efforts remain hampered by complex government structures, fragmented policymaking and a lack of resources and qualified staff. 
Efforts need to continue towards boosting the effectiveness of the executive and legislative bodies, ensuring that state-level authorities are properly equipped, strengthening state-entity coordination and fighting corruption.
As for the economic development, the main conclusion is that there have been some positive developments. 
However the progress report concludes that BiH's economy operates only to a limited degree according to market principles, and much more must be done to address shortcomings in economic competitiveness.
The EU began SAA negotiations with Serbia and Montenegro on 10 October. 
In its report for the country, the EC notes significant progress in co-operation with the UN tribunal. 
At the same time, it warns, Serbia and Montenegro must make further efforts to respect fully the Constitutional Charter, reform public administration and the judiciary, fight corruption, and ensure effective democratic control over the military. 
Political leaders need to take a constructive approach with regard to Kosovo, the EC said.
On the economic front, the report finds the economies in both constituent republics operate to some degree according to market principles, but vigorous reform efforts are necessary to address the shortcomings in competitiveness. 
In Serbia, the main positive developments are continuation of fiscal tightening; reduction of the trade deficit; reduction of external debt; and further progress in the restructuring and privatisation of the banking sector. 
However, inflation and wage pressure has mounted and the business environment remains difficult. 
The government sector still absorbs too many resources.
In Montenegro, the main positive developments were the strengthening of economic growth; a continued decline in inflation, further advancement of privatisation, a decline in unemployment, a reduction of the budget deficit and the rise of bank lending. 
However, external debt increased further and the private sector development is still hampered by an inefficient judiciary. 
High wage growth has diminished competitiveness, according to the EC report.
Regarding Kosovo, the EC found that the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government have demonstrated a strengthened commitment to the implementation of UN-set standards. 
However, it also warns that only modest progress was achieved in the areas of refugee return, freedom of movement and property rights. 
The lack of respect for the rule of law and the problems of organised crime and widespread corruption are issues of great concern, according to the EC.
The Commission's report called for further efforts to strengthen Kosovo's public administration and judicial system and ensure that they are free from political interference; to implement the decentralisation process, taking into account the views of all communities; and to improve the human rights situation, particularly for minorities.
In all, it can be concluded that the EC keeps a watchful eye on the region and that Southeast European countries have a lot to do. 
In the meantime, the progress made by Macedonia in gaining candidate status, and especially that made by Croatia in starting membership negotiations, have sent hopeful signals to other SEE countries.
