04/12/2009
(Blic - 04/12/09; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, B92, European Voice, UN News Centre, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 03/12/09; Reuters - 30/11/09)
Serbia has made further progress in co-operating with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) but must apprehend the two remaining fugitives, chief UN war crimes prosecutor Serge Brammertz told the Security Council on Thursday (December 3rd).
Bosnian Serb warlord Ratko Mladic and onetime Croatian Serb political leader Goran Hadzic are still at large and believed to be hiding in Serbia. 
According to Brammertz, apprehending them remains "the most critical aspect of Serbia's co-operation".
"This remains one of my office's highest priorities," he added in his bi-annual report to the 15-nation UN body.
At the same time, he lauded continued improvements in the way Belgrade is handling its relations with the tribunal.
"Prosecution requests to access documents and archives are being dealt with more expeditiously and effectively," he said "It is important that the authorities continue to provide this level of assistance, which will remain crucial during current and future trial and appeals work."
He also said the Serbian services tasked with tracking down Mladic and Hadzic have become more efficient and are conducting search and other operational activities in a co-ordinated fashion.
Full co-operation with the ICTY is a key requirement Serbia must meet in order to advance towards EU membership. 
Its Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU, signed in April 2008, remains frozen over the issue, as does an interim trade agreement which is part of the SAA.
Dutch Foreign Minister Maxime Verhagen, whose country has been blocking implementation of the two agreements, described the report as positive, even though Brammertz stopped short of defining Serbia's co-operation as "full".
"I will discuss next week with my European colleagues what this means for taking decisions concerning Serbia's [EU] integration process," the AFP quoted him as saying in a statement Thursday. 
He reiterated, however, that Serbia should still be pressed to locate and hand over the fugitives.
EU foreign ministers are expected to decide on Monday whether the reported improvement in Serbia's co-operation with the ICTY is sufficient to unlock its trade agreement with the Union.
Serbian officials said Brammertz's assessment was positive and objective, and insisted that authorities are making every effort to capture the two fugitives.
"The report is impartial and reflects the real situation regarding our co-operation with the tribunal. 
At the moment this fact is the most important one for us," Belgrade-based daily Blic quoted Rasim Ljajic, the head of Serbia's council for co-operation with the ICTY, as saying Thursday.
A day before the Security Council meeting, Serbian state security agents raided the homes of several individuals suspected to have been helping Mladic evade justice.
The agents who took part in the operation reportedly found "notebooks, address books, several CDs, computer hard disks and cell phones".
