04/08/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina --04/08/09
Belgrade said on Monday (August 3rd) that talks between Serbia and EULEX are ongoing. 
"
After two meetings held in Belgrade, negotiations with EULEX regarding the courts in Kosovo will be continued, and there will be talks on the possibility of Serb judges and prosecutors continuing to work," said Serb Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic.
His statement comes after Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci sent a letter to EULEX chief Yves de Kermabon last month, asking for clarification on the organisation's intent to sign three protocols with Belgrade in the fields of justice, police and customs.
"I would ask you please to take into consideration that I have not seen the drafts of those protocols and I have not been officially informed from the EULEX mission that such discussions have been done with the institutions of Kosovo," said Kuci's letter.
In response, de Kermabon met with Kuci to discuss the issue.
"He [de Kermabon] guaranteed me that EULEX has not done and it does not have the right to make negotiations on behalf of Kosovo institutions," said Kuci. 
"EULEX does not negotiate with Belgrade," said de Kermabon in a press release.
"There have been technical meetings with Belgrade, Tirana, Skopje and Podgorica to fight organised crime, trafficking and to improve the exchange of information in the fields of justice, customs and police."
Talking to Albanian TV station Top Channel, Pieter Feith, EU special representative in Kosovo, said he was informed about the EULEX-Belgrade talks, as were Pristina officials.
"Everything is being done in full transparency. 
De Kermabon is in continuous contact on this issue with the deputy prime minister. 
I am sure that the conclusion will be that this is in full accordance with the position of the Kosovo authorities," said Feith.
Kuci fired back, as quoted by Kosovo daily Zeri, saying, "Contacts with Belgrade are not the same as contacts with Tirana. 
Pristina pays attention to the contacts somebody keeps with Belgrade, which are related to Kosovo. 
We should also admit the fact that it is a psychosis, a trauma, laying everywhere among us related to such contacts; and Mr. 
Feith and others should know that even private visits to Belgrade have a meaning for the local representatives and the international representatives working in Kosovo."
