03/12/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 03/12/09
Incumbent Traian Basescu and Social Democrat Mircea Geoana, former minister of foreign affairs, will face off Sunday (December 6th) in a presidential run-off.
The campaign turned ugly last week, after personal attacks were launched by the sparring camps.
A movie allegedly showing Basescu hitting a child at a rally in 2004 sparked controversy in the country.
The footage shows the president leaning over a stage, where he was addressing a crowd in the city of Ploiesti during the campaign for local elections five years ago, to listen to a woman who was asking for help.
A child approaches the two and, at a certain point during the conversation, Basescu seemingly hits the boy hard on the chin.
The president asked the National Institute for Criminal Expertise to analyse the footage, to determine whether it is authentic.
The institution released a communique saying its findings have been submitted to the presidency.
"The contested recording contains elements of computerised editing;
it's not either authentic or a copy accurately made after an authentic recording," Basescu said, presenting the 18-page conclusion.
Basescu sued the newspaper that first published photos of the alleged incident, as well as Dinu Patriciu, a businessman who said he witnessed it.
In response to related attacks launched by former communist dissident and poet Mircea Dinescu, the president's wife, Maria Basescu, who has so far kept a low profile, released an open letter in which she rejected claims she had been hit by her husband.
"I'm breaking the silence today because what the media and the people behind it are saying nowadays is unacceptable to me."
The Pro Democratia Association (APD), a leading Romanian NGO promoting democracy, and which, among others, has monitored elections in Romania, condemned "the lack of ethics and professionalism which defines the electoral campaign for the Presidency".
"In this context, APD launches a last call towards normality and integrity to the electoral competitors who seem to have forgotten that the end doesn't always excuse the means," it further said.
"The electoral dirty attacks have reached an unprecedented peak.
The positive themes of the campaign have all been covered in the mud of such attacks," Florin Ciornei, a political editor with the Romanian newspaper Evenimentul Zilei told SETimes.
"These personal attacks are meant to induce emotional effects on the electorate -- demobilising the opponent's voters or attracting new ones who could to be outraged by such 'disclosures,'" he added.
According to an INSOMAR poll released on Tuesday, Geoana has 54% of the vote, compared to 46% for Basescu.
