03/12/2009
(Novinite, Dnevnik, Focus News Agency - 02/12/09;
EurActiv, Novinite - 01/12/09;
BTA, Dnevnik, Mediapool - 30/11/09;
The Sofia Echo, Novinite, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 27/11/09)
European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso unveiled his new team Friday (November 27th), naming Bulgarian Foreign Minister Rumiana Jeleva as commissioner-designate for International Co-operation, Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response.
Bulgaria's top diplomat said she was flattered and pleased she was getting a portfolio in the area of EU foreign policy, as it carries "great political importance".
Barroso won re-election for a second five-year term at the head of the EU executive in September, but the members of his new cabinet still must be approved by the European Parliament (EP).
The commissioners-designate will face confirmation hearings next month, before the final plenary vote on the full EC on January 26th.
Jeleva, who holds a Ph.
D. in sociology from the Otto-von-Guericke University in Germany, has been nominated for one of the new posts created by Barroso.
She will take up the humanitarian aid part of the responsibilities of Belgium's Karel de Gucht, who was also in charge of development in the outgoing EC.
"This is an innovative portfolio which brings together the instruments for civil protection and emergency response," Barroso said in a mission letter to Jeleva.
"You will be responsible for humanitarian aid, which is one of the most crucial and visible ways, in which the EU can fulfill its global responsibilities."
Barroso also told Jeleva that she must fully respect the principles of neutrality, impartiality and non-discrimination in her job, which "involves both the effective and swift delivery of aid and the promotion of respect for international humanitarian law".
She will work in close co-operation with the UK's Catherine Ashton, the 27-nation bloc's new foreign policy chief and EC vice president-designate.
The British daily Financial Times, reported that Sofia was getting a "lightweight" portfolio, listing the Balkan nation among the "losers" -- along with Italy and Latvia.
Bulgaria's main opposition Socialist Party seemed to agree.
Party leader and former Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev described Barroso's decision as "a slap in the face" and the first major defeat for successor Boyko Borisov's centre-right cabinet in its dealings with Brussels.
In response, Jeleva called a special press conference in Sofia on Monday.
"I am concerned over the tendency of Euroscepticism, imposed by these politicians and political forces that have been unsuccessful in home politics," she said.
Stressing that it is the Treaty of Lisbon that defines humanitarian aid as an autonomous community policy of the EU for the first time ever, Jeleva also noted that one of the principal tasks before the new EC would be to draft a strategy for creating a voluntary European corps for humanitarian aid.
