03/09/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/09/09
KFOR Multinational Brigade North Commander General Patrick Ribayrol said on Wednesday (September 2nd) that his troops are "ready to react" and support EULEX police in the ongoing conflict between local Serbs and Albanian returnees in Mitrovica.
"We are ready to intervene even directly with an order of the commander, but also to support EULEX in the north and other parts of the region," Ribayrol said.
The general's statements were made the same day two incidents occurred in Mitrovica.
At about 7pm a group of Serbs began throwing stones at Albanian houses, spurring Albanians to throw stones back.
No injuries were reported.
A couple of hours later, two strong explosions were heard in the area.
Police and KFOR personnel are investigating the case.
At least six Serbs were injured a day earlier in clashes between Albanian and Serb youth, Serb media reported.
The incidents stem from the ongoing objection of local Serbs to the reconstruction of Albanian homes destroyed during the 1999 conflict in Mitrovica's Kroi i Vitakut (Brdjani) neighbourhood.
On Tuesday, EULEX said that Albanian workers would be allowed into the neighbourhood, and that the mission's police would provide security.
"From the UN perspective, it is a basic right of the displaced to return to their properties and UNMIK favours respecting this right," Kosovalive quoted UNMIK chief Lamberto Zannier as saying, after meeting with Mitrovica Mayor Bajram Rexhepi on Monday.
He added that security and administrative procedures should be taken into consideration.
"During the ongoing debate to find ways for return to and rebuilding of houses, neither side contested the authority of the UNMIK administration," a UNMIK spokesperson told Belgrade-based B92.
EULEX special police are guarding the Kroi i Vitakut (Brdjani) neighbourhood.
The mission says it is supporting Kosovo police, keeping the peace, and urging both sides to find a solution.
Last week, members of Vetevendosje (Self Determination) damaged 28 EULEX vehicles in downtown Pristina in a protest against the expected signing of the protocol.
An Albanian and four police officers were injured.
Police arrested 21 members of the group.
"Since EULEX does not recognise Kosovo, then there is no reason for Kosovo to recognise EULEX," said protest leader Glauk Konjufca.
Serb leaders said they will organise a petition-drive, calling for EULEX to leave Kosovo.
"All the talk [about stopping] smuggling and criminal activities is not true.
This is a part of the 'road map' which has the goal to separate Kosovo from Serbia, and is the price of visa liberalisation [for Serbia]," Assembly of the Community of Serb Municipalities Deputy Chairman Marko Jaksic told B92.
