03/12/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/12/09
Parliament member Gordana Pop-Lazic of the Serbian Radical Party (SRS) threw a shoe at Deputy Speaker Gordana Comic on November 26th, to protest Comic's refusal to allow a fellow SRS member to finish a statement on a controversial statute.
"This is the shoe of the disgruntled citizens who voted for the Serbian Radical Party and who would do the same as me," Pop-Lazic told reporters after being forced to leave parliament with one shoe.
Pop-Lazic claimed her act was an expression against what she terms tyranny in parliament over opposition parties.
She also said that SRS leader Vojislav Seselj, who is on trial at The Hague tribunal, did not order this action.
Though Pop-Lazic missed the deputy speaker, she was fined 350 euros.
Radical Party Deputy President Dragan Todorovic backed Pop-Lazic's action, saying she would be "fined for not aiming well and failing to hit the deputy speaker".
Todorovic compared her to the Iraqi journalist who threw a shoe at former US President George Bush, and said, "Her shoe will enter history."
Serbian state TV missed the shoe incident and apologised to its viewers, saying the cameras were set on automatic mode at that time.
Some media, including the daily Danas, condemned the event, labeling it "a circus", while others such as Kurir reported the shoes were made in Italy and cost about 100 euros.
Opposition Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) Whip Milos Aligrudic said Pop-Lazic's reaction was justified because of what he calls the deputy speaker's "scandalous way of running the sessions".
He explained that "if someone constantly provokes MPs by violating their rights, invents rules, maliciously breaches the rules of procedure [and] interrupts MPs, then that is really out of line."
However, the ruling coalition MPs expressed skepticism at those claims.
They point out the incident was a manner of scoring cheap political points and is a reflection of Pop-Lazic's upbringing.
The head of the ruling coalition caucus For a European Serbia, Nada Kolundzija, said that by throwing a shoe, Pop-Lazic "violated most severely" parliament's rules of procedure.
"There are very clear rules of procedure and they apply to everyone," she said.
"Their [the Radicals'] attempt to turn the parliament into a circus without any rules will fail and has failed so far," she added.
