04/08/2009
(Reuters, AFP, DPA, Novinite, BNR, Dnevnik - 03/08/09; Bloomberg, Dnevnik, BNN - 31/07/09)
Bulgaria may be able to enter the euro zone by the middle of 2013, Finance Minister Simeon Djankov told Sofia-based daily 24 Chasa in an interview published on Monday (August 3rd).
"We have a chance to adopt the euro in the last year of the [government's four-year] mandate," he said.
A former World Bank chief economist, Djankov also serves as deputy prime minister in the cabinet of the centre-right Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB), which was sworn in on July 27th.
Prior to introducing the euro as its official currency, Bulgaria must first join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II), a two-year currency stability test for hopefuls, currently comprised of 16 EU members.
Sofia plans to submit an application for participation in November, Djankov said last week.
"There is great uncertainty about what happens in the whole region in terms of the financial crisis," Bloomberg news agency quoted him as noting. 
"It doesn't affect our application, but may affect the speed with which it is considered."
Djankov believes Bulgaria will fulfil the official criteria for euro zone membership by the end of the year.
The main task now, he noted, is to keep the deficit below 3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the euro zone limit.
"We are currently at 2.2-2.5% (budget deficit) ... 
If the deficit exceeds 3.0%, it will put off our euro zone entry by two more years," Reuters quoted him as saying.
Djankov also forecast that inflation rates will continue to drop to an annual average of 2.8% this year, down from 3.7% in June.
In 1997, Bulgaria was hit by a severe economic and financial crisis that led to a sharp drop in GDP and personal incomes, a collapse of the country's banking sector and major foreign exchange problems. 
After several months of chaos, the country adopted a currency board arrangement, under which the lev was pegged to the euro at a fixed rate of 1.95583.
Bulgaria's entry into the ERM II may allow the lev to fluctuate by as much as 15% around this central rate.
Djankov and central bank officials have said however that the peg will stay unchanged until Bulgaria joins the euro zone.
Stressing that there is no pressing need for Bulgaria to request an IMF loan, Djankov noted however that Sofia intends to seek the Fund's involvement in analysis of the budget for the rest of the year and especially for 2010.
"The IMF analysis can quickly be used for a possible loan in 2010, if it becomes obvious that the 2010 budget cannot be done just with the cuts," he said.
