03/08/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/08/09
The proposed Public Information Bill has caused a serious division within the ruling coalition, as the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), the third strongest coalition member, says it will not support it.
The biggest members of the ruling coalition -- the Democratic Party (DS) and G17 Plus -- believe the bill should be passed for the sake of introducing order in the Serbian media.
G17 Plus leader Deputy Prime Minister Mladjan Dinkic is often the target of local tabloids.
However, journalist associations across the country have spoken out against the bill, claiming it is not in line with European standards and that, if passed, officials will put pressure on journalists.
The South East Europe Media Organisation (SEEMO) said in a statement that a certain level of media regulation is necessary, but "excessive fines can discourage investigative journalism and lead to auto-censorship and the closing down of some media companies."
The bill was scheduled to be put before parliament on July 31st, but the date was pushed back when it became clear the SPS staunchly opposed it.
G17 Plus accused SPS leader and Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic of sparking a government crisis.
"The government can only be toppled by Socialist Party leader Ivica Dacic with his unfair and hypocritical behaviour.
By undermining the adoption of a government bill and delaying the adoption of other, equally important, laws, Dacic has caused a potential crisis within the ruling coalition," G17 Plus said in a press release.
In an alleged attempt to sway the Socialist Party, the DS organised a meeting with the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), which has the same number of MPs as the SPS, and can replace it in the ruling coalition.
At the meeting, the DS, G17 Plus and LDP agreed to reach an agreement with journalist associations and European institutions by the end of the month.
"The Information Bill cannot jeopardise the Serbian government and the long-term partnership of the Socialist Party of Serbia and the Democratic Party," said SPS Vice -resident Zarko Obradovic.
