03/09/2009
(Euractiv, Kathimerini, Guardian, Euronews - 03/09/09; Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, FT, Wall Street Journal, UPI, BBC, ANA-MPA - 02/09/09)
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis has officially called early general elections, following a meeting with President Karolos Papoulias on Thursday (September 3rd). 
Parliament will be dissolved on Monday, with the vote to take place on October 4th.
Halfway through his four-year term, the prime minister announced the move in a televised address to the nation late Wednesday. 
He said he was seeking a "fresh popular mandate" in order to carry out much needed, but painful structural reforms to deal with the effects of the global economic downturn.
"The consequences of the economic crisis are visible; we have two difficult, crucial years ahead of us," Karamanlis, the leader of the ruling conservative New Democracy (ND) party said. 
"Taking necessary measures imposes one solution: the clearing of the political landscape and a fresh popular mandate."
After more than a decade in opposition, the ND returned to power following its sweeping victory in the country's March 2004 parliamentary elections. 
It won the September 2007 polls again, but with his party's one-seat majority in the 300-member legislature, Karamanlis's hands have been tied and pressing measures to control a widening budget deficit and boost the shrinking economy's competitiveness have been delayed.
"If we do not act immediately, then the consequences will be great, with 2010 a difficult year ahead for the economy," the prime minister said in his speech Wednesday.
After years of steady 4% growth, the Greek economy is projected to contract by up to 1% this year. 
Some analysts say the country may be headed into its first recession since 1993 in the coming months.
The "harsh new reality" makes tough structural reforms, strict fiscal discipline and a "war" on widespread tax evasion essential, but such unpopular measures require a stable political system, Karamanlis said.
The government has been facing sharp criticism over its alleged involvement in a string of corruption scandals, its handling of forest fires, especially those in 2007, as well as riots sparked by the killing of a teenager by police last December.
Key economic sectors, such as tourism and shipping, have been badly hit by the global slump, and unemployment has been climbing. 
The opposition says Karamanlis cannot tackle the country's problems.
"He cannot manage the economic crisis, nor draw up a budget, nor control his party nor run his government," George Papandreou, the leader of the main opposition PASOK party said on Wednesday.
It remains to be seen if the snap elections are "political suicide", as many analysts are suggesting, or a gamble that will pay off for ND. 
Recent opinion polls show the conservatives trailing about six percentage points behind the Socialists, who won the European Parliamentary elections in June with a 4.4% lead over the ND.
However, PASOK might not be able to win an outright majority to govern alone, pollsters say.
The Socialists have indicated that in the event that happens, they would seek new elections, after amending the electoral law to make it easier to form a government with fewer votes.
