03/08/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 03/08/09
Southeast European Times: How would you assess the ruling coalition and the Democratic Union for Integration's (DUI) participation in government?
Abdulakim Ademi: The government coalition between the DUI and VMRO-DPMNE is very strong proof that now there are no more prejudices and that simply everything that stood in the way of rapprochement between some political subjects does not exist any more. 
The majority of ethnic Albanian voters in Macedonia have supported DUI at the polls -- a majority of Macedonians supported VMRO-DPMNE, and so Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) and Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) were left as opposition.
We are working to fulfill the promises that we gave to our electorate. 
We are giving our maximum in order to harmonise our positions concerning the crucial issues. 
But the economic crisis is doing its job, and it's hard to make projections.
SETimes: What can you say regarding the ongoing implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement?
Ademi: Among the strategic issues for the country is the implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement. 
In this direction, there are many things that had been done. 
But this matter that deals with the agreement is very broad, and therefore there are segments where stronger engagement is needed. 
This will be connected with many other factors including the subjective factors. 
After the elections in 2008, the law for the usage of the languages was adopted by parliament. 
Also, a great number of people that belong to the smaller ethnic communities in the country were employed in the public administration and that way equitable prevalence was reached.
SETimes: The name dispute remains an obstacle to Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic integration. 
Are EU and NATO accession possible in the near future, and what is your standpoint on the name dispute?
Ademi: As a political subject we have always expressed our opinion that in the co-ordinative group for resolving the problem about the name issue, the ethnic Albanians should be included as well.
DUI, as a legitimate representative of ethnic Albanians, is strongly dedicated to the fulfillment of all conditions, so that the country can become a member of EU and NATO as soon as possible. 
We will help the process of resolving the problem about the name issue with our southern neighbour, determining that the name Macedonia will not reflect elements of national or ideological exclusivity.
SETimes: Macedonia recently recognised the independence of Kosovo, but there are no diplomatic relations between the two countries yet. 
When do you think diplomatic relations will be established?
Ademi: We are two small states. 
The need for co-operation is more than necessary. 
We should not take wrong steps, and we should show capacity for building good neighbourly relations. 
The two states, Macedonia and Kosovo, have mutual interests, such as establishing diplomatic relations, and afterwards also other agreements between the institutions in the fields of health, education and economy. 
I hope that diplomatic relations will be achieved as soon as possible and will be of mutual interest to both countries.
SETimes: Recently the European Commission green-lighted visa liberalisation for Macedonia. 
What is your opinion regarding this process?
Ademi: Macedonian citizens have different ties with all European states. 
A great number of Macedonian citizens have family ties to numerous European countries. 
Therefore, the existing visa regime is a serious obstacle for regular visits between these families. 
Aware of this fact, we as a state, consider this issue as a very serious problem. 
Therefore, for years, we have invested a serious amount of money to meet the criteria of the Schengen visa system. 
I am grateful and very happy for the positive remarks from the European Commission about our work so far. 
Visa liberalisation will have a positive impact on public opinion in the county, and will remove today's widespread opinion in Macedonia that Europe has forgotten the Western Balkans.
