01/02/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 01/02/10
The recovery of Serbia's faltering economy will not be fast or easy, according to a new report issued by the IMF on Thursday (January 28th). 
The group said that if recovery is to come, it will be gradual, with exports growing in 2011. 
According to the report, a return to Serbia's strong pre-crisis GDP growth -- at 4% to 5% -- cannot be expected any sooner than 2012.
"Absorption growth is expected to remain flat in 2010, reflecting the combined impacts of declining real incomes and employment, drawn-out corporate deleveraging, and tight credit conditions," the IMF said. 
"Robust GDP growth in line with pre-crisis trend growth is projected to resume only in 2012."
Help from the IMF was key to Serbia's stability in 2009, when the country was faced with bankruptcy. 
A deal was made with the IMF allowing Serbia to borrow 2.9 billion euros over several years. 
The money Belgrade took last year saved the state from insolvency. 
Belgrade pledged to keep salaries in the state sector and pensions frozen in 2010.
Overall, the economic outlook is somewhat bleak. 
According to the Serbian Statistics Bureau, Serbia's trade deficit totalled 5.2 billion euros in 2009. 
The average monthly salary in December was 375 euros.
Since the beginning of this year, Serbs have been faced with numerous price hikes. 
Spikes in the cost of fuel, electricity and other forms of energy will have the biggest impact on the country's standard of living.
The dinar has been declining against the euro since the beginning of the year. 
On January 1st, one euro was worth 95.8 dinars, whereas on Monday, it will be worth 98.4 dinars, a change that particularly affects those who took loans in euros and are repaying them in dinars.
Several strikes have been organised in Serbia since the beginning of the year, mostly by workers of bankrupt state-controlled companies demanding back pay and the resumption of production. 
Some workers have begun to block major roads throughout the country.
