02/09/2009
(AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, BBC, Bloomberg, RTE, Telegraph, Guardian - 02/09/09)
A powerful explosion outside the Athens Stock Exchange early Wednesday (September 2nd) caused extensive damage to the building and a nearby car dealership, and destroyed eight vehicles, including the van, in which the homemade bomb had been planted.
A woman passing by at the time was slightly injured by flying glass.
"Despite the huge material damage caused to the building by today's explosion, the Athens stock market will operate normally," the bourse said in a statement.
Photos from the scene show members of an anti-terrorist team gathering evidence from the area that was cordoned off by police.
Traffic along the busy highway outside the stock exchange was blocked off for over an hour.
Less than 30 minutes after that attack, a second homemade bomb exploded outside the premises of the ministry for Macedonia and Thrace in the northern city of Thessaloniki, causing minor damage to the building, but no injuries.
While both explosions were preceded by anonymous warning calls to Greek media, police said they could not confirm the two incidents were linked.
The components of the bomb resembled those used by the extremist Revolutionary Struggle, a Greek terrorist group, which emerged in September 2003 when it assumed responsibility for two court bombings in Athens within the span of 30 minutes.
The militant organisation staged a rocket attack on the US Embassy in Athens in January 2007 and is believed to have been behind a series of other assaults, including an assassination attempt against former Culture Minister George Voulgarakis.
Earlier this year, the group planted a powerful bomb in a car outside the US banking group Citibank's headquarters in Athens.
Police defused the device, preventing an explosion.
Police spokesman Panayiotis Stathis said on Wednesday the "methodology" of the attack against the Athens Stock Exchange pointed to Revolutionary Struggle.
"All evidence shows it was a terrorist attack," he told reporters, adding that no one has claimed responsibility yet.
According to police, the van in which the bomb was hidden was stolen Monday in Athens.
Revolutionary Struggle emerged following the dismantling of a notorious leftist militant organisation responsible for the killings of four US officials and 19 other foreign diplomats and Greeks during its 27-year reign of terror.
Victims included the husband of Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis.
The Marxist group was broken up in 2002, after Greek authorities captured its leaders, who are currently in prison.
