01/10/2009
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Split – 01/10/09
The coastal town of Podstrana is trying to capitalise on the theory that the tomb of the legendary King Arthur is located nearby.
The aim is backed by John Matthews, a renowned British historian who is the first to promote the theory that King Arthur was a Roman warrior, Lucius Artorius Castus, buried in Podstrana.
A step away from the main coastal road, near the local church, laid a tablet that records the life of the Roman warrior.
It survived the centuries.
Castus' tombstone in the Podstrana cemetery was recently replaced by a replica.
The town of Podstrana, however, is already attracting thousands of tourists to performances based on the legend of King Arthur.
It ''presents King Arthur from the moment he pulls a sword from a stone, up to the fight between good and evil,'' said Deniver Vukelic, one of the actors.
Jiri Spundov, a tourist from the Czech Republic says, ''This is great.
We've come for holidays and then saw a great performance, especially attractive for our kids.
We immediately phoned friends telling them we are spending holidays at the place where King Arthur was buried."
Like Spundov, other spectators were delighted with the performance.
Podstrana's tourist board welcomes the development.
Now, foreign tourists make it a point to visit the replica of the alleged King Arthur tombstone.
The original was removed for carbon-testing.
'
'We decided to remove the original tombstone due to the threat of possible damages.
The original will be researched and analyzed before being stored in the Podstrana museum's collection," said the Croatian Ministry of Culture.
Meanwhile, tourist board head Marin Kastelancic is developing a promotional strategy based on Matthews' theory.
The board is determined to capitalise on the King Arthur legend.
''It would be great to do a thorough archaeological survey in Podstrana to see what further proof we could find,'' Matthews told the Croatian press.
Meanwhile, an advertisement on the local TV station blares ''Come to Podstrana, King Arthur awaits you there!''
