01/02/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 01/02/10
For the third time, voters in a pair of Kosovo municipalities went to the polls Sunday (January 31st) after a re-vote was ordered by the Central Election Commission (CEC).
Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) Deputy Chairman Fatmir Limaj told Kosovo TV station Klan Kosova that his party had won in both municipalities.
The mayoral victories took place in Prizren and Lipjan/Lipljane over candidates from the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), the party of President Fatmir Sejdiu.
CEC chief Nesrin Lushta said early Monday that preliminary results show the PDK won in Prizren with 53.2% of the votes and in Lipjan/Lipljane with 53.7%.
She said that 43% of voters turned out in Prizren and 57% in Lipjan.
LDK Deputy Chairman Lutfi Haziri admitted that the election results are not encouraging for his party, but said that they would accept the results and will congratulate the winners.
Lushta said she was not aware of irregularities during the re-vote.
The head of the Commission for Complaints and Submissions (ECAC), Xhemajl Pecani, confirmed that voting took place with no incident, although local television reported clashes between supporters from the two parties in Lipjan.
There was no official confirmation of the alleged incidents.
The CEC decided to hold a third round of voting in Prizren and Lipjan after the November 15th and December 13th voting failed to result in electing a mayor in either of the municipalities.
In the November vote, the PDK was winner in most of the municipalities.
The ECAC recommended the vote due to irregularities observed in the second vote on December 13th.
The commission also suggested re-voting in a third municipality -- Gjilan.
Instead, the CEC ordered a re-counting of the votes of Gjilan, but still, was not able to come to a final decision.
It will be decided in court.
US Ambassador to Kosovo Christopher Dell met with Lushta on December 23rd.
"We trust that, upon further review, the CEC will recognise its obligation fully to respect the ECAC's decision to hold new elections in Gjilan/Gnjilane as well," said Dell.
"The intent of the law in this matter is clear and the CEC has a clear responsibility to order new elections in all three municipalities pursuant to ECAC's December 19th decision."
