02/12/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 02/12/09
European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso announced on Friday (November 27th) in Brussels the list of designated EU commissioners, including former Romanian Agriculture Minister Dacian Ciolos, who will take over the EU's Agriculture and Rural Development portfolio.
Ciolos will succeed Commissioner Mariann Fischer Boel of Denmark in the post, and Commissioner for Multiculturalism Leonard Orban, as Romania's representative in the EU executive branch. 
Barroso said he is pleased with Ciolos's appointment, describing him as the most competent candidate for the position.
Following the announcement, Romanian President Traian Basescu held a joint press conference with Ciolos, calling the appointment an enormous success for Romanian diplomacy. 
Basescu explained that Ciolos's candidacy had been supported unanimously by all Romanian political parties.
Basescu also noted the enormous importance of the EU's agricultural policy, given its budget -- about 50 billion euros, or nearly a third of its 2010 budget.
Anne-Marie Blajan, EU affairs specialist for the website HotNews, told SETimes that "attributing this portfolio to Ciolos is a clear victory for the image of Romania, but this couldn't have been possible without France's firm support."
She explained that "Ciolos' success is also a victory of France, who was interested in the agriculture sector being ascribed to a friendly country that shares its philosophy concerning the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), namely more money for subsidies and less for the regional development."
It "shouldn't at all damage Ciolos' professional qualification, and I think the hearings in the EP won't pose many problems for him", she added.
But Blajan cautioned of a bumpy road ahead. 
"Managing a portfolio with a huge budget and the strong dissensions among the member states concerning CAP will provide a range of challenges he will have to cope with."
The new commissioner must be approved by the European Parliament before he takes office for a five-year term. 
The vote is scheduled for January 26th, according to the EC website.
Ciolos served as agriculture minister from October 2007 to December 2008, and has led the presidential commission for agriculture since July 2009.
