01/02/2010
(DPA, Euronews, Financial Mirror, Famagusta Gazette - 01/02/10; AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, FT, BBC, CNA, UN News Centre - 31/01/10; DPA - 29/01/10; UN News centre - 27/01/10)
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon arrived on a three-day visit to Cyprus late Sunday (January 31st) to encourage peace talks aimed at ending the Mediterranean island's more than 35-year ethnic divide.
"I am here to show my personal support for the Cypriot talks to reunify the country," Ban told reporters at Larnaca Airport.
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat launched a new round of direct negotiations in September 2008 amid high hopes.
The two sides have agreed to work for "a bi-communal, bi-zonal federation with political equality, as defined by relevant Security Council resolutions". 
More than 60 meetings held through the beginning of this year did not help iron out differences on a number of thorny issues, such as property, security and territorial arrangements.
Last month, Christofias and Talat began a series of intensive talks in the ongoing UN-sponsored effort. 
Speaking Friday after the second round of intensive negotiations, UN Special Adviser for Cyprus Alexander Downer said the two sides had made significant progress in areas of governance and power sharing.
Commending Christofias and Talat for their efforts in the peace process, Ban encouraged them to continue working towards a deal, telling reporters, "reaching a mutually acceptable solution will require courage, flexibility and vision, as well as a spirit of compromise."
The last attempt at resolving the Cyprus issue ended in failure in April 2004 when the majority of Turkish Cypriots supported a UN-sponsored settlement plan, which Greek Cypriot voters overwhelmingly rejected. 
Eventually, only the internationally recognised Greek-run part of the island joined the EU, representing the whole country. 
Turkish Cypriots, recognised soley by Ankara, have been excluded from the benefits of EU membership.
"I am under no illusion that the Cyprus problem is easy to solve or about the difficulties that you face," said Ban. 
"At the same time, I am confident that a solution is possible and within reach."
Any agreement between Christofias and Talat would be put to a referendum on both sides of the 180km, UN-patrolled, east-to-west "Green Line". 
The line also divides the capital of Nicosia.
With the upcoming Turkish Cypriot presidential elections in April, there is a sense of urgency for an agreement. 
Recent opinion polls show Talat trailing hardliner Dervis Eroglu. 
If Eroglu wins, observers fear the peace process could be derailed.
"Your destiny is in your hands," said Ban. 
"You have taken responsibility for finding a solution. 
You are the ones driving the process and the ones who will benefit from tremendous benefits and opportunities a settlement will bring to this island."
The UN chief was scheduled to meet separately with Christofias and Talat on Monday, before chairing a joint meeting. 
"Solving the Cyprus problem," Ban said, "will give an inspiration to all those around the world trying to solve other seemingly intractable conflicts."
