01/09/2009
(BBC, Euronews, Zaman, Anadolu Agency, Trend News Agency, News.am - 01/09/09;
Reuters, AP, DPA, UPI, Bloomberg, US Department of State - 31/08/09)
Neighbours Turkey and Armenia made a step towards ending their almost century-old enmity Monday (August 31st) as they agreed to launch talks aimed at normalising ties.
The decision was announced in a joint statement by the Turkish and Armenian foreign ministries following months of bilateral discussions mediated by Switzerland.
It said the two sides would start internal political consultations over two protocols -- on the establishment of diplomatic relations and on the development of bilateral relations.
The consultations would be completed within six weeks, after which the protocols would be signed and submitted for ratification to the Turkish and Armenian parliaments, according to the announcement.
"Both sides will make their best efforts for the timely progression of the ratification, in line with their constitutional and legal procedures," said a joint statement mediated by Switzerland.
While Turkey was among the first countries to recognise Armenia's independence in 1991, the two have not established diplomatic ties.
Their common border has been sealed since 1993, when Ankara closed it in protest of the former Soviet republic's backing of ethnic Armenian separatists in Azerbaijan's breakaway mountain region of Nagorno-Karabakh.
But the most divisive issue between the two nations stems from the massacre of up to 1.5 million Armenians between 1915 and 1917 in Turkey.
Armenians maintain that the mass killings were aimed at driving their kin out of eastern Turkey and constituted an act of genocide, a view supported by many Western historians and politicians, but staunchly rejected by Ankara.
While acknowledging that thousands of Armenians did indeed perish in the wane of the Ottoman empire, Turkey insists that the number of victims is exaggerated and attributes the killings to the turbulent times of World War I.
Armenian President Serge Sarkisian told the BBC Russian Service in an interview published Monday that a solution to the dispute over the killings nearly a century ago would not be a precondition for normalising ties between the two countries.
"It's important that historical justice be restored.
It's important that our nations are able to establish normal relations.
Finally, it's important that this is not repeated in the future," he stressed.
"But we do not regard a recognition of genocide as a preliminary condition for establishing relations."
The US Department of State welcomed Monday's announcement.
"We urge Armenia and Turkey to proceed expeditiously, according to the agreed framework," State Department spokesman Ian Kelly said in a statement.
"We remain ready to work closely with both governments in support of normalisation, a historic process that will contribute to peace, security and stability throughout the region."
The two countries began mending ties after Turkish President Abdullah Gul's unprecedented visit to Yerevan last September, when he and Sarkisian sat side by side during a World Cup qualifier match between their national football teams.
Sarkisian is scheduled to visit Turkey on October 14th, which will coincide with the return leg of the World Cup qualifier match between the two countries.
The Armenian president has suggested, however, that he might decide against travelling to Ankara if there is no tangible progress regarding the reopening of the common border.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu has suggested that a decision on the border issue is still not in the cards.
"A longer process is required for that," the AP quoted him as saying, in remarks broadcast by Turkey's NTV television Monday.
