01/12/2009
(EurActiv, Euobserver, The Sofia Echo - 01/12/09; AFP, DPA, AKI, European Voice, EU, Beta, B92, MIA - 30/11/09)
Citizens of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia will be able to travel to most of Europe without visas as of December 19th, EU interior ministers decided during a meeting in Brussels on Monday (November 30th). 
Hailing the move, EU officials said it marked an important step in the three countries' European integration bids.
"Today's decision reflects the clear European perspective of the Western Balkan countries and is the result of the hard work of the countries concerned to meet the requirements for visa liberalisation," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Monday.
By simplifying mobility for Macedonian, Montenegrin and Serbian citizens, the 27-nation bloc will "further foster the contacts between the Union and these countries and open a new era in our co-operation", European Commission (EC) Vice-President Jacques Barrot said.
Swedish Migration and Asylum Policy Minister Tobias Billstrom, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency and who chaired Monday's meeting, called it a "historic" decision. 
Macedonian, Montenegrin and Serbian citizens wishing to celebrate Christmas with friends and relatives living in Schengen area countries will be able to do so now without visas, he noted.
They only need a biometric passport to travel to any of the 28 countries in the Schengen area -- all EU member states, except Britain and Ireland, plus non-EU members Iceland, Norway and Switzerland. 
The duration of their stay must not exceed 90 days within a six-month period, otherwise they will still need to have a visa. 
Those planning to work during a short stay would also have to obtain visas and work permits.
Monday's decision does not apply to residents of Kosovo even if they hold a Serbian biometric passport, as their country has not been recognised by all EU nations yet and was not included in the visa liberalisation dialogue the EC opened with the Western Balkan nations last year.
"This is a practical and clear step towards European integration," Serbian President Boris Tadic said at a joint press conference with Barrot and Rehn in Brussels. 
"Visa abolishment is not part of EU membership negotiations, but there can be no membership in the EU without visa liberalisation."
Hailing the news as a confirmation of Skopje's efforts to meet the visa liberalisation requirements, Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said his country had "reason to celebrate and this day will be written in Macedonian history for sure".
