28/10/2010
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 28/10/10
Political life in Albania has been mired in an impasse since the June 2009 elections.
The opposition Socialists and their allies want ballot boxes re-opened;
the ruling coalition disagrees, and the resulting standoff has held up the legislative process.
EU officials have regularly warned that Albania's EU prospects are being harmed.
Now there are signals that the two sides may be inching towards a solution, though whether anything concrete comes of it remains to be seen, and the tone of discussions remains combative.
Edi Rama, leader of the Socialists, made a surprise decision last week to attend a meeting called by Prime Minister Sali Berisha to discuss the crisis.
He brought with him what he described as an "ultimatum".
It calls for setting up a commission to investigate problems with the election, such as an alleged lack of policing.
Rama said the opposition is committed to implementing a July 8th resolution by the European Parliament, which "deplores the political crisis" in Albania and "strongly urges all political sides to assume their responsibilities".
Specific steps called for in the resolution include conducting dialogue on a new electoral law to ensure transparency in future polls, and setting up a parliamentary committee of inquiry to investigate the June 2009 vote.
If the ruling and opposition parties can't find a solution to the impasse, they should look to outside mediation, the EP said.
Berisha told Rama he would study his proposal.
He affirmed his government's readiness to implement the EP resolution, and said the opposition would be invited to formulate amendments designed to make the electoral process more secure.
The amendments would then be submitted to the OSCE and the Venice Commission, Berisha said, adding that he wants EP members to help with the reforms.
The prime minister also said the government will secure additional budget funds to address issues such as buying new ballot boxes for the 2011 local elections, and will not burn the old ones.
The Socialists, who have been staging parliamentary boycotts and public demonstrations, say they will call these off for the time being while the government considers their demands.
Spartak Ngjela, a Rama ally, told a local station Top Channel that the offer extends to November 8th or 9th.
Writing in Gazeta Shqip, analyst Andrea Stefani said the opposition has no reason right now to show weakness.
"Even the European Parliament in its resolution, makes clear that the investigation of election materials is seen as a precondition of electoral reform," she wrote in her column.
