28/10/2010
(CNN, Deutsche Welle - 27/10/10;
Transparency International, AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, Euronews, Euobserver, VOA, RFE/RL, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, MIA, Beta, B92 - 26/10/10)
Trust in the integrity of public institutions in some of the countries worst affected by the global economic downturn has dropped, Transparency International (TI) said on Tuesday (October 26th), as it released its annual Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI).
"With governments committing huge sums to tackle the world's most pressing problems, from the instability of financial markets to climate change and poverty, corruption remains an obstacle to achieving much needed progress," the Berlin-based watchdog noted.
The group measured the degree to which graft is perceived to exist among officials and politicians in 178 countries, on the basis of 13 different expert and business surveys conducted between January 2009 and September 2010.
It viewed the fact that nearly three-quarters of the nations covered in this year's CPI received scores lower than 5.0, on a scale of 0 (perceived to be highly corrupt) to 10 (perceived to have low levels of corruption), as an indication of a serious corruption problem.
"These results signal that significantly greater efforts must go into strengthening governance across the globe," TI Chairman Huguette Labelle said.
Aside from Cyprus, all other Southeast European (SEE) countries, including EU members Romania, Bulgaria and Greece, were listed in that group, irrespective of whether they fared better or worse than last year.
But even Cyprus, which shares 28th place with the United Arab Emirates in the global rankings this year, appears to have lost some ground in the fight against corruption, as its score has dropped to 6.3, down from 6.6 last year.
Public confidence in the integrity of the Greek government continued to decline, hitting a three-year low of 3.5, down from 4.7 in 2008 and 3.8 last year.
Greece's new mark -- the worst for any EU nation -- placed it 78th in the world, along with China, Colombia, Lesotho, Peru, Serbia and Thailand.
Three other EU member states scoring less than 5.0 points this year -- Hungary (4.7), the Czech Republic (4.6) and Italy (3.9) -- were also mentioned among the countries where corruption perceptions had deteriorated notably.
Bulgaria and Romania, which were named the Union's most corrupt nations along with Greece in 2009, based on their CPI marks of 3.8 each, also continued to lose ground.
Romania's new grade of 3.7 placed it 69th in the world, along with Brazil, Cuba and Montenegro, which was rated at 3.9 last year.
After losing a further 0.2 point to score 3.6 this year, Bulgaria now shares the 73rd position in the global table with El Salvador, Panama, Trinidad and Tobago, and Vanuatu.
"Bulgaria's index is going down and this indicates certain disappointment on behalf of the international business, as well as the Bulgarian community with regard to the potential of the current government to push through consistent institutional reforms," Ognyan Minchev, head of the TI chapter in the Balkan nation, told reporters in Sofia on Tuesday.
While the government's stated political will to fight corruption is welcome, there is more that needs to be done for the country to deal with the problems it faces, the Bulgarian political analyst stressed.
The three SEE countries recognised as official EU candidates -- Turkey, Croatia and Macedonia -- each fared better than the other nations in the region, except for Cyprus.
Turkey's unchanged mark of 4.4 placed it 56th in the world, along with Malaysia and Namibia.
Croatia, which also maintained its 2009 score of 4.1, shares 62nd place with Ghana and Samoa.
Macedonia, which was ranked together with Bulgaria, Greece and Romania last year, has improved its grade by 0.3 point since.
The scores given to Albania (3.3) and Bosnia and Herzegovina (3.2) were also slightly higher than those received last year, while Moldova's new mark of 2.9 is 0.4 point lower than the one in 2009.
Kosovo, which was not included in the previous CPI, has been rated at 2.8, making it the region's most corrupt country.
Worldwide, Denmark, New Zealand and Singapore tied for the top spot with scores of 9.3.
At the other end of the global spectrum were Iraq, Afghanistan, Burma and Somalia with marks of 1.5 or less.
