29/10/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 29/10/10
Snap elections in Kosovo are closer than ever. 
On Thursday (October 28th), the New Kosovo Alliance (NKA) party submitted a request for a confidence motion in parliament. 
It was signed by 40 lawmakers, including members of the ruling Democratic Party of Kosovo.
Such a motion will likely lead to the dissolution of parliament and the government's resignation. 
MPs will discuss it this coming Tuesday.
Meanwhile, one of the main political parties – the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) -- is undergoing a heated internal battle and could even be facing a split.
Former Health Minister Bujar Bukoshi and Uke Rugova, son of the late president Ibrahim Rugova, have announced plans for an alternative candidate list during the elections.
The list, called "LDK-Ibrahim Rugova", will enter the race as a citizens' initiative and field 100 candidates.
The move is a direct challenge to Fatmir Sejdiu, the incumbent party head who recently had to step down as Kosovo's president following a constitutional court challenge.
"We did what was possible to be done in the context of contacts, talks and unfortunately, we could not agree," Bukoshi told KTV, a local network. 
"The last talks between Uke Rugova and Sejdiu did not yield anything in common. 
There were very different and contentious positions regarding the opening of the LDK, the unblocking of the party, and the party election process."
"This race was destroyed by Mr. 
Sejdiu," Bukoshi said, adding that he is no longer a candidate for the LDK leadership.
He insists that the alternative LDK list he and Rugova have put forward is simply intended to boost the party's chances and does not amount to a new political formation.
Rugova agreed, saying the initiative will woo LDK voters who are disappointed with the current leadership.
Sejdiu reacted through an interview published on Friday in Koha Ditore. 
He said his party does not allow factions.
"The LDK does not have two signatures … it will be represented in the Central Elections Commission as one single party," he said.
A senior party official, Secretary General Rame Manaj, took a similar position in a Thursday interview with the BBC. 
He said the demands for Sejdiu's resignation are "part of a scenario created by people who do not belong to the LDK".
