31/03/2010
(Financiarul, Nine O'clock, Actmedia - 31/03/10; AFP, AP, Reuters, Bloomberg, Telegraph, HotNews.ro - 30/03/10; IMF 29/03/10)
Europe needs to take quick action, or risk of dropping out of the top economic division within a decade or two, IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn warned during a brief visit to Romania on Tuesday (March 30th).
"The risk for European economies is to be in the second league," AFP quoted Strauss-Kahn saying in an address to students at the Academy of Economic Studies in Bucharest. 
"There is a probability that, if Europeans do not act swiftly … the [economic] fight will be between the US and Asia, while Europe will be left aside."
He also warned that Europe -- hard hit by the recent global recession -- is coming out of the crisis more slowly than other parts of the world.
"Recovery is going fast in some parts of the world, such as Asia, not so bad in Latin America and will probably accelerate in the United States," said Strauss-Kahn, noting "Europe is still lagging behind."
Strauss-Kahn told the business students that strengthening global co-operation is of vital importance, as world markets could be hit by another crisis at some point in the future. 
Part of the solution for Romania, he said, would be adopting the euro, even though current conditions make that difficult. 
The current target date for Romania to join the eurozone is 2015.
Separately, he told parliament members that steps are needed to strengthen policy co-ordination among the 16 EU nations using the euro.
"Problems like the Greek one, which I do think the EU will be able to overcome, come from the fact that 16 countries have a single currency, but they don't have a single economic policy."
The IMF official said the process of adopting the euro should proceed one step at a time, with macroeconomic stability and prudent fiscal policy taking priority. 
Romania is currently fighting an excessive budget deficit, though not nearly as daunting as Greece's.
In Bucharest, Strauss-Kahn also met with President Traian Basescu, who stressed that Romania would like a long-term partnership with the IMF, one that goes beyond the current stand-by programme, which expires in 2011.
So far, Romania has received 9.3 billion euros from the IMF, and 2.5 billion from the EU.
Speaking in Poland on Monday, Strauss-Kahn listed a "fundamental overhaul" of the European financial system as one of the priority tasks the EU should focus on to avoid becoming marginalised.
"I see a clear need for an integrated European framework for crisis prevention, management, and resolution," he said in an address at the Warsaw School of Economics. 
A European Resolution Authority should be established within that framework, he said, noting that the new body should have the mandate and capacity to deal with failing banks throughout the continent in a timely, cost-effective manner.
The other priorities are strengthening economic policy co-ordination within the EU, reviving growth and tackling unemployment.
