25/10/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --25/10/10
Serbia needs organ donors.
Currently, the availability of organs for transplant is small and recipients face a long waiting list. 
More than 1,500 patients are currently in limbo.
"It is essential to raise the awareness of the need for organ donation or the consent to harvest organs from [a close] relative who suffered brain death," says Nebojsa Stankovic, a member of the Belgrade Military Medical Academy transplant team.
"Their organs can save or extend the lives of at least four patients," he told SETimes.
According to Zoran Kovacevic, one of the transplant team's directors, around 40,000 organ donor cards have been handed out in Serbia, with 30,000 distributed at the Military Medical Academy alone.
"Among the donors is Serbian President Boris Tadic," he said.
The number still falls well short of the country's needs, however. 
Experts would like to see it rise to at least one million; three to four million would be ideal.
About 400 to 500 kidney transplants, 100 to 150 liver transplants and 20 to 30 heart transplants are performed in Serbia annually, Kovacevic said. 
Since 1996, 298 kidney and 13 liver transplants have been performed at the Military Medical Academy.
The Academy was the first health institution in Serbia to launch an organ donor and donor card issuing programme in 2002. 
Its example was later followed by medical centres in Nis and Novi Sad.
New regulations, expected to be adopted soon, will pave the way for distributing donor cards at primary health care units, and each patient's health record will include whether he or she is a donor.
Such measures, in Kovacevic's opinion, will help increase the number of donors and thus the number of transplants.
Kovacevic and Stankovic each have a donor card. 
Both say it would be hypocritical of them to preach the need for organ donations while not joining in the effort themselves.
Many Serbs say they support the idea but just haven't got around to taking action. 
When they do, it is often because someone close to them is in need.
"I don't know why I haven't got a donor card. 
Until one is struck by trouble, or someone close to them is, they don't think about the fact that this can save lives. 
I'm seriously considering donating my organs," Miona Srejic, 39, told SETimes.
