30/03/2010
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 30/03/10
The Serbian government will offer a 40% stake in state-owned Telekom Srbija to the highest bidder. 
The decision to put one of the most profitable Balkan companies on the market was announced by Belgrade on Friday (March 26th).
Telekom Srbija also owns Telekom Srpska, the biggest telecommunications company in Republika Srpska, the Serb dominated entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
Another of its major holdings is M:tel, the mobile communications operator in Montenegro.
The tender for 40% ownership of Telekom is expected to run to the end of the year. 
According to Serbian Telecommunications Minister Jasna Matic, possible buyers include Deutsche Telecom, Turk Telekom and Egyptian Orascom.
Germany's Deutsche Telecom -- already a presence in Croatia, Hungary, Macedonia and Montenegro -- currently owns 20% of Telekom Srbjia through its subsidiary, the Greek operator Hellenic Telecommunications Organisation (OTE). 
The German giant confirmed on Monday to the newspaper Bild that it is interested in buying the additional stake in Telekom Srbija.
Currently, 80% of Telekom Srbjia is owned by the state, with 27% of the company split between employees and citizens of Serbia. 
With the expected sale, every Serb over the age of 18 will receive money or shares they can sell.
The government has said that profits from the sale will be used to build roads in an ongoing attempt to improve traffic flow.
"The future owner of 40% will become the most important shareholder, and by buying out small shareholders, the same company might easily acquire more than 50%", said Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic.
Official data shows that Telekom Srbija, together with its subsidiaries, made a profit of more than 1.1 billion euros in 2008 -- a 25% rise from the previous year. 
It counts 7.48 million mobile phone users in Serbia, Montenegro and BiH. 
Its market share stands at 60% in Serbia, 37.5% in BiH and 26.5% in Montenegro.
Milan Kovacevic, a Serbian foreign investment consultant, told SETimes that he applauds the government's decision. 
"A private owner would manage it far better then the state," he said.
Said Kovacevic: "Telekom Srbija is doing better financially than before, but needs to develop further. 
It would be unrealistic now to finance its growth from the state budget. 
One way is to turn [it] into strong multinational company, but we don't have those kind of resources."
Not everyone thinks it's a good idea. 
Many are asking why the decision was made to sell a profitable company in the middle of an economic crisis. 
Critics argue that the telecom's worth will continue to rise and it is dangerous for a country to sell off its telecommunication infrastructure to a foreign company.
Former Serbian Telecommunications Minister Aleksandra Smiljanic fears the next owner could raise rates.
"It is not wise to sell the only telecommunications infrastructure we have," said Smiljanic. 
"It would take years for the state to build anything similar."
