31/03/2010
By Maria Paravantes for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 31/03/10
With choreography reminiscent of Greek shadow puppet theater and a driving, primal beat, Giorgos Alkaios & Friends rode their song "Opa!" to victory in Athens on March 12th and now head to Oslo to represent Greece in the Eurovision contest.
"Opa" garnered almost 30% of the online vote, half of the tele-vote and swayed the five-member jury.
Unlike past entries, this year's song is characterised by its "Greekness" -- the lyrics will be sung in Greek with backing from traditional folk instruments, the daouli drum and Pontic lyra
Alkaios & Friends squared off against six contestants during the final competition, hosted by journalist Rika Vagiani and model Jenny Balatsinou.
The runner-ups included Christos Hatzinasios with "Illusion", Sunny Baltzi & Second Skin with "Game of Life", Manos Pyrovolakis with "Kivotos tou Noe", Giorgos Karadimos with "Polemao", indie pop band Melisses with "Kinezos" and Émigré with "Touch Me Deep Inside".
The jury consisted of songwriter Mimis Plessas, Hellenic Broadcasting Corporation (ERT) director Antonis Andrikakis, conductor Andreas Pylarinos, journalist Christiana Stamatelou and radio producer Posidonas Giannopoulos.
Alkaios received a total of 22 points -- ten from the jury and 12 from the public. 
Jury chairman Plessas stressed that public and jury opinions differed. 
Viewer ratings peaked, 39.1%, at midnight when the winning song was announced.
“Finally, a song with Greek lyrics,” says Pavlos Angelides, a 39-year-old Eurovision fan. 
"I’ve been watching the show ever since I was 12. 
And to be honest I like this year’s song but I think it will be hard for us, as Greece seems to be the black sheep of Europe right now.”
Since the win, fans have flocked to the band's Facebook page. 
Notes include "Good luck George. 
I'm sure you will make us proud." "Well done Giorgo, the song is magnificent. 
This song is going to rock the whole Eurovision."
Not all Greeks are thrilled with the song. 
"It is a mediocre mix of folk and pop Greek music without character, which represents a part of our culture outside my personal taste. 
At the same time, the melody fails to target the Eurovision fans around Europe. 
For this reason, I believe it will go up in smoke!" said Athens resident Thanos D in a web posting.
The 38-year-old Alkaios made his professional debut in 1989. 
Since then he has scored five platinum and nine gold albums. 
He and the band have a May 25th semi-final hurdle to pass before they can compete in the 25-nation Eurovision finals on May 29th.
In the meantime -- amidst Greece's economic turmoil -- the government ruled on an initial investigation into the state-owned ERT's spending. 
Allegations had been made that the radio and television used exorbitant amounts of money to promote the Eurovision contest.
Culture Minister Pavlos Geroulanos told the influential newspaper To Vima that significant changes would be made in regards to the song contest, beginning with a 50% cut in ERT's Eurovision budget for next year.
"ERT will continue to meet its Eurovision obligations, but the party is over … we will broadcast the event just like BBC does," said Geroulanos.
After meeting with the management of public broadcaster ERT and in view of Greece’s current financial woes, Yiorgos Alkaios announced that he would be covering the video clip production and promotion costs.
“Don’t worry about a thing,” he said as he was exiting ERT headquarters, “We have a great responsibility as a delegation. 
We’re aiming for the best. 
You saw 50 percent of that here and you’ll see the remaining 50 percent in Oslo.”
Greece won the Eurovision song contest in 2005 with Greek-Swede Helena Paparizou performing "My Number One".
