30/03/2010
By Igor Jovanovic and Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Skopje – 30/03/10
Hundreds of people from southern Serbia and northern Macedonia have sought asylum in EU countries, especially Belgium and Sweden, since the beginning of the year. 
The wave of asylum seekers -- motivated by economic hardship -- now threatens the visa-free status of Serbia and Macedonia.
Fearing derailment of visa liberalisation, Serbian and Macedonian authorities have promised the EU they will solve the problem. 
Particular punishment will be handed out to criminal groups -- often pretending to be travel agents -- who exploit people with false promises of asylum.
So far, most of those sent back home from EU nations are ethnic Albanians trying to leave poor regions of southern Serbia and northern Macedonia. 
Organised tours have typically taken the desperate travellers to Brussels, where their applications for asylum are rejected.
Brussels recently called on Serbia and Macedonia to halt the influx. 
The first bus carrying Macedonians and Serbians seeking asylum in Belgium arrived home on March 11th, after they were extradited for violating EU visa-free travel rules.
Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme visited Skopje on March 8th to stress to his Macedonian counterpart Nikola Gruevski -- and the nation at large -- that asylum would not be granted for economic reasons. 
When the petitioners come from democratic countries, pleas for political asylum lack credibility, he stressed.
"My country doesn't give political asylum to economic refugees, so there is no sense in travelling to Belgium from Macedonia for the purpose of seeking political refugee status," said Leterme. 
"The chances of people getting asylum based on economic reasons absolutely do not exist."
In a letter to EU Home Affairs Commissioner Cecilia Malstrom, Leterme warned of "the damaging consequences of the annulment of EU visas for the citizens of Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro".
Belgium takes over the rotating EU presidency from Spain on July 1st.
After being cautioned by the EU, Serbian and Macedonian authorities announced on March 11th -- the same day their citizens returned home -- a co-ordinated police operation to address the problem.
"It is important to us that Europe is not afraid of the Western Balkans, as the case was before," said Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic. 
"[We will] demonstrate that the suspicion is unjustified and that the whole region remains on the path of European integration."
In concert with one another, Serbian and Macedonian police have started investigating travel agencies that have organised trips to Belgium and Sweden. 
For asylum seekers, the journey typically begins in Macedonia, while citizens from southern Serbia board buses along the way.
Macedonian Interior Minister Gordana Jankulovska said the countries "want to send a clear message that the two states are co-operating in that field and are working on preventing the appearance of false asylum seekers".
Several travel agencies in Macedonia have been shut down for operating without a license. 
An ongoing investigation seeks to determine whether other agencies have been deceiving customers deliberately or if those who bought tickets knew what they were doing.
Those who were returned to southern Serbia on March 11th hid their faces from cameras and refused to speak to reporters. 
So did travel agents who had arranged the trip to Belgium.
Shaip Kamberi, the mayor of the southern Serbian town of Bujanovac, said the asylum seekers were duped by unscrupulous business people.
"All those people are victims of manipulation by various agencies, which talked about the possibility of getting economic and political asylum," Kamberi told SETimes. 
"They are also victims of the economic underdevelopment of and discrimination against this region for many decades."
Serbian and Macedonian authorities have announced that, apart from punishing the organisers, they will take a number of long-term measures, including efforts to improve living standards in southern Serbia and northern Macedonia.
The majority of Macedonian asylum seekers are from the Lipkovo region, where the Labour and Social Policy Ministry opened a social centre earlier this month. 
The office will attempt to educate those looking to immigrate about exactly how and under what conditions EU member states grant asylum.
"I think that visa liberalisation was misunderstood and that is why we are trying to explain to our people the procedure for getting asylum in a foreign state," said Macedonian Labour and Social Policy Minister Xhelal Bajrami.
The visa-free relationships with participating EU members state clearly that a stay of up to three months is allowed in the so-called Schengen area for tourism. 
Citizens travelling to the EU from Western Balkan countries cannot expect to get a working or residence permit in the EU.
Visas became unnecessary for citizens of Serbia, Macedonia and Montenegro in December 2009. 
Citizens of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo still have to apply for visas in order to travel.
