29/03/2010
By SETimes staff -- 29/03/10
Prospects for the region are improving, but Balkan countries still have their work cut out for them to improve fundamental quality of life issues, according to SETimes readers polled in an annual survey.
The poll -- conducted from December 1st of last year through January 15th -- registered a mix of hopeful sentiment and realism about concrete problems.
Most respondents expressed faith in the future of their countries and disagreed that the road ahead is bleak.
The trend was negative when it came to the reliability of the judiciary, while opinions were split regarding the police, government and electoral integrity.
Those polled also seemed divided about their countries' international images.
Over half (51.6%) said they had little or no confidence in the judiciary and courts, while only 24.4% had a favourable view.
The police fared better, with more than a third (38.2%) indicating a high level of trust.
Nearly the same margin (37.2%) expressed low confidence and the rest chose neither positive nor negative.
On the question of national governments, more respondents were doubtful than confident (44.9% to 33.2%), while 21.9% claimed neutrality.
Many (40.8%) gave elections high marks for honesty, but 35.8% saw them as dishonest, and 23.4% were neutral.
Neutral, indeed, was a popular choice for many of the questions, suggesting that readers see the situation in the region as a mixed bag.
A total of 1,115 respondents took part in the survey.
They were a youthful group, with the largest bloc between the ages of 20 and 30.
More respondents were 23 years old than any other age group.
More men (63%) participated than women (37%), while the overwhelming majority said they were highly educated, reporting either a college degree or above.
Only about a half indicated they had a full-time job;
the rest were either unemployed or working part-time.
In terms of geographic location, the single largest bloc of respondents (34.4%) was from Turkey, followed by Macedonia (12.4%) and Kosovo (10.9%).
Based on the survey answers, SETimes readers tend to be pro-Western in outlook, with a democratic orientation and a strong belief in integration.
Respondents' attitudes towards the EU were overwhelmingly favourable, with 73.4% saying they had a "positive" or "mostly positive" view.
They also saw participation in NATO as crucial.
Asked if the region is becoming more aligned with the West, or with a resurgent Russia, readers (63.6%) generally picked the West.
However, a sizeable bloc (31.8%) said both are important.
By large margins, respondents claimed to be either tolerant or extremely tolerant of other political views, religious creeds and ethnicities, as well as of the opposite gender.
When asked if they have great faith in the future of their country, over half (53%) either agreed or strongly agreed, compared to 24.7% who did not.
At the same time, only 35% felt their country has a positive image abroad, while 39.5% suggested that the world looks upon their country unfavourably.
A reported 25.5% had a neutral response.
