29/03/2010
(FT, RIA Novosti - 28/03/10; AP, Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, VOA, The Sofia Echo, Xinhua - 27/03/10; Reuters, DPA, VOA, SKY News, BBC - 26/03/10)
Presidents Barack Obama and Dmitry Medvedev agreed to an historic arms-control treaty on Friday (March 26th), calling for a substantial reduction of the two countries' deployed nuclear arsenals.
"I'm pleased to announce that after a year of intense negotiations, the United States and Russia have agreed to the most comprehensive arms-control agreement in nearly two decades," Obama said after a telephone conversation with his Russian counterpart.
The two leaders are scheduled to sign the pact on April 8th in Prague. 
It will replace the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START), which expired at the end of 2009. 
The new accord will take effect after ratification by the US Senate and the Russian Duma. 
Once the agreement is ratified, the two countries have seven years to fulfill their commitments.
"With this agreement, the United States and Russia -- the two largest nuclear powers in the world -- also send a clear signal that we intend to lead," Obama told reporters at the White House. 
"By upholding our own commitments under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), we strengthen our global efforts to stop the spread of these weapons, and to ensure that other nations meet their own responsibilities."
Under the deal, each side would have to reduce the number of operationally deployed long-range nuclear warheads to 1,550, which is 30% lower than the 2,200 currently allowed. 
This amounts to a little more than a quarter of the 6,000 warhead limit set in the original START agreement.
Both countries would also be required to bring the number of deployed and non-deployed launchers, and heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments to 800. 
This is down from the 1,600 in the 1991 treaty.
The two countries also agreed to limit the number of deployed intercontinental and submarine-launched ballistic missiles to 700 each.
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said "The steps we are taking add up to something that makes a very clear statement of intent."
Obama said the new START treaty would establish a strong and effective mechanism for verification and monitoring, while maintaining the flexibility his country needs to protect national security and abide by commitments to its allies.
The US president noted that the agreement would help the two countries put behind them the "darkest days of the Cold War".
"When the United States and Russia can co-operate effectively, it advances the mutual interests of our two nations, and the security and prosperity of the wider world," Obama said.
Russia, however, is still cautioning that it could pull out of the deal if the United States goes too far with plans to build a missile defence system in Eastern Europe, to which Moscow is strongly opposed.
"The treaty is being concluded when both sides have corresponding levels of strategic offensive and defensive systems," the Wall Street Journal quoted Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov as saying. 
"Any change of those levels gives each side the right to consider the question of its further participation in reductions of strategic arms."
Friday's agreement, meanwhile, brought praise from top international officials, including UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen and EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton.
In a statement, Ban voiced hope that the agreement "can be ratified without delay so as to allow its expeditious implementation".
