26/03/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 26/03/10
"Playing with Fire" by the duo Paula Seling and Ovi was far and away the most popular among the 16 tunes from Romania competing at the national Eurosong contest on March 20th.
"I can really say this is the most important thing that has ever happened to me," said Seling after the winners were announced. 
"We will surely have the same type of show [in Oslo] because the concept is good, a musical duet with two pianos and two voices."
The song was composed by Ovi -- born Ovidiu Cernauteanu -- an expatriate Romanian living in Norway. 
The song will represent Romania at the Eurosong semi-final competition in Oslo in May.
It scored 12 points from viewers and the jury at Bucharest's Globus Circus Arena. 
The song received 23,000 votes from the viewers, twice as much as the runner-up, "Save Their Lives", by Luminita Anghel.
This is Seling's first success after four earlier attempts at the national contest for the best song of Europe. 
She won grand prizes at the national music festival Mamaia in 1997 and triumphed in 2002 at the international music festival "The Golden Stag".
Seling and Ovi will begin touring in Europe to support the song, sent to a variety of major radio stations on the continent. 
A video of the duo performing the hit will be distributed to TV stations.
Entertainment reporters said the organisation of the Romanian Eurovision song contest has improved greatly.
"For the first time in years, the national phase of the song contest was held outside state TV studios," Andreea Marinescu, a free-lance journalist attending the contest told SETimes. 
"The fans could listen to their favorite artists live [and] the monotony of a dull live broadcast from a TV studio was removed, thanks to circus performances during the break."
Marinescu concedes, however, that some say the show lacks some of its past lustre.
"People have somewhat lost interest in the show, due to the almost annual scandals related to the alleged contest rigging," she said. 
"Some composers admitted the songs enlisted in this year's contest are less catchy than previous editions because famous and talented composers and artists chose to stay away, either for fear of the regular scandals or following previous years' accusations of alleged plagiarism."
Overall, Romania has a poor record at Eurovision. 
The country's best performance came in 2005, when Luminita Anghel and System came in third with the song "Let Me Try".
The next year, Mihai Tristariu took fourth place with "Tornero", which soon became a European hit.
