25/03/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 25/03/10
The political stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is deteriorating and ethnic rivalry is a main cause of the problem, according to a report to the UN by EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton.
If changes are not made soon, Ashton said, the government of BiH -- described in her report as "on the brink of financial collapse" -- could go broke.
Ashton's critique came in a quarterly report submitted to the UN on March 17th.
Key reforms -- the "five goals and town conditions" stipulated by the Peace Implementation Council for BiH -- are being undermined by combative ethnic leaders, she said.
The report says the Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), has "openly violated" sections of the Dayton Peace Accord and defied the authority of High Representative and EU Special Representative Valentin Inzko.
RS political leaders, Ashton said, have also challenged the integrity of BiH and talked openly of secession.
The one bright spot, said Ashton, who recently visited BiH, is that security within the country is stable and should remain so.
"There is a decline in communication between political leaders, along with a rise of divisive statements from RS, and interethnic disagreements in the Federation of BiH," the report reads.
Serb representatives from RS reacted strongly.
Dusanka Majkic, a member of parliament from RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik's ruling SNSD party, said the method used by Ashton to gauge progress is the real problem.
The EU, Dodik said, is trying to impose authority not granted by the Dayton Peace Accord.
Bosniak Adil Osmanovic -- vice-president of RS and a member of the Bosniak Party for Democratic Action (SDA) -- said it is time for the international community to punish those responsible for stagnation in BiH.
On the Bosnian Croat side, Martin Raguz, of the Croatian Democratic Party (HDZ), referred to the part of the report pertaining to the Muslim and Croat dominated Federation of BiH.
Raguz said there are too many layers of governing bureaucracy.
"The fact is that the economic and social collapse is in sight, but it is also a fact that the Federation [of BiH] has a too complex administration."
Among ordinary citizens, reactions to the report vary widely.
Mladen Knezevic, from Lukavica, in East Sarajevo, told SETimes said that he "does not agree with the assessment" of Ashton.
"The RS is not the disturbing factor in BiH," said Knezevic, raising the ethnic rhetoric.
"The disturbing factors are the Islamic fanatics in the Federation."
Jusuf Music, a pensioner from Sarajevo, doesn't think anything will happen, at least not for the better.
"Ashton's statements," said Music, "will again change nothing."
