27/07/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/07/10
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has recalled former Kosovo Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj and two fellow former Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) members -- Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj -- for a partial retrial.
The three were tried in 2008 on charges of crimes against Serbs or their supporters in 1998. 
Haradinaj and Balaj were acquitted, while Brahimaj was convicted of torture and sentenced to six years.
"The trial chamber failed to appreciate the gravity of the threat that witness intimidation posed to the trial's integrity," ICTY President Patrick Robinson said, reading his decision Wednesday (July 21st). 
The call for a retrial is the first in the court's 17-year history.
"Given the potential importance of these witnesses to the prosecution's case, the error undermined the fairness of the proceedings and resulted in a miscarriage of justice."
Haradinaj, Balaj and Brahimaj were ordered placed in custody at The Hague's Detention Unit. 
The three now face the charge of committing "crimes through a joint criminal enterprise".
They are accused of seeking to impose KLA control on the Dukagjin area of western Kosovo by attacking local civilians, 40 of whom were allegedly murdered in the area.
In 2005, Haradinaj stepped down as prime minister of the then Serbian province and turned himself into The Hague. 
Many Serbs saw his acquittal as proof of what they perceive as the tribunal's bias against Serbia.
Bruno Vekaric, spokesman for Serbia's war crimes prosecutor, called the retrial "a great victory in the fight for the rights of victims".
Haradinaj's Alliance for the Future of Kosovo expressed surprise at the decision and insisted on its leader's innocence.
Flaka Surroi, owner of the Koha media group and publisher of the influential daily Koha Ditore, questioned the timing, coming- just a day before the International Court of Justice (ICJ) isued its advisory opinion, upholding the legality of Kosovo's declaration of independence.
"How is it that after two years there is a need for a retrial and eventual new evidence ... 
and not to think that this might have been influenced from circles which have access to these kind of evidence ... 
it's a bit difficult to understand," writes Surroi.
"When it comes to the retrial, after the [court] decision has been made, he should continue the procedure, without any fear, as he knows he is innocent. 
With his innocence, the [KLA] war is also protected," writes Surroi.
Michael O'Reilly, co-ordinator of the defence team, quoted Haradinaj as saying that recent developments in his case should be seen in a broader context.
"Haradinaj confirmed that the most important issue today is the opinion of the International Court of Justice in favour of Kosovo," he said on Friday, a day after that key, through non-binding, ruling.
"The move of Kosovo further in the process of integration in the community of nations should be guaranteed," O'Reilly said.
"Kosovo has made big progress and we should continue to believe in the international institutions, despite the temporary setbacks," he said.
The government of Kosovo said it will offer institutional assistance to Haradinaj, including to his defence team. 
"We have done so the first time, and we will do it again if asked," Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci, told Kosovo Daily Express.
