26/07/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 26/07/10
The deserted halls of Postavaria Romana, a fabric factory in the communist-era Pantelimon worker district, conveys a feeling of post-revolution industrial hardships.
The old complex matches the grey blocks of flats of the district, notorious in the 1990s for its gangs and drug dealers.
Over time, the area has changed.
Hypermarkets began cropping up and ground-floor private shops flourished.
But the peripheral neighbourhood lacked any cultural venue.
One NGO -- Make a Point -- noticed.
"Make a Point is a NGO which, as our catchphrase says, tries to bring culture closer to people geographically," Madalina Rosca, creative director of Make a Point, told SETimes.
Rosca explained the group's pre-occupation with the idea of periphery, having realised the realities in which some outside the city centre live.
"Any sort of cultural event is located downtown, a few kilometers away.
Sometimes you have to go a long way to get a coffee, let alone watch a film or a theater play," she said.
Rosca and her colleagues came up with the idea of showing free movies in the neighbourhood, every Thursday evening, in a former factory hall.
"It took us months to turn the former hall into a modern space where we could show movies.
For this purpose, we hired a restoration architect and a draftsman," Rosca said.
The results are amazing -- old industrial scales, lift engines and welding devices were reconditioned and turned into practical objects, such as tables and couches.
Make a Point also brings movie producers and actors to join the experience.
"Every two weeks we have curatorial Thursday -- we bring a guest artist or director who chooses, presents and discuss a film they consider essential to their professional formation, or that he/she thinks it must be seen in Romania," Rosca said.
Despite the programme's success, she admits the organisation has to work more on promoting the event locally in the neighbourhood and not only by internet.
"Half of those who come are from different parts of the city."
Make a Point is widening its scope by including other projects as well -- visual and cinematographic culture classes, animation classes for children, concerts and exhibitions.
"One of the exhibitions we are preparing is a fusion between painting and cinema -- movie-going painters and very pictorial movie makers brought together at Postavaria Romana," Rosca said.
