23/03/2010
(Euronews, AFP, Reuters - 23/03/10; FT, AFP, DPA, Guardian, Euobserver, VOA, ANA-MPA - 22/03/10)
Ahead of this week's two-day summit, the EU remained divided on Monday (March 22nd) on whether and how to provide financial assistance to Greece, whose debt and deficit problems have plunged the eurozone into the worst crisis in its 11-year existence.
One camp -- including France, Italy and Spain -- insist that the club of 16 EU nations using the euro must show solidarity with Greece and agree on an aid mechanism to prevent further attacks on the common currency. 
The other camp, led by Germany, has voiced strong reservations about any rescue option.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Monday she was not even planning to discuss the matter at the summit opening in Brussels on Thursday (March 25th). 
German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle noted that there is no need for a bail-out decision at this point.
"We are prepared to show political solidarity but we cannot have a situation where Germany or the EU puts money on the table and therefore lifts the pressure for reforms in Greece," said the minister and leader of the Free Democratic Party, the junior member of Merkel's coalition government.
A new poll published by the Financial Times on Monday suggests that 61% of Germans are opposed to any bailout for Greece, with 40% of the respondents even supporting the idea of their country quitting the euro.
"It's not as if there had been a natural disaster and that's why we are in this position," the DPA quoted Westerwelle as saying. 
"We should remember that [Greece] got here by using faked figures."
Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou's newly elected Socialist government revealed soon after stepping into office in October that the country's 2009 budget deficit would hit 12.7% of GDP, well above the 3% limit for the eurozone.
Facing also a huge public debt, which is expected to climb to 290 billion euros this year, Greece adopted a series of austerity measures in recent months to deal with its severe financial crisis. 
Meanwhile, the nation's credit-worthiness has been downgraded significantly and the cost of borrowing on the international markets has risen.
Greece, which has to refinance about 20 billion euros of debt maturing by the end of May, has been urging the eurozone countries to help it get new loans at lower interest rates than those currently demanded by investors.
Athens believes that a clear signal of EU support could ease the market pressure facing the country.
Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos, whose country currently holds the rotating presidency of the 27-nation bloc, said on Monday that Spain would push for a decision at this week's summit.
"The Spanish presidency will work towards that," he said before a gathering of EU foreign ministers in Brussels. 
"It is an important moment for the future of the EU and the euro," Moratinos added, noting that Greece deserves to be given "this trust, this solidarity" for the painful measures it has taken already to deal with its financial problems.
Papandreou's government announced a draconian 4.8 billion-euro austerity programme at the beginning of this month, which has triggered repeated protests.
Joining calls for an agreement on the aid mechanism for Greece at the summit this week, European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso appeared confident Monday that Germany will eventually back a deal.
"I know Chancellor Merkel. 
She is a committed European and I have no doubts that she will, if needed, be in favour of providing financial assistance to Greece," the EC president said in an interview with the Financial Times. 
"There is no stability without solidarity and no solidarity without stability."
Barroso also indicated that any eurozone financial assistance for Greece in the form of bilateral loans would not constitute a breach of EU rules, which explicitly forbid a bailout of one member of the club by its 15 partners.
"It is not a bailout," he said. 
"We have checked this from a legal point of view ... 
But no bail-out does not mean no help."
