22/03/2010
By Sami Neza in Tirana, Linda Karadaku in Pristina, Jusuf Ramadanovic in Sarajevo, Marina Rogovanic in Podgorica, Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade and Erol Izmirli in Istanbul -- 22/03/10
EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele wrapped up his Balkan tour by attending the regional summit in Brdo, Slovenia on Saturday (March 20th).
The stop capped a week of meetings with Southeast European leaders.
Fuele's message to the region was encouraging but firm.
He took note of important reforms, while urging Balkan countries to resolve obstacles that stand in the way of their accession.
Albania
Talks in Tirana on Friday focused on the ongoing political stalemate.
The country's main parties have been unable to forge a compromise since last fall.
The opposition has boycotted the parliament and there has been no action on demands to investigate the June 2009 general elections.
If the deadlock continues, Fuele warned, "it could well prevent Albania from reaching the political standards expected from a country that has applied for EU membership."
He urged Albanian leaders to look beyond short-term political interests and find a solution quickly.
"In the interest of their country and its EU integration perspective, Albania's political leaders now need to address this challenge constructively, in the EU spirit," Fuele said.
Kosovo
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and President Fatmir Sejdiu met with Fuele on Friday as well.
They discussed a number of issues, including EU prospects, the process of visa liberalisation and the Stabilisation and Association Process.
The EU expects Kosovo to step up efforts to fight crime and corruption, and to strengthen the rule of law, Fuele told the officials.
He stressed the importance of guaranteeing political stability and security for all communities in Kosovo.
"It would be important for the Kosovo authorities to focus first on the political stability in this country, second on engaging [citizens] even more, including minorities, and third, on making progress in the Euro related reforms," Fuele said.
Sejdiu reiterated his country's long-term goals and urged the international community to help achieve them.
"Kosovo has a vision to be a member of the EU and NATO, to have equal chances of action and use of benefits," he said.
"How long that road will be and how much it will be shortened, this will depend on our work, but of course from the support we will have as well."
BiH
On Thursday, Fuele arrived in Sarajevo and met with members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) tripartite presidency and with state and entity prime ministers.
At his meeting with presidency members, he discussed visa liberalisation, the transformation of the Office of High Representative into the Office of the EU Special Representative, and implementation of the Sejdic and Finci vs.
BiH verdict.
During this meeting, he stressed that in the matter of visa liberalisation, the EU would not consider BiH jointly with Albania.
Rather, he indicated, each country would be assessed separately.
After his meeting with Prime Minister Nikola Spiric, he told reporters that in mid-April the European Commission (EC) would make an assessment of the efforts.
"Internal consultations are under way at the EC, to be followed by the consultations with the EU member countries.
We are currently halfway [down the road]," Fuele said.
He also welcomed passage of the Action Plan for Implementation of the Strasbourg-based European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdic and Finci vs BiH case, which covers the right to political appointments for members of ethnic groups.
The verdict should be implemented before the general elections in October, Fuele advised.
Montenegro
After meeting with Fuele on Thursday, Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic predicted his country will gain EU candidate status this year.
"I believe that in 2010 an ambitious goal will be achieved:
Montenegro will obtain candidate status, which will mark the beginning of negotiations with the European Commission on membership," Djukanovic said.
Fuele affirmed Europe's commitment to Montenegro.
"You are not alone on this road.
We will be with you and provide both expert help and continued financial support," he pledged.
However, he also delivered what local media referred to as "a friendly warning" to the country.
"The key engine of the process of European integration are the reforms, and they depend solely on the Montenegrin side.
Also, it is not only important to adopt the reform laws, but to apply them," Fuele said.
In particular, he said, Montenegro needs to focus on organised crime and corruption, judicial reform, strengthening of the democratic culture and administrative capacities.
Serbia
In Belgrade, Fuele voiced support for Serbia's EU integration, while officials assured him they would continue with the reform process and finalise co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
Fuele met with President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic.
After the meetings, Fuele said Serbia must maintain the positive trend in European integration achieved late last year.
"There are many tasks and challenges on the road to the EU, but if Serbia is truly determined to join, I have assured the prime minister that the EC is truly determined to help Serbia in the process," the commissioner said.
Tadic told Fuele he hoped Serbia's EU membership application, submitted at the end of 2009, would be forwarded to the European Commission as soon as possible.
Serbia has the political will to meet the conditions for accession, the president said, making it clear that "full EU membership is Serbia's strategic goal."
Turkey
Fuele's visit to Turkey on March 15th was his first to the country.
He urged Turkey to normalise relations with Cyprus and to speed up the reform process.
"I had the opportunity to underline the importance the EU attaches to the need for Turkey to fully implement the additional protocol and normalise its relations with Cyprus," Fuele told reporters, during a joint news conference with Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu.
Until the economic isolation of Turkish Cypriots ends, Turkey refuses to implement an additional protocol to the 1963 Ankara Agreement, which requires it to open its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels and aircrafts.
Because of the deadlock, the EU froze eight of 35 accession negotiation chapters in 2006.
Fuele also addressed the need for more reforms to bring Turkey closer to the EU.
"New laws reinforcing the rights of citizens, workers and consumers, improving sound management of public funds and food safety, are needed not for the sake of the EU and of progress in the negotiations process, but first and foremost for the sake of Turkey's citizens," he wrote in an editorial published in the daily Hürriyet.
Turkey and the EU share a strategic vision to lead global politics, according to Davutoglu.
"The EU is our common future.
We will exert efforts to make the EU an international player that is geopolitically influential and economically dynamic," he said.
