31/08/2010
Around the Balkans in 50 Days By Alex Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 31/08/10
Last month, Turkish journalists and academics boarded a train at Istanbul's Sirkeci station to embark on a 50-day trip around the Balkans.
The travels of the Balkan Express through nine countries and 22 cities, broadcast live on state television every weekday, aimed to boost Turkey's ties with its neighbours, as well as acquaint Turks with their shared cultural heritage.
The initiative also highlighted the country's growing use of civilian projects to augment its new, proactive foreign policy in a region where the Ottoman legacy and existing Turkish minorities can make relations tricky.
"This second track diplomacy is something new that Turkey is learning," Inan Ruma, a professor specialising in Balkan relations at Istanbul's Bilgi University, told SETimes.
"It's not diplomacy on formal grounds as we're accustomed to, but diplomacy based on civilian actors," he said.
Funded by Turkish State Railways and the public broadcaster TRT, the Balkan Express was welcomed back to Istanbul on August 20th by Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim, who hailed its "importance" for "promoting the region's history".
In recent years, Ankara has been stepping up its involvement in the Balkans, trying to position itself as a mediator, and investing in the reconstruction of Turkish monuments -- involvement that sometimes led to accusations that it is pursuing a "Neo-Ottoman" foreign policy.
The train visited symbolic sights such as an Ottoman bridge in the Bosnia and Herzegovina city of Mostar, reconstructed by UNESCO with Turkish help after it was destroyed during the 1990s conflict.
The project's director, Yildirim Eskici, believes the bridge and its reconstruction are symbolic of the role Turkey can now play in the region.
"It was so exciting to pass over the bridge," he told SETimes. 
"Croats live on one side of the river and Bosnians live on the other side. 
The Mostar bridge is uniting two sides, but it is also separating them."
But Professor Ruma warned that Turkey must tread carefully while reawakening the ghosts of its Ottoman past.
"References to Ottoman history must always be strictly cultural," he said. 
"Even the slightest political reference will create problems."
According to Kerim Balci, a commentator and foreign editor at the daily Zaman newspaper, projects like the Balkan Express draw strength from their capacity to capitalise on cultural ties in a more nuanced way than official diplomacy.
"This Balkan Express project didn't only visit Ottoman sites, and this is part of a new sensitivity," he told SETimes. 
"This kind of cultural activism we're seeing more and more."
But the project also reflects Turks' own rediscovery of their history and ethnic links in the Balkans, about which many remain surprisingly ignorant.
The train visited the sizeable Turkish minorities that exist in most Southeast European countries, including in Bulgaria, where Turks make up more than 9% of the population.
Up until the 1990s, successive Turkish governments remained tightly wedded to an ideology inspired by the country's founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who had severed all links with the Ottoman past.
This mentality extended to the virtual denial of Turkish culture and minorities beyond the borders of the republic, said Bayram Colakoglu, chairman of the Balkan Turks Culture and Solidarity Association.
"It was dangerous to use the term 'foreign Turks' in the 1980s," he told SETimes. 
"The existence of Turks other than in Turkey was considered invisible. 
These people were forgotten by their own motherland."
Colakoglu and others now hope projects like the Balkan Express can help secure future harmony in the region.
"I think that the way to overcome prejudices and enmities is to remove all obstacles to freedom of movement and let the people know each other without any mediators."
