31/08/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 31/08/10
Authorities at the Gracanica Monastery in Kosovo announced at the weekend that they do not think that Kosovo police are equipped to secure its premises, and they have hired private security.
Another Serb Orthodox site, the Raska-Prizren diocese just outside Pristina, has also hired guards for similar reasons, according to local media.
Kosovo police took over security duties from KFOR last week, and are now tasked with guarding numerous Serb religious and cultural sites. 
In a statement, the international peacekeeping force hailed what it described as "another major step in the process of transferring security responsibility to the institutions of Kosovo".
But officials of the Serb Orthodox Church, as well as the Serbian government, have sharply criticised the transfer.
Kosovo police say they are not aware of the church authorities' initiative to provide private security, but added that the monastery has the right to establish rules inside its own walls. 
In an interview with SETimes, Kosovo police spokesperson Arber Beka discussed the transition and its impact.
SETimes: Which Orthodox churches and monasteries are actually being guarded by the Kosovo police?
Arber Beka: The Kosovo police offer overall security for all the religious and cultural sites in the country, without ethnic or religious discrimination. 
For the moment, Kosovo police offer physical security 24 hours a day for 17 Serb religious and cultural sites.
Except for the overall security offered in different religious and cultural sites in the country, security is offered in shifts within a 24 hour term, for designated sites.
SETimes: How was the transfer process from KFOR to the Kosovo police conducted?
Beka: The transfer was done based on KFOR plans.
SETimes: Were there any objections from the [Serb] Orthodox Church about the transfer?
Beka: There was no objection to the takeover.
SETimes: Is the Kosovo police force guarding the historical monuments multiethnic?
Beka: The police of the Republic of Kosovo, as an organisation, intends to offer security and ensure public order. 
It has a multiethnic character, so that its functioning on the ground is without any doubt multiethnic.
SETimes: What is the co-operation with the [Serb] Orthodox priests?
Beka: Kosovo police consider the co-operation with the Orthodox priests generally good. 
Both sides have separate responsibilities.
