31/08/2010
(DPA, RTTNews, WAZ.Eurobserver, Beta, B92, Serbian Government - 30/08/10; AFP - 20/05/10; NATO)
Serbia is planning to open a mission at NATO headquarters in Brussels during Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac's visit to the Belgian capital next month, media reports quoted a Belgrade official as saying on Monday (August 30th).
"We do not have an exact date yet, but it should happen in September," a defence ministry spokesman said.
The mission will reportedly include an ambassador and six military officers.
NATO admitted Serbia into its Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme in December 2006, and shortly after opened a military liaison office in Belgrade. 
Nearly two years later, Sutanovac and the Alliance's then-Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer signed a standard security agreement facilitating the exchange of classified information between a PfP member and the 28-nation military pact in October 2008.
Serbia's relations with NATO have been marked by ups and downs. 
They became extremely strained in 1999 over the Alliance's action campaign to halt the war in Kosovo. 
Although still uneasy, ties between the two improved following the fall of Slobodan Milosevic's regime in 2000 and, three years later, Serbia submitted its PfP membership application.
But its relations with the Alliance deteriorated again in the months ahead of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence in February 2008. 
Serbia's main political parties, including then-Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), launched an anti-NATO campaign and insisted that Serbia stay out of any military alliance.
While a poll conducted about six months ago suggested more than two-thirds of Serbs still oppose any future NATO membership, Alliance chief Anders Fogh Rasmussen has urged the country to consider joining the Pact.
"We all know that for understandable historical reasons, there might be some scepticism in Serbia in regards to a relationship with NATO," the former Danish prime minister said during a daylong visit to Sofia in May.
"I would urge not only the Serb political leadership, but the Serb people to look into the future, to consider the situation carefully and to draw the conclusion that the future for Serbia lies within integration with the Euro-Atlantic community -- NATO and the EU."
Milan Pajevic, a prominent Belgrade-based expert on the Balkan nation's Euro-Atlantic integration, argues however that "neutrality" is an obsolete notion.
"Real and full neutrality doesn't exist in today's world, and it is definitely not a realistic and sustainable solution for Serbia on the longer term," he told WAZ EUobserver, a Brussels-based online news portal. 
"However, an official change of policy can be expected only when some future leadership is courageous enough and faced neither with today's pressing issues on the foreign agenda -- Kosovo -- nor with a strong domestic opposition."
While there are reform-minded politicians within Serbia's current leadership who believe that the country should "engage more with the Euro-Atlantic agenda", they do not share their views in public, as they do not have the power to push them through, according to Pajevic.
"In such a situation, it would be advisable that Serbia at least uses and advances all forms of co-operation in the context of PfP," he added.
