29/04/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 28/04/10
The local election on Sunday (April 25th) in the small town of Arandjelovac, outside of Belgrade, attracted a lot of public and media attention, with many regarding it as a gauge of the nation's political pulse.
The race for city council revealed that the Serbian Progressive Party (SNS) – which was still part of the Serbian Radical Party (SRS) in the most recent general election of May 2008 -- has become a popular political option.
According to preliminary results, SNS won the most votes (26.1%), five percentage points ahead of President Boris Tadic's ruling Democratic Party (DP).
The opposition Liberal Democrats -- who regularly back government initiatives -- won a single seat.
The DP could still secure a majority in the Arandjelovac council if it forms a coalition with its partners at the state level. 
The bloc of parties around the DP could expect to secure 21 seats, while the combined opposition would be left with 20.
"The election results in Arandjelovac show that the citizens voted for a pro-European government and backed the parties that comprise the ruling majority at the state level," said DP's Nada Kolundzija.
Branko Ruzic of the Socialist Party agrees. 
"I expect a government to be formed in Arandjelovac that will correspond to the government at the state level." Socialists are in coalition with the Democrats in parliament. 
In the Arandjelovac election, SP coalesced with two smaller parties and won 14.24% of the vote.
Progressives said they are "enjoying the victory" and it is too early to talk about possible coalitions.
"It would be better for them to talk with the strongest political party, and in Arandjelovac -- and I think in Serbia too -- that is the Serbian Progressive Party. 
They should not be counting votes and looking for ways to cheat the Progressives," SNS leader Tomislav Nikolic said.
He explained that the Arandjelovac SNS chapter would decide if there is room to negotiate with the ruling Democrats. 
"From what I know of the Progressives, they never say no to talks."
The Serbian Radical Party, a formidable parliamentary force in the past, will likely not be represented in the Arandjelovac assembly. 
The Radicals hope a repeat vote at one polling station will allow them to clear the 5% election threshold, for which they need an additional 60 votes.
Deputy leader Dragan Todorovic told SETimes the party is still recovering from "the coup and betrayal" brought about by SNS.
"We expect our leader, Vojislav Seselj, to return from The Hague by year's end, which will additionally strengthen our political position," said Todorovic.
The opposition has been collecting citizens' signatures for calling early general elections since February.
Petar Stamatovic, a pensioner from Belgrade, believes the election in Arandjelovac is a reflection of the public's desire for a change of government in Serbia. 
"The Progressive Party is now the strongest party in Serbia, and that should be proven by calling an early general election," Stamatovic told SETimes.
Many, like student Milica Zivkovic, disagree. 
"I believe this government should be given a chance to complete its term in office until 2012. 
I do not see what good an early election could do at this time," said Zivkovic.
Tadic has rejected all calls for early elections.
