30/08/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 27/08/10
During the trumpet festival in Guca, the complexities of life are forgotten and the small town seems to breathe to the rhythm of the instrument. 
The festival atmosphere is best described by its slogan "You only live once."
The town, population of 2,000, welcomed almost a million visitors to this year's festival, marking its 50th anniversary.
The streets become too small for so many guests, the music is too loud and everyone overindulges in fun, food and drink. 
Guca is a place you come to go wild.
"Excellent atmosphere, lots of people and one really feels welcome. 
I would like to come back next year, I really enjoy the atmosphere here, and the music of course," Italian visitor Stefano told SETimes.
Chris is from England, while Ella from the Netherlands. 
"Guca is amazing, we've been here for 11 days, we arrived a day before the start," Chris explains.
"The festival is incredible, complete madness. 
We've also met many great people and I'm sure we'll see them again," Ella adds.
Marina from Zagreb will be heading for rehabilitation after Guca. 
"I am staying at an apartment with my friends from Bosnia, America and Bulgaria. 
It was fantastic, but after the four days we spent in this madness, I'm going to need rehabilitation," she tells SETimes.
Guca is becoming a tourist attraction and has drawn the attention of both Serbian and foreign officials. 
This year, US Ambassador to Belgrade Mary Warlick, Russian Ambassador Alexander Konuzin, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic and Infrastructure Minister Milutin Mrkonjic attended the festival.
Students of music from China, India and Mexico came to study the attraction and phenomenon of the trumpet. 
They also had an opportunity to visit the Trumpet Museum -- by which Guca expresses its respect for the instrument that has made it famous.
"There are two Serbias, one that wants to join Europe and the other that wants to bring Europe to Serbia. 
Guca is the other Serbia, because visitors from as many as 80 countries regularly come to the trumpet festival," the head of the festival organizing committee Slobodan Jolovic told SETimes.
The 50th festival was doubled in length -- from the usual five days to ten -- and apart from the usual festival competition, it also included the World Trumpet Players and Brass Orchestras Competition. 
The winner of the title of best orchestra was Dejan Petrovic's Trumpet Orchestra, and Ekrem Mamutovic from Vranje was named as best trumpet player.
The World Competition drew orchestras from other continents, such as Australia and North America, but the Serbian musicians came away with the accolades again. 
In this category, the places were switched -- Petrovic was named the best trumpet player, while the best orchestra was the one led by Mamutovic.
"I have been playing the trumpet since I was six, that was one of my first toys. 
At the age of 13, I debuted in Guca and here I am today, winning these awards. 
After all that, I really don't think it gets any better," one of the best trumpet players of today," Mamutovic told SETimes.
Although this year's trumpets have just fallen silent, preparations for the next festival in Guca are already beginning.
"Next year the festival will be back to its usual five-day duration. 
Young people make up the majority of Guca's visitors, which is why we will try to adjust the program to them even more," the town's Culture Center Director Adam Tadic told SETimes.
