29/04/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 29/04/10
A few weeks ago, Romania, Georgia and Azerbaijan signed a memorandum in Bucharest that lays the basis for a major project that will ensure transport of Caspian gas to the EU market.
Dubbed the AGRI project (Azerbaijan Georgia Romania Interconnection), it aims to diversify transit routes while reducing dependence on Russian gas.
The memorandum was signed by Adriean Videanu, Romania's minister of Economy, Trade and Business Environment;
Azeri Minister of Industry and Energy Natig Aliyev and Georgia's Minister of Energy Alexander Khetaguri.
The signing of the memorandum came after a year of trilateral negotiations.
The signatories agreed on founding a project company based in Bucharest that will oversee a feasibility study, the last step to be undertaken before construction begins.
The Azeri gas will move through Georgia and Romania before being delivered to EU consumers.
According to the memorandum, the gas will be first transported to the Kulevi harbour on the coast of the Georgian Black Sea.
There, it will be liquefied before being shipped to the Romanian port of Constanta and distributed on the European market through the national pipeline system.
"AGRI won't replace Nabucco, it is complementary to Nabucco," said Videanu.
"Romania will insist that AGRI is placed on EU's priority list of energy corridors."
Videanu explained that AGRI -- currently assessed at 2 billion to 4 billion euros -- is the fastest and most effective gas transport project under construction along Europe's southern corridor.
He added the project could be finalised before the Nabucco because there are no political barriers for its completion.
Videanu's Azeri counterpart termed the signing of the memorandum a "historic event".
"It is a project important to all the states around the Black Sea," said Aliyev.
Romanian President Traian Basescu characterised the signing as "a major step for each of the three countries equally, but also for the EU".
According to the Romanian news agency Mediafax, AGRI's capacity may be about 7 billion cubic meters of gas per year, about 2 billion of which is for domestic consumption in Romania.
Last year, Azerbaijan produced 23.5 billion cubic meters of natural gas with plans to increase it to 28.5 billion.
Aliyev said that Azerbaijan's gas reserves are 2,200 billion cubic meters.
Romania annually consumes around 16 billion cubic meters of gas, of which 11 billion is produced domestically.
