29/09/2010
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 29/09/10
Campaign promises made by candidates ahead of Sunday's (October 3rd) elections suggest that BiH is still deeply divided along ethnic lines, NGO representatives say.
"Pre-election promises come down to nationalistic statements, interethnic and entity differences based on 'us vs them'," Transparency International Bosnia and Herzegovina (TIBiH) spokesperson Ivana Korajlic told SETimes.
Political parties show little concern for the public's interests, NGOs say, and their platforms seldom address concrete issues such as unemployment, corruption and meeting EU criteria.
"Everything comes down to ethnic-based rhetoric and unrealistic promises which, at present, are impossible to fulfil," Korajlic said.
Given the ethnically fractured nature of the campaigning, the Centre for Interdisciplinary Postgraduate Studies Association Alumni (ACIPS) characterised it as "three campaigns under one roof".
ACIPS President Sanel Huskic explained that parties representing the Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks do not compete with the parties of the other ethnicities but solely amongst themselves.
"The Croatian parties are preoccupied with who is the legitimate Croat representative in BiH and whether they will get more votes;
Serbian parties argue over who will provide greater autonomy to Republika Srpska (RS);
and Bosniak ones about who will bring unity among the Bosniaks," Huskic said.
He added that political parties in RS talk little at all about BiH's European integration.
The governing parties, he added, try not to mention corruption, especially when it involves misuse of state and entity budgets.
Transparency International said that campaign financing in BiH is not transparent and there is considerable misappropriation of funds, particularly by the governing parties.
"The parties in power are using their position in the institutions of government to acquire the means and opportunities to promote themselves," said Korajlic.
She explained the governing parties claim credit for all project results, as well as the results of the work of state and entity institutions, hoping to score points with voters.
A bigger problem, Korajlic warned, is the redirection of budget funds by the governing parties to party-controlled companies.
Sanctions, she said, are rarely imposed.
TIBiH estimates the political parties will spend about 1m euros on print and electronic media advertising during the campaign.
Of all parties, it said, Milorad Dodik's SNSD and Haris Silajdzic's Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina outspent the others during the first 15 days of campaigning.
"It is noticeable the opposition parties did not advertise much, probably because of lack of funds," Korajlic said.
Campaigning ends on Saturday, a day before the general and presidential elections nationwide.
This is the sixth general election in BiH since the 1996 signing of the Dayton Peace Accords.
