31/05/2010
(Various sources -- 29/05/10 - 31/05/10)
Lena Mayer-Landrut, a 19-year-old amateur from Germany, won the 55th Eurovision song contest in Oslo, defeating scores of professional performers from the other 24 countries that made it into the finale on Saturday (May 29th).
The high-school student from Hanover was a virtual unknown until she was selected to represent Germany in March.
She grabbed first place Saturday with a total score of 246 points for her pop number "Satellite", ahead of Turkish rock band maNga and Romania's Paula Seling and Ovi.
"I think it's unreal," Lena said after the show at Oslo's Telenor Arena, when she became only the second German performer to win the Europe-wide competition.
"I'm just completely freaking out!"
Thousands welcomed the new star Sunday at a homecoming celebration in Hanover.
Chancellor Angela Merkel said she was impressed by Lena's "unpretentiousness and warmth".
"Germany deserved to win," members of Turkey's five-man rock band maNga said, adding that they were proud to finish second of the 39 nations that participated this year.
They got a total score of 170 points for their song "We Could Be the Same".
"We were expecting a rank among the top five and we achieved better than we hoped," Efe Yilmaz, the group's DJ, told reporters in Oslo on Saturday.
"Had we won, we would have had to party for 40 days and 40 nights, so I'm relieved now."
This year, the contestants' final scores were based 50% on the television viewers' votes and 50% on the votes of the 39 national juries, each comprised of five music professionals.
Each group ranked the songs in the traditional manner, giving 12 points to their favourite song, ten points to the second best, eight points to the third, etc.
The aim of the new rules was to assuage the effects of politically and geographically motivated bloc voting.
maNga received three 12-point scores -- from Azerbaijan, Croatia and France and four ten-point scores -- from Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Germany and Macedonia.
Turkey's best showing was in 2003, when pop singer Sertab Erener won the competition with her number "Every Way That I Can".
Romania's Paula Seling and Ovi ended up third with the song "Playing with Fire".
They received an overall score of 162 points, including a 12-point high from Moldova and four ten-point marks from Norway, Portugal, Spain and Sweden.
The Romanian performers believe they might have had a better chance of winning, had the countries that were once part of the former Soviet Union not voted among themselves again.
"I think we've done a great job," Romania's English-language daily Nine O'clock quoted Ovi as saying after the show.
Five other Southeast European countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Cyprus, Greece and Serbia -- qualified for the 25-nation finals on Saturday, while Bulgaria, Croatia and Macedonia dropped out of the race after their participation in the semi-finals.
Montenegro did not participate this year due to financial problems.
Greece's Giorgos Alkaios & Friends received a total score of 140 points for his song "OPA", and came in eighth in the finals, ahead of Serbia's Milan Stankovic, who was 13th with an overall score of 72 points for his song "Ovo Je Balkan" ("This is the Balkans").
Albania's Juliana Pasha got 62 points for her song "It's All about You", which landed her in 16th place.
BiH's Vukasin Brajic was right behind with 51 points for "Thunder and Lightning".
Cyprus was ranked 21st with 27 points for "Life Looks Better in Spring", performed by Jon Lilygreen and The Islanders.
