29/09/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 29/09/10
Interior Minister Vasile Blaga's announcement on Monday (September 27th) was not a surprise, following a policemen's protest that degenerated and drew the ire of the government and the presidency.
Still, his resignation could delay Romania's already sluggish efforts to enter the Schengen Zone by April 2011.
Blaga said his decision was matter of honour. 
"I respect the policemen's right to protest, but only within the legal framework," he told a press conference Monday.
By voluntarily leaving his post, Blaga in effect took responsibility for a situation that escalated out of control. 
Friday's protest by over 6,000 policemen went beyond the approved legal limits. 
The crowd left the square in front of the government offices, where they were authorised to demonstrate against salary cuts, and marched to the presidential residence.
There, they shouted obscene slogans and threw their caps over the fence of the presidential palace. 
Five were allegedly carrying guns.
An infuriated President Traian Basescu asked the government to file a report on the incident.
"Many Romanians demonstrated in Bucharest, but they all observed the law. 
The only ones who broke it are the employees of the interior ministry." Basescu said in a televised speech.
He has called a meeting of the country's supreme defence council for Thursday to discuss the protests.
Blaga was replaced by Traian Igas, leader of the Senate's Liberal Democrats. 
Romanians will be waiting to see if he can quickly take over the difficult task of bringing Romania into Schengen within the established time frame.
"I am afraid this could cost us the accession into the Schengen area. 
Blaga did a very serious job with the preparations for this accession," Senate head Mircea Geoana said.
Some political analysts are equally concerned.
"Blaga's resignation and his successor's lack of experience may cause us some problems across the accession road, keeping in mind the former minister had the reputation of a dedicated reformist in the West," Cristian Ciuperca, justice and home affairs editor at the newspaper Romania Libera, told SETimes.
"Romania was supposed to sprint during the second half of the year, judging by the fact that some European voices complain we are still unprepared for the borderless area," he added.
Blaga, however, downplayed the effects of his resignation on the Schengen accession, saying that the efforts are handled by a team of professionals at the ministry.
"We are strictly following the timetable of joining the Schengen area", he said.
