28/05/2010
The first in a two-part series by Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times -- 28/05/10
Jerry Mason, 62, worked in public affairs for 27 years with the US government before deciding he wanted to teach students at the private Wilson Institute in Tirana. 
"I hope we are building the future leaders of Albania in this school today," he says.
Established in May 2001 by Albanian businessman Lulzim Masha, the facility is named after former US President Woodrow Wilson, perhaps best known for establishing the post-WWI League of Nations, the precursor of the modern UN.
The school's preschool through high school curriculum follows that required by the education ministry, plus supplemental subjects, such as advanced math, chemistry and biology, conversational English, dance and American Studies. 
Teacher and staff salaries are considered quite competitive to those in the public schools.
"Wilson has created a working environment which makes you feel appreciated as a teacher and as a person," teacher Arbana Haxhi told the SETtimes.
But is the education better than that offered by the public schools?
Ardian Hoxha, founder and manager of the American School in Kosovo (ASK), says it is.
"As they are a bit more independent in terms of programme and usually have more qualified staff and leadership, private schools are able to deliver more for the students and provide more opportunities for them. 
Thus, success rates are usually higher," Hoxha told SETimes.
Some public school directors, however, disagreed. 
Most say the quality of education is far from superior.
Diana Kalemi runs the Petro Nini Luarasi Gymnasium in Albania, which hosts a student population of about 1,370 who pay a small sum every year, if they can. 
There are about 60 teachers on staff and the curriculum is virtually identical to that of the private schools.
To her, private schools serve a very practical purpose, reducing class size in the public schools. 
"We have from 40 to 41 students per class," Kalemi told SETimes.
Given the tuition -- 250 euros to 300 euros a month in both Kosovo and Albania -- the percentage of children who attend private schools is small in Albania, and even smaller in Kosovo.
Pristina's Xhevdet Doda Gymnasium is a public school, with 1,517 students and 50 teachers, who earn roughly the same amount per month as private schools are charging. 
Director Azem Jaha is proud of his results, telling SETimes, "90% of our students pass the national exam and get [their] diploma."
Even reaching that stage can be a milestone. 
Kosovo's ministry of education says most dropouts leave in the 9th or 10th grade.
Both Wilson and ASK measure their success with the success of former students.
ASK's Hoxha readily admits some private schools are better than others. 
He urges parents to adopt a "buyer beware" attitude. 
"We have private schools that are started with only financial results in mind, and as a priority for the founders, thus delivering a really bad education to the kids." He advises families to "do some research on what the school is all about" before making a final decision.
ASK opened in 2003 and now has over 400 students and 50 teachers, along with dozens of administrative and support staff. 
The school has been operating in the red from the start.
"It is not very easy to survive. 
As a matter of fact, this year we are hoping to break even, and after this year we believe it will be self-sufficient," he told SETimes.
Hoxha says the school pays its teachers around triple the average salary of a public school principal, with staffers from abroad earning even more.
