27/04/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/04/10
More than a dozen Romanian members of EULEX were suspended from the mission on Thursday (April 22nd) over their involvement in a possible smuggling incident.
"The gendarmes, who were travelling back to Romania on leave, were apparently carrying excessive quantities of alcohol and cigarettes out of Kosovo," EULEX confirmed in a press release.
The incident occurred in Bllaca, at the border between Macedonia and Kosovo, in the early hours of April 20th, according to EULEX. 
The gendarmes were questioned by Macedonian customs officials and "large amounts of alcohol and cigarettes were confiscated," the release said.
Lambert Lukas, the deputy head of EULEX police, said the full facts relating to the incident "are still being established".
"EULEX takes very seriously any allegations that members of its staff may have acted either illegally or contrary to the strict internal disciplinary code of the mission. 
If individuals are found to have acted wrongly, action will be taken, without hesitation," said Lukas.
Mission chief Yves de Kermabon, who was informed of the incident by the Romanian National Point of Contact, asked "for an immediate and thorough investigation into the matter".
INA news agency reported the incident, as did the Kosovo daily Koha Ditore website. 
INA also quoted the Macedonian Customs Directorate as saying 17 Romanians, including the driver of an official EULEX bus, were involved.
"During the customs check on the bus, 341 boxes of cigarettes -- Bond, Monte Carlo, Manchester, Pall Mall, Winston, Lucky Strike and LM -- and 133 liters of various alcoholic drinks, were found aboard. 
During the investigation, it was proven that the illegal goods belonged to the bus driver and other passengers," Koha Ditore quoted the Macedonian Customs press office as saying.
INA reported the goods were confiscated and charges will be brought against the driver and the passengers.
"The Customs Directorate is considering the control of the official cars of the diplomatic missions in Kosovo, which use the border and the territory of Macedonia as a transit destination," Koha Ditore reported.
The gendarmes have returned to Romania, where the incident will be investigated by the Commission of the Romanian Gendarmerie Task Force.
"The Macedonian authorities haven't pressed smuggling charges against the gendarmes since the goods found on them were for their personal consumption," the task force said in a statement.
Diplomatic sources told the local press that the group carried goods exceeding the legal limit by 1,000 euros each, and paid a total fine of 500 euros, plus a customs fee of 100 euros before leaving Macedonia.
Florin Hulea, a spokesman for the task force, said the gendarmes were unaware of the Macedonian legislation and that the incident escalated due to language barriers. 
The group spent the night at a hotel on the border before paying the fines the next morning, Hulea added.
SETimes correspondent Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest contributed to the article.
