28/09/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 28/09/10
Independent Kosovo's first president, Fatmir Sejdiu, resigned on Monday (September 27th), 48 hours after the Constitutional Court decided he had committed a "serious breach".
At issue was Sejdiu's role as head of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), a position he continued to hold while president.
Although he declared his LDK post "frozen" as long as he served as head of state, the court found this inadequate.
"This act of mine today also reconfirms my commitment to show this respect towards the institutions and the decisions they take," Sejdiu said in a speech broadcast on RTK.
"I believed that holding the position of the LDK chairman, without exercising that function, as the constitution defines, [was not] a breach."
"However, the Constitutional Court had a different opinion," he said.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci praised the president's decision, saying the constitution is a cornerstone of democracy.
"All the future decisions of the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo will be in accordance with the constitution, the laws and the needs of the our state and our society," Thaci said in a press release after the resignation was announced.
International Civilian Representative in Kosovo Pieter Feith described Sejdiu as "a key leader at an historic time".
"The highest priority must always be given to the credibility and functioning of the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo and to its constitution," he said.
Feith said Sejdiu's resignation is a confirmation "that Kosovo's constitution is strong, and its institutions respect the rule of law".
"I now call on all political representatives to show leadership in the national interest and ensure a smooth transition of the presidency.
I am confident that Kosovo's political system is more than capable of taking the necessary steps to ensure institutional continuity," Feith said.
Assembly Speaker Jakup Krasniqi has taken the post of interim president.
"I guarantee the citizens of Kosovo that there will be a normal constitutional process in the election of the president of Kosovo.
I will invite the political subjects in Kosovo to a meeting to define the future steps of action.
These acts will be at the service of the country and the citizens of Kosovo," Krasniqi told Koha Ditore.
Sejdiu's move came as a surprise to some.
Political analyst Muharrem Nitaj pointed out that the president had known about the possible conflict of interest for two years, and could have resigned from the party whenever it threatened to become an issue.
"The Constitutional Court did not suggest his resignation," Nitaj told SETimes.
"It is possible that there has been pressure upon the president and his resignation was imposed."
The move won't spark an institutional crisis, Nitaj said, but could weaken the Kosovo side during upcoming talks with Serbia.
Two options are now on the table:
a new president or early elections.
The daily Koha Ditore, citing diplomatic sources, said there are no objections to early elections.
However, it noted, that would mean the country would start talks with Belgrade while engaged in an election campaign.
