27/04/2010
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 27/04/10
For the first time in its history, Macedonia will preside over the Council of Europe's (CoE) Committee of Ministers starting in May.
It will be the second high-profile chairmanship to have been held by the country, following senior diplomat Srdjan Kerim's 2008 stint as head of the UN General Assembly.
During a mid-April visit to Skopje, where he met with Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki, CoE Secretary General Thorbjorn Jagland said Macedonia would be presiding during a key phase of the Council's development -- beginning with the Lisbon Treaty coming into force.
He said he expects success, given the credibility Macedonia has gained from undertaking reforms.
Milososki pledged his country's readiness to continue the work of current Council chair Switzerland, aimed at strengthening democracy, the rule of law and human rights as conceived at the Council's 2005 Third Summit in Warsaw.
He said the chairmanship "should be recognisable for the reforms, priorities, conferences and achievements.
We can do this together with all member states, including Greece."
However, Greece is already at odds with its neighbour's decision to use "Macedonian Chairmanship 2010" as the official title for its term at the CoE's helm.
"This kind of move makes the negotiations process within the UN framework harder, and in practice, rejects Greek efforts to create a positive climate between the two countries to resolve the name issue," Foreign Ministry spokesman Gregoris Dalavecuras said.
Athens argues that CoE resolutions require the provisional name "Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" to be used instead.
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov rejected that stance, saying Greece should face reality and recognise the existence of the Macedonian state and nation.
"There are principles in the Council of Europe under which that institution functions as an international organisation," he said.
"We, as chair, will do everything to contribute to the reforms of the Council."
In his meetings with Ivanov and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, Jagland confirmed the Council will respect the Macedonian government's decision to use the title "Macedonian Chairmanship 2010".
"I recognise the sensitivity of the issues ...
[but] I am not the one who allows somebody to use this or that name.
I have to follow the decisions of the organisation I lead," Jagland explained.
Most Macedonians seem to view the upcoming chairmanship as an important step in furthering their country's Euro-Atlantic integration.
Julijana Angelova of Skopje summed up the prevalent view:
"This is an excellent chance to promote the country and its views.
I am sure Macedonia will benefit from this chairmanship in the best way."
Sanja Zografska Krstevska, co-ordinator of the Macedonian chairmanship, told SETimes that her country will focus on "combating corruption, securing continued efficacy for [implementing] the European Convention for Human Rights and the member countries' contributions to reform the European Court for Human Rights".
Priorities also include initiating a debate on and implementing social inclusion of all marginalised groups in many European countries, as well as greater inclusion of youth, with emphasis on the Roma.
The Council has 47 member states, each presiding over the organisation for six months.
The next Macedonian chairmanship of the Council will be in 2033.
