19/03/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 19/03/10
There are nearly 9,800 NATO soldiers in Kosovo, from 25 Alliance nations and seven non-Alliance countries known collectively as KFOR. 
The troops have won and maintained the respect of the local population.
Their current commander -- German Lieutenant General Markus Bentler -- insists that KFOR will continue "to provide security for all the people of Kosovo, by close co-operation with local authorities and international organisations".
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Bentler discussed how KFOR would work to meet that goal.
SETimes: NATO has reduced its forces in Kosovo to just under 10,000. 
Is that enough for the work to be done?
Lieutenant General Markus J Bentler: At the moment, KFOR considers the security situation in Kosovo as quiet and stable. 
The current adaptation of troop numbers is a sign of confidence. 
In order to uphold the high level of flexibility and capability to react to any threat to the safe and secure environment, KFOR is regularly conducting exercises in all parts of Kosovo. 
In the process of troop adaptation, no premature or irresponsible steps will be taken and there will be no security vacuum in Kosovo.
SETimes: How are your relations with the Kosovo Security Force? 
How would you define the force?
Bentler: The Kosovo Security Force (KSF) is a non-military, lightly-armed, multiethnic, bi-gender disaster relief organisation. 
It will provide unique capabilities for emergency response, explosive ordnance disposal and civil protection.
The KSF has already proved its growing competence as a civil protection and humanitarian aid organisation by conducting operations in Albania during recent flooding. 
There is a substantial interest by representatives of different minority communities in joining this multiethnic force.
SETimes: You temporarily suspended co-operation with the KSF. 
Why?
Bentler: [On March 6th], KFOR temporarily suspended support, mentoring and training activities of KSF. 
This action [lasting a week] was taken in response to the appearance of an armed, military-style KSF honour guard during the Martyrs' Commemoration Ceremony on March 6th. 
This is inconsistent with the non-military status of the KSF. 
The NATO flag was also flown during the ceremony. 
This is not acceptable, as KFOR is status neutral.
SETimes: How was the relationship repaired?
Bentler: Following the suspension of KFOR's support to the Kosovo Security Force, the president and prime minister worked with [KFOR command] to satisfactorily resolve the issues in question. 
The new agreement covers the use of the Kosovo Security Force ceremonial unit, which will be displayed using demilitarised weapons when agreed upon. 
It was reaffirmed that the Kosovo Security Force will have no defence or military role, as that duty is undertaken by KFOR. 
We resumed training and mentoring on March 10th.
SETimes: KFOR is still guarding some Kosovo Serb sites of religious and historic importance. 
When will the Kosovo multiethnic police be able to take care of that job?
Bentler: The local institutions are ready to take on more and more responsibility. 
One key element of KFOR's mission is to strengthen local security institutions so that they take over security tasks progressively, in accordance with their proven capabilities. 
Preservation of religious and cultural heritage sites within Kosovo as valuable properties is a responsibility for all the people of Kosovo, while preserving them falls within KFOR's responsibility to provide a safe and secure environment.
The Kosovo Police (KP) are ready to take over responsibility for police tasks formerly implemented by KFOR. 
In general, KFOR co-ordinates relevant aspects of its mission with the institutions in Kosovo and liaises with the KP through EULEX. 
EULEX is responsible to monitor, mentor and advise the KP.
We have seen that the Kosovo Police are capable and willing to execute many tasks. 
To give an example, one could mention the good job the KP did providing security during the recent municipal elections. 
KFOR maintains contact with all agencies relevant for security issues on a regular basis, including, for example, the KP, EULEX and respective ministries.
SETimes: Is Serbia a military threat to Kosovo?
Bentler: KFOR doesn't see any threat from outside Kosovo. 
KFOR's area of responsibility is limited by the Kosovo Administrative Boundary Line [ABL] and we are committed to providing a safe and secure environment, as well as freedom of movement for all of Kosovo. 
Under UN Security Council Resolution 1244, KFOR provides the same degree of security all over Kosovo. 
We stay impartial and never take part in or comment on political issues, as long as they do not [threaten] a safe and secure environment.
SETimes: Are the parallel, Belgrade-supported structures in the north a threat to overall security?
Bentler: The existence of parallel structures is a political issue. 
In line with its mandate, KFOR is providing stable security conditions, in which political questions can and should be solved by the relevant stakeholders. 
Any duplication [or] mirroring of administrative structures is of no value. 
It can, on the contrary, lead to undesirable results or even spoil the effects of both structures. 
If, for example, a single judicial system does not exist, legal security or clarity on justice issues cannot be provided.
The political misuse of so-called "parallel structures", as well as related political agitation, can be a threat to a safe and secure environment and therefore is not tolerated by KFOR. 
Therefore, KFOR also closely monitors the situation in the areas where the so-called parallel structures operate in order to react if any threat to the safe and secure environment should arise. 
KFOR is in close contact with all relevant international and local stakeholders and supports their search for political solutions within the framework of its mandate. 
Should the safe and secure environment of the people in Kosovo be threatened, KFOR would be ready to take appropriate measures to counter this threat.
SETimes: How do you control the border with Serbia in the north?
Bentler: KFOR has very good co-operation with the neighbouring countries [including] the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Montenegro, but also a very good technical co-operation with Serbia, concerning the administrative boundary line. 
We have regular meetings with Serbia on a technical level. 
We control the boundary with [KFOR and KP] and synchronised (KFOR/Serb Forces) patrols.
Control of persons and goods crossing the borders is a police task and does not concern KFOR. 
How these tasks will be executed along the administrative boundary line will be agreed between the relevant actors as well. 
KFOR will only get involved if and when the security of the people in Kosovo is jeopardised.
SETimes: Most people in Kosovo continue to trust KFOR more then any other local body. 
Yet there are soldiers in KFOR from countries that have not recognised Kosovo as a state. 
Is that a problem?
Bentler: [Recognition] does not influence KFOR's mandate or the position of the mission as a whole regarding the status of Kosovo. 
About the cognition of the local population I believe that KFOR, as an expression of a credible Alliance, is perceived only and solely as a homogeneous unit. 
KFOR soldiers are always committed to the impartial stance of our organisation.
SETimes: Kosovo has clearly expressed its aspiration for Euro-Atlantic integration. 
How do you see the prospect for Kosovo integration into these Euro-Atlantic structures?
Bentler: KFOR is not actively involved in resolving the status question. 
It refrains from participating in any discussions of political issues.
SETimes: How do you see the prospects for Kosovo in general?
Bentler: I am very optimistic. 
Over the recent ten years together we have achieved a lot, particularly in the field of security. 
This is the prerequisite for progress in other areas: economy and political development. 
KFOR continues to provide the support that is needed, buying valuable time for the remaining challenges to be solved in a peaceful manner.
