22/07/2010
By Maria Paravantes for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 22/07/10
Has the so-called "Greek tragedy" -- a 300-billion-euro state debt, the EU's largest -- affected vacationers?
With less than two weeks remaining until the August summer holiday season kicks off, are they still willing to dig into their pockets?
The answer is that many Greeks are indeed changing their plans, with alternatives and budget considerations taking centre stage.
They're still going on holiday, but not like before.
"Overall, families have changed their plans and opted for fewer days in all-inclusive hotels.
The large hotels are able to provide better deals such as half- or full-board, which is suitable for families with kids," Travel Plan agent Daphne Bakopoulou told SETimes.
Working for one of the largest travel operators in Greece, Bakopoulou explains that more holiday goers are gravitating towards destinations that are accessible by car, and avoiding exorbitant ferry prices and the ongoing strikes at ports.
Indicatively, a trip to Crete, a popular family destination, will cost a family of four 180 euros one-way, economy class.
A round-trip ticket to Rhodes now costs 250 euros each.
"For us, the worst aspect of the economic crisis has to do with access to the island.
Despite hoteliers lowering prices, Greek customers will think twice about spending so much money on airplane and ferry tickets," Kos Island's Platanista Hotel owner Mina Platanista told SETimes.
Though large hotels have dropped their prices by offering all-inclusive deals, Platanista explains that overall, this damages income for other tourist-related businesses.
Despite the fact that most customers book last minute, this year Greeks are taking advantage of advance booking, which offers discounts of up to 25%, or booking through travel agencies, which can offer interest-free payment plans for credit card users.
In no way do Greeks seem to be staying home for the summer.
Even if it's only for a few days, they'll be hitting the beach.
"We've decided this year to stay at our vacation home in Loutsa [a seaside community on the outskirts of Athens] instead of going to an island," says Karolos, a father of two.
"My mother can take care of the kids and we'll end up spending much less.
It's too costly now to travel by ferry, pay for the car, accommodations, food, etc."
"I have two weeks off work and I've decided to go camping," George Hiotis, a car mechanic, told SETimes.
"Going by ferry won't cost lots for me because I'll go by motorbike, but why pay some 60 or 70 euros a night for a room when I can pay less than half that for a tent?"
One manager of a seaside campground in the Peloponnese told SETimes that there has been a 50% decline in customers compared to last year, with most staying for one or two nights instead of three or five.
