27/08/2010
(Euobserver, Blic - 27/08/10; AFP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, Canadian Press, Deutsche Welle, VOA, RFE/RL, RTTNews, Beta, B92, Blic - 26/08/10; RFE/RL - 25/08/10)
German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle urged Serbia on Thursday (August 26th) to stop challenging Kosovo's independence and focus its efforts instead on its goal of EU membership.
"Those who want to join Europe must maintain balanced policies," Westerwelle warned in a speech at the University of Belgrade, stressing that membership in the 27-nation bloc requires "dialogue about practical issues".
After months of UN-led direct status talks between Belgrade and Pristina failed to produce a deal, Kosovo declared independence in February 2008.
At Serbia's initiative, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution later that year, asking the International Court of Justice (ICJ) to issue an advisory opinion on the legality of the move. 
Last month, the UN's primary judicial body ruled that Kosovo's declaration of independence did not violate international law.
Kosovo has been recognised by 69 countries worldwide so far, including the United States and 22 EU nations, Germany among them.
In September, the UN General Assembly is expected to discuss a new Serbian draft resolution that effectively invalidates the ICJ opinion and calls for new direct talks on "all open issues" between Belgrade and Pristina.
In Serbia, the second leg of his tour of four countries that were once part of the former Yugoslavia, Westerwelle said that the UN court's finding was "unambiguous" and should have put an end to any further discussion on the issue of Kosovo's status.
"Kosovo's independence is reality. 
There is no point in denying the facts," he said, noting that the geographical map of southeast Europe has already been drawn and completed.
After talks with Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic, Westerwelle said that the future of all Western Balkan nations is in the EU. 
But, he said, the bloc would not admit new countries engaged in long-running external disputes and not prepared to resolve them "co-operatively".
"A day will come when EU, Kosovo and Serbian representatives will be sitting around the same table," he said. 
"Someone would say it is a utopia, but the reconciliation is possible if you face the reality."
Westerwelle also urged Belgrade, which has invested a lot of energy and effort in mustering support for its draft UN resolution and in preventing further recognitions of Kosovo's independence in recent months, to drop its policy of confrontation.
"Those who are for confrontations, who open status questions despite the fact that international institutions have assessed that it is not necessary, correct or legally justified, have a lot of homework to do," Italian news agency AKI quoted him as saying.
The German foreign minister also met with Serbian counterpart Vuk Jeremic, President Boris Tadic and representatives of parties in parliament.
While acknowledging that the support of EU heavy-hitter Germany is of critical importance to Serbia's membership bid, Jeremic made clear that Belgrade is not backing down at the UN.
"Serbia will not withdraw the resolution it submitted to the UN General Assembly, however we are ready for constructive talks on all issues including the resolution," he said. 
"We cannot stand behind a conclusion that would confirm Kosovo's independence."
