27/09/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 27/09/10
Margareta Matache is executive director of the Roma Centre for Social Intervention and Studies (CRISS). 
She spoke to SETimes about the ongoing controversy over France's expulsions of Roma, the progress of integration in Romania and the obstacles that remain.
SETimes: Please describe the CRISS and its activities.
Margareta Matache: CRISS is a human rights organisation founded in 1993 to defend and promote Roma rights. 
CRISS's priority is [achieving] access to health care and education but we also have a research department and give legal advice in cases of discrimination, abuse and violence.
Some cases are used to lobby to change laws. 
For example, in 2003, we observed segregation in the schools, where Roma children were moved to separate classes or buildings. 
In 2007, the ministry of education passed an order to desegregate schools after we talked to them.
CRISS works with local partner organisations in Romania that we helped develop. 
We usually live off donations from embassies but also work in partnership with the Open Society Institute and the Central East European Trust.
SETimes: Can you comment on the French authorities' "public safety measures", which culminated with the expulsions of Roma groups?
Matache: We are looking at two sets of measures. 
First, the voluntary repatriation programme that France implemented for several years, before September 1st. 
This is a camouflaged form of expulsion by means of money -- 300 euros per adult and 100 euros per child -- a purchase of the right to free movement.
We also examine the economic programmes the returnees could be part of. 
They were supposed to receive 3,500 euros to start a business but in many cases weren't even informed about it. 
We even wrote a report on this in 2008 after a visit to France and in Timisoara County, where Roma were promised to be included in the programme.
Second, we examine France's post-September violations of communitarian law and European principles and values -- for example, fingerprinting the expelled Roma. 
Some accept it freely though consent is not hard to get [through pressure].
This is how it works. 
French police first warn Roma they will bring down their camp in a week and expel them unless they leave. 
A few days later, immigration officers inform the Roma they will pay them to leave and -- possibly -- enlist them in a social reinsertion programme. 
The Roma agree in order to get some benefits rather than be brutally evicted, with their dwellings demolished.
SETimes: France argues it also undertook the measures to protect against illegal practices, such as human trafficking.
Matache: There are Roma who are involved in human trafficking just as there are Roma who are human trafficking victims -- and not solely in France. 
I don't think solutions lie in restricting the rights of an ethnic community but in the laws in France and in other countries. 
They have laws that address crimes such as human trafficking.
SETimes: Each case of law breaking can be treated individually?
Matache: Indeed, that is what the European directive on free movement stipulates and that is a rule throughout the world; criminality is judged individually.
SETimes: Which country carries greater responsibility concerning the Roma issue?
Matache: The Roma are Romanian citizens and the responsibility falls more on Romania. 
Before Romania's 2007 EU accession, when it was closely monitored, Bucharest strove to convince the EU that the Roma integration process is making progress. 
After 2007, the Roma issue became visibly Europe-wide.
While France is really focused on expelling the Roma and the European Commission authorised discussing the Roma dossier, the Romanian authorities so far aren't familiar with this community's problems and haven't even set their mind on solving them.
The argument that the Roma are not a national problem but a European one has been going on for a year in Romania. 
That is because we don't have representatives either on the political level or inside international Roma organisations that are able to negotiate with the government.
However, I find it strange that France decides on Romania's internal affairs -- the appointment of a Romanian state secretary on Roma is made upon France's request. 
Both are EU members and have equal rights, but France imposes its will here.
SETimes: Aren't Roma leaders supposed to mediate and streamline the integration process?
Matache: There are big discrepancies in the ways Roma leaders tackle integration in the numerous Roma communities throughout the country. 
I meet local leaders who exert control over the community, but prefer to hide the Roma problems or not to show any interest in them because of their position within town halls or prefectures, where they act as experts.
Because he or she is a single person in a big system, it is easier to try to keep one's job and ignore Roma problems. 
During a conflict between the Roma and Romanians in Transylvania, no one in the Roma community recognised the Roma prefecture representative when she showed up, because she had never been there.
There are Roma leaders who have achieved respect both from the local authorities and the community. 
But overall, we lack strong leaders, especially in politics. 
For example, there were no reactions in the Romanian parliament to the recent developments in France, or in Italy a year ago. 
I also include here the Roma-related institutions such as the governmental National Agency for Roma.
Out of 200 Roma organisations, only 20 are active. 
Some were created by leaders who call it "my organisation" and use it to legitimise themselves in their relations with local authorities, but they don't invest in people or generate programmes.
There are always some who accept what the government says and does. 
The authorities realised quickly it is easy to divide us. 
We can generate unity around the Romany language for example, despite the fact that in the aftermath of communism nearly 40% don't speak it anymore. 
Roma history could also generate unity, but not if it isn't included in Romanian history books.
We don't have a political agenda; the Roma are not motivated to vote for a Roma politician, which is why there is only one Roma representative in parliament.
Locally, there is a general desire to keep the Roma dependent because one can buy them very easily and cheaply from an electoral point of view. 
In short, the problem concerns representation and also the creation of a real Roma civic movement. 
Since we haven't been good negotiators, the government doesn't bother about integrating us.
SETimes: How do you address the majority's prejudice towards the Roma in their integration?
Matache: Apart from TV campaigns directed at the majority to view the Roma in a different way, we organised street activities like "racismo-meter" when we used a blood pressure device while asking pedestrians questions about the Roma. 
Of course, the device was used symbolically, but the questions were well tailored.
After years of campaigns, we concluded that people like TV spots or other visuals, but it is very hard to affect the minds of average Romanians beyond that. 
Some prejudice stems from lack of information. 
Some Romanians have never met Roma, or have seen only beggars or others that have offended them on the street. 
These stick in their minds and become a reference point for the Roma in general. 
But if we reduce the 1.5 million Roma in Romania to only those [disadvantaged] that are visible, we won't be able to create and implement integration policies.
The change of mentality starts with education. 
As long as there is strong cultural diversity in Romanian schools, the majority can think of the Roma otherwise.
