24/06/2010
By Dejan Stankovic for Southeast European Times in Johannesburg and Nelspruit -- 24/06/10
Day 15, June 22nd
Off to Nelspruit, the site of our final group match with Australia.
Now, definitively, the deciding one.
We chose not to go on the freeway, but rather to take a somewhat longer route so we could see some interesting parts of South Africa.
And yes, it was a good decision.
The countryside is wonderful and now we understand why this is considered one of the prettiest countries in the world.
It's beautiful.
We stopped at a small town called Pilgrims' Rest in the province of Mpumalanga, an hour's drive from Nelspruit, the provincial capital.
It was declared a national monument in 1986 because gold digging began there.
The architecture is pretty much the same as it was at the end of the 19th century.
The biggest highlight was the lively local market, where one could buy everything from African crafts and jewelry to Zulu masks.
The prices were very high.
But then came negotiating.
If you pay even 50% of the marked price ...
well, you're a fool.
Some of us managed to buy things officially worth 30 euros for only 3 euros.
The Mbombela stadium in Nelspruit is definitely one of the nicest I have ever seen.
It's newly built for the World Cup.
From outside it looks as though it is being carried by 18 giraffes.
Inside, the black-and-white design recalls the zebra.
The wildlife theme is no accident -- we are near Kruger Park, the biggest national park in South Africa.
The only problem with the stadium is that it is hard to envision its future use.
The city of Nelspruit has been officially renamed Mbombela, though many ignore that.
It is the smallest of all the host cities, with slightly over 200,000 residents.
The next season will be the first one since the mid-1990's in which Mbombela/Nelspruit will have a Premium League club.
It's not easy to fill a 40,000-seater.
There's much less to do here than in Johannesburg or Port Elisabeth.
After 10pm, McDonald's is the sole culinary option.
After the games, when all the fans run out to celebrate or console themselves, they need to eat.
One McDonald's just isn't enough.
Day 16, June 23rd
Another disappointment.
Defeat against Australia 1-2.
A shameful farewell for us.
Our coach blames referee Jorge Larionda, who didn't give us a penalty after Tim Cahill played an obvious handball.
We all think that is not an excuse.
We've lost against Ghana and against Australia, two teams that are -- at least if you look at players' names -- worse than us.
We lost, and we should go home early.
Still, there has been some disastrous refereeing here.
Plenty of mistakes by the refs;
beginner's mistakes.
Red cards, penalties, offsides.
Ghana was also a victim.
Germany's Philip Lahm got away with a handball on the goal line.
He should have got a red card, and Ghana should have got the penalty.
At the start of the tournament, the quality of play was low.
As things heat up, it is getting better.
The big guns are starting to play their game, and I'm sure that by the end we're going to see some great football.
It's a World Cup, and South Africa is the world.
Africa is the world.
It's not just Europe, the Americas and China, Japan or South Korea.
What with the empty stadium seats and organisational problems -- not to mention the highly unpredictable Jabulani ball -- this Cup has had its shortcomings.
But it's here to stay in our memories.
And isn't that why World Cups are held?
