24/06/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 24/06/10
Tuesday's (June 22nd) bomb attack on a military bus in Istanbul, the country's largest city with nearly 13 million residents, has fueled concerns that the Kurdistan Worker's Party (PKK) is now targeting urban areas.
Responsibility has been claimed by the "Kurdistan Freedom Falcons", thought to be linked to the PKK.
It was the latest in a series of incidents since late May, primarily in the country's southeastern Anatolian region.
The terrorist organisation ended a unilateral ceasefire on May 31st, saying the government has failed to meet the demands of the Kurdish people.
With the apparent change in PKK tactics, authorities are considering how best to respond, in order to protect the public.
On Monday, the country's top civilian and military officials convened a security summit under the leadership of President Abdullah Gul.
The summit resulted in a new threefold counterterrorism strategy.
It entails an overhaul of intelligence and re-organising combat troops at the Iraqi border, a risky mountainous region where the majority of the attacks are perpetrated as the terrorists filter from the country's north.
In the future, new recruits will only be sent to this region after intensive training, and only when there is a need for more troops.
The idea is to deploy specialised sergeants in this region and strengthen the military outposts.
The strategy also aims to boost co-operation with neighbouring countries and the United States, which has been providing actionable intelligence to Turkey since 2007.
"We stand ready to review urgently any new requests from the Turkish military or government regarding the PKK," US Ambassador to Turkey James Jeffrey said on Monday.
Apart from these measures, an effort is being made to bring all of Turkey's political parties, as well as NGOs and the press, together in a united front against terrorism.
"Terror is a national problem," wrote veteran journalist Fikret Bila.
"The best way for the government and the opposition is to find solutions together."
Gul held separate meetings with opposition leaders in the aftermath of the deadly attacks, urging them to help find common ground.
He will also meet with representatives of the country's NGOs.
Leaders have also been trying to prevent ethnic clashes, in the wake of the latest terror wave.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has urged the press to be responsible in its coverage.
"Unfortunately, the media is intentionally or unintentionally supporting the terrorist organisation in a serious way," Erdogan said on Tuesday during an address to parliament.
Nihat Ali Ozcan, an expert on security matters, says fueling ethnic separatism is central to the PKK's strategy.
"The PKK was aiming to build its identity by using terror and violence," Ozcan said in an interview with Today's Zaman on Wednesday.
"The identity-building process is over.
The PKK is looking to strengthen this, but it cannot achieve this goal by using the old methods.
If it transforms the existing situation into ethnic clashes, then the identities will be crystallised."
"The role of the media is very important.
It should not use separatist language," he added.
