26/05/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 26/05/10
Authorities in Kosovo received a list of people wanted by Macedonia earlier this month, after a shootout at the border resulted in four deaths.
According to Macedonian police, the three Macedonians and one Kosovar were smuggling weapons. 
This is not a first border incident, and officials believe that a number of criminals with Macedonian citizenship are hiding in Kosovo.
Kosovo Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi visited Macedonia after the shootout, stressing that his country is dedicated to the rule of law and regional security. 
Rexhepi talked about that trip and future co-operation with Macedonian authorities in this exclusive interview with SETimes.
SETimes: What were the steps that were agreed on, and how will they be carried out?
Bajram Rexhepi: We are strengthening the relations between the two countries in all fields -- especially on security issues. 
We have already signed a memorandum on police co-operation with Macedonia; we expect to make it operational through ... 
technical protocols.
We have agreed to communicate between the two interior ministries and the subordinate agencies to have a joint and efficient fight against organised crime, weapons smuggling, drugs, human trafficking and illegal immigration.
SETimes: During your visit, Macedonian authorities reportedly gave you a list with the names of 70 Albanians in Kosovo and Macedonia, who are wanted criminals. 
Does the interior ministry have information about the people on this list?
Rexhepi: We have received, through official channels, a list of the persons who are wanted and who are suspected to be in Kosovo. 
Based on the initial verifications, the majority of those people are citizens of Macedonia.
The list has been forwarded to the police and the justice bodies. 
The responsible mechanisms in the country will carry out verifications on each case and they will act according to the laws of Kosovo.
SETimes: There have been accusations that Kosovo is involved in the tensions in Macedonia. 
How would you comment on those allegations?
Rexhepi: In the past, especially before the recognition of independence, Kosovo has been accused as an exporter of violence, weapons smuggling and as a sponsor of tensions. 
This perception is changing now and Kosovo is perceived not only as a consumer, but also as a contributor to regional security.
Kosovo is dedicated to security and regional stability, as well as to the rule of law. 
We are testifying to this dedication through the efficient fight against all kinds of crimes, which in our countries, has a regional context. 
We are a credible partner, and we invite the others to follow this approach.
