23/06/2010
By Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 23/06/10
In the wake of EULEX's anti-corruption stings in Kosovo, opinions are divided about the effort's overall result.
Over a period spanning several weeks, the rule of law mission raided the Kosovo Assembly, the ministries of transport and education, and the municipality of Gjiljan in an operation targeting graft and fraud.
Corruption remains a pervasive problem in Kosovo, and many see EULEX -- which has brought forth over 100 cases -- as the key to countering it.
Gjergji, an economist who requested that only his first name be used, told SETimes that he is optimistic that things are moving in the right direction.
"Corruption is an obstacle to economic development.
The thieves should be in prison, their illegal properties confiscated," he said.
"They should be punished for what they have done, if they have done it."
Others are more sceptical.
"It has been nearly a month since the searches were carried and the charges made public, but nothing concrete has been undertaken," analyst Muharrem Nitaj told SETimes.
The raids initially caused friction with the Kosovo government, which said that it has the mandate to fight corruption and that EULEX should stick to its mandate of mentoring and advising.
With officials of Kosovo's three biggest parties – Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's PDK, President Fatmir Sejdiu's LDK, and former Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj's AAK -- under investigation, some warned of potential political destabilisation.
EULEX and Kosovo leaders have since smoothed over their disagreements, and the government insists it is committed to addressing the corruption issue effectively.
"I am determined to fight what has been tolerated in these ten years.
I also have the support of the Kosovo citizens, [and] friends from the international community to implement that," Thaci said.
Blerim Shala, deputy chairman of the opposition Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, gives credence to EULEX investigations, saying there is no going back.
"Everybody knows that.
Going back would mean for the EULEX mission taking a one way ticket [to leave Kosovo] and very soon," Shala said.
However, he warned, fighting corruption and "political bargaining" don't mesh.
"It will come out to be very expensive for Kosovo in the months and the years to come," he said.
A Pristina-based accountant, who also only provided a first name, Samiri, is among those who doubt EULEX will achieve tangible results.
Many of the worst offenders, he said, are protected from justice due to their political connections.
"Small fish can be investigated and they would probably go to jail … but that is all," he told SETimes.
