23/06/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 23/06/10
In an effort to close a chapter of Croatia's past, President Ivo Josipovic visited the memorial site at Bleiburg on Sunday (June 20th).
"I came here to end the story of World War II, and to close the gap existing in the Croatian nation so that we can move forward," Josipovic said, laying a wreath at the site, located at the Austria-Slovenian border.
In May 1945, tens of thousands of Croatian Ustasha forces -- together with civilians and Slovenian and Serbian collaborators with the regime -- fled from the approaching Yugoslav Army, heading toward Austria.
Though historical accounts differ, most are thought to have been caught and executed by the Yugoslav Partisans in the border region after an unsuccessful attempt to surrender to the British.
The anniversary of the massacre is marked every year.
But the commemorations remain controversial due to the use of Nazi symbols by Croat groups attending them.
Josipovic is the first Croatian president to visit the site.
"We need to see Croatia as a modern country that is oriented towards the future and whose statehood is being based on antifascism and the Homeland War," the president said.
Josipovic -- a staunch fighter for reconciliation -- visited Bleiburg two days before Croatia celebrated the Day of Anti-fascist Struggle.
"This puts an end to the dispute considering Croatia's anti-fascist past, which undoubtedly had that side it should not have had," Josipovic said.
"We have been waiting for this for 65 years," Ilija Abramovic, who survived Bleiburg, told SETimes.
But Milorad Pupovac, a member of Croatia's Serbian minority, criticised the visit.
"Bleiburg is not a place of suffering, but a place of revival of an ideology that is unacceptable," he said.
Josipovic also visited Dobrova Cemetery in Tezno, in the Slovenian town of Maribor.
Mass graves were discovered there, containing the remains of victims killed by Yugoslav communist authorities in 1945.
Most of the 18,000 victims were soldiers.
