21/07/2010
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/07/10
A newly adopted law on electronic communications is stirring controversy in Serbia, with critics saying it is unconstitutional and a violation of the right to privacy.
It requires telephone and internet operators to monitor communications and maintain records, which can be accessed at any time by police and security services, without a court order.
A fierce public debate has been waging for months over the legislation, which was eventually adopted by parliament.
Among the ruling coalition members, only the Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians opposed the measure, while Vuk Draskovic's Serbian Renewal Movement abstained.
Ombudsman Sasa Jankovic proposed an amendment that would require the police and security services to seek court permission for access to an individual's communications, but parliament rejected it.
Jankovic told SETimes that the issue moves next to the Constitutional Court of Serbia.
"An unlimited right to control citizens' telephone and internet communications is a violation of a basic human right to privacy.
That right is guaranteed by the constitution," Jankovic said.
Commissioner for Information of Public Interest Rodoljub Sabic also sought to amend the bill.
But the government disagreed.
According to Nada Kolundzija, president of the ruling coalition's parliamentary group, the existing legislation does not breach the constitution.
"The constitution does not state how to control and how to collect the information," she said.
Transparency Serbia has blasted the new law, while the Association of Journalists of Serbia (UNS) considers it a threat to the confidentiality of sources.
"In the future, it will be known when, how long, to whom, with how many and where did a given reporter talk," says UNS President Ljiljana Smailovic.
One Belgrade resident tells SETimes he is not surprised by passage of the law.
"They have been eavesdropping on us for over 50 years, and this supposedly democratic government does not want to give that up," said Miroslav P, who is 62.
