26/08/2010
(B92 - 26/08/10; Reuters, DPA, Bloomberg, BBC, Canadian Press, Deutsche Welle, AKI, Xinhua, Beta, B92 - 25/08/10; Reuters, DPA, B92 - 29/06/10)
A member of Serbia's notorious Zemun Clan gang was extradited to Belgrade early Wednesday (August 25th), more than three years after he was convicted in the March 2003 assassination of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
Sretko Kalinic, nicknamed "the Beast", was tried in absentia and sentenced in May 2007 to 30 years in prison for his role in the plot to kill Serbia's first democratically-elected prime minister. 
In a separate trial, the 36-year-old hitman, who holds dual Croatian-Serbian citizenship, received a 40-year sentence for 19 other murders.
Kalinic became the first Croatian citizen to be extradited to Serbia since the 1991-1995 conflict between the two former Yugoslav republics.
The move became possible after Belgrade and Zagreb signed an extradition agreement June 29th allowing the handover of organised crime and corruption suspects, who often flee to other states that were once part of the former Yugoslavia.
Kalinic was captured in Zagreb earlier that month, after he was wounded in a shootout with Milos Simovic, another Zemun Clan member convicted in connection with Djindjic's murder. 
Simovic was arrested a few days later while trying to cross the Croatia-Serbia border.
Kalinic was flown from Zagreb on a Serbian government plane. 
Video footage of his transfer, which was conducted amid tight security, showed special police putting a bullet proof vest on him before driving to the airport in a jeep.
Zorana Vucicevic, spokeswoman of the Serbian justice ministry's Department of Corrections, told Reuters that, following his arrival, "Kalinic was immediately detained in Belgrade's central prison."
Once the investigations against him are complete, he will be transferred to the Zabela Prison in eastern Serbia to serve his 40-year sentence, Belgrade-based B92 reported on Thursday, quoting Justice Ministry State Secretary Slobodan Homen.
Under Serbian law, Kalinic has the right to request a retrial since he was sentenced in absentia. 
Officials expect Kalinic's statements to help shed light on numerous other serious crimes committed in the past, mostly in Serbia.
"It is believed that Kalinic, who is suspected of certain crimes, could help clarify five to six murders with his statements," Homen said on Wednesday.
Speaking ahead of the extradition, Serbian Police Director Milorad Veljovic praised the improving level of co-operation between law enforcement agencies of the two former Yugoslav republics.
It "has put organised crime and its masterminds in a very difficult, although not fully unexpected situation", B92 quoted him as saying. 
"I am sure they will try to return the blow, but we will not let them do that and thus make our co-operation even stronger and our fight against organised crime even more resolute."
