21/07/2010
(AFP, DPA, Bloomberg, FT, EurActiv, Euobserver, New Europe, European Voice, The New York Times, Sofia News Agency, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, Mediafax, European Commission - 20/07/10)
The European Commission (EC) criticised Romania on Tuesday (July 20th) for "significant shortcomings" in its fight against corruption, as it praised Bulgaria for its strong push for reform over the past 12 months.
"While Bulgaria has embraced reform efforts and achieved important results, Romania has lost momentum," the EU executive arm said on the release of its annual reports on the two nations' progress in the field of justice and internal affairs.
With the two countries' EU entry in January 2007, the EC established a special Co-operation and Verification Mechanism (CVM) to assess the headway being made in meeting their judicial reform and anti-corruption commitments, and in Bulgaria's case -- in fighting organised crime.
More critical than previous editions, this year's report on Romania's performance said, overall, the country failed to show "sufficient political commitment to reform".
It specifically reprimanded the country over recent developments surrounding its National Integrity Agency (ANI) following the Constitutional Court's ruling in April, which declared key parts of the law on the agency unconstitutional.
In response, parliament passed a law in late June that significantly curtailed the ANI's powers to effectively verify, sanction and seize public officials' unexplained assets, according to Brussels.
"This puts Romania in clear breach of its accession commitments," EC spokesman Mark Gray said as he presented the reports Tuesday.
The commission urged Romania to deal with some lingering fundamental weaknesses in judicial reform by improving the efficiency of the judicial process and the consistency of jurisprudence.
For the first time since 2007, Brussels paid special attention to public procurement procedures in the two Balkan countries and found important irregularities in both.
It said Bucharest and Sofia need to boost safeguards against fraud and conflicts of interest in that area.
The report on Bulgaria's progress -- the most positive so far -- said the country showed "a strong reform momentum" in the past 12 months.
The recently approved judicial reform strategy "demonstrates political determination to achieve a profound reform" according to the EC.
It also welcomed Bulgaria's efforts to deal with cases of fraud involving EU funds, as well as the growing number of indictments for cases involving high-level corruption and organised crime.
"For the first time, we see real political will in Bulgaria to push through reform," said Gray.
The EC stressed that more cases involving organised crime and high-level corruption must be concluded in court, and called for further efforts to improve the professional practices of police and the judiciary, particularly as regards the investigation of complex cases.
Noting that Bulgaria and Romania have each made "some progress" in certain fields, Tuesday's reports urged the leadership of the judiciaries in both countries to be more pro-active and to take more responsibility for the benefit of reform.
Making it clear that it will continue monitoring the two countries for at least another year, the EC also made ten concrete recommendations for each, saying it wants to see them implemented before the summer of 2011, when it will issue its next annual reports.
