25/05/2010
By Esra Erduran for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 25/05/10
Kemal Kilicdaroglu was elected president of the big opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) at the party's congress Saturday (May 22nd).
He replaces longtime leader Deniz Baykal, who resigned earlier this month.
Kilicdaroglu's nomination was backed by 1,189 out of 1,197 delegates.
Supporters say he will energise the party and help boost its popular appeal.
"I was not going to come to the convention if it was not for Kilicdaroglu," said Huseyin Balbora, a delegate from the southeastern city of Diyarbakir.
"For the first time in many years, I started to believe that CHP will be more than an opposition party."
"He will be the leader that will highlight the 'people's party' characteristics of the party," Balbora added.
The weekend's convention was the largest in decades.
Crowds lined up in front of the convention centre to witness what is being described as a milestone in Turkish politics.
Baykal, who had led the CHP since 1992, stepped down on May 10th amid a sex tape scandal.
A private company hired by the CHP later concluded the recording was a hoax.
"The show of unity after such a distressing time … has shown to those who were behind the [tape] that their actions have failed;
we are stronger and more powerful than before," said one member during the assembly.
Baykal, 71, did not attend the congress and has kept a low profile since it.
He is said to be upset that Kilicdaroglu did not disclose his candidacy earlier.
Many now expect a change in the party's tone.
Under Baykal's leadership, the CHP was criticised for moving far from its grass roots.
"Under the long rule of Baykal, the party carried out elitist politics and failed to fulfill its mission to collect all left wing politicians under its roof," said Cafer Yuksel, a prominent left-wing politician who worked both for the CHP and later for the Social Democratic People's Party
"The policies of the CHP were one of the factors that carried the AKP (the ruling Justice and Development Party) to power," he told SETimes.
According to Yuksel, the leadership change has the potential to reunite fractured political forces.
"Kilicdaroglu's election … has allowed other politicians to either join the CHP ranks or to support the party," he said.
Rahsan Ecevit, widow of the late Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, openly supported Kilicdaroglu's candidacy.
Her decision, Yuksel says, is "the first signal of the merger of the scattered Turkish leftist parties".
A key figure in Turkish political history, Ecevit served four times as prime minister.
Many say he left behind a political gap that has yet to be filled.
"Kilicdaroglu has huge responsibility on his shoulders as he is expected to gather the leftists under his party's roof as well as claiming [victory over] the AKP government.
He is not a miracle-maker, only a newly elected party leader.
Time will show how he would fulfill all these expectations," journalist Ilnur Cevik told SETimes.
