20/07/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 20/07/10
New technical talks between Belgrade and Pristina are expected to start after the International Court of Justice (ICJ) issues its advisory opinion Thursday (July 22nd) on the legality of Kosovo's independence.
Both sides, however, remain far apart and do not even see eye-to-eye on the scope of the coming negotiations.
Belgrade says the status question must be revisited and a compromise solution reached.
"As far as Kosovo is concerned, Serbia will not change its policy one iota," Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said.
"Serbia wants to create an international situation in which it will be obvious that a certain kind of compromise is necessary," he said.
"However, the unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo is no compromise, so it must be something else."
But Pristina is equally adamant, insisting that independence is a done deal.
According to President Fatmir Sejdiu, that issue has been closed once and for all and any bargaining is "absolutely unacceptable".
Kosovo officials also oppose any form of partition.
With Pristina so far unable to extend its authority to Serb enclaves in and around Mitrovica, some analysts believe Belgrade has set its sights on retaining control of the north.
That could prove to be dangerous.
Partition, the BBC's Arber Vllahiu said, could trigger a domino effect that would destabilise the whole region, impacting Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and other areas.
"The whole engagement of the NATO troops in Kosovo and elsewhere in the Balkans would be disturbed," he said.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci says there is no chance of the north being separated from the rest of Kosovo.
"We look forward to the advisory opinion of the ICJ and believe it will reflect positively on the will of the people of Kosovo.
No matter what a few lonely voices may argue, there will never be partition of Kosovo and our country will permanently enjoy inalienable territorial integrity," he told SETimes.
Ramush Haradinaj, of the main opposition Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, cautioned against tinkering with the Ahtisaari blueprint, which provided the basis for Kosovo's independence plan and established guarantees to protect the Serb minority.
"Each of the local and international mechanisms should be aware that any ideas for a modification or 'adoption' of the Ahtisaari Package represents a very dangerous turn back.
This turn is not in the interest of anyone in Kosovo," he said.
Pieter Feith, the EU special representative in Kosovo, who also serves as the International Civilian Representative, thinks boycotts and resistance are gradually giving way to a spirit of co-operation.
"A growing number of Kosovo Serbs are ready to embrace their rights to decide matters of their concern," he said.
"I believe that Belgrade and Pristina should seize this opportunity to deal with the practical matters they have common interest in resolving.
The EU is uniquely well-placed to promote helpful conditions and facilitate dialogue.
It has the full range of incentives and instruments to help the parties to engage and sustain a gradually progressing relationship," he added.
