23/06/2010
(AFP, Reuters, Bloomberg, EurActiv, ITAR-TASS - 23/06/10; FT, Bloomberg, Reuters, DPA, BBC, New York Times, Deutsche Welle, VOA, RIA Novosti, MarketWatch, Euobserver - 22/06/10)
Russia sharply reduced gas supplies to Belarus on Wednesday (June 23rd) amid a deepening price dispute between the two neighbours, but assured that the move would not disrupt deliveries to Europe.
"I have two [pieces of ] news for you -- one good and one bad," Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller said in remarks aired on Russian state television.
The good one was that "the transit of Russian gas through Belarus is taking place at full volume and Russian gas customers [in Europe] are having no problems with deliveries," he said. 
"The bad news is that the Belarusian side is not taking any steps to pay the debts for Russian gas supplies, and from 10am on June 23rd, we are introducing a limit on Russian gas supplies to Belarus by 60%."
The energy crisis between the two former Soviet republics erupted on Monday, when the volume of regular daily Russian gas supplies to Belarus was reduced by an initial 15%, in a bid to press Minsk to settle its debt. 
The cuts doubled to 30% on Tuesday, with Gazprom warning that they could rise to 85% in the event Belarus fails to act quickly.
The Russian company claims that Minsk owes it $192m for gas deliveries since January.
"The restriction of supplies will continue in proportion to the outstanding liability," Miller said on Wednesday.
His remarks followed a statement by Belarusian President Aleksander Lukashenko the previous day, who said that his country had borrowed the money it needs to settle its debt to Gazprom, which would happen "shortly". 
But he also accused the Russian company of having itself failed to pay $260m in gas transit fees it owes Minsk.
The dispute reportedly stems from the fact that Belarus has continued to pay for its Russian gas imports at the price in effect last year: $150 per 1,000 cubic metres of gas. 
Gazprom has since raised it to $169.20 for the first quarter of this year and $184.80 for the second, according to Reuters. 
The Russian company says Minsk's debt could grow to $600m by the end of 2010, if it keeps paying at last year's rate.
Russian supplies cover a quarter of Europe's gas needs. 
Of the total volume, 80% is shipped via Ukraine and the remaining 20% through Belarus.
Lukashenko said on Tuesday that the row with Moscow is turning into a full-scale "gas war".
"I have ordered my government to stop transit through Belarus as long as Gazprom does not pay for the transit," he said during a meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov. 
"They have not paid one kopeck for a half a year."
He also criticised Russian President Dmitry Medvedev for remarks he made Monday following Minsk's offer to pay its debt in kind with Belarusian equipment or machinery. 
Commenting on that proposal, Medvedev said "neither pies nor butter nor cheese nor pancakes" were acceptable either.
Lukashenko said on Tuesday that he would not accept any attempts by Moscow to denigrate his country.
"I am sorry, when they start humiliating us with either cutlets or sausages or butter or pancakes, we perceive this as an offence to the Belarusian people," he noted.
Urging Belarus to abide by its commitments, the European Commission said on later Tuesday that there are no signs that Minsk had shut down the transit of gas to Europe.
"We expect that gas flows to Western Europe will not be affected and we expect that contractual obligations will be fulfilled," Marlene Holzner, spokeswoman for EU Energy Commissioner Guenther Oettinger, said.
Meanwhile, European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek told Russia's RIA Novosti that the EU will stay out of the energy row between the two countries.
"Similar crises have occurred with Ukraine and Belarus before," he said on Tuesday, an apparent reference to the Russia-Ukraine gas crises in 2006 and 2009 and a brief one in early 2007, triggered by an oil price dispute between Moscow and Minsk.
"We do not interfere in relations between two countries -- that is up to Russia and Belarus or Russia and Ukraine to deal with. 
The EU will not be directly involved in the resolution of this conflict."
