25/05/2010
(UN News Centre, UN Security Council, Office of the High Representative - 24/05/10; AFP - 23/05/10)
Though Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has made notable progress in international relations recently, internal politics have deteriorated, High Representative Valentin Inzko told the UN Security Council on Monday (May 24th).
Reporting on developments in BiH between November 1st and April 30th, the Austrian diplomat cited the country's election to a non-permanent Security Council seat as "the greatest and most visible reflection" of its new standing in the international political arena.
He also cited the successful implementation of reforms needed for lifting EU visa requirements, as well as NATO's decision to offer the country a Membership Action Plan last month.
Those developments show that BiH can function and move forward to the benefit of its own people, he said.
Inzko, who also serves as EU special representative in BiH, said he expects the informal EU-Western Balkans summit that Sarajevo will host on June 2nd to give a further boost to this trend of more constructive relations among countries in the region.
While noting that BiH remained "safe and secure" during the reporting period, he voiced concern about the political situation ahead of the October general elections.
As a result of attempts to undermine state-level institutions, continuing nationalist rhetoric and challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement, the overall domestic political climate remained negative, the diplomat told the Security Council.
"The leadership of Republika Srpska has, for example, led the way in undermining the state-level institutions and threatening to hold an entity referendum that would seek to repudiate the authority of the high representative and decisions under Dayton," said Inzko.
Bosnian Serb politicians have repeatedly voiced their opposition to Inzko's decisions. 
One example he cited on Monday was their rejection of his December decision to extend the mandates of foreign judges and prosecutors in BiH. 
RS officials claimed that they were not obliged to accept or enforce his decisions. 
RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, who is staunchly opposed to any steps that might curb his entity's substantial autonomy, has repeatedly threatened to call an independence referendum.
Inzko bluntly stressed on Monday "Any entity referendum challenging the authority of the Dayton Accords or the High Representative ... 
would be unlawful and would endanger the entity itself, as the entities derive their legitimacy from the same accords."
He also criticised references to the possible "emergence of a new state" and proposals by nationalist politicians to open a discussion of the "peaceful dissolution" of BiH.
"This chronic political disagreement has occurred at a time when unemployment has continued to rise, living standards have continued to fall and the capacity of the authorities to meet the basic needs of citizens has been systematically eroded by declining revenue," Inzko said.
He also voiced concern that the continuing divisive rhetoric could spark trouble in the run-up to the October vote.
"There has also been a rise in actions threatening to undermine earlier progress towards overcoming the legacy of serious war crimes," he noted. 
"Furthermore, the Federation [of BiH] has not yet met the constitutional obligation for an equal distribution of key positions in national institutions."
