03/06/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/06/13
The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) continues to play an important role in the region, especially on issues related to electoral processes and democratisation.
Alban Bala, the founder of the Albanian Institute of Public Relations, said that the OSCE's role has been an indispensable factor in countries with high political polarisation and conflicting relations, and has become the most important partner in the electoral processes.
"For as long as standards continue to be so vulnerable, the OSCE role will continue to strengthen," Bala told SETimes.
Last year, the organisation enabled eligible voters in Kosovo to participate in the Serbian presidential and parliamentary elections.
"Our strong track record in this kind of exercise is why Belgrade and Pristina, as well as the EU, suggested that OSCE would be the best-placed organisation to facilitate the local elections in northern Kosovo.
We have a long-standing presence on the ground in Kosovo, including in the north," OSCE Secretary-General Lamberto Zannier told SETimes.
Ramadan Ilazi, executive director of Kosovo Peace Institute, said that having northern Serbs participate in Kosovo local elections would mark democratic progress in the country.
"The organisation of the elections in the north by the OSCE is important for the trust of the Serb community in this process, having in mind that this organisation is status-neutral towards Kosovo.
But the OSCE role should be technical and [under] the framework of the umbrella of the Central Election Commission because otherwise, there would be problems," Ilazi told SETimes.
"The OSCE role is essential for organising the elections in the northern part, but it should be done carefully in order not to transform this role into an indispensable role," he added.
But Zannier said that the OSCE Mission in Kosovo will be able to work in close consultation with the local and international partners.
"Together, and with the consent of our participating states, we will assess whether the conditions exist for the OSCE to facilitate the participation of all communities in the upcoming local elections," Zannier said.
The OSCE head said the recent agreement between Pristina and Belgrade will help the people in Serbia and Kosovo move towards their chosen path of further European integration.
"What is important now is to come to a clear understanding between the sides on how this agreement is actually going to be implemented.
The OSCE is ready to play a constructive role in support of its implementation, taking into account our mandate and expertise in Kosovo," Zannier told SETimes.
The organisation also plays an important role in neighboring Albania, where political polarisation and conflicts have been rife.
They will monitor the June 23rd parliamentary elections in the country.
"I would encourage all sides to contribute to the legitimacy and credibility of the electoral process.
As a first step, it is important to ensure that the Central Election Commission has a meaningful and full membership," Zannier told SETimes.
The Albanian Central Election Commission continues to work with only four members, down from seven after the majority sacked one member and two resigned.
"The upcoming elections will be very important for the future of Albania.
I sincerely trust that political competition, which is in itself inherent in every democratic system, will not translate into undue polarisation or open confrontation between political forces," Zannier said.
The OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights has just deployed its observation mission in Albania, and the team will be following all developments closely, including the issues surrounding the commission.
The organisation is also active in Macedonia, and has helped the country smooth over its recent political standoff.
"Recent internal political differences have been overcome, and the OSCE has played its part in observing the holding of municipal elections.
It is now important to keep up the good work.
In my view, the difficulties we are witnessing in Macedonia stem much from a perceived slowing down of the Euro-Atlantic integration process.
It is vital that this process is kept up and running," Zannier said.
The OSCE said it will continue to support Macedonian authorities in implementing the reform agenda.
When will OSCE monitoring be unnecessary for elections in the region?
Let us know your thoughts in the comments.
