22/06/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/06/10
Belgraders have had the chance to party with the stars this month, with four musical greats performing in the Serbian capital.
Audiences were treated to the sounds of Billy Idol, Elton John, Bob Dylan and Eric Clapton.
Idol played at Usce Park on Monday night (June 21st) as part of his European summer tour, which also took him to Skopje.
Idol is no stranger to Serbia -- four years ago, he was at the Exit festival in Novi Sad.
On June 9th, Clapton took the stage with Steve Winwood, attracting 16,000 people to the Belgrade Arena.
The seasoned performer told the crowd that he well remembered his concert in the Serbian capital three decades ago.
The two-hour concert offered one hit after another, including "Had to Cry Today", "Dear Mr. Fantasy" and "Layla".
Clapton wove long solos through his performance, including nearly ten minutes of guitar virtuosity during the song "Voodoo Chile".
The audience rewarded it with a loud ovation.
Winwood demonstrated his outstanding singing capabilities and spent much of the concert behind a Hammond piano.
"Clapton sounded so good, it was like playing a CD, that's how quality the performance was," Svetozar, 22, told SETimes.
Bob Dylan's performance at the Belgrade Arena on June 6th brought accolades, with some local media hailing it as the best concert ever in the Serbian capital.
Like Clapton, the folk-rock legend had played in Belgrade before, appearing there in 1991.
Now, 19 years later, 12,000 fans at the Arena were swept away as Dylan sang and played some of his greatest hits for two hours.
Among the stand-outs were "Masters of War", "Cold Irons Bound", "Forgetful Heart" and "Ballad of a Thin Man".
"This was a concert and performance for the schoolbooks.
It's amazing how much energy that man has at the age of 69;
I envy him," Ljubisa, 37, an economist from Novi Sad, told SETimes.
"My dad brought me to the concert;
this is not the kind of music I listen to and recognise, but I liked it," said Danica, 13.
The first of the June concerts was Elton John's, on June 3rd.
His performance, which lasted 2.5 hours, was attended by about 10,000 people.
"We meet again after a long time," the British knight told his audience, alluding to his show in Belgrade 20 years ago.
The 63-year-old singer wrapped up the concert by climbing onto the piano.
One of the highlights was a ten-minute version of the song "Rocket Man", featuring a flamboyant piano solo and a psychedelic climax accompanied by space-themed visual effects.
The audience also gave a standing ovation to John's performance of "Don't Let the Sun Go Down on Me".
Dragica, a teacher from Belgrade, was thrilled by the British musician's performance.
"The sound quality was excellent, and his emotion and energy reached everyone in the hall," she told SETimes.
Some were slightly disappointed.
"We expected a different repertoire, the real fun and hits started near the very end of the concert," Milan and Svetlana told SETimes.
