20/07/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/07/10
Belgraders got a surprise early this week when the country's president, Boris Tadic, and his visiting Croatian counterpart, Ivo Josipovic, took a stroll down the city's famous Knez Mihaljova avenue, stopping to talk with passersby.
It was a sign of the two leaders' readiness to leave the troubled past behind and put bilateral relations on a better footing.
Josipovic arrived in the Serbian capital Sunday (July 18th) for a two-day visit. 
Talks with Tadic focused on resolving outstanding issues.
The remaining problem areas include the return of Serbs to Croatia, the issue of missing persons, protection of minorities and border demarcation.
On the returns issue, Josipovic said the "doors are open to all citizens who wish to return to Croatia, but [their] return must be sustainable."
"The problems of accommodation and employment are most important, and Croatia is ready to intensify returnee programmes," he said.
Tadic echoed the importance of achieving "an atmosphere of friendship", saying his country seeks the best possible relations in all fields. 
He said he is ready to visit Vukovar and other places that suffered severely during the Balkan conflicts.
Prosecution of indicted war criminals is a must, he added.
They agreed to disagree on Kosovo. 
"Croatia has recognised Kosovo's independence and has no ambition to mediate to resolve the issue," Josipovic explained. 
He voiced hope, however, that representatives of Belgrade and Pristina, in co-operation with the international community, will be able to find solutions.
Both presidents said they support the idea of settling their countries' genocide suits at the International Court of Justice out of court. 
Croatia sued Serbia in 1999, and Serbia countersued this year.
One immediate avenue for better ties is in the economic arena. 
Josipovic said there is interest among Croatian businesses in investing in Serbia. 
He called for opening up both countries' markets.
Political and economic issues aside, the two presidents also discussed sports. 
They backed the idea of forming a regional football league for Serbian and Croatian clubs.
"Josipovic is a very pleasant and calm man; I'm glad that he came here. 
I think it is time we finally put all the stupid things from the past behind us," Srdjan Music, 31, told SETimes.
But the wounds are deep, and not all are convinced that the legacy of conflict can be easily overcome. 
Ljubinka Miric, 42, said she doubts the show of goodwill.
"This is not a case of sincere friendship between Tadic and Josipovic, but rather that they have to have good relations in order to satisfy the EU," she said.
According to political analyst Zoran Stoiljkovic, however, the visit suggests that the region as a whole has entered a new era, one characterised by a long-term warming of relations, greater possibilities for co-operation and the overcoming of disputes.
"[The visit] reflects Croatia's pending EU accession, as well as the possibility of the whole region, primarily Serbia, staying on the path of European integration," he said.
