22/06/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/06/10
With the World Cup casting it spell, many fans are locked in a state of trance, with non-football-related pursuits deferred or ignored.
For those who are less enchanted with the sport, that can make for an exasperating month.
Just ask Natasa Josifovic. 
She was born on June 13th, but this year her birthday was overshadowed by Serbia's World Cup showdown against Ghana. 
Celebrations did not start after the match either, because Serbia had lost 1-0.
Natasa told SETimes she did not berate her husband for allowing her birthday to be pushed into the background by the match.
"It doesn't matter, it's once every four years, after all," she said. 
"Besides, I went shopping after the game, with my husband's money of course. 
The defeat by Ghana got him so depressed, he didn't even have the strength to be upset about the cost."
Her friend Valentina Bulatovic was less sanguine. 
"What a bummer! 
I invited a male colleague to the movies, but he said he couldn't go because he had a busy game schedule," she wrote on her Facebook page.
Though a growing number of women also follow the sport, World Cup mania is still widely considered a male affliction, as numerous wives and girlfriends can attest.
The Sava Centre's Congress Hall cinema recently hosted a mini film festival with the title "If you're not watching soccer, come to the movies with your girlfriends". 
The movie selections were tailored to a female audience, featuring leading men such as George Clooney, Brad Pitt and Hugh Grant.
"This isn't so bad either," Jasmina told SETimes after buying tickets for one of the movies. 
"Now we have the time to get together with our girlfriends, whom we have not seen in a long time. 
And we don't have to cook much these days, since our men are satisfied with beer and peanuts."
Dragana, though, is worried about the impact on future generations. 
"All you see on TV all day are football matches. 
I've brought my kid to the movies to prevent him from going dumb due to all that soccer."
Movies are not the only alternative. 
The Usce shopping mall, one of the largest in Belgrade, has put together a special programme for the duration of the World Cup. 
Other possibilities include taking salsa lessons or competing in a women's bowling championship.
Alternatively, one can follow the old adage: "if you can't beat them, join them". 
Lonely hearts can make their way to any Belgrade café with a TV tuned to World Cup broadcasts. 
The men will certainly be there.
Belgrade psychologist Tanja Markovic-Sesum told SETimes that the World Cup, and the potential neglect of women during the month of football, are not priority issues when it comes to male-female relations in Serbia.
"My female clients have much bigger problems than football -- they complain about much more serious matters," she says.
