24/09/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/09/10
As Ramush Haradinaj prepares to face the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) once again, emotions at home are running high.
The ICTY held a statutory session on Thursday (September 23rd) and has another scheduled for next month.
Patrick Robinson is the presiding judge.
According to the editor of Kosova Sot, one of the major dailies, the retrial is "bitter news for all Kosovars".
It will mean that Haradinaj is absent during a crucial phase in his country, Margarita Kadriu said, noting his importance as leader of the opposition Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK).
"Keeping in mind the fact that Kosovo is in a very important phase of state-building, his lack of presence will be reflected in the processes.
The real opposition is more than important for the processes Kosovo is going through," Kadriu said.
The Hague court denied Haradinaj's request for provisional release on September 11th arguing it would pose a danger to witnesses and to the integrity of the retrial.
"Publicity surrounding his release would add to the already threatening atmosphere influencing witnesses not to appear before the tribunal, and/or risk encouraging Haradinaj's supporters to engage in acts of intimidation," the court said.
Its appeals chamber noted the previous failure by the trial chamber to counter witness intimidation and secure the testimony of two witnesses, resulting in a miscarriage of justice.
Haradinaj served as prime minister until 2005 when he was indicted by the ICTY and had to resign.
His uncle, Lahi Brahimaj, as well as former KLA unit commander Idriz Balaj will also be retried.
Haradinaj was granted pretrial provisional release during his first trial in 2007, which ended with a verdict of not guilty.
The prosecution appealed the decision and the appeals chamber ruled that a retrial should take place on two parts of the indictment.
He is accused of participating "in a joint criminal enterprise aimed at asserting full control in the KLA operational zone of Dukagjin, which allegedly was carried out by the unlawful removal and mistreatment of Serb civilians, Kosovar Albanians, Kosovar Roma and other civilians, who were, or were perceived to have been, collaborating with Serb forces or not supporting the KLA".
Michael O'Reilly, the co-ordinator of Haradinaj's defence team, said he is disappointed the tribunal decided against provisional release.
He welcomed, however, the court's "positive remarks concerning Mr. Haradinaj's co-operation" and its determination for the proceedings to move ahead without delay.
Haradinaj's AAK issued a statement expressing disappointment and concern.
"Political developments in Kosovo and on Kosovo are deeply damaged with the lack of presence of the leader of the opposition," it said.
