23/09/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 23/09/10
Women are crying, holding their children firmly in their arms.
Men are trying to control the water that is pouring from everywhere.
They construct barriers and constantly check the water levels.
A state of emergency has been declared in a number of Croatian villages as a result of what is being called the "water wave".
The Sava, Croatia's largest river, has risen to 463cm, its highest level in 50 years.
Dams burst in the area near Zapresic, a northwest suburb of Zagreb.
People queued up on Zagreb bridges to witness an apocalyptic scene.
Two famous riverbank night clubs, Brasil and Sidro (Anchor), have been destroyed.
Villages in the neighbourhood of Velika Gorica and Sisak, southeast of Zagreb, have been flooded since the weekend.
The Croatian Army has been sent to help with evacuations.
A mother with a three-week-old baby was rescued from her home Tuesday (September 21st) morning.
Those affected are doing what they can to assist rescue efforts and recover their belongings.
Some carry the chickens and hens that did not survive the night, placing them on an ever-growing pile of dead animals.
"I want my house back.
I want my life back," says Gordana B, a mother of four.
Her children, meanwhile, have been unable to go to school.
The road leading from Sisak to Velika Gorica has been closed.
People complain that the response should have been more efficient and quicker and that they did not receive any warning from authorities that the river might threaten their homes.
Croatia experiences floods from time to time, but this has been the worst in decades.
There has been one flood-related fatality:
a 66-year-old man working on the water barriers died when a driver lost control of his vehicle and hit him.
Floods have swamped not only the Zagreb area, but the Istrian Peninsula as well.
In the city of Umag, streets are under water and a brand new sports centre, built to the tune of 5.5m euros, has been damaged.
The good news is that it seems as though the worst has passed and that there will be no more water waves.
According to the agriculture ministry, the floods did not severely damage the fall harvest.
Key crops such as wheat and corn are not grown in the affected areas.
Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor has visited the area with a high-level delegation, promising that all necessary help -- including clean clothes, shoes and toiletries -- will be provided.
Velika Mayor Gorica Drazen Barisic and his team were up during the night trying to protect the river barriers designed to help stop further flooding.
