19/07/2010
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 19/07/10
Statements by two members of the gang that assassinated Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic may help shed light on the background of the murder, prosecutors say.
Milos Simovic, a fugitive member of the Zemun Clan criminal organisation, was arrested on June 10th at the Croatia-Serbia border. 
He had been attempting to flee Croatia after allegedly shooting fellow mobster Sretko Kalinic in a Zagreb suburb. 
Both men were fugitives from justice, having been sentenced by a Serbian court for their role in Djindjic's killing.
Now there is hope they will provide information about the tangled web of political, military, intelligence and underworld connections widely thought to have been behind the Djindjic assassination and other political killings -- including the 1999 murder of journalist Slavko Curuvija.
"We are working on uncovering thus far unknown circumstances of the murder of Prime Minister Djindjic and the revolt of the Special Operations Unit which preceeded it," Serbian prosecutor for organised crime Miljko Radisavljevic told SETimes.
Simovic is currently in Serbian custody, while Kalinic awaits possible extradition. 
Radisavljevic says questioning has just begun and the prosecutor's office is carefully following developments.
According to police sources quoted in the media, Simovic has pointed a finger at Radical Party leader Vojislav Seselj, currently detained on war crimes charges at The Hague, and at General Aca Tomic, former head of the Military Security Service.
Police charged both men in 2003 for suspected involvement in the Djindjic assassination, but the indictment against Seselj was soon dropped. 
Tomic was taken off the list of charged persons in 2004, after Vojislav Kostunica became prime minister.
The special prosecutor's office, however, is now reconsidering the decision not to pursue criminal charges against them.
In comments to the newspaper Blic, Justice Minister Snezana Malovic said she expects the political machinations behind the shooting of Djindjic to be uncovered.
"I am sure that the judicial bodies, particularly the prosecution, will establish the truth and that all who participated in the murder of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic and Slavko Curuvija, giving orders and helping, no matter who they were, will be adequately punished," she said.
Two attorneys representing the Djindjic family, Srdja Popovic and Rajko Danilovic, told SETimes that there is an official document in the military counterintelligence headquarters that refers to meetings between Tomic and Zemun Clan members Dusan Spasojevic and Milorad "Legia" Ulemek.
Former special prosecutor Jovan Prijic had the document when he was finalising charges for the murder of the prime minister, the attorneys say. 
The court accepted it, but Prijic pulled it from the docket soon thereafter under mysterious circumstances, and resigned without explanation.
Tomic won punitive damages in the amount of 60,000 euros for spending 100 days in detention in 2003. 
He denies any role in the assassination, claiming he is the victim of a CIA smear.
