23/04/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 23/04/10
When Slobodan Milosevic was in charge, power in Serbia was concentrated in Belgrade. 
The late dictator favoured a strongly centralised system of territorial organisation, arguing this was necessary to keep the country together.
Today's Serbia has inherited this approach. 
Experts warn it is hindering progress and must be reconsidered as the country moves towards EU accession.
"Apart from Belgrade, there is only one other somewhat autonomous and recognisable region in Serbia -- the province of Vojvodina," Aleksandar Popov, head of the NGO Centre for Regionalism, told SETimes.
"The situation in which Belgrade distributes funds to local self-governments throughout Serbia is not good for regional development," he said.
According to Popov, a new model should be chosen through public debate. 
"It is certain that decentralisation will result in the better economic development of different regions, as they will have their own bodies to decide on the money earned by those regions."
Uneven development has caused an influx of people into the major cities -- Belgrade, Novi Sad and Nis -- while remote areas of the country are rapidly losing population.
Novi Sad, for example, had about 200,000 residents 20 years ago. 
It has since grown to 320,000 with an infrastructure system totally unprepared for the increase.
Unemployment and salary data spotlights the imbalance. 
The unemployment rate in Belgrade's central district of Stari Grad is around 2.5%, while in Lebane, a municipliaty in southern Serbia, it is about 60%.
The average salary in the capital's New Belgrade district is about 520 euros a month, whereas in the southern Serbian town of Vladicin Han it amounts to just 140 euros.
Two-thirds of state funds are invested in northern Serbia, while the rest goes to the south.
Serbia is a "highly inefficient, centralised and highly corruptible state, which is a consequence of Milosevic's time", Nenad Canak, chairman of the Serbian Decentralisation Council, told SETimes.
"Due to a lack of middle levels of power … the inefficiency of the state administration is visible at every step," he said. 
"Decentralisation is an inseparable part of society's democratisation."
For the time being, the idea has no strong opponents among parliamentary parties, and President Boris Tadic insists the political will exists to take action.
"The matter of regionalisation is not a matter of dividing Serbia, but rather a matter of securing better conditions for all people in our country, regardless of where they live," Tadic said as he opened a parliamentary debate on the topic in late March.
The president called decentralisation "one of the biggest challenges facing society", adding that "all institutions need to be involved in its work to avoid the mistakes from the past."
