23/09/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 23/09/10
As EULEX continues to probe allegations of fuel smuggling, tax evasion, misuse of authority and links to organised crime, an undisclosed number of KFOR soldiers have come under suspicion.
"Our investigators are working closely with EULEX," KFOR spokesman Captain Hans-Dieter Wichter told SETimes. 
"It is a standing policy of NATO and KFOR not to disclose either the nationality or identity of the soldiers involved."
EULEX police and Kosovo customs officers conducted searches at four companies, as well as at the private residences of seven local suspects, who include both Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs. 
Five are currently under arrest while the other two are abroad. 
Their connection with any KFOR personnel remains unknown.
"Should any KFOR personnel be involved in illegal activities, It is within the responsibility of the state from which the soldiers originate to take disciplinary action or prosecute them. 
As soon as KFOR authorities receive information about suspicious activities, they act at once, together with other institutions and the nations of the soldiers under investigation," Wichter told SETimes.
The new commander of KFOR, General Erhard Buehler, told media on Monday (September 20th) that his predecessor had started the investigation.
"We wrote to the authorities of this contingent and the Kosovo authorities started an investigation," said Buehler, without specifying which KFOR contingent is involved. 
He also confirmed that a foreign delegation twice visited Kosovo to investigate the case.
"KFOR welcomes a thorough investigation and, in the case there is clear evidence, the criminals will be brought to justice," the NATO peacekeeping force said.
EULEX, meanwhile, said there could be additional suspects.
"EULEX is investigating anyone that might be involved in such activities, be they internationals or locals," Karin Limdal, the mission's chief spokesperson, told SETimes.
The Kosovo daily Zeri reported that KFOR conducted an internal investigation last year into illegal fuel sales. 
It said former KFOR commander Markus Bentler subsequently requested the dismissal of the commander of the Ukrainian contingent.
During 2008 and 2009, three million litres of fuel were allegedly sold to three private petrol stations: AS Graniti in Stime, owned by Agim and Sali Beqaj; Alb Petrol in Podujevo, owned by Idriz Ejupi; and Onazis in Pristina, owned by brothers Nazmi and Nexhmi Kastrati.
"KFOR condemns all criminal acts and the involved nation has initiated all appropriate measures, including disciplinary and criminal investigations," the NATO force said in a statement.
