24/05/2010
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 24/05/10
Montenegro's ruling party, the Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS), won in most municipalities during local elections Sunday (May 23rd). 
In Podgorica, however, it will not be able to form a government on its own. 
Instead, it will have to seek support from the Social Democratic Party (SDP), led by Ranko Krivokapic. 
According to preliminary results, the DPS-led coalition will hold 28 seats in Podgorica's city council; the united opposition will have 24, while the SDP will have five.
Opposition parties had hoped for a breakthrough in the local contests, after finally coming together to form a united front. 
But Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic's DPS swept the tables nevertheless, achieving an absolute victory in seven out of the 14 contested municipalities -- Bar, Danilovgrad, Savnik, Zabljak, Berane, Bijelo Polje and Rozaje.
In five others, it must form a coalition. 
Besides in Podgorica, it needs an alliance with the SDP in Ulcinj and Andrijevica; and with small ethnic Albanian parties and civic groups in Plav and Kolasin.
The anti-DPS opposition only managed to pull off victories in Pljevlja and Pluzine. 
It still retains a majority in Golubovci, a part of Podgorica with its own municipal assembly.
Meanwhile, Krivokapic's SDP now finds itself in an enviable "kingmaker" role.
"We will work in the interests of all citizens, and after the elections we will again consult with the citizens because the city [of Podgorica] belongs to them. 
Citizens will define what will be the final priorities when entering into coalitions with potential partners for future city government," party vice president Vujica Lazovic told journalists.
"The SDP is the only real winner of the elections in Podgorica," said analyst Milos Besic. 
"It is obvious that the party's constituency consists of young intellectuals, a progressive electorate. 
The DPS is a relative winner."
In Besic's view, the vote was a washout for the opposition. 
"They were united, they were a serious coalition, 12 parties together, but did not manage to threaten the DPS," he said.
Opposition leaders, meanwhile, are refusing to recognise the results in Podgorica due to what they claim are "a significant number of complaints" about the voting process.
They say numerous irregularities took place, with voters being shuttled among polling stations, and the possible tampering of voters' lists.
Meanwhile, the opposition is wooing the SDP. 
Talks are under way on a possible coalition in the capital.
"They can decide whether they want the status quo and that for the umpteenth time, after the big words, return to the embrace of DPS, Milo Djukanovic and [incumbent Mayor Miomir Mugosa], or they can go with us," opposition leader Nebojsa Medojevic said.
