22/04/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/04/10
A lack of professionalism and financing in the health care system continues to contribute to Kosovo's high infant mortality rate, as well as the deaths of many mothers during childbirth. 
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), 68% of the deaths result from complications during pregnancy. 
About 36% of these deaths are caused by trauma during delivery.
The statistics come from a WHO report covering the years 2000 through 2008.
Ardiana Biba, an 18-year-old mother, died several hours after she gave birth to a stillborn child at Pristina's University Clinical Centre in February 2009. 
No one from the medical staff was aware when her situation took a grave turn, the Kosovo daily Kosova Sot quoted her father, Muhamet Biba, as saying. 
He is determined to find out what caused his daughter's death.
Most patients in Kosovo say that public hospitals offer very poor service. 
This was the reason why one woman, Ilirjana, an architect from Pristina, chose a private clinic to have her baby.
Prices at private clinics vary, with the one Ilirjana chose costing 600 euros for a delivery. 
For a cesarean, the cost is more than double. 
In Kosovo, the average salary is about 300 euros a month, allowing few to afford private health care.
Public clinics are officially free, but as Sueda Latifi, a Kosovo gynecologist notes, conditions are poor, with premature babies often dying in the first six weeks of life. 
A lack of financing and medical equipment are the main reasons for the public hospitals' poor performance, Latifi said.
"The human factor can't do miracles, the essential medicine is missing," she told Radio Free Europe. 
"Babies, who are born underweight, need special equipment which is missing here [in public hospitals]. 
We have alerted all the institutions … locally and internationally."
Sami Uka of WHO in Pristina said dealing with this problem is a vital challenge to Kosovo society, one that does not get the attention it deserves. 
Kosovo suffers from the lack of an overall information system for its health system, Uka said, something that can aggregate all critical data.
The health ministry says more mother and infant deaths are registered in Pristina because most of deliveries are done in the main hospital there. 
But this is not entirely accurate.
Faik Hoti, a spokesperson for the ministry of health, told SETimes that the statistics are skewed because most deaths occur in poorer rural areas, yet are recorded in Pristina.
"Pristina is not where [the people] come from," said Hoti. 
"It's [places like] Decan, Dragash, Mitrovica, Vushtri [and] Malisheva."
According to the ministry, about 10,000 deliveries take place in Pristina each year, with most of the mothers coming from outside the city.
"The ministry of health believes the infant mortality can be reduced through revising and implementing the new strategy for reproductive health," said Hoti, explaining that this includes more funding for prenatal education as well as more training for health care providers. 
Also, more obstetric and gynecological clinics need to be built throughout the countryside.
Uka said that WHO has recommended since 2000 that the country implement a strategy to address infant and child illnesses. 
The strategy was prepared by WHO and UNICEF.
There is also an extended programme for the immunisation of children, as well as requirements for infant and child nutrition. 
The WHO has stressed the necessity for improving pre- and post-natal care and has planned a Kosovo seminar on health care for mothers and babies.
