21/06/2010
(Sofia News Agency, Focus News Agency, Dnevnik.bg -- 19/06/10 - 20/06/10;
DPA, UPI, Sofia Echo, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg, Sofia News Agency, Focus News Agency, Nova TV - 18/06/10;
EurActiv, RIA Novosti - 17/06/10)
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov said on Friday (June 18th) that he supports the construction of the Belene nuclear power plant, but that its price must be slashed to make it feasible.
Bulgaria revived the project back in 2005.
According to initial estimates, the overall cost of putting in place the country's second 2,000-megawatt nuclear plant, 100km to the east of its existing one in Kozloduy, would total about 4 billion euros.
That would be a "good" price, Borisov said in an interview with Sofia-based Nova TV on Friday morning.
But, when each of the project components is multiplied by the appropriate escalation indices, it would ultimately grow by up to 8 billion euros, he noted.
"The cost must be reduced," he stressed, voicing confidence that the Belene plant could be completed at a lower price and in a way that will make it commercially viable.
He has repeatedly stressed that given the financial problems facing the country, his government cannot afford to pay nearly 13 billion euros for the plant.
Bulgaria and Russia signed an agreement on the project during then-President Vladimir Putin's visit to Sofia in January 2008.
Shortly after, Bulgaria's former Socialist-led government chose Russian company Atomstroyexport to build the plant.
Its construction came to a standstill after the strategic investor, Germany's RWE, pulled out of it in October 2009.
Borisov said on Friday that he has told the Russians that the project would be implemented, but only after issues such as its final cost and viability have been clarified.
"I assume that the Russians understand our concerns," said Borisov.
During an interview with bTV, President Georgi Parvanov suggested that the construction of Belene be put to a referendum.
He says the project will not exceed 8 billion euros.
Parvanov also defended the deals on the South Stream natural gas pipeline and the Burgas-Alexandropoulis oil pipeline projects that were signed along with Belene during Putin's visit in early 2008.
While he described them as a "grand slam" for Bulgaria at the time, critics have repeatedly accused him and the former Socialist-led cabinet of having increased the country's energy dependence on Russia.
In a June 11th statement, Borisov indicated that Bulgaria would withdraw from the Burgas-Alexandropoulis project with Greece and Russia, largely due to environmental concerns, particularly after the oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico.
Borisov told Nova TV on Friday that the government's final decision on the matter will depend on the results of an international environmental assessment.
"We are all aware that after the situation in the Gulf of Mexico, many, many environmentalists would now be more careful when placing oil in a small port such as Burgas and in a rough sea like the Black Sea," Borisov said.
Meanwhile, Parvanov criticised the government over its "lack of continuity in the energy policy", which, according to him, has led to a "collapse in [Bulgaria's] energy diplomacy".
At the end of an economic forum in Saint Petersburg on June 12th, Bulgaria was warned that if it fails to take corporate decisions related to the South Stream pipeline quickly, it may be forced to drop out of the project.
