21/06/2010
By Panayiotis Koumantaros and HK Tzanis in Bloemfontein and Athens for Southeast European Times -- 21/06/10
It's amazing what a few days of introspection and an avalanche of bad press can do for a football team. 
Greece's first victory, 2-1, at the World Cup level on Thursday (June 17th) against Nigeria couldn't have come at a better time.
Five days earlier, the team lost hands down against the Republic of Korea, 2-0. 
But on Thursday it was rejuvenated and even reminiscent of the squad that stunned the world in 2004 as it took the European Cup. 
The 2-1 victory at Bloemfontein's Free State Stadium included a sizzling performance by the Greek side in the second half, aided greatly because a red card forced Nigeria to play with ten men.
Short tempers, frowns and dejected looks gave way to ecstatic celebrations on the field and in the locker room. 
Athens' sports dailies on Friday featured triumphant headlines. 
Only a few days earlier, they had vilified the players and coaching staff as slackers.
Veteran German coach Otto Rehhagel, the target of much of the negative press, shook every player's hand after the game, while team manager Takis Fyssas, a player on the now historic 2004 team, justified the wild celebrations as a welcome "relief" from the incredible stress the team was under.
The Greek national squad traveled back to Durban on Friday, June 18th, for a day off. 
Parents, wives, children and girlfriends of the players joined them there, having stayed in Johannesburg since the tournament began.
Only one incident marred the otherwise pleasant mood and showed just how sour relations had become between the team and the Greek press. 
Liverpool FC fullback Sotiris Kyrgiakos, on his way to the team bus, stopped to give a Greek sports journalist a piece of his mind.
Moments later, Nigerian midfielder Nwankwo Kanu passed by and fielded the inevitable question about the send-off of teammate Sani Kaita.
"Yes, it killed us, but even so, the game would have changed if we had scored a goal during our opportunity in the 59th minute," he said. 
"OK, Kaita made a mistake but there's no need for us to keep criticising him."
Greek fans made their presence felt in Bloemfontein with about 4,000 supporters in the Free State Stadium stands. 
Most were day-trippers from the ethnic Greek communities in other South African cities, although members of the unofficial national team fan club were also visible, as were numerous expatriates from Australia, many of whom are attending Australia's "Socceroos" games as well.
"Today the lads played like Greeks; this is what we want to see, regardless of whether we lose every game," Marinos from Melbourne said outside the stadium. 
George, also from Melbourne, said the 16-hour trip from Australia and the hefty expenses were well worth the trip to see Greece's first win at a World Cup.
"I follow the Greek national team everywhere; I was at the Euro 2008 in Austria," said Tassos, a fan from Sydney. 
"They owned today's game and I don't believe we would have lost even if Nigeria continued with 11 players. 
The lads had guts."
Conversely, Nigerian fans vented their disappointment.
"I am very sad. 
We presented a very poor image; we were not a team," said Vincent, a Nigerian who permanently resides in South Africa.
"[Lars] Lagerbäck said he knew Greece well and was prepared," said Sani, sitting next to him, in reference to the Nigerian team's Swedish coach."The football we played was bad. 
Unfortunately, we don't have the team or the players we had in the past."
One surprise was the attitude of the South African fans at the stadium. 
By and large, they enthusiastically cheered on the Greeks -- and showed little enthusiasm for their fellow Africans from Nigeria.
Local sportswriters attributed that reaction to interethnic tensions arising from the Nigerian immigration to South Africa.

