22/04/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/04/10
Family and friends of prominent human rights activist Biljana Kovacevic-Vuco gathered Wednesday (April 21st) to commemorate her life. 
Kovacevic-Vuco died on Tuesday in Belgrade at the age of 58, after a long illness. 
The president of the Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights, Kovacevic-Vuco was among the founders of the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia.
"What she did, together with her associates in her organisation, was laying of foundations of a new value system in Serbia. 
Everything she touched turned into institutions of modern society," Faculty of Law Professor Stevan Lalic said in a speech at the memorial.
"Biljana lived in a country in which, during the past quarter of a century, almost every day at least once you had to do your best in order to remain a decent human being. 
Only those made from good clay can withstand that."
Kovacevic-Vuco was a key player in the growth of Serbia's fledgling human rights and anti-war movement during Slobodan Milosevic's rule. 
She also criticised Milosevic's domestic autocratic policies.
Her colleagues in the NGO sector describe her passing as an irrecoverable loss for Serbia, which wants to move forward and deal with its past.
"Her activities in the legal field, the laws and ideas she proposed, have undoubtedly brought Serbia closer to European values and standards," Civic Initiatives Director Miljenko Dereta told SETimes.
The messages she sent were sometimes "tough, and reopened painful wounds from the past", which is why they were met with a lack of understanding, Dereta said.
The work and activism of Kovacevic-Vuco can be described as an uncompromising fight for human rights, but her insistence on Serbia facing the war crimes committed in its name was often met with opposition and condemnation.
"I did not always agree with her actions and opinions. 
But at this moment I can only say she left too soon and I am sorry about that," Democratic Party of Serbia official Milos Aligrudic told SETimes.
Kovacevic-Vuco was born in 1952 in Belgrade, where she graduated from Belgrade Law School.
She worked as a volunteer at the Centre for Anti-War Action and an SOS hotline. 
She was one of the founders of the Helsinki Human Rights Committee in Serbia, and was at the helm of the Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights since 1997.
"The Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights even today, when a swarm of locusts has thundered through Serbia, continues to fight against war, for mankind without repression, for the small and big who were endangered in any way. 
For the victims of any race or nation," Kovacevic-Vuco once said of her organisation.
