18/10/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 18/10/10
Former Deputy Prime Minister and current Economy Minister Damir Polancec was sentenced to 15 months in prison on Friday (October 15th), after he was found guilty of abuse of power. 
Unless Polancec wins an appeal, he will be the highest-ranking Croatian official convicted on corruption charges.
Polancec ordered a 19-page, 68,000-euro study to be written for the economy ministry. 
The funds were actually used to pay the lawyer who represented factory workers after the state settled a legal dispute with them.
Zagreb District Court Judge Ivan Turudic said the study was clearly "unnecessary and overpaid".
The lawyer, Petar Miletic, was sentenced to a year in prison and was barred from practicing law for two years. 
Polancec and Miletic must also repay the 68,000 euros to the state budget.
"I am not guilty and I will appeal," Polancec said.
On Friday, he openly discussed recent alleged contacts he had with government officials, including Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor. 
Polancec claims that she sympathised with him, describing him as the "wrong man, at the wrong place, at the wrong time".
Since taking office in July, Kosor has made fighting corruption a top priority. 
A dozen managers at state companies have been taken into custody. 
In most cases, indictments are still pending.
Croatia hopes to complete its EU accession talks by next year. 
However, a major requirement is to maintain a steady fight against widespread corruption.
Polancec says he feels betrayed by his former colleagues and claims he was not acting independently.
"You have tried to convince us that you are not responsible, but you failed. 
There were no technical mistakes in question; what you did was a criminal act," Turudic said when handing down his verdict.
He also told Polancec that the likely motive was to score extra political points with former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader.
"You had high standards you had to take care of and instead, you have entirely ruined the reputation of politics and law. 
There is no chance you can say that what you did was for the benefit of Croatia," the judge said.
Polancec's lawyer, Anto Nobilo, said his client will appeal.
