22/09/2010
By Misko Talevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 21/09/10
Wahhabism is becoming a concern but does not represent a security threat, Macedonian Interior Minister Gordana Jankulovska and visiting Serbian counterpart Ivica Dacic agreed during talks at the weekend.
"These groups have been followed for over a year and at the moment they do not represent a great security threat to both countries. 
Still, there is the danger that the region can be a base for recruitment of terrorists," Dacic said after meeting with Jankulovska on Saturday (September 18th).
Over the past several months, groups affiliated with the conservative Wahhabi movement have taken control of five mosques, and the split among Macedonia's Muslims appears to be deepening. 
The Islamic Community (IVZ) is at sharp odds with hardliners led by Ramadan Ramadani.
IVC leader Sulejman Redzepi has called on the "government, the parties of Albanians in Macedonia, foreign diplomats, especially the embassies of the US and the EU, to support the IVZ and undertake [all] measures against these radical elements".
During Ramadan, radical Kosovo imam Sefket Krasnici preached at Skopje's "Chair" stadium, attracting a crowd of several thousand. 
He shocked the country with his denunciations of Mother Teresa, a native of the Skopje area whom many consider a saint.
"She belongs in the middle of Hell because she did not believe in Allah, the prophet and the Qur'an ... 
Even if she believed in God her belief was incomplete, with deficiencies. 
God does not accept such worship," Krasnici said.
Such remarks could only come from "sick minds" and do not reflect mainstream Muslim opinion, said Pande Lazarevski, a professor at Skopje University. 
"The Muslims in Macedonia are reasonable people and know which road is the right one," he told SETimes.
"Is this speech in the function of Macedonia's faster entry in NATO and the EU, and for increased investments? 
Who provides the logistics for such people to preach here?" Skopje resident Jovan Ristovski, 45, asked.
Particularly concerned are Muslims loyal to the IVZ.
"Every Muslim abhors this type of speech and way of thinking. 
People who have God in their mouth but the devil in their heart don't deserve attention. 
They simply don't know what the true human values are," said 37-year-old Imer Syleiman, an Albanian from Skopje.
Krasnici was reportedly invited by the NGO Kalaja Shkup, but no such NGO is listed in Macedonia's central registry.
"The Committee for Relations with Religious Communities is the sole authority that provides permits for foreigners to perform religious rituals, but only upon the request of a lawfully registered religious community, in this case the IVZ. 
Because we did not get a request from them, we did not issue a permit to Krasnici," explained Committee President Valentina Bozinovska.
Wahhabi leader Ramadani denied that he organised Krasnici's visit, but was full of praise for the outspoken imam.
"Had I called the guest, I would have been proud of it and would not hide [the fact]. 
He is a great intellectual, a Ph.D. 
with a rich career," Ramadani said.
