22/09/2010
(EurActiv, Euobserver - 22/09/10; AP, Reuters, AFP, FT, Bloomberg, BBC, RFE/RL, European Voice, European Parliament - 21/09/10)
The European Parliament has adopted a law that seeks to boost the security of gas supplies to the 27 EU nations and make them less susceptible to future gas crises.
Parliament members approved the legislation by a decisive 601-27 margin, with 23 abstentions, on Tuesday (September 21st). 
The bill came after months of negotiations and is expected to get final approval from member states within weeks.
Under the new rules, the 27 countries will have up to two years in which to draw up detailed emergency plans for gas supply crises. 
The latest one occurred in January 2009, when deliveries to more than 20 European countries were disrupted due to a pricing dispute between Russia and Ukraine.
As a result, millions of EU citizens, mostly in Eastern Europe, were left without heat during two weeks of freezing weather.
The EU covers about a quarter of its gas needs with imports from Russia and 80% of those supplies are shipped to the bloc's nations via Ukraine.
The bill adopted on Tuesday will also force gas companies to guarantee supplies to domestic customers for at least seven days of extreme temperatures, at least 30 days of exceptionally high demand or for as long a period of "infrastructure disruption" under normal weather conditions.
National governments have four years to comply with this supply standard, and three years to build new cross-border inter-connections. 
The lack of such connections was found to have significantly contributed to the supply problems in early 2009.
The European Commission (EC) has set aside 1.4 billion euros to underpin "infrastructure projects such as reverse flows".
Under the new legislation, the EC will play a strong role in co-ordinating emergency measures and ensuring that the national plans do not endanger the security of gas supplies to other member states in times of crisis, an EP statement said.
The main crisis levels envisioned in the bill are "early warning", "alert" and "emergency".
The EC would have to declare a "Union emergency" or a regional emergency at the request of at least two member states that have declared national emergencies.
Spanish MEP Alejo Vidal Quadras, who steered the law through the 736-seat EU legislature, welcomed the approval of what he called a "milestone regarding this issue in the EU".
"This is a sea change under which member states are moving beyond a purely national approach," he said, noting also that MEPs have made sure that the rules "will not be used as a loophole for governments to distort the internal market, using the excuse that there is a possible crisis".
EU Energy Commissioner Guenther Oettinger appeared equally enthusiastic, as he welcomed the adoption of the rules, which other European officials have described as a step towards strengthening solidarity in the field of energy within the bloc.
"This regulation is a major step forward to ensure that every household has gas, even in the event of gas supply disruptions," Oettinger said.
