23/08/2010
By Sasa Ilic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/08/10
Former USAID Mission Director to Serbia Michael Harvey is a decorated development professional with experience in Tajikistan, Haiti, Ethiopia, Iraq and Jordan. 
Harvey finished his tour in Belgrade last month, having served there since September 2007. 
Prior to continuing on his next post in Tel Aviv, Harvey talked to SETimes correspondent Sasa Ilic about his experience in Serbia.
SETimes: What has impressed you most in Serbia?
Michael Harvey: The change of political orientation. 
The elections nearly three years ago really clarified where Serbia wanted to go -- to the EU and [to] a renewed commitment to finish the economic reform programme. 
That wasn't the case under the previous administration. 
Many of the mayors around the country were less than positive political actors then, but now there is a new cast of good partners in the big cities.
Most striking however, is how much Serbia is burdened by the past and how much it doesn't need to be. 
The people are ready to move on, want some of the issues resolved -- like [the arrest of war crimes indictee Ratko] Mladic and Srebrenica -- and the government is working on addressing them. 
I also think the people don't yet appreciate how much the rest of Europe is ready to welcome them back.
SETimes: What was key to achieving USAID's priorities to foster investment, economic growth and job creation in Serbia?
Harvey: Recreating a healthy political-economic system requires that people feel they have a stake in it. 
It is about dignity and the confidence in the future. 
USAID has played a central role in getting the economic reform agenda completed and I am very proud of it. 
But it is not yet finished, which is why Serbia continues to lag behind.
Much of the problem is related to corruption inbuilt in the system, which harms Serbia's international reputation as an investment destination. 
USAID will continue to be a partner in helping Serbia become a destination for Serbian and international investors.
SETimes: USAID has focused on the media since its very beginnings in Serbia. 
How do you assess this sector today?
Harvey: The media is under tremendous stress on two fronts. 
First, private media is run by advertising revenues, and Serbia is the middle of a major economic downturn. 
While the economy is better than a year ago, we are still a long way away [from the crisis' end]. 
Second, there are real issues on how the sector will be regulated in terms of issuing licenses.
On the positive side, [USAID implementing partner] IREX and the other partners have done a tremendous job in improving the Serbian media's professionalism. 
Now you are getting high-quality journalists. 
That is something that I am extremely proud of.
SETimes: What do you expect the new mission director's priorities to be?
Harvey: Because Serbia is not yet in the EU, USAID is extending its presence to follow the accession date, which means we are starting out several new projects. 
The challenge will be to get those up-and-running.
I am worried the government will be consumed with the elections in six months. 
Politicians worrying about elections do not worry about governing -- and governing is what is needed now. 
There is so much work that needs to be done for Serbia to enter the EU. 
I am hoping my successor, Susan Fritz, will be able to keep the new projects and the government focused to get across the line. 
Hopefully, we will all celebrate Serbia's EU membership on January 1st 2016 -- my prediction.
SETimes: What changes would you like to see in Serbia in the next five years?
Harvey: The single biggest thing Serbia must do is complete the economic transition and detangle the political parties and the state from the economy. 
They are still too deeply woven into it. 
Without it, you are not going to have an environment that business people will invest in.
They have to take that system apart and create one where the private economy is creating jobs. 
It is a bigger challenge than getting into the EU, because you can get into the EU without addressing those problems, but you will not be a wealthy, happy society until they are resolved.
SETimes: What is your most precious memory from Serbia?
Harvey: That is easy -- the friends. 
This has been a great place.
