21/09/2010
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 21/09/10
Montenegrin army forces, together with fellow soldiers from the United States and eight partner countries, demonstrated on Friday (September 17th) their readiness to conduct joint action in crisis situations.
Before an audience that included top-level Montenegrin officials, the chief of general staff and media crews, they showed their ability to rescue people whose lives are threatened.
The exercises were held at the army barracks in Danilovgrad, 20km from Podgorica. 
The approximately 300 army members and rescue teams from the ten partners conducted themselves as though they were facing a real situation.
The first exercise involved fire fighting, rescue operations and the evacuation of casualties from the second floor of a building. 
Equipment for lowering casualties, special ropes and a special cushion were assembled in minutes.
The explosion and destruction of a bridge was then simulated. 
Rescuers pulled people from crushed vehicles and helped remove toxic chemicals. 
The injured were transported via helicopter to an improvised hospital, complete with an operating room equipped to handle natural, technological and biological incidents.
The inferno on the bridge, meanwhile, required more than on-the-ground fire fighting efforts. 
Within minutes, members of the helicopter-airplane unit of Montenegro's Department for Emergency Situations and Civil Security extinguished the fire from overhead with two Air Tractor planes.
All this was part of an ambitious military medical exercise, MEDCEUR 2010, organised by the Montenegrin Defence Ministry and the US European Command. 
It was the biggest such exercise organised by Montenegro since the country gained independence in 2006.
The drill started on September 10th and runs through Wednesday.
In addition to Montenegro and the United States, the exercise participants are from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Macedonia, Moldova, Serbia and Ukraine.
"This is an opportunity to learn from each other and, if in the future be required to work together, we will be friends and we can work on common procedures," said co-director of the exercise, US Army Lieutenant General Brent Vaseler, as it began.
