20/04/2010
(Various sources -- 19/04/10 - 20/04/10)
European airspace began reopening on Tuesday morning (April 20th), six days after a volcano in Iceland sent huge clouds of ash across the continent.
The ensuing aviation ban turned Europe into a virtual no-fly zone.
Eurocontrol -- the agency that handles air traffic across 38 European nations -- said it expected up to 60% of flights scheduled over Europe to take off Tuesday.
This followed a Monday agreement to divide the continent into three air zones, based on volcanic ash content.
The first zone, covering the region above the volcanic plume, remains a strict no-fly area, said Jose Blanco, minister of public works for Spain, which currently holds the rotating EU presidency.
The second zone, with a lower concentration of ash, will allow flights co-ordinated by EU member states, as advised by aviation experts.
The third zone, unaffected by the volcanic eruption, will have no restrictions.
"There cannot be any compromise on safety," EU Transport Commissioner Siim Kallas said on Monday.
"All decisions must be based on scientific evidence and expert analysis."
The unprecedented closure of most of Europe's airspace a day after last week's eruption of Iceland's Eyjafjallajokull volcano caused travel chaos that left an estimated seven million passengers stranded around the world.
With more than 63,000 flights cancelled in 23 European countries between Thursday and late Sunday, airlines claimed losses exceeding 1 billion euros.
Bulgaria, whose airspace was partially closed during the weekend, said on Monday there would be no flights to Western Europe on Tuesday, while flights were allowed to the eastern and southern parts of the continent.
Serbian media quoted the country's JAT Airways as saying that half of Monday's planned flights took off and air traffic to Russia, Greece, Turkey, Montenegro, Macedonia and southern Italy has been fully restored.
However, flights to and from Britain, France, Germany, Switzerland, the Scandinavian and other Western European countries were still banned.
The full impact of the crisis has yet to be measured.
It has already been deemed bigger in scale and negative effect on the economy than the forced suspension of flights in the wake of the September 11th 2001 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington when US airspace was closed for three days.
