15/07/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 15/07/10
With stiffer border controls being applied throughout the EU, the Evros River in northeastern Greece has become a more attractive route for illegal immigration. 
The consequences can be fatal.
On July 3rd, 11 bodies were discovered along both sides of the river, which separates Greece from Turkey. 
Two more were found on July 6th. 
The number of dead migrants plucked from the riverbanks since mid-December 2009 stands at 19.
"The problem is that many of these people … don't know how to swim," said Nikos Raptopoulos, head of the biggest state hospital in Alexandroupolis. 
"So you have migrant smugglers leading these people to remote sites along the river and then telling them to wade or float across aboard flimsy children's dinghies. 
When one person accidentally falls off or wades into deep water, the others fall in to try and save them, even if they don't know how to swim."
Raptopoulos, a physician, said the latest victims were young adults, both men and women. 
Roughly half were believed to be from sub-Saharan Africa and the rest were from the Middle East or South Asia. 
Drowning was the cause of death in all cases.
"Our morgue has nine refrigerator spots and there are another six for maintenance, so we're often obliged to double up bodies in the cold chambers. 
This is horrendous," Raptopoulos told SETimes.
"What would happen if 12 Britons or 12 Germans were drowned? 
Doesn't anyone get outraged over this? 
I wonder why two countries, Greece and Turkey, can't co-operate over this issue to prevent 25-year-olds from drowning in a river," he said.
Journalist Dimitris Petrovic says Greek patrols along the southern portion of the Evros -- also known as the Maritsa -- are pushing smugglers to look for remote spots upriver.
According to the former head of Greece's Hellenic Migration Institute (IMEPO), the flow of illegal immigrants has surged following efforts by other countries to tighten their borders.
"Apparently we are the only remaining open 'gateway' to Europe, due to stricter measures in Spain and Libya, for instance. 
Italy is also showing a decrease, due to a migrant re-admittance protocol with Libya and Morocco," former IMEPO head Alexandros Zavos told SETimes.
"Frontex is now helping monitor Greek borders, thus they [Europe] can ascertain from where the illegal migrants are coming in, which is Turkey," he said referring to the EU agency for external border security.
Zavos, whose tenure ended in late March, was sharply critical of the Greek government for failing to pressure Turkey to better deflect the flow of illegal immigrants into Europe.
He also charged that one of 21 agreements recently signed by the two neighbours severely dilutes a bilateral 2001 migrant re-admission pact. 
The new one imposes an annual ceiling of 1,000 re-admittance applications, that is, a ceiling of 1,000 deportations back to the country from which illegal migrants entered.
He said the latest figures collected by IMEPO for 2008 show that roughly 146,000 people were detained in border areas while attempting to enter Greece illegally; 55,000 of which were intercepted in the Aegean Sea or Evros prefecture.
