20/04/2010
By A. Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 20/04/10
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's meeting in Paris earlier this month with French President Nicolas Sarkozy has led to some optimism -- however cautious -- that France may rethink its opposition to EU membership for Turkey.
Erdogan met with Sarkozy on April 8th.
The French president's strong opposition has been a persistent roadblock for Ankara.
Turkey has the sixth largest GDP in Europe with 644.8 billion euros annually and its growth over in the past decade and a half has hovered at around 6.5%.
That figure is not just higher than all other candidate nations but one that remains unattainable for many current EU members.
Turkey and European partners have played major roles in addressing the Iranian nuclear crisis, the security situation in Afghanistan and enhancing stability in Iraq.
Nevertheless, the country's increasingly prominent role has not won over sceptics.
Sarkozy has argued that "Europe must give itself borders" and that "not all countries have a vocation to become members of Europe."
Turkey has no place within those borders, the French president has insisted.
This has been Sarkozy's official line since he took power in 2007.
But a recent visit by Erdogan -- to be followed by a Sarkozy trip to Ankara -- may signal a shift in Turkey's favour.
"The most significant outcome of Erdogan's visit is Sarkozy's acceptance of his invitation to [visit] Turkey late this year," Dr.
Cengiz Aktar of Bahcesehir University in Istanbul told SETimes.
"Since he assumed the presidency, Sarkozy has changed his mind on almost all policy topics but Turkey," Aktar said.
"But recently he is under growing pressure from the French business sector, which has almost lost all competitiveness in the Turkish market against its rivals.
We can foresee that Sarkozy is now also looking for ways to turn away from strong opposition to Turkey."
Erdogan said that he and the French president discussed all aspects of bilateral relations, including economic and military ties, along with the possibility of co-operating to address regional and global problems.
"I hope we will host Mr. Sarkozy in Turkey late this year and discuss in more detail, our steps for the future," Erdogan said.
Turkey and France are NATO allies and enjoy similar views on many foreign policy issues.
Yet the last French official to call on Turkey was former President Francois Mitterrand, in 1992.
Sarkozy's immediate predecessor, President Jacques Chirac, was viewed as a friend of Turkey.
With Chirac's backing, Turkey began membership negotiations with the EU in 2004.
But Sarkozy has openly challenged Turkey's full membership and blocked the opening of five of the necessary 35 chapters of accession talks.
The fact that Ankara could not get strong political support from France in efforts to resolve the Cyprus dispute is another source of trouble.
Aktar says it is not France that opposes membership for Turkey, but "Sarkozy's France".
"Sarkozy only aims at getting the support of voters who fear Islam, and he thinks he can manage this by opposing Turkey," Aktar said.
"If Sarkozy loses the 2012 elections, France will have a new policy towards Turkey -- whether by a president elected from left or right."
Other EU members such as Britain, Italy and some northern European countries strongly support full EU membership for Turkey, stressing its geo-strategic importance as a bridge to the Muslim world.
Germany, however, has only offered "privileged partnership" status for Turkey, which falls short of full membership and is thus unacceptable to Ankara.
One of Turkey's strongest supporters for EU inclusion is Spain, which currently holds the rotating presidency of the bloc.
Diego Lopez Garrido, the Spanish secretary of state for European affairs, recently said that accession chapters on education and food safety would likely be opened for Turkey by year's end.
