21/05/2010
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/05/10
Serbia recently announced that it plans to introduce professional management into enterprises in which it is a majority stakeholder, as a result of unsuccessful privatisations.
"The government model is not based on assistance, but on establishing mandatory transparent relations for the state as owner on the one hand, and for the professional management on the other," Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic's office said.
The idea is for management to be chosen publicly among interested entrepreneurs in Serbia and abroad. 
Serbia's Privatisation Agency lists 182 companies that remain unsold after three or more attempts to auction them, and 246 sold at the third auction. 
Of the latter, the contracts were terminated in 80 cases because the new owners failed to start production or other economic activities.
When the government plan surfaced, industrialists from the "Privrednik" (Entrepreneur) club -- called "tycoons" because they acquired capital during the Milosevic regime and the Yugoslav wars, and under UN sanctions -- said they would assist the troubled companies.
In turn, the industrialists demanded that politicians avoid the term tycoons, because a decade after Serbia's democratic revolution, they "deserve to be recognised as capitalists".
At a meeting of government officials, industrialists and union representatives last month, Milan Beko, privatisation minister under Slobodan Milosevic, explained how the "capitalists" will provide assistance.
In 2008, the Belgrade port authority, he said, rented the Keramika ceramics factory in Vojvodina, which was in bankruptcy proceedings, having changed ownership 23 times in a short period of time. 
After an 800,000-euro investment, Keramika reinstated production, and the Belgrade port authority bought it at the asking price.
"This we want to spread across Serbia," Beko said. 
Miroslav Miskovic -- owner of Delta Holding -- explained that his group is not asking for special privileges, but for the same business conditions as their competitors in Croatia, Bulgaria, Romania and Slovenia enjoy.
"The Serbian interest is to economically conquer the surrounding markets," he noted.
Cvetkovic said that the involvement of Serbian business is not a bad idea, but clarified there will not be acquiring enterprises, free of charge. 
A private investor must buy at least part of the company.
To ease the process, the government announced it will create a map of companies to be offered to private investors. 
"Everything must be clear and transparent," said Labour and Social Affairs Minister Rasim Ljajic.
The prospect of giving additional capital to the "tycoons" concerns some analysts, as well as union representatives and owners of small businesses.
"We have seen during privatisation in Serbia that domestic and foreign 'investors' use government privileges and suck capital from firms which they buy (usually not paid in full)," Megatrends University Economics Professor Vladimir Vuckovic told SETimes.
"In the case of the tycoons, it is possible they want to prevent foreign competition in their basic businesses, like Galenika," he said. 
Galenika is the second largest producer of pharmaceuticals in Serbia.
Vaso Lekic, owner of a promising medium-size Foodland company, sees nothing wrong with the tycoons' offer.
"Nobody gains if the companies die, neither the government nor the employees. 
If you have somebody that has proven management [success] ... 
and wants to help, give him a chance. 
Of course, clear bills and control are a priority," Lekic told SETimes.
