15/07/2010
(Blic, Danas - 15/07/10;
B92, Radio Srbija, Vecernje Novosti, Radio Slobodna Evropa, Blic - 14/07/10;
AP - 19/03/10;
RFE/RL - 07/01/10)
Slovenia has filed an indictment against two retired officers of the former Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) over their alleged involvement in war crimes against Slovenian civilians 19 years ago, Serbian media reported on Wednesday (July 14th).
The charges -- pressed by prosecutors in the town of Murska Sobota -- against former General Vlado Trifunovic and his subordinate, Colonel Berislav Popov, stem from the JNA's intervention in Slovenia after it declared independence from Yugoslavia on June 25th 1991.
Unlike Croatia or Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose secessions were accompanied by years of bloody conflict, Slovenia's move triggered only a brief ten-day war.
A peace deal between the Slovenian government and former Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic's regime, signed on July 7th 1991 on the Croatian Brioni Islands, put an end to clashes that killed at least 18 Slovenes.
At the time, Trifunovic was the commander of JNA forces stationed in Varazdin, in Croatia, which declared independence from Yugoslavia on the same day as Slovenia.
The Slovenian indictment reportedly alleges that Trifunovic ordered Popov to reinstate JNA control over a border crossing between Austria and Slovenia.
Earlier this week, Trifunovic told Radio Slobodna Evropa that he had received orders to that effect just an hour before the operation.
He said the supreme command and civilian leadership in Belgrade and the command of the Fifth Military District in Zagreb told him that the Slovenian Territorial Defence had removed the customs officers and border guards from the crossing, leaving the border with Austria open.
"I was told to get there in an hour.
Prior to that, I didn't know that I would go to Slovenia," Trifunovic said in the interview, published on Wednesday.
"My small unit went there with a mission to protect the border," he added, noting that he was in his office in Varazdin during the unit's operation in Slovenia.
Popov, in turn, claimed that the JNA troops' actions were in line with both the rules of engagement, as well as the instructions that came from the government in Belgrade and the military.
"My unit did not do anything in the sense of war crimes, because we did not execute anyone, hang anyone, ...
arrest anyone, ...
destroy anything for no reason, and we did not attack anyone first," Belgrade-based B92 quoted him as saying in a report Wednesday.
Slovenian prosecutors launched the investigation against Trifunovic and Popov back in 1995.
The indictment was drawn up in 2008, but was not filed.
The main hearing in the case against the two former JNA officers is scheduled at the District Court in Murska Sobota on October 28th and 29th, according to Serbia's Beta news agency.
Trifunovic indicated he does not plan to attend.
"They will probably try me in absentia," he said.
With its indictment, Slovenia has become the third former Yugoslav republic to accuse the two of involvement in atrocities committed during the Balkan conflicts.
In the 1990s, both were sentenced in absentia to 15 years in prison by the District Court in Zagreb, which convicted them of war crimes stemming from the clashes in Varazdin, including the deaths of two civilians.
Earlier this year, Serbia dropped criminal charges against Trifunovic, who was convicted of treason by the Milosevic regime over his refusal to obey orders to fight.
He chose to leave the barracks in Varazdin instead.
Facing a siege by Croat armed forces in 1991, he negotiated a way out for his troops, which reportedly saved the lives of 250 JNA soldiers.
