19/04/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 19/04/10
Former Serbian model Katarina Rebraca, her mother and three of their closest aides were arrested on April 7th on suspicion that they embezzled money from the humanitarian fund they have been running for the last few years.
Police suspect that the women embezzled about 370,000 euros from the Katarina Rebraca Charity Fund, formed four years ago for the purpose of opening Serbia's first centre for early breast cancer diagnosis.
They had allegedly been spending the money on personal luxury items, such as designer clothes and a Jeep.
As the case came to light, many are wondering about the potential negative impact on charity work in Serbia.
Rebraca's foundation had dozens of high-profile donors, including Erste Bank, Carlsberg Beer, the Partizan football club and the municipality of Belgrade.
Will such donors -- not to mention ordinary citizens -- be more wary in the future about spending their money on noble causes?
According to psychologist and Belgrade University philosophy professor Zarko Trebjesanin, most Serbian citizens are struggling to make ends meet.
Humanitarian initiatives already have a hard time raising money and scandals such as the Rebraca case will only make things more difficult.
People are going to think long and hard before donating their hard-won income, Trebjesanin says.
Charity groups, he says, "must frequently demonstrate the results of their work and the success of their actions.
When donors see that their money has reached those who need it ...
this will have a positive effect on the decision to help again and will restore trust."
Rebraca's arrest came on the heels of two other alleged embezzlement cases.
One involved misuse of a Serbian Orthodox Church fund meant for aiding the hungry in Kosovo.
In another, a man solicited money from companies and citizens to help pay for treatment of a seriously ill child, who turned out to be fictitious.
Mirjana, 32, a saleswoman from Belgrade, says it will not be easy for her to donate money now, because she does not want "someone else to gain wealth on the misfortune of others from my modest salary".
Zlatko, 42, a Belgrade teacher, says he will continue to donate money for charity actions, but "only through the Red Cross".
The Divac Charity Organisation, founded by former Serbian basketball player Vlade Divac and his wife, told SETimes they have had no problems with donors after the unveiling of irregularities in other charity groups.
Fund representatives say they do not expect difficulties because they work in a transparent manner and have very visible results.
One of the fund's actions was the purchase of houses for the refugees living in collective camps.
So far, about a million euros have been collected and about 100 houses purchased.
