19/04/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 19/04/10
Relations between Croatia and Serbia are improving with their presidents meeting on several occasions in the last week.
Croatian President Ivo Josipovic met with Serbian counterpart Boris Tadic in Budapest for a trilateral session with Hungarian President Laszlo Solyom before travelling to the Vojvodina region of Serbia, to speak to representatives of the Croatian national minority there.
Such contacts, they agree, boost political stability and reconciliation throughout the region.
"If Serbia and Croatia agree on their united future and if they overcome the problems from the past ...
this will show an honest intention and readiness to take new responsibilities for the entire region," Tadic said.
According to Belgrade's B92 television station, Tadic and Josipovic discussed the possibility of each country dropping the genocide law suits filed against one another at the International Court of Justice in the The Hague.
Josipovic said "These law suits make sense if the problem can not be solved differently, but I believe it is possible to solve them" through mutual agreement.
The basis for getting to that agreement, Tadic said, is that no crime "can be left unsolved and unpunished" and the rights of citizens must be paramount.
However, Josipovic's recent peacemaking visits triggered strong criticism at home.
During a speech to the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) parliament last week, he expressed regret over Croatia's drive to divide the country during the 1990s Balkans conflict.
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and the members of the ruling Croatian Democratic Party (HDZ) pounced on it, with Kosor suggesting the comments damaged Croatia's Constitution.
Kosor called a meeting Friday (April 16th) with five former prime ministers -- Franjo Greguric, Hrvoje Sarinic, Nikica Valentic, Zlatko Matesa and Mate Granic -- who held government positions during the war.
Each said that Croatia never tried to bring about a partition of BiH, nor was an aggressor in that country.
Josipovic, said Greguric, "told an absolute lie that will now damage Croatia".
When Josipovic returned to Zagreb, he openly challenged Kosor on television to prove he had violated the constitution or offer her resignation.
So far, she has not responded to the challenge.
