20/05/2010
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 20/05/10
Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic and his ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) will face strong opposition in 16 of 21 municipalities during Sunday's (May 23rd) local elections.
Although analysts predict Djukanovic's triumph, surprises are not out of the question. 
A tight result is almost certain in Podgorica, which represents around one third of the total 400,000 registered voters.
"DPS might suffer the most damage in northern municipalities because of the economic crisis, not because of the unification of the opposition. 
People in the north are very disappointed with living standards," Momcilo Radulovic, a political analyst and secretary general of the European Movement in Montenegro, told SETimes.
"I don't expect the opposition to win in Podgorica, although they showed maturity by forming coalitions," he said.
In the previous elections, held three months after the May 2006 referendum when Montenegro restored its independence from the loose union formed with Serbia, the opposition won only in the city of Pljevlja.
The opposition claims they can win if those that stayed home last time come out to vote in this election. 
In 2006, the opposition gained more votes than the DPS and its allies in the capital. 
Due to a number of small opposition parties not making the census, Djukanovic won.
The backbone of the opposition's 12-party coalition includes Srdjan Milic's Socialist People's Party, Andrija Mandica's New Serbian Democracy and Nebojsa Medojevic's Movement for Changes.
The ruling party is counting on the support of Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic's Social Democratic Party (SDP). 
The party vaguely suggests such a possibility.
On the campaign trail, Djukanovic continues to remind voters that that he helped restore Montenegro's statehood.
His party -- a coalition of the Liberal Party, Bosniak party and Democratic Union of Albanians, and in some municipalities the SDP -- is still counting on victory.
Four years ago, the Socialist Peoples Party (SNP) and New Serbian Democracy opposed the split from Serbia, and Djukanovic claims they are still trying undermine Montenegro's independence.
Last week, he alleged that Serbian President Boris Tadic was the driving force behind uniting Montenegro's fractured opposition -- and that one of his advisers is in charge of helping it.
Opposition parties, however, deny they are questioning independence. 
They say they will push for parliamentary elections aimed at dealing with the country's languishing economy and the fight against organised crime.
"The re-activation of Montenegro's state status shows that the opposition has failed to focus on the economy as a major problem, but also the unwillingness of authorities to move on to a genuine reform and offer a quality programme, rather than repeating an old story," Radulovic said.
