19/04/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 19/04/10
Challenger Dervis Eroglu attracted just over 50% of the vote Sunday (April 18th) to become the new president of the Turkish half of the divided island of Cyprus.
According to the Supreme Election Board, Eroglu got 50.3% of the vote, while incumbent Mehmet Ali Talat trailed with 42.8%, as polls had predicted.
Eroglu, the former prime minister of the northern half of Cyprus, leads the National Unity Party (UBP).
He becomes the third president of the breakaway state founded after Turkey's 1974 military intervention, which followed an Athens-backed coup aimed at uniting the island with Greece.
In his first statement after declaring victory, Eroglu promised "warm relations with motherland Turkey" while saying he would continue negotiations with the Greek Cypriot administration.
"In order to defend the rights of our people at the negotiating table, in order to reach an honourable, viable accord, talks will continue," he said.
In conceding the race, Talat said his "dream to solve the conflict is still alive … I will do my best to ensure a solution during the rest of my life".
During the campaign, Eroglu harshly criticised Talat for accepting the idea of single sovereignty for Cyprus.
Eroglu insists that any agreement with Greek Cypriots should be founded on a two-state solution of equal sovereign rights.
Greek Cypriots fiercely reject the idea.
A spokesman for Cyprus's internationally recognised government said Eroglu's election is a "negative development, bearing in mind the positions that Mr Eroglu has and expresses".
"What is important now is to get to the fundamentals of this development, how we will handle matters, what our tactics will be, so that we are able to implement the aims of a solution," the spokesman, Stefanos Stefanou, told the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation.
Talat and Cypriot President Demetris Christofias held more than 70 rounds of meetings over the past year-and-a-half, boosting hopes for a solution by the end of this year.
The fate of the talks will have a significant impact on Turkey's EU bid;
any stalemate will complicate that journey.
Turkish President Abdullah Gul congratulated Eroglu after the polls closed, saying in a written statement that he expects the new president to "exert [every] effort to finalise [reunification] negotiations", as Talat has.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan sent a similar message, adding that he hopes the talks would successfully conclude by year's end.
