20/05/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 20/05/10
UNMIK remains crucial to Kosovo's stability, according to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Presenting his report to a Security Council session on Monday (May 17th), he said the mission "remains committed to facilitating the engagement of all sides in finding practical solutions to issues of mutual concern".
UNMIK remains uniquely positioned to facilitate dialogue and works with both sides through establishing task forces, Ban said.
"One task force has begun work and is addressing practical aspects of returns to the Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani area," he explained.
Voluntary minority returns are up, although they remain low in absolute numbers, he said.
Ban also urged Pristina and Belgrade to take "a pragmatic approach to the participation of representatives of the Kosovo institutions in regional and international forums".
A special part of his report focused on northern Kosovo.
Ban said he "remains concerned about the possibility of increased tensions if the Kosovo government implements its strategy for northern Kosovo in conditions that lack transparency and dialogue with the local communities and all relevant stakeholders".
Sensitive issues affecting northern Kosovo can only be addressed through continuing talks and co-ordination among all relevant players, factoring in local concerns and circumstances, the secretary-general said.
Also covered in Ban's report were pressing issues such as functioning of the courts in northern Kosovo and electricity distribution.
Regarding the latter, Ban said a sustainable solution remains elusive.
Serbia has taken over the distribution of electricity in the north and is now issuing bills to consumers, he noted.
UNMIK head Lamberto Zannier represented Kosovo at the session.
He cautioned "the absence of a significant reconciliation process between the communities continued to be a challenge, which, coupled with economic difficulties, continued to present the risk of social unrest."
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic, meanwhile, told the Security Council that his country advocates new talks between Pristina and Belgrade, including on the issue of status.
He asked Council members to back efforts to find a lasting solution, and said the upcoming International Court of Justice ruling on the legality of Kosovo's independence declaration could open a new window for strategic compromise.
"This year may be the year of mutual success.
I want to assure the Security Council that Serbia is ready to flexibly and sincerely engage, and that our intent is not to freeze the conflict, nor to triumph, nor subdue anyone," he said.
Disagreements over status should not hammper efforts to resolve practical issues, Jeremic said.
He accused the Kosovo authorities of rejecting status-neutral solutions to practical problems, especially regarding the rule of law.
Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni -- addressing the Council as a private citizen -- summed up Kosovo's efforts to develop its economy, including a new highway, and develop its state structures and institutions.
But he also did his share of finger-pointing.
"Serbia, through destabilising and extremely hindering interventions, has continued to be unhelpful," he said.
"Encouragement and support for the illegal structures in the north has continued and the announcement of the so-called elections -- organised by Serbia in northern Kosovo -- is another irresponsible and unacceptable intervention."
