14/10/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 14/10/10
Although they differ in explaining the causes and culprits of two incidents this week, both the government and opposition in Belgrade agree that the situation is alarming and that the very foundations of democracy are in jeopardy.
In the past several days, Serbia has seen two dramatic events -- riots by Serbian soccer fans in Italy on Tuesday (October 12th), which interrupted the European Championship qualifier between Italy and Serbia, and violence on Sunday at the Gay Pride Parade in Belgrade.
The parade was the scene of brutal clashes between about 6,000 hooligans and 5,000 policemen that lasted almost all day.
When it was over, more than 150 people were injured -- most of them police officers; over 200 were arrested, and property damage totalled thousands of euros. 
During the clashes, hooligans attacked the parliament, state TV headquarters, the city headquarters of President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party and the headquarters of its ruling coalition partners.
University of Belgrade professor Zoran Dragisic says he believes the turmoil in Belgrade was orchestrated in advance, for political ends. 
He tells SETimes that the hooligans were organised in a nearly military manner, and carried out synchronised attacks on police throughout the city.
"The action was well planned and politically motivated, because the Democratic Party, Socialist Party of Serbia, parliament, and state TV were attacked. 
Those are political targets," Dragisic said. 
He said those who ordered and financed the clashes must be found.
State TV head Aleksandar Tijanic agreed, calling it "a brilliantly planned and implemented military strategy".
"I fear that this may be a final rehearsal for something else," he said.
Democratic Party senior official Dragoljub Micunovic said the incidents in Belgrade "put the survival of the government and ruling parliamentary majority to the test".
"Now the state must show that it will not tolerate violence," Micunovic said.
Liberal Democrat leader Cedomir Jovanovic went one step further and accused the opposition Serbian Progressive Party, led by Tomislav Nikolic, and Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia, of inciting the riots.
Those two parties, however, replied that the riots were sparked by the government, which they say has impoverished the country and created an army of about a million unemployed, as well as generations of young people with limited prospects.
Among the 249 arrested in Sunday's riots, 54 are underage. 
The average age of those detained is 20, and more than 60% of them came from other towns, where salaries are much lower than in Belgrade.
Policemen who came under attack told the media they had never before faced such hatred. 
Psychologist Zarko Trebjesanin says these are very dangerous young people, because they are "poor, unhappy and have no perspective".
Adding to concerns sparked by Sunday's events was the subsequent riot by Serbian fans at a football match held in Genoa, Italy. 
Tuesday's match had to be interrupted after only six minutes.
Serbian fans not only lobbed a flare at Italy's goalkeeper, but also attacked their own side's goalie, Vladimir Stojkovic, aboard the team bus, for deciding to move from one Serbian team to a rival one.
