14/10/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 14/10/10
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton wrapped up her Balkan tour on Wednesday (October 13th) in Kosovo, where she urged both Pristina and Belgrade to engage in dialogue to resolve their remaining issues.
"From the start, the United States supported Kosovo's right to exist as a sovereign independent state within its existing borders," Clinton said at a press conference after meeting with Prime Minister Hashim Thaci.
Clinton underlined that the United States is encouraged by the upcoming dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia.
She said it "offers a chance for these countries to settle practical problems and overcome obstacles to being good neighbours".
"Some matters such as status, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kosovo are not up for discussion.
But the leaders of both countries must approach the dialogue in good faith and with respect for each others' concerns," she said.
The talks represent an opportunity to address immediate needs while making progress towards mutually beneficial goals, such as increasing travel and trade, she said.
Clinton confirmed that she will discuss the issue of these talks with EU officials in Brussels, to help structure the dialogue.
"There are a number of the questions that have to be answered about the process, putting it together, which we began to address with our colleagues here, and with the EU and the Serbians," Clinton said.
"The United States will play a supportive role.
We believe strongly that there needs to be a very clear path for this dialogue.
It can not go on for a long time;
it needs to be focused and produce results," she said.
Clinton also said that the United States will assist as needed with Kosovo's expected early elections, as "they are a milestone for this new democracy, and we know that they will be transparent and faithful to the constitutional order."
Thaci said there is a new phase in relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
"The chapter of the future and co-operation has been opened.
So, the time has come to close the one century conflict between Kosovo and Serbia;
the moment of co-operation and looking into the future has come.
Kosovo is ready, Kosovo has shown a will for dialogue on practical issues with Serbia, as two states [on] an equal level," Thaci said.
