17/06/2010
By Zlatko Kovach for Southeast European Times -- 17/06/10
Slovenia's victory over Algeria on Sunday (June 13th) was its first in a World Cup tournament, and the team -- popularly known as Zmajecki (dragons) -- currently leads Group C, ahead of England and the United States.
The excitement is palpable.
"People are overwhelmed with football these days and they only talk about the national team and their prospects to advance to the next round," POP TV's sports reporter Tomaz Klemencic told SETimes.
Authorities decided against placing a huge screen in Ljubljana's Presern Square this year.
Instead, fans have been flocking to cafes in the capital and across the country.
Their dream is for Slovenia to reach the second round, and excitement is boiling over ahead of the game Friday with the United States.
Fans acknowledge their opponent is a formidable team, but believe a second victory is within reach.
"The game against the United States will be very hard and we all know that," says Klemencic.
"If we beat Russia [in the qualifications], why couldn't we repeat this with the US?"
Uros Jazbec, a fan, is confident in the team's abilities.
"Slovenia should be able to win because the vast majority of our players compete in foreign teams and have experience in international tournaments," he told SETimes.
In all, 21 of Slovenia's 23 players compete in foreign clubs around Western Europe and elsewhere.
Supporters cite the team's particularly strong defence and midfield.
Slovenia allowed only four goals in the qualifications for the World Cup -- second best among the qualifying teams, after The Netherlands.
"If our defence covered successfully [Andrei] Arshavin of Russia, they should cover [US's Landon] Donovan without problem," Jazbec said.
Head coach Matejaz Kek's emphasis is on the team as a whole, not on star players.
He has worked hard to instill a collective spirit, as well as a belief in victory among the young players.
The team's average age is 26.
"The players are great friends on and off the field, are confident and have great energy and motivation," Klemencic confirms.
This is in contrast to the 2002 World Cup in South Korea/Japan when then-star Zlatko Zahovic clashed with then-coach Srecko Katanec.
The backbone of today's team consists of goalie Samir Hadanovic of Udinese, centre-half Bostjan Cesar of Chievo, midfielder and team captain Robert Koren, recently released by West Bromwich Albion, and attacker Milivoje Novakovic of Cologne.
The team typically plays a 4-4-2 formation, but if necessary, reverts to attacking with three players.
Two players that show potential are Valter Birsa of France's Auxerre and, on the bench, the young Rene Krhin, who plays with European Champions League winners Inter Milan.
By all accounts coach Kek's job has been boosted by a strong staff of assistants, including experienced coach Milan Miklavcic.
"This is our third big tournament after the 2000 European Cup and the 2002 World Cup.
For Slovenians, football definitely gained in importance," Ljubljana native Marko Savic told SETimes, capturing the spirit that prevails among the team and its supporters.
SETimes correspondent Christos Ringas in Athens contributed to this report.
