17/06/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 17/06/10
Gorazde is a small city in eastern Bosnia, with a population of about 30,000.
It is considered one of the poorest areas in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH), and economic downturn has made things even worse.
Farming and cattle breeding are the main sources of livelihood.
During the Yugoslav era, much of the population worked at Pobjeda (Victory), then one of the biggest ammunition factories in the Balkans.
Today, Pobjeda's output is slim.
It mainly produces detonators used in the international community's effort to clear the remaining mines from BiH.
Today, one of the few employers around is the AS company's recycling plant, though it too is feeling the pinch.
With the recession, the purchase price for recycled plastic waste has nose-dived.
"This should have been the regional dump for whole eastern Bosnia," AS owner and director Abdulah Hasanagic told SETimes.
"Everything was promising in terms of success, but the economic crisis is ruthless."
According to Hasanagic, who began collecting plastic containers several years ago as part of a rare environmental initiative in the country, it no longer pays for him to supply plastic waste at his own cost.
Currently, all of the plastic and non-plastic waste for the canton is disposed of in the neighbouring village of Kopaci, in Republika Srpska.
The company ran a very successful business last year and the number of employees grew.
Now, however, hiring is at a standstill and its recycling operation curtailed.
"We currently retain 18 employees, which is really a maximum, and there could have been many more, if the project had been completely implemented," said the company's technical director, Nihad Culov.
The plant is located at two sites.
Currently, only the first -- next to Hasanagic's private residence -- is active.
At the second location, a couple of kilometers down the road, the machines are on standby.
The company is successful in selling its finished products.
These include plastic figurines of various sizes, cases for pistol ammunition, and items for the food programme -- containers for honey, coffee spoons and crates for vegetables.
Despite difficulties, the AS company owners hope they will overcome the crisis.
The recycling project has not been fully abandoned, but is waiting for better times, Culov said.
"There were negotiations with some partners from Sweden, but the Chinese proved to be much more interested in co-operation," he said.
Recycled plastic is most frequently used in construction products, Culov said, including anchors for facades and nails, as well as in plastic protectors for wheel rims.
