20/05/2010
(Finfacts, Sofia News Agency - 20/05/10; Bloomberg, Reuters, AFP, ANA-MPA, Dnevnik.bg, International Institute for Management Development - 19/05/10)
Greece ranks highest among five Southeast European (SEE) countries included in an annual competitiveness survey released by the International Institute for Management Development (IMD) on Wednesday (May 19th).
Greece moved up six places to 46th in the Lausanne-based business school's new World Competitiveness Yearbook, ranking 58 industrialised and emerging economies this year.
Despite its current debt and deficit problems, it is also the only one within this group to have improved its position since last year. 
But it may lose some ground in future assessments due to the severe crisis it currently faces.
"The credit-worthiness storm that affects Southern Europe acts as a drag on the performance of Spain (36th) and Portugal (37th), although for Greece the consequences of the recently approved austerity measures were not factored into the results," it said. 
"It is unfortunately to be expected that these three nations, which all have significant budget deficits, growing debt and weak trade performance, will suffer from further recession this year."
The IMD analyses and ranks the surveyed countries on the basis of 327 criteria, grouped into four competitiveness factors, including economic performance, government efficiency, business efficiency and infrastructure. 
The survey cited Singapore, Hong Kong and the United States as the most competitive nations in the world.
Greece's better standing this year reflects its improved ranking in each of those individual categories, except government efficiency, where it slipped one place to 54th.
Of the other four SEE countries included in the IMD competitiveness index this year, Romania retained its 54th position in the world, while Bulgaria, Croatia and Turkey each lost some ground.
While all four are ranked lower than Greece and close to the very bottom of the table, none of them belong to the 18-nation group of so-called "sinners" that will suffer a "debt curse" for at least another decade.
Turkey, whose 2009 public debt exceeded 46% of GDP, slipped one position to rank 48th in the world. 
The second most competitive economy among the SEE nations after Greece, it improved its rankings on three of the individual competitiveness factors, but fell six places to 37th on business efficiency.
Bulgaria, which was the 38th most competitive economy, according to the previous IMD survey, lost 15 spots to finish 53rd this year. 
Bulgaria, however, is the only SEE country placed in the group of nations whose 2009 public debts totaled less than 20% of their respective GDP.
Croatia slipped three places to 56th, making it the lowest-ranked SEE country in the new competitiveness index. 
Along with Romania, it was among the 18 nations included in the survey whose 2009 public debt totaled between 20% and 40% of their respective GDP.
