19/08/2010
By Erl Murati for Southeast European Times in Tirana --19/08/10
More than a year after the country's last general elections, Albania remains paralyzed by a political deadlock between the ruling coalition and the Socialist-led opposition.
The latter, charging election irregularities, has held up the passage of legislation by boycotting parliament.
The ruling coalition, meanwhile, has rejected Socialist demands for a recount.
The crisis has raised questions about the functionality of Albania's political system, two decades after the fall of communism.
"There is a problem with democracy in Albania," European Commission (EC) Ambassador in Tirana Helmut Lohan has said.
"I wish Albanian politicians would understand how this crisis endangers the country's integration process and find a solution."
About 89% of Albanians favor EU integration and 82% say that the country's EU path is important for the country, according to an Albanian Institute of International Studies survey.
But swift progress towards that goal is improbable unless the country can convince Brussels that its political system is maturing.
"If the parliament is not functioning well, the EC positive recommendation for Albania's EU path may be endangered," Lohan warned.
Both sides in the stalemate are refusing to back down.
"The opposition will not vote in any draft legislation in parliament until we see electoral transparency," said Gramoz Ruçi of the SP parliamentary group.
"All we want is opening of ballot boxes.
There are irregularities.
We keep saying that to the democrats.
Ballot boxes should be opened, at least in one electoral zone.
If our claims are wrong, I am ready to quit my mandate as a lawmaker," Ruci told SETimes.
The opposition wants a parliamentary commission to be established in order to investigate alleged election manipulations, but the ruling Democratic Party (DP) claims such a move is illegal.
"Transparency could be made only according to the Constitution.
We cannot overturn court decisions.
Edi Rama, the head of the Socialist Party, lost in the last elections and now he should learn to act as opposition," Prime Minister Sali Berisha said.
The international community has tried to resolve the crisis.
Leaders of the two main parties met in May, in Strasbourg, with the mediation of EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele.
The meeting put an end to a 19-day hunger strike of 20 SP lawmakers and more than 200 supporters, who pitched tents in front of Berisha's offices.
The opposition ended the boycott and entered parliament, but refused to vote on any legal matters.
Many bills require a consensus for adoption and have been put on hold indefinitely.
EU representatives, from whom Albania is hoping to get the membership invitation, say this is unacceptable.
Meanwhile, behind-the-scenes efforts continue to reach a solution.
"We are organising a meeting away from the media attention to understand our common points," the DP parliamentary group's Astrit Patozi told SETimes.
"In November, the EU will give its opinion on Albania.
We hope there will be positive signals," Belgian Ambassador Marc Michielsen, who's country tholds the current EU presidency, said.
