19/08/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 19/08/10
Observing Ramadan in Pristina, 40-year-old Florent Ismaili says Islam is a religion of harmony.
"The Qur'an says if you help one person you help humanity, and if you hurt one person you have hurt humanity. 
Muslims should be a good example for all of humanity, and that is why I am proud to be a Muslim and an Albanian," Ismaili told SETimes.
Islam "helps us be more mature, quieter, more loyal, and more devoted," he said. 
"This is the mission of Ramadan."
The holy month requires appropriate thoughts and behavior, he explained. 
People should act with sincerity and take care of their children, spouse, parents and friends. 
Even if provoked, one should avoid conflict and simply reply that he or she is observing Ramadan.
Although his children are only 4 and 6 years old, Ismaili said they already recognise its significance.
"They know they should be more understanding and listen to their parents. 
They are very careful before Iftar, when the whole family sits down and waits to be allowed to eat," he says.
He stressed that Islam teaches moral values -- such as responsibility, respect for family, work and dedication -- and promotes happiness.
Political and religious leaders in Kosovo have been sounding similar themes.
Kosovo's Mufti, Naim Ternava, stresses that a moral and loving life is the basis for happiness. 
"All of us are asked to create through our work the best possible conditions for a life with greater dignity for all those who live and love this country," he said in this year's Ramadan message.
Quoting the Q'uran, he urged followers to "co-operate with each other in charity and mercy, and not in sins and animosities"
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, in a visit with Ternava and the Islamic Community, said religious tolerance in Kosovo could serve a model for the region.
Thaci also said he expects Kosovo's Islamic Community to make an important contribution to preparations for the UN General Assembly meeting in September, when Kosovo is likely to be on the agenda.
