14/07/2010
(Deutsche Welle, Zaman, World Bulletin - 14/07/10; AFP, Reuters, DPA, Euronews, VOA, Sofia Echo - 13/07/10; European Commission - 12/07/10)
An EU delegation, headed by the 27-nation bloc's foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton, held talks with senior Turkish officials in Istanbul on Tuesday (July 13th), focusing on Ankara's bid to join the Union, as well as a range of regional and international issues.
The main objective of the meeting "is to reaffirm the EU's commitment to Turkey and explore ways how the EU and Turkey can enhance co-operation in the region", the Union said in a statement Monday.
Ashton, accompanied by EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele, met with Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and Ankara's chief negotiator with the Union, Egemen Bagis. 
The discussions were held under a new political dialogue process, envisioning ministerial-level meetings between the two sides twice a year.
"There should be a zero doubt policy about our commitment," Fuele said at a joint news conference after the talks. 
"We have a very clear mandate from member states. 
We will be looking at ways we can speed up the accession process."
Turkey began its entry talks with the Union in October 2005, but the process has been moving at a snail's pace, largely due to its sluggish reform progress and its refusal to allow vessels and planes of EU member Cyprus to enter its ports and airports. 
Another reason is the objections raised by several of the bloc's heavyweights, insisting that the predominantly Muslim country should eventually be offered some sort of a "privileged partnership", rather than full-fledged membership.
Turkey has so far closed only one and opened another 13 of all 35 negotiating chapters that candidates must complete before joining. 
Eight of the remaining 21 to go have been frozen since late 2006 over Turkey's failure to normalise trade ties with Cyprus.
The EU statement Monday quoted Fuele as expressing hope that "more chapters could be opened this year", provided Turkey fulfills the conditions for this. 
Fuele also called on Ankara to focus on implementing required reforms.
"The [European] Commission will continue to support Turkey in carrying out these reforms," he said.
Following Tuesday's talks, Fuele and Ashton voiced support for a package of constitutional amendments proposed recently by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government, which will be put to a national referendum on September 12th. 
According to the EU officials, the changes are in line with the bloc's requirements and a step in the right direction, in view of the country's membership bid.
In addition, Ashton said she welcomed Ankara's growing role in regional and international matters, describing Turkey as an "important partner" for the 27-nation bloc, especially in the area of foreign policy.
"Trust and friendship are the marks of the relationship between Turkey and the EU," she said, noting that both share the goals of peace and prosperity.
Davutoglu said his country wants to extend its co-operation with the bloc on important developments that could affect both sides.
"We share such a vast geography, ranging from Afghanistan to the Mediterranean," the AFP quoted him as saying. 
"Turkey is following an active policy and gives the utmost importance to conducting these policies in co-operation with the EU."
Another issue discussed on Tuesday was the recent increase in violent attacks by members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), considered a terrorist organisation by both the EU and the United States.
Bagis had indicated ahead of the talks that his country would seek the Union's support in efforts to deal with the separatist group.
Davutoglu said on Tuesday that the PKK poses a serious threat not only to his country, but the EU as well.
Ashton agreed on the need for joint efforts in fighting terrorist organisations.
"We should eradicate the organisations that use the EU to get funds and finance training activities," she said.
