14/10/2010
(European Voice, Blic, The Irish Times - 14/10/10;
Reuters, DutchNews.nl, B92, Beta, EMportal - 13/10/10)
The Dutch Parliament decided on Wednesday (October 13th) that a debate on Serbia's EU bid should be postponed until the country shows full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The decision came ahead of a meeting of the 27-nation bloc's foreign ministers on October 25th, when the diplomats are scheduled to discuss whether Belgrade's membership application should be referred to the European Commission (EC) for its opinion.
The Dutch parliament, however, said that the issue must be put on hold until chief ICTY prosecutor Serge Brammertz's next report on Serbia's co-operation with the UN tribunal, which he is due to submit in early December.
If that demand is rejected by the other 26 foreign ministers, The Netherlands will reportedly insist that both the submission of Serbia's application and any other moves linked to its EU accession be made conditional on its full co-operation with The Hague-based court.
Dutch lawmakers believe that Belgrade has been fulfilling its obligation to hand over indicted war criminals only under strong international pressure.
They are pushing particularly for the arrest of former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, one of the remaining two fugitives still sought by UN prosecutors.
The other EU member states believe, however, that Serbian authorities are making strong efforts to capture Mladic and former Croatian Serb political leader Goran Hadzic and should therefore be allowed to move forward on the path towards eventual membership.
Vladimir Vukcevic, the head of Serbia's ICTY action team, indicated on Wednesday that the authorities could have Mladic back in 2006, but missed that chance due to obstructions.
"Mladic's arrest fell through when Rade Bulatovic, who was chief of the Security Information Agency, arrested Stanko Ristic, who was hiding Mladic," Belgrade-based B92 quoted him as saying.
"This was a disastrous move that allowed Mladic to escape.
We had Mladic within our reach and just needed to decide on the purely technical issue of how to perform the arrest."
The decision to include the question of Serbia's application on the agenda of the upcoming foreign ministers' meeting in Luxembourg was taken in the wake of the UN General Assembly's September 9th resolution on Kosovo.
Outgoing Dutch Foreign Minister Maxime Verhagen said on Wednesday that the other 26 EU member states and the EC and are pushing for a positive decision on the country's candidacy bid in "light of Serbia's constructive behaviour" ahead of the adoption of the document.
"Whether progress in the talks between Serbia and Kosovo, mentioned in the resolution, should figure as a factor when weighing the candidacy request will be subsequently decided by the Dutch government," Belgrade-based B92 quoted the diplomat as saying.
The question now is whether Serbia's application will be listed on the agenda of the October 25th meeting as a technical or a political issue.
If it is treated as a technical issue, a qualified majority support, which already exists, will suffice for a decision to forward it to the EC for its opinion to be passed.
But if it is considered a political issue, such a decision will have to be backed by all 27 member states.
