19/05/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 19/05/10
The absence of reconciliation between the communities in Kosovo continues to pose a threat of unrest, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon's special representative for Kosovo, Lamberto Zannier, told the UN Security Council on Monday (May 17th).
The main source of instability stems from the country's north.
The town of Mitrovica is divided along ethnic lines by the Ibar River, separating its northern, mostly Serb, and southern, ethnic Albanian parts.
Earlier this month, EU envoy for northern Kosovo Michael Giffoni said the bloc should demonstrate a stronger presence in the north.
"
A feeling of … division is very evident in Mitrovica, and that is something that the EU does not like," Giffoni told the Belgrade daily Politika.
He said support for dialogue and mediation is needed in this part of the country, more than in others, and a pragmatic approach should be used to solve daily problems.
"Some questions, such as status, should not be dramatised," Giffoni said, adding that "reconciliation and joint progress are the only solution for all nations … in the Western Balkans."
However, residents say that much of the tension can be solved through political will.
Miki Marinkovic, from the Serb NGO Aktiv in northern Kosovo, believes the most important thing for the unstable north and people living there is to have peace.
"The solution for the north needs to be agreed [upon at] a political level between all the parties in the region, including Belgrade, because that will be the permanent solution.
As for the people, the most important thing is not to have any hostilities, riots, and actually to have peace in the future," Marinkovic told SETimes.
The young Serb believes "improvements will definitely come" in that part of Kosovo.
"Like everywhere in Kosovo, the rule of law needs to be fortified," he said.
"So yes, I think improvements need to be made in the north, like elsewhere in Kosovo, with regard to the security of the individuals …, the security of property and basic rule of law," Marinkovic said.
Aferdita Rushiti is editor-in-chief of Blue Sky, a Kosovo radio channel that broadcasts in Albanian and in the languages of other communities of Kosovo, especially Serbian.
She said the situation in northern Kosovo is complicated.
Rushiti told SETimes that there are no parallel structures operating in the north -- just Serbia's institutions.
"The extension of the powers of our executive in the northern part of Mitrovica is almost zero," she says.
Rushiti believes in the strategy drafted with the help of the International Civilian Office, run by Pieter Feith.
"However, we should wait and see what results that plan will produce," she added.
What is most important, she said, is to re-establish customs procedures in the north and fight smuggling there.
Otherwise "there will be no other solution."
"I think there will always be a part that will have a bigger autonomy," she said of northern Kosovo.
"But over the longer term, I think, if we know how to 'play', then this part of Kosovo will fully integrate."
