13/07/2010
By Adisa Busuladzic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 13/07/10
For the first couple of years after the massacre at Srebrenica, Hasan Nuhanovic kept hoping that somehow, somewhere, his mother, father and brother would turn up alive and well. 
In the meantime, he tried to move on with his life. 
He managed to track down his college sweetheart. 
She became his wife -- and they now have a daughter, Nasiha, named after his mother.
Hasan continued working as an interpreter. 
As a survivor, he was constantly swamped with media attention. 
Journalists frequently asked him for assistance in reconstructing what has become known as Europe's worst massacre since World War II.
He began using all his free time -- after work, weekends, leave time, even his sick leave -- to work with Hague tribunal investigators, as well as with reporters investigating the atrocity. 
He co-operated closely with Pulitzer Prize winner David Rohde on his book Endgame and with Frank Westerman, author of Making Srebrenica into a Global Affair.
A Hague tribunal investigator once had Hasan watch a video that clearly showed his father, Ibro, speaking with Serb Army General Ratko Mladic. 
His father was apparently trying to convey a message from Srebrenica civilians, just days before the massacre.
Months later, Mladic was indicted by The Hague tribunal and accused of genocide, crimes against humanity, and numerous war crimes for the attack on the UN-declared safe area.
Hasan buried his father's remains at a ceremony in Potocari Memorial Cemetery on July 11th 2007. 
His father was one of 465 Srebrenica genocide victims whose remains were excavated from mass graves and identified that year.
Searching for the truth
Hasan's efforts to establish and publicise the truth about the Srebrenica genocide continue unabated. 
He has written his own book, titled Under the UN Flag. 
It chronicles the events and examines the responsibility of the UN and other international community representatives.
Legal action has been another channel. 
Hasan has sued the UN for failing to protect his family, who were officially under the protection of UN forces in a safe area designated by a Security Council resolution. 
He and the family of Rizo Mustafic -- a UN electrician ordered by a Dutch officer to leave the Potocari base -- have filed suit in Dutch civil courts against The Netherlands.
In addition, Hasan and Mustafic's family have recently filed a case in a Netherlands military court against the commander of the Dutch battalion in Srebrenica, Thom Karremans, and his deputy, Rob Franken, alleging their complicity in war crimes and genocide.
"This year is different!"
When contacted recently to set up this interview, Hasan was asked if he's still in the same job he had last time he'd been contacted. 
"This year is different!" he exclaimed enthusiastically. 
"This year I've finally got the job I really want to do. 
Two months ago I was appointed Programme Co-ordinator of the Srebrenica-Potocari Memorial Centre and Cemetery."
He has worked closely with other survivors, and with organisations representing the families of Srebrenica victims, to design and build the memorial, which contains 10,000 burial sites designated for victims. 
To date, 8,372 victims have been identified.
This year is different.
On the morning of July 9th, Hasan Nuhanovic drove to Srebrenica to attend the official ceremony marking the 15th anniversary of the genocide. 
That day, a memorial service and burial were taking place for 775 victims whose remains have been identified this year.
Among them were his mother and brother.
Sunday was a sad family reunion. 
It was the first time in 15 years that the Nuhanovics were all together at the same place. 
Ibro, Nasiha and their younger son, Muhamed, rest side by side in the Potocari Memorial Cemetery, while their son and brother Hasan works there.
You can read the first part of Hasan's story here .
