16/06/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/06/10
A decision by the EU's Council of Ministers to start the ratification process for Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) is being hailed as a milestone for the Balkan country, although analysts caution that a long road lies ahead.
The Council moved on Monday (June 14th) to greenlight the process after UN tribunal chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz submitted a positive report on Serbia's co-operation.
The SAA is the first contractual agreement between the EU and a candidate country, and must be ratified by the parliaments of all 27 member states, as well as by the European Parliament.
"All parliaments of all EU member states will ratify the agreement and thus demonstrate to their investors that Serbia is safe and that business can be done with us," Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic, tasked with overseeing the EU integration process, told local media.
This will "increase the number of investors and new jobs in our country", he added.
President Boris Tadic, meanwhile, pledged that his country would wrap up its obligations to The Hague tribunal by capturing and extraditing the two remaining indictees, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.
Political analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic told SETimes that the ministers' decision is "a very important act for Serbia".
"That will also be very important for the continuation of work on Serbia's European integration, even though it is already clear the process will not be as fast as Serbia and other Western Balkan countries would like," Stankovic said.
The fact that a potential date for debating Serbia's membership application was not mentioned at Monday's meeting is proof that Belgrade's journey to the EU will be neither swift nor easy.
"Many events within the EU are resulting in enlargement exhaustion, which is why the Western Balkans will have to wait a while at the EU's door.
Also, many issues in the Balkans are still open, and I believe that Belgrade will in some way have to resolve the Kosovo problem prior to becoming a membership candidate," Stankovic said.
Ivan, 41, from Belgrade, says he is glad about the EU ministers' decision.
"I don't think that decision will affect our everyday life, but it is a step towards European integration, which I care about very much.
I know that is just one step, but I think that every step in the right direction is important," Ivan told SETimes.
Muharem, 53, from the western Serbian town of Prijepolje, said the EU's decision "is a ray of light that should make Serbian citizens feel like they are getting closer to a well-ordered world".
"I also expect that to lead to improvements in everyday life, but I think we will have to wait a while for that to happen."
