16/06/2010
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 16/06/10
Despite a disastrous start for the national team, when it lost 0-2 to South Korea in its first match at the World Cup, Greeks are eternal optimists and some still hope for a place among the top 16.
Interest remains strong in a nation where football has long been one of the top sports attractions.
Dimitris Kaimas, a sports reporter for Greece's state radio network ERA, spoke with SETimes about the team, its fans, and the overall mood coming into the World Cup.
SETimes:
How are Greeks celebrating the country's participation in the World Cup?
Dimitris Kaimas:
The cafes and taverns are overcrowded these days, as many like to watch Karagounis, Gekas and the other players.
However, because we are going through a crisis, many people gather in friends' houses over beer and ouzo, and share opinions about the game, the lineups, the strategies.
"If I was the coach…" is a phrase heard often these days.
If our team brings victories, those small gatherings will turn into huge groups in central squares with national flags in hand and [ready] to celebrate until dawn!
If not, then they will demand radical changes and we will seek blame.
Most tourists are coming from European countries where football is adored and they seek cafes or bars to watch their teams.
SETimes:
How many players competing in the Greek Super League are in the World Cup?
Kaimas:
We'll have the chance to watch seven foreign players from the Super League.
Gilberto Silva, captain of the Brazilian national team, is the biggest name.
Next is Djibril Cisse, Super League's top scorer, who after many years, plays for the French team.
Also, a basic player in Chile's line up is PAOK's Pablo Contreras, as is Skoda Xanthi's Zdeno Strba for Slovakia.
By playing for Algeria, Rafik Djebbour will try to win a transfer to a league better than ours.
Danny Fernandez of Iraklis is among the 23 players on the Portuguese team, which is important to him and to Iraklis, while Levadiakos' Ignacio Gonzalez is a player on loan.
SETimes:
Were there any measures taken regarding the Greek fans?
Kaimas:
We often experience violent incidents in sports -- football, basketball, volleyball and recently even handball.
Often, the incidents become a lead story in the foreign media.
The cause for all incidents is the fanatics among fans.
However, with few exceptions, Greeks have not created incidents involving our national teams.
The national team does not have bad fans.
Especially those travelling to South Africa are not going to do anything [bad].
If organised fans of the major Greek clubs were travelling, then there would be big danger.
SETimes:
What does Greek football gain from the team's second qualification for the World Cup?
Kaimas:
Participation itself is a gain.
The national team players get additional experience and Greek football is present on the top football event on Earth.
The team's course will set the benefits and losses.
Nobody wants to remember the one and only entry in the 1994 World Cup, which produced three defeats and ten received goals.
If the team qualifies among the top 16, it will be a huge success, affirming our presence is not accidental.
It will legitimise the rise of Greek football and make those who consider our team an average one shut up.
SETimes:
Is there an interest from foreign managers in Greek players?
Kaimas:
There is big interest.
Big careers have started through the World Cup.
Now that Greece competes in the tournament, it is likely that new horizons will open for some players.
Ninis, Sampras, Torosidis and Vyntra will most likely "oblige" managers and the leading European clubs.
Of course, it is one thing to show interest and another to get a transfer.
But perhaps this time is their time.
