13/07/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/07/10
Economic, political and military co-operation between Serbia and Turkey is on the rise, leaders of the two countries said as they met in Belgrade on Monday (July 12th).
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan arrived in the Serbian capital with Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and a delegation of Turkish businessmen. 
Erdogan met with Serbian counterpart Mirko Cvetkovic and President Boris Tadic.
The two prime ministers agreed to disagree on Kosovo, and voiced a common stance when it comes to preserving Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) territorial integrity.
"The views of Serbia and Turkey are completely identical," Erdogan said.
As for Kosovo, differences of opinion between Ankara and Belgrade "have never been an obstacle to bilateral relations", he said. 
"This is about mutual understanding between our two countries; relations between Serbia and Turkey are one topic, and Kosovo is another."
The visit yielded several agreements, including on reconstruction of the M8 state road between Novi Pazar and Aljinovic. 
The two countries signed a Memorandum of Understanding on construction of a Corridor 11 highway section linking Belgrade and the southern Adriatic, and initiated negotiations on constructing an industrial zone in Novi Pazar.
Meanwhile, Davotoglu and Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic signed a deal on annulling the visa regime for Serbian and Turkish citizens. 
Apparently in conjunction with the visit, Serbia's Foreign Ministry announced that a free trade agreement with Turkey, reached in 2009, will be implemented starting in September.
In addition to their talks in Belgrade, Tadic and Erdogan visited Novi Pazar, a city in Serbia's Sandzak region with a majority Muslim population. 
There, the Turkish prime minister inaugurated a House of Turkish Culture.
"We have a long history of relations in the political arena, but today we confirm the closeness of our culture," said Tadic.
Erdogan said a new era of relations in the Balkans is unfolding. 
"Serbia is a key country on that road and through its wealth of ethnic diversity, it will contribute to the good relations in the Balkans," he said, describing Sandzak as a bridge of co-operation between the two countries.
