13/10/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/10/10
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met with Serbian officials on Tuesday (October 12th) regarding a range of issues -- dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, Serbia's European integration and co-operation with The Hague war crimes tribunal.
Clinton and President Boris Tadic agreed that co-operation between the two countries is at a high level and that existing differences -- such as the issue of Kosovo -- could be overcome through negotiations.
"The resolution on Kosovo passed by the UN General Assembly provides good grounds for dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, the topic of which should be the challenges of everyday life.
That dialogue will have a positive impact on Serbia's relations with its neighbours, [as well as] the EU and the United States," Clinton said.
Tadic reiterated that Serbia had not, and would not, recognise Kosovo's independence.
Nevertheless, he said, negotiations should start as soon as possible.
Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic echoed those remarks, saying his government is ready to act on a recent UN General Assembly resolution calling for talks.
Clinton voiced strong support for Serbia's European integration, saying she believes the country has the potential to become not only a member of the EU, but a leading European country.
On the topic of co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, Tadic said his country is doing everything it can to close a dark chapter in history and arrest the remaining fugitive indictees, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.
"Serbia will fulfil its obligations completely, not for the sake of The Hague tribunal but for its own sake, its citizens' sake and for reconciliation in the region," he said.
Clinton said Washington recognises Serbia's efforts at meeting its obligations.
"That effort must be appreciated," she said.
Economic ties were also discussed.
Clinton and Serbian officials agreed that investment should increase and that trade between the United States and Serbia should be enhanced.
The United States is already one of the biggest foreign investors in Serbia, at about $1.6 billion.
During her visit, Clinton also met with Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic and Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac, as well as with representatives of the civil sector.
More than 200 Serbian and foreign news crews covered the visit.
