18/05/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 18/05/10
More than 30,000 fans braved a cold rain to see the US band Metallica perform at Zagreb Hippodrome on Sunday (May 16th) for the first time.
"Why did it take us so long to come here and play?" lead singer James Hetfield asked the crowd.
Metallica is promoting their ninth studio album, "Death Magnetic", and Croatia was included in the European part of their tour named "World Magnetic".
"The band members arrived in the Croatian capital just a few hours before the concert and left immediately afterwards for their next stop, in Portugal".
The band played in the open, on the hippodrome area near the banks of the Sava River.
But even in the second half of May, the weather was unpredictable.
The temperature was chilly with constant rain showers.
The stage was simple but effective and huge video walls enabled fans to see clearly what was happening on stage.
For security reasons, nobody was allowed to bring umbrellas to the concert area.
Fans were soaked but excited.
They sang all of Metallica's songs, including "Enter Sandman" and "Master of Puppets", as well as the heavy metal anthem "Nothing Else Matters".
The band returned twice to the stage for encores.
"I watched Metallica's concert earlier abroad ...
and I am glad that they are in Zagreb now.
This is a professionally played concert.
I guess the band members were surprised how many people love them here and stand in the rain just to listen to their music," Split resident Renato Zelic told SETimes.
People from all over Croatia came to see the concert, as well as fans from Austria, Slovenia and Bulgaria.
Tickets started at 50 euros.
Doors opened in the afternoon, but fans began lining up in the early morning.
Weather wasn't the only issue on concert day.
Just days earlier, 60 horses from the Hippodrome were quarantined following an outbreak of leptospirosis, a dangerous disease that can affect humans too with potentially fatal results.
The horses were isolated and health authorities said there was no concern the disease would spread.
