13/10/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 13/10/10
Germany wants to make sure that the Eastern border of the Schengen area won't be violated by acts of corruption, Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Tuesday (October 12th) during a day-long official visit to Romania. 
Merkel's warning comes amid Romania's efforts to join the borderless area in April of next year.
"We must be sure that granting visas on the external borders is done without corruption, illegalities. 
This is very important, because otherwise the entire Schengen space would be endangered by such illegal practices," she said, stressing that Germany supports Romania's effort to join Schengen.
"In November, there'll be an evaluation in the EU -- this will be done according to objective criteria and we will rely on the data provided by the European Commission," Merkel said at a joint press conference with Romanian Prime Minister Emil Boc.
She also said the evaluation would be strictly done according to technical and not political criteria. 
"The Roma integration issue has nothing to do with the Schengen accession criteria," she said, alluding to recent calls from French officials that the ethnic minority integration issue be set as criterion for Romania's accession to the borderless area.
She said that the Verification and Co-operation Mechanism (MCV) for Romania will be maintained. 
"The reforms in the field of justice are approached with great courage, but I don't think you're at the end of the road. 
The EU's monitoring helps you see where you stand," she said.
In a meeting with President Traian Basescu, Merkel reiterated the two countries' common interest in settling the Transdniester conflict and problems in the Western Balkans. 
"I think Romania can play a very important role here," she said.
The two officials also discussed Romania's desire to establish a strategic partnership with Germany, its top commercial partner and the third largest foreign investor in the country. 
Commercial exchanges between the two countries reached 7.8 billion euros in late June.
According to one local analyst, Merkel's visit brought a rude awakening to Romania.
"Romania seems to have gotten lost in the dispute with France over the Roma issue lately. 
But Merkel put it point blank: forget about this and mind the stringent topic of fighting corruption, which may tip the balance in the accession efforts," Iulia Enache, deputy head of the foreign affairs department with the newswire Mediafax, told SETimes.
"The visit … also had a very important economic weight. 
Apart from the juridical transparency, so necessary for the German investors, Merkel again touched on the graft topic, which prevents healthy economic development, two aspects Germany underlined [to] Romania so many times, before and after EU accession," she added.
