01/04/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 01/04/13
As Balkan countries continue working to broaden their economic presence on international markets, marketing experts encourage increasing investments aimed at branding domestic products. 
Promotional efforts that create unique names and images in the minds of consumers will help Balkan countries trigger corporate growth and provide a boost in tourism, experts said.
Global recognition of Balkan products would be a significant step for the region and could help stimulate the development of other industries and the branding of additional products, analysts said.
"The branding of one product which is recognisable and popular in one region will lead to a bigger number of consumers," Sinisa Pekevski, a branding expert with SE Communications in Skopje, told SETimes. 
"A good marketing promotion is also needed which will lead to a promotion of the country itself, and it will bring development of the local and regional economy."
Filip Petrovski, director of the marketing company Advantage Creations in Skopje, told SETimes that governments can provide trademark protection in order to help companies prevent their products from being copied, but companies must develop their own strategies to broaden the reach of their brands.
"The state can only help by strengthening its own image in Europe and wider and providing equal conditions for competing in the field of trade with the other countries," Petrovski said.
Petrovski said the international spread of domestic brands should start by building brand recognition in neighbouring markets.
"Macedonia can be recognised through products which have geographical origin of these territories. 
… The rice from Kocani, the beans from Tetovo, the potato in Berovo, the apple from Prespa, cheese could also be protected according to the geographical origin," Petrovski said.
Serbia has had success with well-known brands including Spice C, Jaffa and Stark. 
Experts said Croatia has made more progress in branding than other countries in the region because it works continuously to promote its products.
"[Croatian] companies Jana and Dukat are standing strong at the markets in the region and wider because of promotion of their products," Pekevski said. 
"Other countries like Albania and Kosovo are still [lacking] in this field, and the funds allocated to promote products are very low."
Miograd Kostic, a branding expert and management consultant from Belgrade, told SETimes that only a small number of products from the Balkans can be found in the biggest European and world markets.
"That is why the Balkan countries should join together in a bigger system of trade and to become a global provider of products that come from there," Kostic said.
Macedonia's government recently announced that it will offer subsidies for branding products.
"There are subsidies for the farmers who will sell their products to the processors that produce branded products," government spokesman Aleksandar Georgiev said. 
"We appeal to grow the interest of branding of the agricultural products because in that way those products are easier to sell and they get a better price on the market."
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, there are more than 160 products that fulfill the requirements for being certified as original products. 
Montenegro's programme "The best of Montenegro -- The quality of Europe" has certified 74 products from 14 companies.
Companies must demonstrate proof of the geographic origin of their products in order to receive the designations.
Without proper branding, products can be stolen by other companies. 
In the 1990s, Macedonia didn't properly protect its red pepper product Ajvar. 
Slovenia rebranded it as its own and protected it with a trademark.
Slovenia and Croatia are attempting to resolve a dispute over the Slovenian brand Kranjska kobasica. 
At least three Croatian companies processing meat under that name have produced and sold the protected Slovenian brand.
After Slovenia filed for an EU Protected Designation of Origin status for the meat product in 2012, Croatian officials filed an objection with the European Commission to Slovenia's claim, leaving it up to Brussels to try to resolve the dispute.
"The Croatian Chamber of business and producers of Kranjska sausage have collected all the relevant historical evidence on which the complaint is based, and the ministry of agriculture will contribute [to help strengthen] Croatia's side in this process," Miroslav Kuskunovic, spokesman for the Croatian Ministry of Agriculture, told SETimes.
There's more at stake than national pride. 
According to the government, the country's Kranjska kobasica production is worth 13 million euros annually.
The expansion of branded products could also boost the development of tourism, Vojislav Zanetic, professor of media and communication at the University of Belgrade, told SETimes.
"Anything that allows the tourist to feel good in another country helps the development of tourism. 
For the needs of tourism, the country itself should be branded and the branded products can certainly help that. 
For example, Switzerland. 
The tourists go there not only to see the country but also to try the products which have been produced there," Zanetic said.
Governments should help domestic companies by lowering taxes and providing favorable credit lines to stimulate investment in new production and branding efforts, Zanetic said. 
He added that investments also are needed to train marketing managers and technologists, "who can help in the process of branding and promotion of domestic products."
Toso Cacoroski, a manager of the Sileks hotel in Ohrid, told SETimes that branding could bring a lot of tourism income to Macedonia.
"Macedonia is increasingly being declared as a country of the wine, and wine tours are being organised around the country," Cacoroski said. 
"Wine is becoming a serious factor that can attract tourists. 
That's why Macedonia should brand its own specific products, and the outcome of that will be certainly positive in terms of attracting tourists."
"The tourists who come to Ohrid, the first thing they want to do is try Macedonian products, which they've read about on the internet," said Ohrid resident Rita Milenkovska. 
"They want to try the Macedonian red wine, or to try a Macedonian dish with beans, or the Ohrid trout. 
A lot of the tourists come especially for this. 
A better promotion is needed, which will lead to bigger numbers of tourists for sure."
