17/09/2010
(Euronews, EurActiv, Independent - 17/09/10; AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, FT, BBC, RFI, Guardian, Euobserver, RFE/RL - 16/09/10)
The leaders of the 27 EU member-states agreed during a summit Thursday (September 16th) to sign a free-trade pact with South Korea and to grant trade concessions to help prop up the flood-devastated Pakistani economy. 
But the one-day meeting in Brussels was overshadowed by a row over France's controversial expulsions of hundreds of Roma migrants to Romania and Bulgaria in recent weeks.
Originally, the EU leaders were to focus on foreign policy, economic and trade issues. 
The thorny question of Roma repatriations was reportedly added to the agenda at the last minute by the bloc's president, Herman Van Rompuy, who chaired the summit.
The lunchtime discussion of the issue sparked a lengthy verbal exchange between French President Nicolas Sarkozy and European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso.
"Sarkozy made a strong point defending France's position. 
Jose Manuel Barroso stood up and said he was not happy with the current situation in France. 
Sarkozy replied in a sharp manner," Reuters quoted an unnamed EU diplomat's account.
An estimated 15,000 Roma from Romania, the country with the largest Roma population within the 27-nation bloc, and Bulgaria currently reside in France.
In late July, Sarkozy ordered authorities to clear 300 illegal Roma and traveller camps by the end of October. 
A total of about 1,000 illegal Roma migrants, mostly Romanian nationals, have since been repatriated in groups to the two Balkan countries.
Paris's move sparked a wave of criticism from human rights watchdogs, the UN, the Vatican, the United States, as well as many French and foreign media. 
Earlier this month, the European Parliament (EP) demanded an end to the expulsions. 
After continuous pressure from MEPs and with Paris vowing to continue its crackdown, EU Justice Commissioner Viviane Reding threatened legal action against France, citing discrimination.
She issued the threat in a speech Tuesday, after a French interior ministry memo, dated August 5th, was leaked to the press. 
The document instructed police to target Roma camps "with priority".
"This is a situation I had thought Europe would not have to witness again" after World War II, Reding said.
Although the veteran commissioner from Luxembourg had already apologised for her remarks, Sarkozy told reporters in Brussels that he will not allow anyone to "insult" him or his country. 
He described as "disgusting" any attempts to link the recent expulsions to the mass deportations during World War II.
"I am head of the French state. 
I cannot let my nation be insulted," Sarkozy said. 
In separate remarks to the press after Thursday's summit, Barroso hinted that the French leader should follow Reding's example and apologise for misplaced statements.
"It is unacceptable for there to be any kind of discrimination of ethnic minorities," the DPA quoted the EC president as saying. 
"It is true that in the past few days and weeks, we have heard some things said that were out of order ... 
but there are issues of substance to look at."
Van Rompuy said the situation of the Roma in the EU will be discussed during the bloc's next summit in October.
The EC, which has not backed off from its threat to take France to court for possible breach of EU laws on the free movement of people, was reportedly asked on Thursday to draft a strategy for the Roma.
