18/08/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 18/08/10
A fire that broke out due to an apparent short circuit in an improvised air conditioning device consumed the intensive care section of the Giulesti maternity hospital in Bucharest on Monday (August 16th).
Four newborns were killed and seven were critically injured.
It is a tragedy many say could have been avoided if medical staff at the municipality-operated facility had followed basic professional procedures.
"It is by far the worst tragedy ever in a Romanian hospital.
And this is just one example of the state Romania's health care system is in," Vasile Barbu, head of the National Association for the Patients' Protection, told SETimes.
"It all comes down to crass negligence and irresponsibility of the personnel.
Our own inquiry revealed no one was in the room for a long time after the flames broke out, that's the only plausible explanation of the fact three babies died on the spot before even being evacuated," he said.
A fourth baby died Monday night after being transferred to another hospital.
There were no smoke alarms in the area, and some medical devices had not received fireproofing treatment, Barbu said.
"Furthermore, we found a wooden cupboard there, which was not supposed to be kept in an intensive care ward because it is first of all a germ nest and then a fire enhancer," he added.
Preliminary information suggests the short circuit occurred behind the cupboard, which then ignited.
"We will assist the families involved in this tragedy both with legal and psychological support.
We want those responsible to be held accountable and the state to pay the families damages," Barbu said.
The prosecutor leading the investigation confirmed that nearly an hour passed after the fire broke out before anyone in the hospital reacted.
According to reports, the nurse on duty was not in the room and it was finally a patient who alerted the medical staff.
The three infants who died at the scene asphyxiated.
The seven injured babies are now at Grigore Alexandrescu Hospital.
Its manager, Dan Enescu, said he is not sure about the chances of survival, due to their critical burns.
A team of Israeli medics has been flown in to help treat them.
The Giulesti maternity ward has been evacuated and shut down pending the outcome of the investigation.
The manager of the hospital, which paradoxically is one of the most modern in the country, has refused to resign.
He says the ward was understaffed because of austerity measures that prevented many vacant positions from being filled.
Local officials are promising that all 21 hospitals under City Hall's management will now be equipped with smoke alarms.
This was not the first incident at the ward.
In 2008, several babies suffered severe burns after a nurse mistook a bottle of disinfectant for medical alcohol.
Three nurses were penalised for failing to report the incident in time.
In a separate incident in November 2009, a nurse at the Bucur maternity facility in Bucharest forgot about a baby in an incubator.
The infant suffered burns on 20% of his body and required plastic surgery.
The nurse, who was sacked, said she was a victim of the system because she had to cover too many sections -- again, due to lack of personnel.
Romania's medical system is facing a serious exodus of medical staff.
About 8,000 medics, nurses and pharmacists have left Romania since 2007 due to low salaries and poor working conditions.
Another 2,000 waiting for necessary documents to be issued so they can leave the country.
