15/04/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 15/04/10
About 161,000 Turkish Cypriots will choose between incumbent Mehmet Ali Talat and Prime Minister Dervis Eroglu in Sunday's (April 18th) presidential elections. 
Recent polls show Eroglu is nearly eight points ahead.
Many analysts believe the result could signal a change of course for Turkish Cypriots. 
Talat is known for a commitment to ending the decades-old division of the country between Greeks and Turks, while Eroglu is a hardline nationalist with no apparent desire for reunification, although he has said he will move ahead with negotiations.
In a recent interview with the daily Aksam, he accused Greek Cypriots of being insincere in the talks and said "it would be very hard to find a solution."
He added "That's why we have no right to sit at that table forever and keep our people under pressure. 
I promise them that they will live peacefully in their own state."
In an interview on April 8th, also published in Aksam, Talat said the stakes are high. 
"We are not only going to elect the president through this election. 
It's also about Turkey's fate, Turkey's relations with the EU and its status in the world," he said. 
"A victory for Eroglu will surely end reunification talks and it will have an effect on Turkey."
Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has made no secret of its backing for Talat. 
It would like to see a Cyprus agreement reached by the end of this year. 
But with the incumbent's chances appearing to flag, Ankara may need a plan B.
"If the Turkish government believes Talat has finished his mission, it could endorse Eroglu, who at least promises to continue negotiations," said Gozde Kilic Yasin, political analyst for the Turkish Centre for International Relations and Strategic Analysis, in a recently released report on what Cyprus might look like after the election.
If Eroglu were to reach an agreement with the Greek south it would have "a better chance of being approved by the people at a referendum", Yasin said.
In 2004, a unification blueprint known as the Annan Plan was overwhelmingly supported by Turkish Cypriots while being rejected by a majority of Greek Cypriots. 
Since then, the mood of Turkish Cypriots seems to have changed. 
Current opinion polls show it would be very hard to find similar backing for such a plan today.
The EU suspended eight negotiation chapters in 2006 when Turkey refused to open its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels and planes as dictated by a customs union protocol. 
The 27-member bloc will review the state of negotiations with Turkey in December.
