15/06/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/06/10
In the Serbian capital, excitement and anticipation was palpable Sunday (June 13th) morning.
No question was as important as "Where are you going to watch the game?"
The whole country was planted in front of television screens as the clock struck 4pm.
The afternoon heat only seemed to fuel the tension among fans as Serbia's match against Ghana began.
Spectators gathered in friends' homes and cafes.
"Hey, how much beer should I buy for the gang?" Mladen, 23, asked his friend over the phone as he rode the bus.
"The whole gang is getting together at a friend's place, the 15 of us.
We have to win, we have a really strong team."
As game time approached, cafes downtown were packed.
Fans dressed in national team jerseys jammed around the tables, their faces painted in the colors of the Serbian flag -- red, white and blue.
Half-priced drinks, games and wagers were all part of the fun.
During the national anthems of Ghana and Serbia, the shouting and cheering got under way.
At one table, four women weighed in.
"We'll definitely beat them;
it'll be six to zero," Zorica said.
"It's not true women don't like soccer," added Jelica.
A young man wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with "Serbia" and the Serbian coat of arms was sitting at another table.
"I'm not from Serbia, I'm Dutch but I'm rooting for Serbia," he said.
"It'll be two to zero for Serbia," Jan said.
A group of five friends were sitting at a table, looking tense, head in hands after each missed chance.
"We're going to win one to zero.
We're definitely going to pass into the second round of competition, after that we'll see," Lazar predicted.
The first half ended without either team scoring.
The second half started and the Serbian team squandered several goal opportunities.
"What the hell are you doing, Zigic!" a petite blonde yelled.
The end of the game was near and the tension was peaking, with everyone carefully watching each pass and attempt at a goal.
Five minutes before the end, Ghana scored a penalty goal.
In an instant, all the euphoria vanished.
When Ghanaian player Asamoah Gyan's shot hit the back of the net, Serbia's hopes for this Cup shattered.
Fans watched intently to see if the Eagles could even the score.
They could not.
Afterwards they were stoic.
"I expected our team to win.
I feel bad, but what can you do?
On to the next game," Srdjan said.
