12/07/2010
By Adisa Busuladzic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 12/07/10
Hasan Nuhanovic is a tall, thin 42-year-old Bosniak.
His metal-rimmed spectacles and his fair and impeccable complexion, inherited from his mother, make it hard to tell his age.
His determined, yet unimposing, demeanor hides his torment.
Thanks to his excellent English, his high intelligence and almost fanatical dedication to work, he has held a variety of reasonably paid jobs with different international organisations in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) for the past 17 years.
After a busy day on the job, he likes to unwind by playing rock on his acoustic guitar or chatting with friends over beer -- though he'll never touch one of the most famous brands, because it is Dutch-made and the UN peacekeepers at Srebrenica drank it.
"I'll take anything else!" he'll declare resolutely, startling the bartender and guests on neighbouring stools.
"Bring me any other beer you've got!
I don't care what it is or how much it is."
Those who know him describe Hasan as an excellent colleague, a devoted husband and father, and as one of the most decent human beings they've ever met.
The rest of the world, meanwhile, knows him as the most famous survivor of the Srebrenica genocide.
A family's plight
If you Google Hasan Nuhanovic's name in search of his pictures or personal data, you'll stumble on the photograph of his parents he always keeps close by.
Taken in 1989 or 1990, the photograph shows his father, 47-year-old Ibro, general manager of the local wood-processing factory, smiling at the camera as he holds his graceful and pretty 42-year-old wife, Nasiha, in an affectionate embrace.
Life could not have been better.
Hasan, their eldest son, was at Sarajevo University, pursuing a degree in mechanical engineering.
His brother, Muhamed, was enrolled in high school.
The family had much to be happy about and even more to look forward to.
And then everything changed.
In the spring of 1992, war broke out in BiH.
The Nuhanovics narrowly escaped the 1992 massacre of about 2,600 fellow Bosniaks by Bosnian Serb forces in Vlasenica.
They fled their hometown in the family car, grateful that Hasan had come from Sarajevo at the weekend so he could leave with them.
They took refuge at Ibro's brother's place in Srebrenica.
During the ensuing siege by Bosnian Serb forces, they endured heavy shelling, sniping and starvation.
In the spring of 1993, however, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 819, terming Srebrenica "a safe area, which should be free from any armed attack or any other hostile act".
The first group of UN peacekeeping troops arrived.
Hasan soon got a job with them as an interpreter.
For the next two years, the Nuhanovics and other residents of Srebrenica lived in relative peace, with the Serb infantry and artillery more or less quiet in the surrounding hills.
They were strictly forbidden to venture out of the UN "safe area".
In July 1995, the Bosnian Serb Army suddenly activated its weaponry and launched an offensive.
Hoping that the UN forces would protect them, the Nuhanovics sought refuge at the UN base camp in Potocari.
They were among 5,000-6,000 civilians who managed to enter the base before the peacekeepers, represented by the Dutch battalion, sealed the main gate and all other entrances, leaving about 20,000 people to the mercy of Bosnian Serb troops.
A "safe haven" abandoned
Hasan's family hovered around him as he continued doing his job as the Dutch battalion's interpreter.
They felt secure at the base, although they heard screams and shots in the distance.
For two days they listened to other people tell stories of brutal executions going on just outside.
And then they heard chilling words that their son had to translate.
"Hasan, tell your family to leave right now!" a Dutch soldier ordered the young Bosniak.
As he relayed the message, Hasan's eyes welled up with tears.
They knew he was merely doing his job.
As the Dutch soldiers escorted them towards the exit, Hasan screamed at the Dutch officers in protest.
And then he shouted towards his mother, father and brother:
"I am coming with you!"
His 19-year-old brother, Muhamed, screamed back.
"You are not coming with us.
You are going to stay inside because you can!"
That was the last time Hasan saw them alive.
The Dutch ordered all 5,000 people out of the base.
Standing next to the UN forces, Serb soldiers waited outside, separating men and boys away from their wives, mothers and sisters.
The separation of the civilians was still taking place as the Dutch soldiers embarked on their white armoured personal carriers, SUVs and trucks clearly marked with black UN letters.
They took Hasan and a handful of other local staff with them, leaving the "safe area" they had been mandated to protect.
The last thing Hasan remembers seeing, through the rear window of the UN vehicle carrying him to safety, were civilians surrounded by heavily armed Serb soldiers standing in front of the Potocari base.
There were no signs of the Dutch presence except for the numerous beer cans and bottles littering the ground.
Hasan Nuhanovic's story will continue on Tuesday in SETimes.
