17/05/2010
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 17/05/10
More than two years after Kosovo proclaimed its independence, Serbia's leaders have been suggesting a return to the negotiating table may be in the works.
Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic is confident that an anticipated International Court of Justice ruling will find the independence declaration contravened international law. 
If so, officials say, the door would be open for new status talks and a compromise that is acceptable to Belgrade.
"One side will have to let go, and, of course, it will be Kosovo," insists Serbian State Secretary for Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic.
Many Kosovo Serbs, however, are sceptical. 
According to representative Rada Trajkovic, Belgrade lacks the clout to achieve a solution to its liking.
"Serbia is weak politically and in terms of security, is economically dependent on donors and has no clearly defined strategy for Kosovo and Metohija," Trajkovic told SETimes. 
"Even if with all these weaknesses it was able to start negotiations on the status, they would not result in success."
Technical talks on issues affecting the lives of Kosovo Serbs are a more realistic possibility, she said. 
Such talks, "if well prepared, could strengthen the position of the Serbs and the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo", she said.
Trajkovic also urged Serbia to exercise caution in any negotiations. 
Albanian extremist groups have begun regrouping in Macedonia, she said, and any ill-advised move by Belgrade could lead to new conflicts.
From another angle, hardline nationalists oppose Belgrade-Pristina negotiations, even those limited to improving the conditions for Serbs in Kosovo, on the grounds that it implies recognition of independence.
"The story of technical negotiations is a lure for Serbia," Vice President of the Council for Kosovo and Metohija Marko Jaksic told SETimes. 
"It would not improve our life here, because we live badly just because we are opposing the independence of Kosovo."
Kosovo Serb refugees, meanwhile, wait to see concrete improvements in their situation. 
Many feel that, for all the talk of negotiations, Belgrade is doing little to help them.
Since leaving their villages of Ljipljan and Strpci in 1999, the Jelisavcic and Djurdjevic families have shared in a two-room apartment in the Belgrade suburb of Kaludjerica. 
Both families support themselves through manual labour.
"My son Bojan wears two different shoes, on the left leg one model and number, on the right leg a second model and number. 
One is number 38, another 40. 
He found them in a container in New Belgrade," Stojan Jelisavljevic said.
"We haven't been able to buy clothes for the children in ten years," he added.
Social Affairs Minister Rasim Ljajic is openly critical of the country's Kosovo policy. 
"Serbia allocates 500m euros a year for Kosovo, but I'm not sure that the money is the best spent," he said.
If talks do resume, analysts say, Serbia will likely seek different arrangements for northern Kosovo and territories around Serbian monasteries, allowing for special, parallel relations with Belgrade.
"Northern Ireland is a good example, as well as any solutions that are offered in [former UN envoy Martti] Ahtisaari's plan," said Predrag Simic, former Serbian ambassador to Paris and professor of international law.
Acknowledging that Serbia has formally rejected the Ahtisaari plan, Simic notes that UN Resolution 1244 and the Kumanovo Agreement were also deemed out of the question at one point, only to be accepted later.
As for status, changing any aspect of Kosovo's independence is unlikely, political analyst Dusan Janjic told SETimes.
"Belgrade would be wise to open talks with Brussels on co-operation on the status of crisis management. 
This would end the blackmailing of Serbia over Kosovo when it approaches the EU," he said.
