16/09/2010
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 16/09/10
Macedonia expects a hot political autumn as it works to meet the criteria for EU accession.
The European Commission will be delivering a report in November that assesses the country's progress in implementing various reforms.
These include improvements to the judiciary, public administration, Assembly rules and procedures, and implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement.
Regardless of how much progress Macedonia has made in these areas, the country's name dispute with neighbouring Greece remains a sticking point.
Although resolving the issue is not officially a pre-condition for membership, Athens has leverage within the bloc, and several other EU members have backed Greece.
"Greece is a member-state, and you are not.
Your positions are not equal.
The world is not a fair place, especially international politics," Swedish Ambassador to Macedonia Lars Freden has said.
Within Macedonia, public opinion is divided, not only among the political parties, but along ethnic lines.
"Changing the name for EU or NATO membership is out of the question.
The politician that would do such a thing would certainly be committing high treason," a 57-year-old Macedonian from Skopje, Boris Kostovski, told SETimes.
A survey conducted in July by the Pavel Satev Institute found that 83% of ethnic Macedonian voters would reject a name change for the purpose of Euro-Atlantic integration if a referendum were organised tomorrow.
By contrast, slightly more than 73% of ethnic Albanians polled in the survey said they would vote for the change if it meant a smoother path to accession.
"We should accept a certain compromise with Greece, because we want to join NATO and the EU.
If the name is the only obstacle, then the politicians should find a solution so we can get this thing done," a 38-year-old Albanian from Skopje, Jonuz Berisha, told SETimes.
An August Eurobarometer poll registered a 6% decline from last year in the number of Macedonians who think EU membership is good for the country.
The government insists it is willing to find a solution, but not one that would compromise Macedonia's identity and national interests.
"I believe that it is about time to solve the dispute, but I still think that Greece's demands are maximalist," Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski has said.
This situation has caused a renewed strain between the government and the Social Democrat-led opposition, which has been pressing for compromise.
With the EC report only two months away, Macedonia has a short time frame in which to solidify its reform image, and, if possible, to bring its position closer to that of Greece over the name issue.
Most analysts believe rapprochement on the latter will probably have to wait until Hungary takes over the rotating EU presidency in 2011.
The current holder, Belgium, is led by a caretaker government and can't get too involved in the Macedonian question.
