12/10/2010
(AP, AFP, DPA, RFE/RL, Telegraph, The Irish Times, B92 - 12/10/10;
AP, Reuters, AFP, AKI, VOA, Guardian - 11/10/10)
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Tuesday (October 12th) called for an end to the political deadlock among Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) main ethnic groups, urging their leaders to give a push to stalled EU and NATO required reforms instead.
She arrived in Sarajevo -- the first leg of her three-day tour of the Balkans -- late Monday, becoming the first US top diplomat to visit BiH since 2004.
On Tuesday morning, Clinton had a closed-door joint meeting with the Bosniak, Croat and Serb members of the country's tripartite presidency, but made no statement after the talks.
Her visit to BiH comes about 14 years after she travelled to the Balkan nation as first lady, just months after the signing of the Dayton Peace Accords.
The agreement, which ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, left the country split into two highly autonomous entities -- the Muslim-Croat Federation of BiH and the Serb-run Republika Srpska (RS).
But the complex institutional setup established under the Dayton Accords turned it into one of the countries with the most cumbersome systems of governance.
"The Dayton Accords were essential as a framework for stopping the violence, and they created an initial order," the Washington Post quoted former US diplomat Kurt Volker as saying.
"In reality, the Dayton Accords froze everything in place, and it's been sort of dysfunctional."
The United States and the EU, which BiH hopes to join one day, have been pushing the Bosnian leaders to carry out constitutional reforms to improve the efficiency of its institutions and make it a functional state.
But numerous international attempts to foster a compromise among leaders of the main political parties over the past few years have failed, largely due to the Bosnian Serbs opposition to any move that could spell the end of RS as an entity, or reduce its level of autonomy.
Meanwhile, the increased political tensions led to a deadlock that brought reforms required for Euro-Atlantic integration nearly to a halt.
"It is fair to say that the political process is stalled," US Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Philip Gordon told reporters on Monday.
"That is one reason the secretary wanted to come here and underscore for the parties their need to move forward with the types of reforms that will strengthen their candidacies for EU and NATO membership."
Addressing university students at Sarajevo's national theatre Tuesday, Clinton urged them to press their leaders to focus on related reforms, instead of lagging further behind neighbours in the region.
"These reforms are needed for their own sake," the AP quoted her as saying.
"But they are also needed if your country is to fulfill the goal of becoming part of the European Union and NATO.
Your neighbours have taken strides in that direction because they know that there is no better way to achieve sustained economic growth and long-term political stability than by integrating with Europe."
Speaking less than ten days after more moderate politicians gained ground in BiH's October 3rd general elections, Clinton said also called for quick steps "to strengthen democratic institutions, deepen peace between neighbours", and create the conditions for a better future.
"You have come too far, you have too much to lose if you do not overcome these differences," she said.
