16/09/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 16/09/10
In an effort to revive the ailing tourism sector, Romania has launched an effort to "brand" the country using an attractive logo and catchy new slogan.
"Romania -- explore the Carpathian Garden!" the new campaign urges visitors. 
It was officially launched on July 29th during the Europa League Dinamo, Bucharest-Hajduk, Split football match.
The logo, a green leaf with a blue stripe underneath, symbolises nature, air and water. 
The only problem, critics say, is that it is not original. 
Romanian bloggers have discovered a similar logo representing a British transportation company.
Tourism Minister Elena Udrea says the government is looking into the issue. 
She has threatened to halt most of the payments to the Spanish-American consortium THR-TNS, which won the country branding contract, unless it can prove the logo was an original creation.
"We can only pay for research. 
As far as the creation part [of the logo] goes, we are waiting for the final version of the visual element, copyright protected, and then we will analyse the situation," Udrea told Mediafax.
Experts say reviving Romanian tourism depends on a comprehensive package of measures, including investments in infrastructure, impeccable services and adequate legislation.
"The country brand is an important element [in giving a boost to tourism], but it is only a starting point. 
First, it has to be sustained by a strong and coherent promotion and a competitive product," Ana Maria Moanta, marketing director with Marshal Turism, one of the largest tourist agencies in Romania, told SETimes.
"The [tourist] sector needs serious investments -- responsibly handled, good roads, restoration of architectural jewels, well-trained, professional personnel, legislation, good quality-price report, and a clean environment, for a competitive product," she said.
For Moanta, the new campaign -- despite questions about its origin -- catches the very essence of what Romania has to offer.
"The country brand cannot compensate for the poor services, but can guide tourists to discover what they are actually looking for -- great landscapes, historic and cultural sites, good food and wines, tradition," she said. 
"What's most important is that tourists are impressed and recommend [Romania] to their friends."
The country's two earlier campaigns failed to yield substantial results.
A total of 3.3 million entries by foreigners were registered at Romanian border passes in the first six months of the year, according to the National Statistics Institute, which is down by 3.4% compared to the same period last year.
