17/08/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 17/08/10
Kosovo leaders are calling for a change to UN Resolution 1244 in light of the International Court of Justice's recent advisory ruling on Pristina's unilateral declaration of independence.
The July 22nd opinion found that the declaration had not breached international law.
Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni says there are three main reasons the resolution needs to be replaced.
First, a new resolution would be necessary to obtain a Security Council recommendation on moving ahead with the procedure for UN membership.
It would also be needed to define a window of time for ending the mandate of international presences in Kosovo.
Finally, Hyseni said, it would be in accord with the established practice of the Security Council.
He acknowleged that it could be an uphill battle, however.
"The request to replace the resolution has been made keeping clearly in mind and being fully aware of the difficulties that would accompany such an enterprise, such as the replacement of Resolution 1244 and the closure of the UNMIK mission," Hyseni said.
Political analyst Muharrem Nitaj agrees that the resolution must be changed to reflect the new reality.
"The resolution, on which Kosovo has been governed for some years now, is not functional.
UNMIK is almost nonexistent and it operates only in some certain fields, mainly in the [counry's north].
Kosovo has been recognised as independent from 60 states and all these states in fact can not recognise both, the Kosovo state and the Resolution 1244," Nitaj told SETimes.
He also says that the new resolution should recognise the situation on the ground and contain elements that would force Pristina to implement democratic standards in the establishment of its state and in implementing the rights of minorities.
Serbia, meanwhile, is preparing its own plan of action at the UN in response to the recent ruling.
"Serbia is interested in passing its resolution [at next month's UN General Assembly meeting], and on the other hand, is interested in having talks even if it has to intervene in the text of the resolution," Interior Minister Ivica Dacic said on Sunday (August 15th).
"But if Serbia accepts that the text of the resolution corresponds to the independence of Kosovo ...
then the question arises if Serbia can have talks at all."
On Monday, Kosovo leaders formally asked the UN to reject the Serbian resolution.
A letter signed by President Fatmir Sejdiu and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci urged all member states to extend recognition.
For its part, UNMIK says it will continue to fulfil its Security Council mandate.
According to the mission's head, Lamberto Zannier, "the UN's preliminary legal assessment is that the [ICJ] opinion does not affect the status of UNMIK, or our status-neutral policy."
"Indeed, the judgment confirms the applicability of UN Resolution 1244," he said.
