09/03/2010
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 09/03/10
Albania is inching closer to building a nuclear power plant.
The government demonstrated its political will by establishing the National Nuclear Agency in January, responsible for development of the Albanian Nuclear Energy Programme.
"Producing nuclear energy in Albania is a real prospect, although we are in the early phase of the process," says Milo Kuneshka, co-ordinator for the Albanian Nuclear Energy Programme.
"Our first focus is to establish the legal framework, at the same time working on other plans to expedite the process."
Albania forecasts the use of fourth generation power reactors, the latest technology to be available by 2020.
Prime Minister Sali Berisha first mentioned Albania's goal to produce nuclear energy over the winter of 2007, when the country faced severe electricity shortages.
At the time, the foreign ministry alerted the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of Albania's intention to produce nuclear energy.
Since then, the country has positioned itself as being "open to partnership" with any government interested in the endeavor.
Tirana has made it clear that it does not have the money to launch the project alone.
So far, Italy and Croatia have shown some interest.
"Albania will welcome all offers," said Kuneshka, noting that Italy has companies with experience in the nuclear sector.
Albania's neighbour to the west has been banned from building nuclear plants on its own soil since a 1987 referendum.
Croatia is under a similar prohibition through 2028.
Critics of the Albanian plan question whether the nation should risk the dangers of nuclear power before looking for energy from hydro projects, and wind and solar power.
"I have no doubt that nuclear is pure energy and we need energy, but I am against producing it for its environmental and security reasons," said Besmir Geziqi of the Albanian Green Party.
"I am sure that the potential for alternative energy in Albania is enough for the country's needs and for export."
