14/06/2010
By Georgi Mitev-Santek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 14/06/10
Serbia's national team lost to Ghana 0-1 Sunday (June 13th) in its first World Cup game in Group D, making progress to the tournament's second round significantly more difficult.
"The guys promised us that they will play their hearts out on the field, but most of the time we saw a bunch of frightened faces without a clear idea how to attack. 
Ghana didn't play that much better but they played strong and held their position," disappointed fan Nebojsa Kilibarda told SETimes.
Coach Radomir Antic's tactics may have sounded good in theory -- to beat Ghana through fast counterattacks by relying on wing players -- but in Pretoria, the team experienced a different reality. 
Serbian midfielders tried unsuccessfully to score through long passes to the strikers, while Ghana challenged the Serbs through counterattacks.
Wingmen Milos Krasic and Nenad Milijas struggled to control the ball in the face of a formidable Ghanean defence, and could not create a single significant opportunity in the first 20 minutes. 
Ghana's defenders left Serbian strikers Nikola Zigic and Marko Pantelic with little to no room for maneuvre.
Zigic, who is 202cm tall, was effectively taken out of action, while his colleague Pantelic received the ball on only a few occasions. 
Only after Zigic was replaced with striker Danko Lazovic in the 69th minute did the Serbian offence start to find its rhythm.
Meanwhile, Serbia's defenders fended off Ghana's wing attacks. 
With the match seemingly at an impasse, errors and penalties finally made the difference. 
Aleksander Lukovic picked up a yellow card for a sliding tackle in the 54th minute, and 20 minutes later was ejected for grabbing his opponent.
Down a player, the Serbian side picked up the pace. 
But the wind was taken out of their sails in the 83rd minute, when Zravko Kuzmanovic used his hand to deflect a Ghanaian pass inside the Serbian box.
That gave Ghana a penalty kick and Asamoah Gyan clinched the deal, putting Ghana ahead 1-0 with minutes to go. 
A devastated Kuzmanovic publicly apologised for making a foolish mistake.
Serbia now has an uphill battle ahead if it wants to get out of Group D. 
On Friday, the team plays heavily favoured Germany -- which showed off its explosive power on Sunday, dispatching Australia 4-0.
Antic tried a positive tack, saying the Ghana match "is already behind us" and that the team is getting ready to face Germany. 
He explained the loss is "forcing us to adopt a different attitude, because in the remaining matches we have to get points".
"I promise that nothing is over," Antic said.
