14/06/2010
By Dejan Stankovic for Southeast European Times in Johannesburg -- 14/06/10
Day one, June 8th
At last!
After a long time guessing about what is awaiting us in South Africa, the first experiences are under way.
And maybe because I tried to prepare myself for the worst, I'm pretty satisfied with what I have seen so far.
Didn't expect to see South Africa repeat the high level of organisation that Germany brought to the last World Cup.
And I'm positive it won't happen.
There is a slight doubt as to whether everything is still ready for the tournament and it's three days before kick-off.
But the atmosphere, totally different culture and all those smiling people around me make me believe this will be an unforgettable story to tell.
Or am I just an absolute optimist?
Day two, June 9th
The World Cup is here.
Everything stopped at noon, and all the hosts came out on the street to dance and celebrate football.
It was loud, it was different, it was fun.
For the first time, we had the chance to visit the hotel where the Serbian team is staying.
Sunnyside Park looks quite well from the outside.
Players say that the inside is even better.
We have to believe them because we were not allowed to go inside.
Security measures.
Numerous armed people were in front of the hotel.
They had automatic rifles and shotguns.
There were two security checks.
Also, four policemen from Serbia.
It leaves the impression of being a safe place.
Day three, June 10th
Everything was all about the World Cup concert in Soweto with stars like Shakira, Alicia Keys and Black Eyed Peas.
Unfortunately, I was unable to attend it.
My purpose here is to write about the Serbia national team, so I had no option but to watch the event from the bar in our hotel.
Many local people were around me.
Maybe it was just my impression, but you could see joy in their eyes.
Hope that they are going to some higher level.
They were friendly, without exception.
Coming to us to chit-chat.
Day four, June 11th
Hello South Africa!!!
The time has come.
Ke Nako, as our hosts say.
The hotel staff awoke us at 7am with a song.
It was a very nice way to say good day.
Later, we went to the opening ceremony at the Soccer City.
Police were visible.
Military also.
But I had the impression that stewards were still a bit confused and that if you had the intention you could smuggle practically anything into the stands.
Military jets flew over the stadium in Johannesburg to announce the beginning of the ceremony;
shortly after the noise was deafening.
The world had the opportunity to feel African culture.
Surprisingly, the stadium was not even close to full.
One of the reasons was the problem with traffic.
Attendance improved after the opening ceremony as the match between South Africa and Mexico approached.
It was thrilling.
The game was exciting, but the stands were breathtaking.
It was clear that the people of South Africa were not only happy, they were proud.
In those few hours, Africa was, maybe for the first time in history, the centre of the world.
Of course, there are some downsides to being here.
If you think that anyone will come and help you repair your internet connection during the South Africa game you're mistaken.
Volunteers tried, but they are "just" volunteers.
The guys from the internet provider didn't want to hear about our problems.
And then there's the headache from the vuvuzelas (the multi-coloured plastic trumpets).
It's nice to witness something different, but personally, I prefer the traditional way of cheering with songs and flags.
Problems were even bigger at the Serbian base camp, where journalists and team officials had a big fuss.
They didn't let us talk with the players outside the press conference.
And the press conference was televised live on our national public service RTS.
We didn't fly 8,000km and our companies didn't pay a lot of money so we could attend only what everybody could see from Belgrade.
It was not pleasant.
But, the situation calmed after we had a conversation with our captain, Dejan Stankovic.
Don't mix us up -- we just have the same name :)
Day six, June 13th
From euphoria to complete disappointment.
That was Serbia's first match day.
Fans from all around the world provided a colourful build-up for the Serbia vs Ghana match.
Especially exotic were members of the Zulu tribe whose unusual moves and delirium were a complete surprise to all of us from Europe.
It was incident-free.
Everybody came to the Loftus Versfeld stadium with a sporting spirit.
Posing together for pictures, dancing, waving flags, wearing ridiculous stuff.
The game was, at least for the Serbs, a complete disaster.
The lack of any idea, the obvious fear in the players.
And then stupid mistakes.
A red card, and a penalty.
The majority of the stands were delighted with the 1-0 Ghana win.
As expected, the African team was the loved one.
To be honest, it hurts.
Maybe because of that, vuvuzelas are really starting to annoy me.
And the internet, of course.
In the stands, I was again one of the few whose cable was out of order.
And the reaction from our hosts was ...
well, there wasn't any.
I really hope things will get better for us.
And I hope I'll have the chance to see some more of Johannesburg, because so far I've mostly seen it from the bus.
