13/04/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 13/04/10
While a senator remains in custody in a corruption probe, a chief judge and two businessmen said to have dealings with him were released Monday night (April 12th) in a case spanning politics, business and the judiciary.
The High Court of Justice and Cassation (ICCJ) ruled in favour of the appeal filed by Judge Florin Costiniu and the two businessmen who had been placed under preventive arrest for 30 days.
The three cannot leave the country for the next month.
The businessmen were identified as Costel Casuneanu and Marius Locic.
They are charged with attempting to bribe Costiniu to gain influence in a pair of lawsuits.
Costiniu, head of the civil section of the ICCJ, was suspended from that chairmanship by the Magistrates' Superior Council (CSM) until the end of the probe.
The CSM ruled that Senator Catalin Voicu of the Social Democratic Party -- arrested on March 30th -- should remain in custody.
Prosecutors allege that Voicu accepted 260,000 euros in bribes from a businessman last summer.
The money, prosecutors allege, was intended to bribe judges.
Prosecutors with the National Anti-Corruption Directorate (DNA) used transcripts of phone calls that Voicu allegedly made to the two businessmen as evidence in the case.
It was in these transcripts, prosecutors maintain, that Costiniu's name surfaced.
Investigators also handed over transcripts of phone conversations the judge had with the businessman Casuneanu.
In a press release after the arrests, the DNA said that Costiniu knew "he was acting upon a request coming from businessman Costel Casuneanu with a view to obtaining a favourable solution for the latter's firm and he would be rewarded with large amounts of money."
Casuneanu is known in Romania as the "Asphalt King" because of many profitable road building contracts he has won from the state.
Before his arrest, he was involved in a lawsuit against the state road and highway authority after losing a public tender.
"The 'Voicu file', as the case has become known in the media, has the potential to become the most important corruption case investigated by Romanian authorities since the fall of communism," Cristi Ciuperca, an editor specialising in justice issues for the daily Romania Libera, told SETimes.
"The senator, in my point of view, is just the interface of former communist elite that came to power shortly after 1989 and some of whom managed to remain in key positions even after 2000."
"Without these [powerful] people's support, Voicu couldn't have had access to judges of the supreme court … no one would have turned to him unless they knew who was behind him," Ciuperca said.
