16/08/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 16/08/10
Israeli President Shimon Peres lauded the "new Romania" during a three-day visit to Bucharest last week.
He assured counterpart Traian Basescu that the friendship between the two peoples will endure long into the future.
"I have thrice visited Romania and each time I have seen a different Romania.
Now I see a democratic Romania, which is orienting itself towards a top position in Europe," Peres said on Thursday (August 12th) during a joint news conference with Basescu.
"Romania for Israel is not a mere point in history or geography, but a whole historical chapter.
We will never forget that, during Europe's darkest period, during the Nazis, Romanians saved the lives of 400,000 Jews who [later] came to Israel and contributed and are still contributing to building Israel," Peres said.
"There is a friendship between our peoples that will not end, but will go on in time and history," he added, noting that half a million Israelis hail from Romania.
Talks with Romanian leaders -- including Basescu, Senate leader Mircea Geoana and lower house Speaker Roberta Anastase -- focused on bilateral co-operation in defence, technology, education, business and tourism, and on regional issues, such as the peace process in the Middle East.
Two agreements were signed -- one on cultural, educational and scientific co-operation, and the other on amending an existing protocol on promoting investment.
Peres also attended a religious service honouring six Israeli airmen who died when their helicopter crashed in the Carpathians during a military drill in late July.
Basescu also assured him that Romania supports without reservation the latest package of sanctions adopted by the UN Security Council against Iran.
"We reject the idea Iran could possess nuclear arms," Basescu said, calling for a diplomatic solution to the issue.
"Romania will be a loyal partner to NATO, of which it is a member state, and a loyal partner to Israel."
"President Peres' visit was a historic one because it was the first visit ever made by a president of the state of Israel to Romania," David Oren, the Israeli ambassador in Bucharest, told SETimes.
"The visit was an opportunity to consolidate and deepen the excellent bilateral relations between Israel and Romania in all aspects.
It exemplified the importance that both sides give to these special relations," Oren said.
"Moreover, it was an opportunity to search for ways to strengthen the relations even more than the present situation, especially in the area of economic, scientific and research co-operation," he added.
In a speech during a ceremony at the Holocaust Memorial, Peres said Romania had courageously taken responsibility for its role during World War II.
The Simon Wiesenthal Centre, however, criticised the Israeli president on Friday for failing to condemn the atrocities committed by the wartime regime of Ion Antonescu.
A 2004 report by a historical commission on the Holocaust concluded that 280,000 Jews and 11,000 Roma were killed under Antonescu's regime.
