11/10/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 11/10/10
The latest nationwide strike in Greece took place on Thursday (October 7th) as the Civil Servants' Union (ADEDY) urged members to shun work and instead protest the government's urgent austerity measures: slashed salaries, bonuses and future pensions.
Thursday's strike included trade unions representing public school educators, air traffic controllers, state hospital staff and employees at local government entities. 
About 1,500 protesters gathered in front of parliament on the rainy morning. 
The results, however, were decidedly flat.
"Union representatives claim that three out of ten educators participated in the strike, but that's exaggerated; it's more like two out of ten, or even one out of ten," a high school teacher at an inner city school in Athens said, requesting anonymity.
"It will be interesting to see if reactions occur after the [2011] state budget passes later this month … Thursday's action was merely 'revolutionary gymnastics'," the natural sciences teacher said, referring to the tabling and expected ratification of the closely watched draft budget. 
Throughout the year, the civil servants' union declared roughly a dozen actions, mostly 24-hour strikes, one two-day strike in May, as well as various work stoppages.
Thursday's strike, however, did not include the biggest private sector union umbrella group, GSEE, which meant that all-important mass transit providers, including debt-plagued Hellenic Rail (OSE), operated as usual.
The lack of a mass transit strike in Athens and Thessaloniki meant that disruption of services in the country was minimised.
Asked why education sector unions have shied away from declaring strikes in the face of recent salary cuts, when open-ended strikes -- often accompanied by vigorous protest marches -- occurred in 2007 and 2008 to demand a 1,400-euro minimum salary for newly hired teachers, biology instructor and Athens-area secondary teachers' union official (EL.ME) Yiannis Fassaris cited what he called people's "wait-and-see attitude and fear".
"People are waiting; they have not accepted (the austerity measures), they're numb. 
Moreover, people's mood vis-à-vis mobilisations is flat," he said.
Fassaris emphasised that he expects nothing from the current socialist government except more wage cuts, mainly via implementation of an across-the-board wage scale for all public sector employees, which the trade unions fear will gravitate towards the lower end of the scale.
Although the union representing workers at troubled OSE did not participate in Thursday's action, the rail operator has been hit with repeated strikes to derail the government's decision to substantively streamline the money-losing company.
Outgoing rail workers' union President Nikos Kioutsoukis on Wednesday repeated his charge that the Greek government wants to turn OSE into an "amusement park … open only on weekends. 
It wants to turn the railway into a miniature, down to 800km from the current 2,600".
While agreeing on the need to drastically reform the debt-burdened rail operator, Kioutsoukis said the plan to halve OSE's nearly 6,700-employee workforce does not guarantee the base salary and pension rights of OSE employees set for transfer to other public sector positions.
OSE has accumulated debts of more than 10 billion euros, although union representatives have strenuously countered that the bulk of the debt stems from bank lending forced upon the organisation by successive governments for whatever works on the national rail network, instead of direct state funding.
