14/05/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 14/05/10
After more than a year of negotiations, Turkey and Russia have concluded a deal to build a nuclear power plant on Turkey's southern coast. 
The project could cost as much as $20 billion.
The agreement between Russia's state-owned Atomstroyexport and the Turkish government was signed on Wednesday (May 12th), midway through Russian President Dimitry Medvedev's two-day trip to Ankara and Istanbul.
"It's an extremely important contract for us," Russian nuclear agency chief Sergei Kiriyenko told reporters. 
"This will be the first case in which Russia not only builds a power plant, as we have in Iran and India, but will also own it," he added.
Atomstroyexport will be in charge of building the plant's four reactors, in the eastern Mediterranean town of Akkuyu, in Mersin province. 
Construction will take an estimated seven years to complete. 
The reactor builder will own 100% of the project and may later sell as much as 49% to investors.
Turkey's leaders are hailing the deal -- which must be endorsed by parliament -- as a milestone in efforts to develop nuclear power. 
They say it will be presented to lawmakers within a week to ten days.
"Let me be frank: We [have been] trying to enter the nuclear business for the last 40 years but unfortunately we do not know how to do it," Energy Minister Taner Yıldız told reporters on the sidelines of a conference in Istanbul.
"We have to see the big picture. 
Previous tenders were cancelled fours times by the court. 
We believe in the need of nuclear energy for Turkey and are confident that we will be successful in this," he said.
The plans, however, have drawn strong criticism from civic and environmental organisations. 
The Chamber of Electrical Engineers (EMO) is questioning the terms and has warned the deal could actually increase Turkey's energy dependence on Moscow.
"Full authority of the to-be-built nuclear power plant belongs to Russia. 
This agreement will not make Turkey a hub of nuclear technology as the government suggests; it will make us more dependent on Russia," the chamber said in a statement Thursday.
With nearly 65% of Turkey's natural gas coming from Russia, critics say Moscow could use its role as energy supplier as a political tool.
According to the EMO, the cost of electricity from the planned nuclear power plant will be significantly higher than the global market averages. 
"We'll have to pay nearly $51 billion to the Russians over 15 years for 415 billion kilowatts of electricity," the organisation said.
Meanwhile, Greenpeace Turkey said the government ignored opposition from local Mersin residents, academics and NGOs. 
"It's a very undemocratic process," the group said.
