09/07/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 09/07/10
Romanian emergency services are in a race against time, scrambling to assemble a 4.5km-long dam along the Danube, to protect a large sector of the harbour city of Galati, one of the country's most important economic centres.
The move comes after unprecedented water flow on the river this week. 
Weathermen warn it will peak on Saturday (July 10th), with 17.860 cubic metres per second and a water level expected to reach 677cm -- 16cm above the historic high of 2006.
Work started on Sunday night after local authorities sought help from the central administration, warning that any delay would lead to the largest urban disaster since WWII. 
Around 1,500 firemen, gendarmes and military, most of them brought in from neighbouring counties, worked day and night to raise the almost 2m-high sandbag dam.
"If the dam doesn't last, the Danube will flood a quarter of the city, which also comprises the naval construction site, the harbour and the customs [sector]. 
This means 12,000 jobs, 45m euros a day in damages and 250m euros in damages to private property," Galati County Prefect Cosmin Paun told SETimes.
The city's old district of Valea Orasului sits on the first terrace, parallel with the river. 
The nearly 1,500 houses there are the most vulnerable. 
More than 8,000 people are prepared to evacuate if the dam fails.
Flood control is the contingency plan that local authorities have prepared if the dam breaks, but this would occur at great expense -- villages, people, arable land could all be lost.
"Flooding Galati would be a shame to us all, a sign of the authorities' powerlessness, but this doesn't have to happen," Romanian President Traian Basescu said while visiting the dam construction site.
"I think everything that could be done was done. 
But my conviction is Galati won't be flooded", he said after inspecting the finished dam.
"God forbid!" the president declared when asked about the controlled flooding alternative.
"People in the neighbourhood are scared, panicked," Ovidiu, a local who volunteered to help the emergency units build the dam, told SETimes. 
"This is a first for us who have lived here for decades. 
We've never gone through something like this before."
"We worked 13 hour shifts to make sure we finish the dam in time," he said.
Some locals say nature is exacting revenge. 
"The Danube is just claiming back the territory it has lost after all that work during the artificial industrialisation of the country," A Sandulescu, a pensioner in Galati, told SETimes.
"It's the same with the floods in the other parts of the country where mountains and hills have been deforested. 
It's nature's way of telling us we have gone too far."
