14/05/2010
(Makfax - 14/05/10; MIA, Makfax, Official Website of the Macedonian President, US Embassy in Skopje - 13/05/10)
The United States strongly supports Macedonia's bid to join the EU and NATO, a senior US diplomat said in Skopje on Thursday (May 13th). 
Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Philip Gordon called for a quick solution to the country's long-running name dispute with Greece, so that it can meet its Euro-Atlantic integration goals.
"The name dispute is a key to unlocking that," Gordon said during his first visit to the country since assuming the post about a year ago.
The row between the two neighbours over the name "Macedonia" derailed Skopje's Euro-Atlantic integration path in 2008, when Greece blocked its neighbour's entry into NATO over the issue. 
It has also threatened to prevent Skopje from achieving its EU membership goal until a settlement has been reached.
Greece refuses to recognise the neighbouring country's constitutional name, Republic of Macedonia, citing the potential for territorial claims on its own northern province of Macedonia.
Efforts to resolve the problem through UN-mediated negotiations were stepped up in the past two years. 
But they failed to produce a deal, as various proposals tabled by Matthew Nimetz, the UN special envoy for talks between Athens and Skopje, have been rejected by either one or both parties.
The issue topped the agenda of Gordon's talks with Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov on Thursday, during which Gordon reportedly stressed the need for a "sincere political will on both sides" so that compromise can be achieved.
Ivanov assured him that his country is "prepared for a mutually acceptable solution in the frameworks of the UN Charter, resolutions and international law", his office said in a statement after the meeting.
Gordon also met with the leaders of the main opposition Social-Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) and of the ethnic Albanian Democratic Union for Integration, Branko Crvenkovski and Ali Ahmeti.
After his talks with Gordon, Crvenkovski said Washington wants to see an agreement in place ahead of NATO's November summit. 
That, according to him, implied that "efforts to reach a solution should start now."
