19/09/2005
By Anes Alic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 19/09/05
Unable to overcome a deadlock on required police reform, Bosnia and Herzegovina will miss the opportunity to start Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) talks with the EU this year.
"I regret that the chance to celebrate 10 years of peace by opening a new phase of European future has now been lost", European Commissioner for Enlargement Olli Rehn said Wednesday (14 September).
His statement followed news that the Republika Srspka (RS) Parliament had again rejected the concept of police sector restructuring based on three key EU principles.
BiH has already missed two previous EU deadlines for meeting the requirements for launching Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) talks -- the first step towards membership in the European bloc.
Brussels had hoped the country would finally be ready by November, which marks the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement that ended the 1992-1995 conflict.
Early this week, Brussels indicated that the talks could be launched right away once the police reform agreement is signed by the BiH federal government and the two entities.
However, that will now not happen.
By a vote of 56-10, Bosnian Serb lawmakers voted Wednesday to reject the proposed model because it would allow police to cross inter-entity lines while carrying out their duties.
The international community envisioned police reforms that would install a state-level legislative and budgetary authority over the police, the establishment of police districts based on policing considerations rather than on ethnicity, and an end to political interference in police operations.
The reforms would have reorganised the police forces into 11 interethnic regions.
Bosnian Serb officials, however, have resisted the reforms, which they say are aimed at doing away with the Serb-dominated Republika Srpska (RS) entity -- the borders of which were laid out in the Dayton peace agreement.
Progress is a Slow Road
The EU Road Map, published in 2000, set out 18 essential steps to be undertaken by BiH before work on a Feasibility Study for the opening of SAA negotiations could begin.
In November 2003, the European Commission (EC) approved the Feasibility Study, but there is still much work to do.
The fist deadline for meeting the requirements to begin SAA talks was in June 2004.
That deadline, like one earlier this year, was broken due to failure to co-operate with the UN’s Hague-based International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Until several months ago, the Republika Srpska authorities had failed to arrest a single war crimes suspect since the conflict ended in 1995.
In recent months, they have managed to persuade some wanted war criminals to surrender to The Hague -- but only in return for sizeable cash rewards and other benefits.
When the Feasibility Study was approved in 2003, there was plenty of optimism.
The Bosnian authorities drafted an ambitious Action Plan to realize the SAA conditions.
They called for the passing of 43 laws and the formation of 25 new government institutions.
Thirteen of those laws have so far been passed.
None of the institutions necessary for their implementation, however, have been set up.
Indeed, significant progress has been made.
Earlier this month, the Bosnian authorities agreed on sweeping defence reforms that will unite the country’s ethnically separate armies under a single joint command.
Entity defence ministries will be shut down and transferred to a state level beginning next year.
It was a major hurdle to overcome, and a long time clearing it.
So far, however, sufficient political will has not been summoned to overcome the other two major obstacles:
police and media reform.
In late May, EU officials confirmed that they would not suggest launching accession negotiations until agreement is reached in these two areas.
Lord Paddy Ashdown, the international community’s High Representative to Bosnia, called on the country’s three ruling nationalist parties to return to the table to discuss the controversial police reforms on 26 July.
But the Republika Srpska officials opted out of the meeting because most of them were on vacationing out of the country.
They requested instead that parliament discuss the reforms.
"I am very disappointed by the failure of today’s meeting, especially by the lack of responsibility and seriousness shown by those political parties who did not even attend the meeting," Michael Humphreys, the head of the European Commission delegation in Sarajevo, told a news conference on 26 July.
Media reforms have met a similar fate.
The Bosnian Parliament approved a new broadcasting law in May, but Croat deputies in the upper house threatened to block the bill, which they said discriminated against their ethnic group.
Croat politicians are demanding that Bosnia’s Federal radio and television (FTV) be dismantled and that a third, Croat channel be created.
In short, they are seeking the creation of three ethnicity-based, rather than entity-based, channels.
The law won a small victory on 23 July, when the Constitutional Court ruled that the draft PBS law did not violate the interests of the Croat people in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A Public in Waiting
For now, BiH remains the only country in the region that has not managed to secure any legal agreement with the EU.
In poll conducted by the EU in February 2004, over 73 per cent of Bosnians said they would like to see their country become a member of the bloc.
However, most also said they were aware of the huge obstacles in the way.
When asked which political party worked most actively towards BiH’s integration into Europe, just over 32 per cent said "none", with only between 6 per cent and 7 per cent choosing any one of the ruling nationalist parties -- parties that won 30 per cent of the vote from their respective ethnic electorates in 2002 elections.
