11/06/2010
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 11/06/10
Visiting Sarajevo last week, Serbian President Boris Tadic urged Southeast European countries to cheer for the Serbian national team at the World Cup.
Heeding his call won't be a problem in Republika Srpksa (RS), where most view the Serbian team as their own.
But what about the rest of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)?
"Considering that BiH didn't qualify, in South Africa I'll support Serbia.
We are close neighbours, which binds a similar mentality and customs," said Avdo, a Bosniak fan.
Zvonko, in Mostar, will also cheer for Serbia -- not, he says, because his wife is Serbian, but because attacker Marko Pantelic is his favourite.
Football has often been coloured by the national and interethnic quarrels that cost so much bloodshed in the former Yugoslavia.
Clashes in stadiums are hardly uncommon.
In late April, for instance, 40 people were injured during riots between fans of Sarajevo and Siroki Brijeg.
Their fans also clashed in October 2009, and one person was killed.
Muslims make up the majority of Sarajevo supporters, while Siroki Brijeg fans are predominantly Croats.
"The fans were the ones who channelled official policy and nationalism in the early 1990s in the former Yugoslavia," psychologist Srdjan Puhalo told SETimes.
In the international context, though, fans may be ready to put aside differences in the name of regional solidarity.
"I do not believe that the relations between the three peoples in BiH have dramatically [changed], but the alternative is simply missing," Puhalo said.
"Who will you support -- France, Italy, England or Serbia?"
"Perhaps we are now at the beginning of a new process ...
both in politics and in sports and in life in general.
Your neighbour is closer than someone who is far away, and you're also related to him," he said.
RS Vice-President Adil Osmanovic, a Bosniak, has already accepted Tadic's suggestion and said that he will support Serbia at the World Cup.
"I love football, and mostly, I love Brazilian soccer.
Now I'll definitely cheer for the national team of Serbia, because this is the only country from the former Yugoslavia that is participating in the World Cup," Osmanovic told SETimes.
