14/09/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 14/09/10
After nearly two years of litigation, the trial of generals Ante Gotovina, Ivan Cermak and Mladen Markac is ending, with prosecutors and defendants alike awaiting verdicts by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
The three were indicted on war crimes charges stemming from 1995's Operation Storm, and were accused of participating in a joint criminal enterprise to ethnically cleanse Serbs from the Krajina region. 
Gotovina, who went into hiding after the charges were announced, was captured by Spanish police in 2005 while on the run.
Over 303 days of proceedings, prosecutors and defence attorneys deposed nearly 140 witnesses. 
Many prominent current and former officials took the stand, including former US Ambassador to Croatia Peter Galbraith and close aides of the late President Franjo Tudjman.
Former Serb rebels and Yugoslav National Army officers, such as Kosta Novakovic and Mile Mrksic, also testified.
As expected, the defence used its closing statements to call for acquittals, while the prosecutors demanded lengthy prison sentences -- 27 years for Gotovina, 23 years for Cermak and 17 years for Markac.
Prosecutor Alain Tieger said the evidence "proved beyond reasonable doubt that the three generals were legally responsible for the crimes".
Presiding judge Alphons Orie announced the court will deliver its verdict in the "foreseeable future" but did not specify a deadline.
Markac's attorney, Goran Mikulicic, said he expects a verdict by Christmas.
The generals are Croatia's only high ranking officials to have been indicted for war crimes in The Hague.
Gotovina's attorney, Luka Misetic, told SETimes that he is "confident the tribunal will see things the way we see them".
Gotovina, he added, "conducted himself honourably and in accordance with all of the laws of war".
Another member of the general's defence team, Greg Kehoe, described Gotovina as a patriot who had worked "in difficult conditions, trying to establish democracy in his country".
Kehoe too is sure of an acquittal.
Attorneys for Cermak and Markac also called on the judges to acquit their clients, describing them as honourable men and patriots who sought to defend their country without committing crimes.
Polls show the majority Croats expect the three to be acquitted and allowed to return home. 
Gotovina's hometown of Pakostane -- on the Adriatic coast -- is already organising a celebration party for the general's return.
