08/10/2010
By Natasa Radic and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb and Belgrade -- 11/10/10 Photos by Petar Kos
The group of reporters were more than a little surprised when they caught sight of the train on the tracks. 
A well-worn red engine was pulling 32 weathered freight cars. 
It was an anticlimactic start to a venture that could generate as much as 50m euros in revenue per year.
The region's first joint freight railway since the breakup of Yugoslavia, Kargo 10, started operations this week. 
Headquartered in Ljubljana, it is the result of an agreement signed six months ago with the aim of making regional railways more competitive by joining forces.
Some are already dubbing it the "Railways of SCS", referring to the old Kingdom of Serbs, Croatians and Slovenes. 
According to promoters, though, it has little to do with the past and everything to do with the future.
"Regional co-operation is helping trade and economies, as those countries that are not in the EU benefit from links with those that are," says Slovenian EU and Development Minister Mitja Gaspari. 
"This joint railway project will help the competitiveness of all three economies of the three states included."
"Kargo 10 will be an important player in the transport business," predicts director Robert Vuga.
Serbian Infrastructure Minister Milutin Mrkonjic told reporters that the strategic goal of the new railway company is to attract some of the cargo currently transported through the longer Corridor 4, which runs through Romania and Bulgaria.
"Today 7,000 trains pass through Corridor 4 and about 1,000 through Corridor 10. 
If we could attract just 2,000 more trains to Corridor 10, Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia would conspicuously increase their net foreign currency inflow," Mrkonjic said.
In addition to each of the three countries earning tens of millions of euros a year, companies trying to move goods between markets can expect to shave hours off transport time, boosting profits.
Macedonian and Montenegrin railways are also interested in joining the project. 
"They will not become part of our joint company, because they are not in the same corridor, but will co-operate with our company as partners, which is a true example of regional co-operation," Mrkonjic said.
Belgrade economist Mahmut Busatlija is cautious, however, saying a shorter distance between two points does not always mean faster.
"The average speed of trains in Corridor 4 is around 90km per hour, whereas the average speed of trains running through Serbia is 35km per hour. 
That bottleneck will prevent the rapid attraction of traffic from Corridor 4."
"Investing in railway infrastructure requires large sums of money, which Serbia does not have at the moment," he told SETimes.
He acknowledged, though, that this kind of integration will benefit everyone, as "none of the three states' railway companies are competitive or self-sufficient on their own."
Will such co-operation spread to other forms of transportation -- air travel, for example? 
Not at this point. 
The notion of merging Slovenian Adria Airways, Croatia Airlines and Serbia's JAT has yet to take off, amid concerns of causing more financial turbulence for the regional air carriers.
