08/07/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 08/07/10
Bekim Fehmiu was one of the greatest actors of the former Yugoslavia and one of the few who managed to build a respectable international career. 
A Kosovo Albanian by ethnicity, he transcended cultural, national and international boundaries.
Fehmiu committed suicide in his Belgrade apartment on June 15th. 
Media reports linked the act to the fact that he had been seriously ill for a long time.
In keeping with the actor's last wish, his ashes were scattered on the Bistrica River, not far from the Kosovo town of Prizren. 
Admirers in Pristina and Belgrade paid their respects to Fehmiu, who had been a link of sorts between Albanians and Serbs.
Milazim Salihu, cinematographer and director of the Pristina-based film distribution company Genci, told SETimes that Kosovo "most likely in the next 200 years, will not get an actor" of his caliber.
"He was a remarkable actor, an extraordinary man, a great and devoted friend, who left films behind him that will remain part of the history of European and world cinema," Salihu said.
Fehmiu, who withdrew from the limelight to protest the Balkan conflicts, was a link between Kosovo and other parts of the former Yugoslavia, the director added. 
"Bekim's work, due to the time in which he worked and the themes he played out, belonged to all peoples in the former Yugoslav territory," Salihu said.
Radoslav Zelenovic, head of the Yugoslav Film Archive in Belgrade, told SETimes that Fehmiu made an "invaluable" contribution to Yugoslav cinema.
"One should understand that at the time when that film was made, Yugoslavia was behind the 'iron curtain', a country of the Eastern Bloc. 
By playing Bora in I Even Met Happy Gypsies, Fehmiu brought attention to himself and became the sole actor from that part of Europe to achieve a notable international career," Zelenovic said.
In that movie, released in 1967, Fehmiu plays a Roma man, Bora, who earns a living selling feathers.
In one of Yugoslav cinema's most famous scenes a drunken Bora sits at a tavern and breaks glasses with his bare hands, to the tune of "Djelem, Djelem". 
The song's title means "I travel" in the Romany language.
Speaking at the commemorations following Fehmiu's death, his colleague and former Serbian Culture Minister Branislav Lecic said he had learned a great deal from Fehmiu, with whom he had started his acting career.
"Fehmiu was the greatest Serb among Albanians and the greatest Albanian among Serbs," Lecic said.
Fehmiu co-operated with all major directors of the former Yugoslavia and won numerous acting awards. 
He appeared in movies in other European countries, particularly Italy, where he became famous due to the TV show "Ulysses".
