14/09/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 14/09/10
Kosovo police have stepped up security measures in the north after Serbs and Albanians clashed following Saturday's (September 11th) World Basketball Championship match, in which Serbia lost to Turkey.
Police spokesman Besim Hoti says ethnic Albanians and Serbs threw stones at each other when Albanians started celebrating Turkey's victory.
Unofficial figures report seven injured.
Groups on both sides gathered around the Ibar Bridge as KFOR, EULEX and Kosovo police stood in the middle.
Gunshots were fired and EULEX confirmed that one French gendarme was wounded in the leg.
"Kosovo police increased security measures mainly in the mixed community areas in order to prevent a possible incident," Baki Kelani, Kosovo police chief spokesperson told SETimes on Monday.
He said that except for the post-match melee, the situation in Kosovo has generally been quiet.
"It was an isolated incident -- the police and KFOR managed to keep the situation under control," Kelani said.
EULEX chief Yves de Kermabon said the mission "will not tolerate such unlawful behaviour and is ready to take whatever measures required, in conjunction with the Kosovo police and KFOR, to ensure that any repetition of such events will be vigorously dealt with".
Likewise, KFOR Commander Major General Erhard Buhler said the peacekeeping force "will not tolerate any violence in Kosovo".
President Fatmir Sejdiu said that such incidents damage the country's image and serve those who are against peace, stability and the wellbeing of all in Kosovo, regardless of ethnicity or religion.
Sejdiu asked all citizens to act responsibly and "not be trapped by different hooligans who work against the law".
He also condemned the attack against EULEX and KFOR members, saying it was "entirely unacceptable and shameful".
Goran Bogdanovic, Serbia's minister for Kosovo, meanwhile, cited the incident as evidence that the situation in Kosovo's volatile north should be discussed during future talks between Belgrade and Pristina.
"This is proving that only minor incidents need to happen for the situation to escalate.
We are against violence and call for immediate dialogue.
We believe that the north, as well as other problems in Kosovo and Metohija, should be part of this dialogue," Bogdanovic told the daily Koha Ditore.
