14/09/2010
(Zaman, The Guardian - 14/09/10;
AP, AFP, Reuters, Bloomberg, DPA, FT, BBC, CNN, Euronews, Euobserver, EurActiv, RFE/RL, The Economist, Xinhua - 13/09/10)
The EU welcomed the successful referendum on a package of constitutional amendments in Turkey at the weekend, but warned on Monday (September 13th) that it will watch closely how the envisioned changes are implemented, and called for further sweeping reforms.
"The result of the referendum brings Turkey a step closer to its European objective, but more needs to follow," European Parliament (EP) President Jerzy Buzek said in a statement.
"After implementing these constitutional changes, further and deeper reforms need to be implemented."
The package of 26 amendments to Turkey's constitution, which was crafted two years after the 1980 military coup, was supported by 58% of voters in Sunday's referendum.
It boosted the chances of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party (AKP) winning next year's general elections for a third mandate.
In the wake of the referendum, more than 200 laws will need to be changed, Turkey's pro-government daily Zaman reported on Tuesday.
Lawmakers are expected to start working on them after the end of their summer recess, on October 1st.
"We will bring laws that need to be passed immediately to parliament as soon as October," Bekir Bozdag, deputy chairman of the AKP parliamentary group, told the paper.
"Relevant ministries will prepare separate reports as to which laws need to be passed the earliest.
Some laws are more urgent than others."
Those deemed less urgent could be put on hold until next year, he said.
The measures will, inter alia, make the Turkish military more accountable to civilian courts, will end the immunity from prosecution granted leaders of the last coup, 30 years ago, and will give the AKP-dominated parliament the power to appoint several judges.
In addition, the reforms will expand the social rights of civil servants, as well as strengthen gender equality and child protection.
Following Sunday's vote, EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele said the proposed reforms are "a step in the right direction, as they address a number of long-standing priorities in Turkey's efforts towards fully complying with the accession criteria".
He did voice concern, however, that the referendum has contributed to the polarisation between secularists, who opposed the changes, and religious Turks.
Fuele also urged the government to ensure that the process of drafting the required implementing legislation is conducted in consultation with all political parties and civil society and in "a spirit of dialogue and compromise".
"A number of implementing laws will be needed and we will follow their preparation very closely," Fuele warned.
"We share the views of many in Turkey that today's vote needs to be followed by other much needed reforms to address the remaining priorities in the area of fundamental rights, such as freedom of expression and freedom of religion."
German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle, whose country, along with France, insists that Turkey should be offered some sort of a "privileged partnership" rather than full-fledged membership when it completes its EU entry talks, voiced support for Ankara's reform efforts.
"We don't want to rashly promise something before the time comes, but nobody can rebuff and exclude such an important, obviously modernising country," the DPA quoted the minister as saying on Monday.
"We encourage those forces in Turkey that are continuing this process of reform.
The outcome of the referendum shows that Turkey's gaze is in the direction of Europe."
Egemen Bagis, Turkey's minister for European affairs and Ankara's chief negotiator with the EU, vowed in an interview with Euronews on Monday that his country would continue the process of democratic reform.
"Having taken this step, we are going to continue with reforms, and we will all take the necessary first steps so that Turkey becomes a country that answers to the European criteria, so that the people of Turkey benefit from a high standard of living," he said.
