08/07/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 08/07/10
As the World Cup draws to a close, fans will be returning to regular life.
For weeks now, the international contest has kept many glued to their TV sets for significant portions of the day. 
In Belgrade, as in many other parts of the region, it has also filled up betting venues.
"Everyone is betting: men and women, young and old; there is a complete euphoria since the start of the World Cup," a betting venue employee, who identified herself as Ivana, told SETimes.
Visits were most frequent prior to the Serbian team's matches, she explained. 
"One customer told me he took a loan to bet Serbia will win against Ghana. 
He took 500 euros from the bank and lost, and his wife doesn't know about it," she said.
Some were less patriotically inclined and bet Serbia would lose to Germany last month, only to be surprised by the outcome.
"There are no favourites in this World Cup, as there have been major surprises," Ivana noted.
Milena, a young woman at the venue, said she is placing bets for a friend. 
"He is working and can't come to place a bet on time. 
He lost 30,000 euros once but still hasn't had enough," she said.
Carefully looking at the lists and betting tickets, another visitor, Rade, confides that he places bets daily and earns about 10 to 20 euros per day on average. 
"I used to bet on a daily basis even before the World Cup and now I simply can't miss a single game," he told SETimes.
Other customers, like Dragan, say the World Cup atmosphere encouraged them to give betting a try.
"I have never bet before, but all my buddies are doing it," he said. 
"I will make a small bet, and if I win -- great, if not -- nevermind."
Another better, Zoran, says he avoided putting money on the Serb games. 
"We get impossible opponents and lose to the ones we are sure we can beat," he said.
"I was sure we would beat Australia and qualify for the second round," adds another customer, Petar. 
"Thank God I didn't bet a lot of money. 
I am sadder at Serbia's defeat than losing money," he said.
Serbia was eliminated in the World Cup's first round, but Ivana says the interest in betting has not waned. 
"Despite the disappointment, our regular customers came back the next day," she said.
Many will likely be there on Sunday when Spain takes on The Netherlands in the final, and on Saturday when Germany and Uruguay vie for third place.
