13/09/2010
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 13/09/10
Turks offered a resounding "Evet!" during a referendum on reforms that the government says will strengthen democracy.
In Sunday's (September 12th) ballot, 58% of those who cast a vote backed the amendments to Turkey's military-era constitution, delivering a greater than expected victory to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who has led the country for eight years at the helm of the Justice and Development Party (AKP).
The vote will give parliament and the government a far greater say in the makeup of the country's top court -- a measure which opponents claimed was a blow to judicial independence and a move towards autocracy.
The Islamic-rooted AKP argued that the judiciary -- a bastion of Turkey's secular regime -- was politically biased.
Analysts have said the result constitutes a major boost to Erdogan, ahead of next year's general elections.
The referendum was viewed by many as a vote of confidence in the prime minister, who has faced criticism for his domineering leadership style, as well as a renewed challenge by the main opposition party in parliament, the Republican People's Party (CHP).
Following his victory, Erdogan struck a conciliatory tone.
"Those who said 'yes' and those who said 'no' are equal winners, because advanced democracy is for everybody," he told supporters.
"I apologise if I hurt anybody in the referendum campaign process."
For the CHP, and its new leader, Kemal Kilicdaroglu, who had been credited with rejuvenating his party, the defeat was stinging.
In an embarrassing twist, Kilicdaroglu was unable to vote since he failed to register.
"We respect the will of the people," he said after the vote count.
"We have learned lessons from the referendum."
Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation Director Etyen Mahcupyen told SETimes that the AKP will continue its electoral dominance as long as it is the only party to court Turkey's rising religious middle class, which is demanding greater freedom and democratic rights.
"This referendum shows that the AKP will have a good chance to be in power again after the next election [in 2011], if the opposition parties do not change their strategy," he said.
The reforms also pave the way for the prosecution of military officers in civilian courts -- potentially including those behind a brutal coup in September 1980.
Additionally, they will introduce greater privacy protection, enhanced rights for women, children and the elderly, and collective bargaining for public employees.
The result was welcomed by the EU, which backed the amendment package.
"These reforms are a step in the right direction as they address a number of long-standing priorities in Turkey's efforts towards fully complying with [EU] accession criteria," said Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele.
Hugh Pope, a specialist in Turkish Affairs and analyst with the International Crisis Group, also welcomed the result.
"For all the complexities of the situation, it's a government that's trying to move forward with reform," he told SETimes.
"Turkey's a country that's definitely worth more better and serious attention from the EU than it's currently getting."
The vote revealed stark division in Turkey's attitudes to its governing party.
Every one of its western coastal provinces voted against the measures.
In the southeast, where the main Kurdish political grouping, the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), had urged a boycott, many refused to cast a ballot.
In one province, Hakkari, turnout was just 6%.
Pope said despite its victory, the AKP should take heed.
"It's clearly going to have to take the BDP seriously, and there are very clear signs that the Western coastal provinces are skeptical of the government's intentions, and these are the real dynamo areas of Turkey."
