13/05/2010
(Makfax, The Irish Times - 13/05/10;
AFP, Reuters, AP, DPA, BBC, AKI, MIA, Makfax, B92, Official Website of the US Embassy in Skopje - 12/05/10;
AP, B92 - 30/04/10)
Four people were killed in a shootout between police and an armed gang early Wednesday (May 12th) in northern Macedonia, close to the country's border with Kosovo.
The incident occurred near the villages of Radusa and Rasce, about 20km north of Skopje, when police tried to stop a white Mercedes Sprinter van suspected of carrying illegal weapons.
"We set an ambush and ...
people from inside the vehicle opened fire;
police responded and four of them [in the van] were killed," Macedonian police spokesman Ivo Kotevski told AFP.
According to media reports, police received a tipoff and were stopping vehicles in the region to prevent arms from being smuggled into Macedonia.
Kotevski said the authorities seized a range of weapons, mines and four bags of explosives in the van.
They also found insignia of the National Liberation Army (NLA), an ethnic Albanian rebel group that was officially disbanded after the August 2001 Ohrid Framework Agreement.
Interior Minister Gordana Jankulovska told reporters at a news conference Wednesday that three of the gunmen -- wearing black uniforms -- had been identified and are well known to police.
Two were ethnic Albanians from the Macedonian villages of Grcec and Merovo and the third was from Kosovo.
The origin of the fourth person had not been established.
In a report Thursday, Macedonia's Makfax news agency identified the four.
One of the Macedonian nationals, Harun Aliu, was convicted earlier this year of the January 2008 murder of a member of a special police unit.
He was sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment.
Two others received the same sentence.
The incident near Radusa, described as the most serious since the 2001 conflict in Macedonia, came less than a fortnight after another shootout between police and a group of unidentified armed men in the area, near the Blace border crossing.
During that operation, police discovered several depots containing a large cache of weapons, including explosives, firearms, mortar rounds, various mines and hand grenades.
There is no indication so far that the two incidents are connected, Jankulovska said on Wednesday.
She added that the police operations in Radusa and Blace demonstrate that authorities are keeping the security situation under control.
"We have once again sent a clear message that violence cannot be tolerated and that we will respond in the harshest manner to all attempts at jeopardising the security, safety of citizens, as well as of the police officers," the minister said.
The US Embassy in Skopje issued a statement Wednesday, praising the Macedonian authorities.
"The United States commends Macedonia's successful police action against armed criminal elements evidently planning violent acts against the citizens of Macedonia," Ambassador Philip Reeker said.
"We reaffirm our strong opposition to and condemnation of violence and those who promote it."
