13/05/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/05/10
Serbia plans to professionalise its armed forces and end mandatory military service by 2011, Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac announced last week.
The reform "is in line with a modern army and state", he told the ministry's publication, Defence.
Serbs can look forward to a system that provides greater security, Sutanovic said.
He added that a professional soldier "is trained, capable and ready to respond to all challenges at a given moment, because that is his profession".
Currently, all Serbian men are required to serve for six months.
Under the new system, young men who wish to join the armed forces will undergo a three-month basic infantry training run by the defence ministry.
Ministry officials said the application process is under way for the new group, and they expect to have 10,600 professional soldiers soon after the reform.
The ministry also plans to hike soldiers' monthly income from 300 euros to 700 euros.
Not all Serbs agree with the change.
Military analyst Aleksander Radic says it is "a bit rash".
"I think the model of an army that combined recruits and professional soldiers should have been kept," Radic told SETimes.
"Only in the army was Serbia able to train a larger number of people for reaction to emergency situations, such as earthquakes and floods.
Now it will not have that possibility."
But fellow analyst Zoran Dragisic disagrees.
"The absence of recruits will not be a blow because the army has been gradually reducing the number of conscripts for years," he said.
He feels the army should have been completely professionalised even earlier, as a cost-cutting measure.
"Transferring to a professional armed forces is like getting a car to run on natural gas instead of on gasoline," he told SETimes.
"It is expensive until you switch, but afterwards it pays off."
Radic, on the other hand, believes that ending conscription sends the wrong message to society.
"I think too much is expected of professional soldiers who earn less than 300 euros per month," he said.
"Unlike in the 1990s, when it had an exaggerated image of a warrior nation, Serbia is now completely distancing itself from the very idea of an army, which might be excessive."
The new reforms surprise some members of the public as well.
"Back in the day in my village, one could not get married until they completed mandatory army service," pensioner Dobrivoje told SETimes, adding that it was considered a "disgrace" to be rejected for such service.
Still, he said, "I am glad that my grandson won't have to suffer in the army."
