07/10/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 07/10/10
EULEX, the EU's rule of law mission in Kosovo, arrested two brothers this week as part of an operation targeting organised crime.
Srdjan Vulevic, a Serb from Leposavic, was detained on Wednesday (October 6th) when he showed up to post bail for his brother, Dejan, who was arrested earlier this week on suspicion of having committed several crimes, including attempted murder.
Charges in Srdjan Vulevic's arrest include threatening a public official, unauthorised possession of weapons and obstructing official persons in performing their duties.
EULEX spokesperson Blerim Krasniqi said the mission is investigating 25 people in northern Kosovo, with six of them considered priority cases.
Leaders in the municipality of Mitrovica have been asking for stronger measures to establish the rule of law. 
The frequency of incidents is "creating problems for the implementation of different projects in the north", Deputy Mayor Riza Haziri told the daily Express.
KFOR Commander General Erhard Buhler, EULEX Police chief Udo Karl-Heinz Moller and Kosovo Police Director on duty Behar Selimi spoke with the media about their plans.
According to Buhler, the number of KFOR soldiers in both parts of the town has been increased and they will be setting up checkpoints and conducting foot patrols.
"Measures will be taken in the north and in the south. 
The joint operations … intend to overcome these challenging situations of the security in the north," he told the Express.
Moller said some of the measures were implemented on Monday. 
"The actions we have started in Mitrovica will continue," he told reporters.
As for the Kosovo police, "Our duty is to offer security, to narrow the circle of the criminals and we will do that for sure," Selimi said.
EULEX chief Yves de Kermabon, who talked to officials in Serbia last week, told the media that Belgrade is also interested in fighting organised crime.
"We are making attempts to establish relations with the neighbouring countries, [Serbia] one of them … [the countries] should work together without political interference, because this is the only way to be efficient," de Kermabon told Koha Ditore.
The co-ordinator for implementing Pristina's strategy for northern Kosovo, Ylber Hysa, says that any step undertaken there is significant, given that over the last ten years the north has not been under the control of Kosovo institutions.
"I am not part of the latest projects, but I hope they bring results, and not be part of media campaigns, as has happened several times in the last years, when UNMIK did nothing to change the unstable status quo in the north," Hysa told SETimes.
