07/10/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 07/10/10
Customs Director Mladen Barisic, facing criminal charges, could avoid prosecution if he activates his mandate as a parliamentary deputy and gains legal immunity.
Barisic was arrested last week and charged with corruption, abuse of position and illegal mediation.
He has been dismissed from all of his duties.
At a press conference, state attorney Mladen Bajic vowed "We will come to the end of this investigation.
We don't know where it will lead us, but I promise you, we will follow the leads."
Investigators found that Barisic lives a life of luxury.
Croatia's daily Jutarnji list reports that he had nearly 330,000 euros on his person at the time of the arrest.
He owned a collection of expensive watches and had a reserved table at a luxury restaurant in downtown Zagreb.
The office of Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor, who has said fighting corruption is a major priority for her administration, declined to comment on the case.
Many of the prime minister's former colleagues face serious charges, including former Deputy Prime Minister Damir Polancec.
Some say the series of arrests are inevitable.
"Finally, we have imprisoned representatives from all institutions -- a shameful truth.
This country has to deal with corruption and 'separate the wheat from the chaff'," retired salesman Marko Barisic (no relation to Mladen) told SETimes.
Mladen Barisic's alleged activities have been closely linked to those of Nevenka Jurak, a longtime female friend and head of the consulting agency Fimi Media, which had been handling government PR.
Jurak was arrested in August and remains in custody.
At a meeting in 2007, Barisic allegedly ordered all state firms to hire Fimi Media exclusively, ignoring public tenders.
Barisic has not commented on his case or on reports linking it to former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader.
"My client will present his defence when he calms down a bit," said Barisic's attorney, Ante Madunic.
Some Croatian media reports speculate that Sanader is the ultimate target of the investigation, though this remains unconfirmed.
