07/07/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 07/07/10
None of the four main objectives assumed by Romania through an EU supervisory mechanism --the Co-operation and Verification Mechanism (MCV) -- for justice and internal affairs has been accomplished so far, a survey by two Romanian NGOs concludes.
It recommends that the MCV should be maintained.
A total of 84 experts -- 60 journalists and 24 NGO representatives specialising in justice and anti-corruption -- participated in the survey, released last month by the Romanian Academic Society and the Romanian Centre for European Policies.
Under the MCV, established for both Romania and Bulgaria, the European Commission issues twice-yearly reports that assess progress made by the newest member states in the field of justice.
There have been five such reports for Romania since it joined the EU in 2007.
There are four reference benchmarks established for Romania, and six for Bulgaria.
An overwhelming majority of respondents, 91%, agreed the greatest failure is in the first objective, which calls for "consolidation of the transparency and efficiency of the act of justice, especially through enhancing the capacity and responsibilities of the Superior Magistrates' Council".
The council, a 19-member panel of which 14 members are magistrates, oversees the field of justice and is the guarantor of its independence.
At least 65% of the 84 experts concluded the second objective -- creation of the National Integrity Agency to check politicians and high-ranking state employees' assets for possible conflicts of interest -- has not been met.
Nearly 60% gave the same answer when asked about the third objective -- continuation of progress made in impartially investigating massive corruption.
As for the fourth objective -- continued implementation of measures to prevent and fight corruption in local administrations -- almost 71% of the respondents said it had not been fulfilled.
As a consequence, two-thirds of those surveyed said the MCV has to be maintained and sanctions made even tougher for failing to meet the four reference benchmarks satisfactorily.
About 86% said the MCV has kept or enhanced the subject of corruption on the public agenda, while 85% of them felt the mechanism has also led to a change in political speech, concerning corruption.
The experts also criticised parliament's role in fighting corruption, with 80% of them saying the institution abuses its prerogative to approve criminal investigations against its members.
Only the National Anti-corruption Department (DNA) received a positive assessment, with 56% of the experts agreeing it does its job.
"The results of the survey are somewhat predictable, since the efforts to reach these benchmarks are minimal, not to say nil," Anne-Marie Blajan, a journalist with the website Hotnews, told SETimes.
"Not surprising either is the conclusion the MCV has to be kept.
There is this unanimous opinion that, unless the EU exerts a minimum of pressure, the reforms would altogether disappear," she added.
However, she disputes some of the survey's conclusions.
"It is debatable to what extent the MCV has led to a change in political speech in Romania.
Maybe the whole political class internalised the anti-corruption fight and the reform topics in their pre- or immediately post-EU speech, but the latest 2008 parliamentary and 2009 presidential elections have shown these were not a preoccupation anymore," she said.
"But these topics resurface soon before the EC report is due to be released," concluded Blajan, who specialises in covering EU affairs.
