07/07/2010
(Reuters, RFE/RL, B92, Xinhua - 07/07/10; AP, Reuters, DPA, Beta, B92, UN News Centre - 06/07/10)
At Serbia's request, the UN Security Council held an emergency session Tuesday (July 6th) to discuss the situation in Kosovo, following last week's grenade explosion at a flashpoint area in the country's north.
The incident occurred on Friday when an unknown assailant threw two bombs at a demonstration of about 1,000 Kosovo Serbs protesting Pristina's move to open a community service centre in the ethnically-divided town of Mitrovica. 
A Bosniak pediatrician, who did not attend the rally, was killed in the attack. 
Eleven others, all ethnic Serb protesters, were wounded.
Serbian President Boris Tadic told the Security Council on Tuesday that he had requested the meeting due to "the serious deterioration of the security situation in the northern part of Kosovo".
Addressing the 15-nation body, he blamed tensions in the area on Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence in February 2008 and on a "sinister plan" to expand the scope of Pristina-based institutions to that part of the country.
"The ethnic Albanian authorities have to be told what the consequence will be -- should they try unilateralism again," said Tadic.
Urging the Security Council to condemn Friday's attack, he also warned that Belgrade would otherwise be forced to reconsider its relations with the international presence in Kosovo.
Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni said local police are investigating the case, with the assistance of EULEX. 
He urged Serbia to "stop interfering" in his country's internal affairs.
"Please, for the sake of Kosovo Serbs, leave them alone," a Security Council statement quoted him as saying. 
"Work with us for their benefit. 
And do talk to us… on the many practical issues that would, on the one side, help relations between our two countries, but, on other side, would have a critical impact on the well-being of the Serb community."
Hyseni also suggested that the hand grenades "were most probably" hurled by participants in Friday's demonstration.
Condemning that bombing incident, members of the Security Council as well as the UNMIK and EULEX mission chiefs in Kosovo, Lamberto Zannier and Yves de Kermabon, called for restraint on both sides. 
They also urged the sides to commit to dialogue in addressing challenges in northern Kosovo.
Expressing deep regret over the violence, Zannier noted that the relevant law enforcement authorities must "take urgent measures to bring the perpetrators to justice".
He also briefed the Council about another incident in Mitrovica, in which Kosovo Serb lawmaker Petar Miletic was shot and wounded by an unknown assailant outside his house Monday morning.
"Events over the past few days point to the need to initiate this dialogue as a matter of urgency," Zannier said, pledging that the UN would continue to work with all sides to encourage dialogue and ensure peace and stability on the ground.
De Kermabon assured the Council that those investigating Friday's bombing attack would make every effort to apprehend the perpetrators. 
Despite the recent incidents in Mitrovica, he said there is no risk of a general deterioration in security, either in north Mitrovica or the rest of Kosovo.
