05/03/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 05/03/10
Yves de Kermabon, the head of EULEX, met with Belgrade officials on Wednesday (March 3rd) to discuss strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo.
De Kermabon met with Serbian Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic and State Secretary Slobodan Homen to discuss ways to get courts in Mitrovica functioning again.
"Both parties agreed that the discussions, which concentrated on improving the rule of law situation in Kosovo, were frank, positive and constructive," said EULEX in a press release.
"The aim was to find functional solutions in the field of justice, police and customs that can be acceptable to all communities."
EULEX confirmed that "a number of confidence-building measures were discussed" and "follow-up meetings, especially in the justice field" will take place to achieve "functional solutions".
"It was agreed that there was an urgent need to improve the rule of law situation in the north of Kosovo and that the best way forward was to find pragmatic solutions," the EU mission said.
According to Bogdanovic, the EU mission does not support the plan for Serb-dominated northern Kosovo.
The proposal -- conceived by the International Civilian Office in Kosovo (ICO) and the Kosovo government -- envisions the integration of the northern part of the country and the dissolution of parallel structures there that are supported by Belgrade.
"De Kermabon said that EULEX and the EU will not support violent or imposed solutions in northern Kosovo," Belgrade based RTV B92 quoted Bogdanovic as saying Wednesday, after the meeting.
Earlier this month, de Kermabon told the Belgrade daily Vecernje Novosti that the ICO plan is not a EULEX strategy.
"We believe that progress in northern Kosovo can only be achieved through dialogue, step by step," he said.
Bogdanovic said discussions centred on the formation of a joint EULEX/Serb government "work group that will deal with technical questions in the sectors of customs, justice and police".
But EULEX denied on Wednesday any agreement on such working groups.
"No agreement was made on setting up working groups in the field of customs, justice and police," the mission said.
"The meetings focused almost entirely on normalisation of the work of the court in Mitrovica."
Homen told the Serb media that "there was discussion on the need to process war criminals, the importance of the fight against organised crime, and the exchange of documents, which has been stalled for two years."
"We once again expressed our readiness to process war crimes, but said that we need EULEX's help in that," Belgrade's B92 quoted Homen as saying.
Before the meetings with de Kermabon, Bogdanovic was quoted by Serb media as saying certain topics would be unavoidable.
He cited "legislation in northern Kosovo, then the implementation of police protocol in matters of customs and the flow of goods and capital between the two administrative lines".
EULEX did not confirm that any of this was discussed.
