12/05/2010
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 12/05/10
The government is under strong pressure to nominate new judges for the ten vacant positions on Albania's Supreme and Constitutional courts.
Three mandates of the 17 Supreme Court justices have already expired, while the fourth expires on May 21st.
The Constitutional Court currently lacks six of its nine justices.
"It is the most important moment for the judiciary," Maksim Haxhia, head of the National Lawyers House/Guild told SETimes.
The vacancies are leading to delays in the handling of legal issues, he said, with the Supreme Court affected the most.
According to the constitution, the president must present a list of nominees to parliament, which then votes on them.
Albanian law stipulates nominees should be elected by 50%+1 of the votes.
Because of an ongoing protest by the Socialist opposition, however, only 72 of the 140 members are attending parliament sessions -- making 37 votes enough to elect the judges.
"I think that there are considerable chances to make mistakes in the nomination process," Haxhia said, "especially with the situation in the parliament".
President Bamir Topi began working on the nominees' list in February.
Last week, he said he will not nominate justices affiliated with any political group.
The aim is to "to give life to the principle of having separated political and judicial powers, and that of having a sovereign judiciary", Topi said.
To ensure an infusion of new people, former judges of one court cannot join the other, he added.
The nominees will be elected in a transparent process, the president said, adding that along with professional criteria, the candidates' moral and professional integrity will be taken into account.
Candidates will also be required to present a declaration of assets and property.
"If in the election process [Topi] remains faithful to the criteria he has declared, I think we will see positive improvements for both courts and our judiciary," Haxhia said.
The government is also consulting about the selection principles with independent legal experts.
Representatives of EURALIUS, OSCE and the US programme OPDAT are also taking part.
Socialist Party Secretary for Legal Issues Fatmir Xhafa says such meetings are "useful, but not sufficient if the process is not transparent".
The Socialists have emphasised the nominations' importance as an opportunity for the president to positively influence the functioning of the courts.
They announced that they will support any constructive step in the process.
In 2008, the majority Democrats parliament rejected five nominations by the president.
