09/04/2010
(Washington Post, AP, Nine O'clock - 09/04/10; Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, BBC, CNN, New York Times, Washington Post, FT, RFE/RL, VOA, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, Croatian Times, Euobserver, The White House - 08/04/10)
The signing of a new arms reduction pact between the United States and Russia in Prague on Thursday (April 8th) signals continued improvement between the former Cold War adversaries.
US President Barack Obama and Russian counterpart Dmitry Medvedev signed a new version of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) at Prague Castle, the Czech president's residence. 
Both hailed the deal as significant for both countries and global arms control.
The pact, which must be ratified by both countries' legislatures, replaces the 1991 START agreement, which expired in December 2009. 
When the new agreement goes into effect, each nation would have to cut their number of deployed nuclear warheads to 1,550 apiece over the next seven years.
The reduction to 1,550 is 74% lower than the limit set in the original START deal and 30% lower than the one established under the 2002 Moscow Treaty, according to a statement released by the White House on Thursday.
The United States and Russia would also have to cut by half the number of deployed and non-deployed launchers and heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments, bringing the number down to 800 per country. 
The new START also limits the number of deployed ballistic missiles and heavy bombers to no more than 700 each. 
Verification would take place via 18 on-site inspections per year.
"This day demonstrates the determination of the US and Russia -- the two nations that hold over 90% of the world's nuclear weapons -- to pursue responsible global leadership," Obama said, addressing hundreds of officials at the Renaissance-era castle's Spanish Hall.
Describing the pact as a "win-win situation" for the world, Medvedev said it opens a new era in US-Russian relations while allowing higher levels of co-operation in other areas as well. 
He noted however that the two sides remain divided over a planned US missile defence system in Eastern Europe.
Shortly before the signing ceremony, the Kremlin distributed a statement, warning that new START treaty could be derailed if the US beefed up missile-defence systems in a way that poses a significant threat to Russia.
Obama said that the two parties had agreed to a "deeper dialogue" on the issue.
Later Thursday, Obama hosted a working dinner with leaders from Eastern Europe: Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia. 
He worked to reassure his guests that the thaw in US-Russian ties would not come at the disadvantage of Washington's allies in the region.
On the question of possible new UN sanctions against Iran over its nuclear ambitions, Obama said Russia and the US are working together at the UN Security Council on the matter.
"We cannot turn a blind eye to this," agreed Medvedev, noting that sanctions against Iran should be "smart" and not impose hardship on its people.
