06/07/2010
(EurActiv, RFE/RL - 06/07/10; AP, AFP, WAZ.Euobserver, Xinhua, B92, Blic, Balkans.com, Focus - 05/07/10)
The European integration of the Western Balkan countries is essential to strengthening the region, EU Council President Herman Van Rompuy said in an interview published on Monday (July 5th).
"The European future of the region is key for its stability, and the intention is that the process of EU integration clearly continues in the most effective possible way," he told the Croatian daily Jutarnji List, ahead of his visit to Zagreb. 
"The European Union has, on several occasions, confirmed its commitment to the enlargement process and the European perspective of the Western Balkans."
Van Rompuy, who served as Belgium's prime minister before taking office as the 27-nation bloc's first elected president in December, said Brussels will continue working for the EU hopefuls' progress. 
But countries must make more efforts to implement the required reforms and meet the Union's membership criteria, he stressed.
Croatia, the most advanced in the EU accession process among the Western Balkan countries, is expected to enter the bloc in 2012 or 2013, as its 28th member. 
It would thus become the second former Yugoslav republic to join, following Slovenia's admission six year ago.
"Croatia's success will also give a positive signal to the region by proving that accession to the EU is attainable," Van Rompuy said after talks with Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor in Zagreb, the third leg of his two-day tour of the region.
He paid brief visits to Slovenia and Serbia earlier Monday. 
In Belgrade, Van Rompuy met with President Boris Tadic, who "expressed his discontent with the slow-down in the process of European integration", according to a statement issued by his office after the meeting.
Tadic "believes that it is vital for the future of the Western Balkans to be integrated into the European Union as quickly as possible" and that any other solution would be "useless" for the region and the EU, it added.
Tadic and Van Rompuy also discussed the situation in Kosovo, where one man was killed in the ethnically divided town of Mitrovica on Friday in an explosion that left another 11 injured.
While the EU president was travelling through the region, Kosovo Serb lawmaker Petar Miletic was shot and wounded by a gunman in Mitrovica on Monday.
Condemning the recent flare-up of violence in Kosovo, Van Rompuy called for "restraint, calmness, stability and dialogue", during his visit to Zagreb.
He wraps up his tour of the region after his visit to Pristina on Tuesday (July 6th), when he is scheduled to meet with President Fatmir Sejdiu.
