06/10/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 06/10/10
Although nothing has been officially decided in Kosovo since the September 27th resignation of President Fatmir Sejdiu, almost all the country's political parties have made it clear that early elections should be held soon.
The vote will probably be held in January or February 2011, according to Kosovo media reports. 
The heads of the major political parties have been meeting with Interim President Jakup Krasniqi to determine the best course of action.
At least two options are on the table.
According to the constitution, extraordinary or snap elections must be held within 45 days of the post vacancy, or early elections within four to six months.
"There is a split on that between different political groups. 
There should be elections because the actual crisis is more then just institutional. 
It is not related only to the resignation of the president, but to a series of factors," Kosovo analyst and university professor Ulpiana Lama told SETimes.
Long and frequently public disagreements among the coalition members, differences over the basic governing policies and serious economic difficulties the country is experiencing are some of the issues that need to be tackled.
The Kosovo daily Koha Ditore reported that a meeting between Prime Minister Hashim Thaci of the Democratic Party (PDK) and Sejdiu, head of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), as chairmen of their respective parties, concluded with a decision to hold early elections within four months.
"First, this year's budget had to be changed to allocate money for the Central Election Commission and for the new elections, something that can be resolved easier with the approval of a temporary budget by the end of the year, when there will be a surplus. 
Secondly ... 
the new institutions should be established -- at the latest -- by the middle of March in order to be able to vote on the 2011 budget. 
[Without that], we would be in trouble; the state cannot function without the money," Koha Ditore Editor-in-Chief Flaka Surroi wrote.
Krasniqi, of the PDK, has met with leaders of the Central Election Commission, Valdete Daka and Xhemajl Pecani, to discuss the commission's ability to organise the elections.
Daka said that while the CEC can technically do it, there are some challenges -- getting approval of the budget in time, getting the necessary logistical support, authenticating the voters' lists, informing the public, co-ordinating voting among the Diaspora and securing support from international institutions.
Then there's the cost: the government would have to allocate the estimated 4m euros to cover the expense, according to Koha Ditore.
However, the trickiest issue could be amending the Electoral Code and getting approval from parliament.
That won't be easy, Democracy in Action head Ismet Kryeziu told Kosovo public broadcaster RTK.
"The electoral code has a number of shortages, serious ones; there is no time to fix them," Lama agrees.
Surroi points out that the biggest party in Kosovo, the PDK, now leads the three main institutions: parliament, the Presidency and the government, all supported by the constitution.
"We came to the point where -- with or without the consent of the rest of the political parties -- this party can announce the early elections.
Thaci … is convinced that he has very big chances to win the next elections," Surroi wrote.
