06/07/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/07/10
An emerging scandal at Belgrade's Oncology Institute is testing public confidence in the health care system.
Director Nenad Borojevic and nine co-workers were arrested last week on corruption charges.
They are charged with prescribing and obtaining larger quantities of cytostatic medications than necessary in order to favour certain pharmaceutical companies.
Police alleged they received close to 1m euros in bribes from firms, including Merck Serono, Roche and Astra Zeneca.
"Let me be clear and precise:
[they] prescribed more medications to the patients than was necessary in order to increase the consumption of those medications and earn more money," said Interior Minister Ivica Dacic.
The police operation which led to the arrests was dubbed "Kraba" (Crab) and lasted 14 months, he said.
The country's health minister, however, cautioned against sensationalising the case.
He reminded the public of the presumption of innocence, and criticised what he described as exaggerated media headlines.
"Press claims that double or triple doses of cytostatics were given to children -- which killed [some] -- are irresponsible," Minister Tomica Milosavljevic said.
"Certainly, the news of the doctors' arrest for accepting bribes is not good.
I think we should all await the reports by the investigative bodies and act according to the law."
The head of Serbia's Health Insurance Bureau, Svetlana Vukajlovic, told SETimes that the loss of trust in the medical profession is the biggest consequence of such corruption scandals.
"The concern that patients are not being treated appropriately and are being abused for profit brings far-reaching consequences.
It is difficult enough for patients to face a serious illness, but it is unacceptable to also face a fear of whether they will receive appropriate treatment," said Vukajlovic.
Like the health minister, Vukajlovic refuses to believe that medical professionals prescribed excessive amount of cytostatics to children.
"If that is true, then it is not only a crime, but also a monstrosity.
I hope the investigation will prove that claim to be untrue," she said.
The Oncology Institute scandal is the not the first such case that has come to light.
Early last year, the father of a 10-year-old boy told police that surgeon Eugen Slavik of the Institute for Neurosurgery asked for a 500-euro bribe to operate on his son.
Police arrested Slavik after finding marked currency notes in his possession.
While such incidents have angered and frightened much of the public, there are others whose trust in doctors is steadfast.
Retiree Milan Sretenovic, 64, told SETimes that the entire profession should not be condemned because of few individuals."I don't believe Professor Borojevic is involved.
I received treatment at the Institute for Oncology and I know that he is a great expert."
Bogdana Ristic, 43, however, told SETimes that fraud is pervasive in Serbia.
"Such things happen on a daily basis but are rarely revealed.
A patient feels helpless because the doctors you can trust are few," she said.
