09/06/2010
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 09/06/10
Ask any fan about Greek football, and the first words you'll hear will be "Euro 2004".
The next will usually be "Otto Rehhagel". 
That's the name of the German coach who led the Greek national team to triumph in the European Championships six years ago, and who is now leading them into their second World Cup appearance.
He and the 23 players selected for the roster left Greece on Saturday (June 5th) for Durban, South Africa, where they will spend the next week preparing for the team's opening match against South Korea.
"Othonas", as the Greek press likes to call him, enjoys a complex relationship with fans. 
Everyone toasts him for the Euro triumph, even as some criticise his methods. 
He has taken heat in the press for his roster of players, for tactical choices on the field, and for spending too much time back in Germany.
But no one can deny his results. 
The Greeks have again qualified for a major event, and they did so by beating Ukraine 1-0 on its own turf. 
That was sweet payback for losing to Ukraine 1-0 in Athens four years ago, a result which kept Greece out of the World Cup in Rehhagel's homeland.
The 2006 disappointment spurred him to change his methodology and bring new players onboard. 
The average player on the current roster is less than 30 years old.
More than half of the 23 players are members of Greece's domestic clubs. 
Eight are from Panathinaikos, this year's national champions, while three other teams -- Olympiakos, PAOK and Aris -- provided two each.
Completing the roster are members of European teams, such as Italy's Campionato and Germany's Bundesliga.
Angelos Charisteas, the top scorer in Euro 2004, is returning along with midfielder Kostas Katsouranis, defender Giourkas Seitaridis, keeper Kostas Chalkias and team captain Giorgios Karagounis.
SETimes caught up with members of the Blue/White Beacon Fan Club as they prepared to board flights to South Africa. 
They seemed moderately optimistic about the team's prospects.
"What we expect is to see something better," said Theofilos Adamakis. 
"I would like us to score at least once in order to celebrate, something that we couldn't do in '94; to win one point, something that we also didn't do in '94; to win a game, also something that we didn't manage in '94, and if possible, to qualify for the second round, another thing that we didn't do in '94. 
In other words, to take steps forward."
"A good, decent performance; and if we qualify, it will be ideal," he said.
"I believe our presence will be very dynamic," said Triantafylla Serveta, speaking of fellow Greek fans who will be rooting for their team in South Africa.
