06/10/2010
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/10/10
Serbia's government, now in its third year of a four-year term, is working to speed up delivery of its promises in the face of calls for early parliamentary elections.
The opposition Serbian Progressive Party (SNS) is leading the charge for them.
"Only someone who is not engaged in politics does not see the potential of an election campaign," said its leader, Tomislav Nikolic.
New Serbia party chief Velimir Ilic agrees.
"The doors are open for ...
those who have a common goal, to have the early elections and win," he said.
According to the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy, opinion polls early in the summer suggested the SNS has a slight lead.
The SNS has called opposition parties for talks because it wants to lead a moderate, right-oriented coalition, says political analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic.
He adds, however, that the call for early elections has no real basis.
The government, for the time being, is not responding to the opposition's effort.
After losing a high-profile challenge to Kosovo's 2008 declaration of independence at the International Court of Justice in July, and reworking a resolution on Kosovo with input from the EU at the UN General Assembly last month, the government's focus has shifted to domestic concerns:
building roads and bridges and addressing other issues important to the public.
Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic says the government is stable, making early elections unnecessary, but Belgraders are divided over the issue.
Milan Vidojkovic, an engineer at the JAT national air company, favours going to the polls.
"Those who win the most votes should lead the country, and if it is Tomislav Nikolic's party, let them be in power for the next four years, although this does not mean that I voted for them."
Katarina Ostojic, a student, says she apprehensive of elections and of the SNS.
"The party of Tomislav Nikolic, which presents itself as pro-European, is not, in my opinion.
It only attempts to present itself in a certain light and attract as much of the electorate [as it can].
It will be totally different if it comes to power.
The country could fall into a bigger crisis, and lose its chance to join the EU," she said.
In terms of foreign policy, the SNS maintains that negotiating with the EU is the way of the future.
Both the SNS and the Democratic Party of Serbia, led by former Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, say that the "defence of territorial integrity and the sovereignty of Serbia" is their policy.
They call it the "red line", but do not mention Kosovo specifically.
