09/06/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 09/06/10
When prominent Romanian opera singer Amalia Antoniu was admitted in April to the CFR2 Hospital in Bucharest for minor surgery, she never expected to end up in intensive care, in critical condition, kept alive by machines.
"They [doctors] think she caught an infection in the operating room because she went in there perfectly healthy," her mother explained. 
Hours later, at the same hospital, another patient also ended up battling for life.
The investigators concluded the two patients contracted a nosocomial (inter-hospital) infection, caused by a non-sterile environment.
The story drew considerable media attention, and an investigation was launched. 
The manager of the hospital, accused of lax management, lost his job. 
The maternity- neonatology section, where Antoniu underwent surgery, was temporarily closed. 
Four ward heads were dismissed a few days later.
As a result, Prime Minister Emil Boc ordered a thorough evaluation of the almost 400 hospitals in the country. 
Those found unfit to function will be turned into asylums, he said.
Specialists have their own explanation for the phenomenon. 
"The recent cases … are just the tip of the iceberg. 
In reality, situations as those seen at CFR2 happen every day at public medical institutions in the country," Evenimentul Zilei health editor Geta Roman told SETimes.
"The rules concerning hygiene and sterilisation exist, but they are not [backed] by strict controls, especially in those hospitals controlled by the ministry of transport, where rules more lax than in other similar institutions," she said.
In March, three babies and five mothers contracted a staphylococcus infection in the maternity ward of the CFR2 hospital. 
In Suceava County, a patient scheduled for a long-awaited kidney transplant was removed from the list after he was found to have contracted two forms of hepatitis at a public hospital.
Actor Toni Tecuceanu died at the infectious diseases hospital Matei Bals in Bucharest early this year, after being infected with the bacteria Acinetobacter.
Medics' College President Vasile Astarastoaie says there are 10,000 cases of nosocomial infections every year in the country's hospitals, the lowest level in Europe. 
But the figure is low, he says, because staffers do not report all the cases, due to possible sanctions.
Vasile Barbu, head of the Association for Patients' Protection, offered SETimes a closer look into this phenomenon. 
"We did a study late last year, over October and November, and we came up with sinister results. 
Of all the patients we monitored -- patients that had undergone open-thorax surgeries, such as cardiac interventions -- 30% died after leaving the hospitals due to nosocomial infections," he said.
"We also concluded most of the infections originated in the ventilation devices -- the filters and the hoses -- not changed or sterilised," Barbu explained. 
"We were shocked to see in a hospital in Bucharest that, in the same room, in a corner there were used hoses being washed just with tap water, while in the other corner, just a few meters away, they piled the infected ones."
He said his association, founded in August 2008, is currently providing legal assistance to patients involved in 60 pending cases, while 900 files are in the final pre-court phase. 
The organisation will also launch soon an anti-graft campaign in the hospitals, Barbu said.
As they lose trust in state hospitals, Romanians are heading to the private ones. 
MedLife, the largest private health care operator in the country, has seen a 40% increase in revenue compared to last year when it registered 26.3m euros in income.
With investments amounting to 15m euros this year, MedLife wants to extend its network of clinics and open its second private hospital in Bucharest.
"I gave birth to a child in a private hospital, even though it cost me [figuratively] an arm and a leg," Diana told SETimes. 
"After hearing so many unfortunate happenings in the state hospitals, I realised money comes second and health first. 
I was terrified by what a friend of mine went through in a public hospital, where her little baby caught a fungus only a few days after being born," she said.
