11/05/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 11/05/10
Tough anti-crisis measures unveiled by the government last week have raised the ire of Romania's unions, which are warning of sustained protests and strikes in the coming weeks. 
Opposition parties are also complaining.
The measures include deep public sector cuts. 
Romania's 1.3 million state employees and 4.7 million pensioners will see their salaries and pensions reduced by 25% and 15% respectively, President Traian Basescu announced on Thursday (May 6th).
Social benefits will also be slashed by 15%, while current national social protection programmes will be re-evaluated, the president said. 
State subsidies will be curtailed.
"I'm calling on Romanian society to avoid the country's Greece-isation," Basescu said, announcing the steps during an IMF delegation's visit to Bucharest.
"Unless we reduce salaries and pensions in early 2011, we will risk engaging a new loan, this time not 20, but maybe 30 billion euros. 
It is our last chance to avoid aggravating the country's financial situation," the president added.
The opposition is not buying the argument. 
Social Democratic Party leader Victor Ponta has accused the government of "social genocide", while Liberal leader Crin Antonescu condemned what he described as "measures of an unprecedented dramatics".
"These are aberrant measures, taken by people who just have no clue what living in Romania is really like," said Lucian Sava, 28, a history teacher, saying the cuts would be a disaster for two-income families where both spouses are employed by the state educational system.
"It is unbearable to keep harassing various social categories when central administration structures, earning huge salaries, are not touchable," he said. 
"The system has to be reformed, but let's start with the ministries first."
Eliza Sandulescu, a first-year medical doctor currently in her residency, says the country's health care system is at risk.
"We've heard countless wake up calls lately with the alarming number of medics who chose to go abroad. 
They even said it was turning into a matter of national security. 
And what do they do in return? 
They curtail our salaries. 
This is not helping the public health system, already in shambles, and will only worsen corruption in the hospitals," she told SETimes.
Pensioners also lambasted the measures. 
"It is too much for us, especially those barely living off our pensions. 
I understand solidarity in times like these, but let's be reasonable," said Gheorghe Cochilet, 67, alluding to those with large incomes.
"I cannot accept being the victim of the government's inability to handle the crisis," he added.
