04/03/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 04/03/10
A recent survey by Gallup International in Kosovo was a study in contradictions.
Most respondents -- 67% -- are satisfied with their standard of living, yet continue to look for something better abroad.
And while the government is viewed with a high level of confidence, almost nine in ten Kosovo Albanians perceived it as corrupt, according to the survey.
Robert Manchin, director of Gallup Europe, presented the findings in Pristina on February 25th.
The report is called "The roots of a mismatch:
High optimism vs.
challenges of making the fruits of independence work for every Kosovar".
Despite challenges, two third of respondents have a hopeful view of recent developments in the country, according to the survey.
Avni Zogiani, of the NGO Cohu, said the optimism is based on Kosovo's two-year-old independence after a long era of repression.
The positive feelings, he said, should not be seen as praise for government institutions.
"We don't have an optimism here based on the real situation," said Mimoza Kusari Lila, deputy chairman of The Alliance for the New Kosovo (AKR).
On the downside, the survey showed that the percentage of people who believe corruption has compromised government grew from 71% in 2006 to 83% in 2008.
Organised crime also remains a problem, with only 25% saying they believe authorities are doing everything they can to fight it.
Aware of this lack of confidence, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci announced on February 26th that a special task force was being formed to organise an array of authorities in the ongoing crime battles.
"I would invite you all, without any hesitation -- ministers, government cabinet, deputy prime ministers -- to approve these measures as concrete proof of our government dedication to fight corruption, organised crime and all other negative phenomena," Thaci told his government in announcing the task force.
Just as troublesome to those surveyed was unemployment, with about 44% saying they had serious problems finding work.
This was especially true among young people.
The percentage of Albanians who consider independence a good thing has dropped, according to Gallup, down from 93% to 75%, while 80% of Kosovo Serbs are critical of it.
"People's assessment of Kosovo's independence can perhaps be interpreted as 'it's time to sober up', after the secession party," according to the Gallup report.
A majority of Kosovo Albanians (80%) and Kosovo Serbs (64%) believe Serbia will never recognise Kosovo.
The survey also showed that Serbs in Kosovo do not feel protected by Belgrade.
About 60% said the Serbian government was doing a poor or even a bad job in protecting their interests.
According to the survey, Kosovo Albanians remain the strongest population in the region in terms of support for NATO and the EU, though confidence in the later is waning.
In general, there is more trust in NATO than in religious organisations, Gallup found.
According to the survey, 48% of respondents believe the EU is to blame for Kosovo missing out on visa liberalisation, while only 15% blame the government and politicians.
Kusari Lili of the AKR says Kosovo remains "in the process of justifying in front of foreigners that we deserve better".
