04/03/2010
By Marko Biocina for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 04/03/10
After a year and a half of intense negotiations, Croatia officially joined the Russian-backed South Stream pipeline project on Tuesday (March 2nd).
The contract on construction and operation of the natural gas pipeline was signed in Moscow after a meeting between Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin.
Croatia is the eighth country to join the project, following Italy, Slovenia, Bulgaria, Serbia, Hungary, Greece and Turkey.
The pipeline in Croatia is to be built and operated by a partnership of Russia's Gazprom and Croatia's state-owned Plinacro.
Each company is expected to hold 50% of the joint venture.
"It is a new page in the bilateral relations between Croatia and Russia.
It is truly an equal partnership, as can be seen from the ownership stakes in the joint company," Kosor said after signing the contract.
Also on Tuesday, reports surfaced that Russia may reduce its share to include Electricite de France SA (EDF).
"We allow for the possibility that our part can be cut," Gazprom Deputy Chief Executive Officer Alexander Medvedev said on Tuesday, during an interview in Paris.
By how much Gazprom might trim its holding is still unclear.
The 900km pipeline -- scheduled to open in 2015 -- will connect Russia to the Balkans, where the route will then split north and south.
The link intentionally bypasses Ukraine, to avoid recurring disputes over gas supplies that have curbed Russian deliveries to Europe in the past four years.
It is unclear whether Croatia agreed to Russian demands that the pipeline could only be used to move Russian gas.
"If Croatia agreed to grant Russia exclusive use of the pipeline, negative effects will not be obvious right now, but could appear in a decade or so," Igor Dekanic, a leading Croatian energy expert, told SETimes.
"The problem could occur if [another] pipeline is constructed in the future.
In that case, Croatia could have difficulties in getting gas from an alternative supplier because of lack of infrastructure and won't be able to use the existing pipeline because of the exclusivity rights," Dekanic explained.
Croatia now imports about 40% of its gas from Russia, with local production in the future expected to decrease;
thus the need to import more.
By joining South Stream, Croatia could ensure bigger import quotas of Russian gas in the future while continuing to develop other import routes.
The final South Stream route will be determined by results of a feasibility study, a Gazprom official told SETimes.
