08/04/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 08/04/10
It was a year ago Wednesday (April 7th) that the Croatian flag was raised at NATO headquarters in Brussels. 
That same week in 2009, Albania joined the Alliance. 
Now, the nations are marking the milestone.
In Zagreb, President Ivo Josipovic and Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor discussed defence and foreign policy issues at a special meeting marking the first anniversary of their membership in NATO.
Afterwards, Josipovic told reporters that joining NATO had been a key foreign policy goal of Croatia since independence in 1991. 
"The second goal will be to enter the EU," he said.
Kosor called Alliance membership a historic moment and said that its commemoration "is additional encouragement to all [Croatians] on the way to the EU".
NATO membership simultaneously strengthened Croatia's national security and international standing, she said. 
Because of this, she noted, there is now room for economic partnerships in areas other than defence.
According to the latest public opinion polls conducted by the research group GfK, 64.6% of Croatians feel safer since the country joined NATO.
Just over half -- 50.2% -- believe Croatia's international reputation has increased because of membership in the Alliance. 
The mission of NATO's International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan was supported by 68.3% of respondents in the GfK survey.
And 54.1% believe that by contributing to NATO and UN missions Croatia strengthens its national security and international reputation.
After the meeting, Josipovic and Kosor announced a decision to send 20 additional troops to join the ISAF in Afghanistan. 
With the extra soldiers, the country has 320 troops stationed there in the war against terrorism.
In Tirana, the ministry of defence organized a Jubilee Conference on April 2nd to mark the occasion. 
It was attended by military officials, politicians and diplomats.
During the conference, Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha focused on the political achievements, and promised the same commitment to the process of EU integration.
Defense Minister Arben Imami thanked the army's military and civilians for their "willingness that comes from a desire to see your country contributing to the world's security and peace as a NATO member state."
However, not everyone was as enthusiastic. 
Socialist Party (SP) chief Edi Rama noted that a full year of NATO membership has not changed the poor status of politics and the economy in Albania.
Rama used the occasion to continue to trumpet the SP's insistence -- which had led to the party's boycotting of parliament -- that the ballot boxes from the June 28th 2009 election be opened for review.
"Today Albanians are banned from their fundamental right of information," said Rama at a press conference. 
"Justice has been under continuous threat."
Albanian forces are also serving with NATO. 
Troops are stationed in Afghanistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have also served in Iraq.
SETimes correspondent Manjola Hala in Tirana contributed to this report.
