08/06/2010
By Georgi Mitev-Santek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 08/06/10
The Serbian national team left for Johannesburg on Monday (June 7th) exuding great optimism before its first match with Ghana on June 13th.
Players and coaches met with fans and journalists at Cafe Marko -- owned by the Ajaks club and the national team's centre forward Marko Pantelic -- to address any final questions before boarding.
Striker Nikola Zigic assured the crowd that the team is well prepared and will show exactly that in the first game with Ghana. 
"We will give our maximum [effort] and will not embarrass ourselves for sure," he said.
Nenad Santrac of the Serbian Football Federation told SETimes "the team will undoubtedly show their best, just like during the qualifiers when we finished first in the group ahead of France and Romania, and I expect us to advance in the second round."
According to Santrac, head coach Radomir Antic is mostly to credit for the successes shown in the qualifiers.
"Antic has tremendous experience and he brought back our faith in the national team," he said, following Serbia's embarrassing elimination in the last World Cup in Germany, when it lost 0-6 to Argentina, among other losses.
Antic has had a successful career in Spain but never coached in a World Cup competition, and agreed to contribute his expertise by returning to Serbia in August 2008. 
He transformed the national team into a fifth-highest-scoring in European qualifying while maintaining a very strong defence.
However, Santrac notes that the team has never played in altitudinal conditions such as those in South Africa, where from a high altitude they will go to a very low one. 
On the positive side, Serbia does not have a single player injured in the qualifiers, unlike other teams.
This is the 11th time that the Serbian team is competing at the World Cup; FIFA and UEFA recognise Serbia as inheritor of the states of "Serbia and Montenegro" and "Yugoslavia".
In 2006 in Germany, the team did not score a single point but allowed many goals. 
The debacle was that much harder to swallow because the country ranked first in the qualifiers, ahead of Spain.
This time around, the chance to reclaim Serbia's glory belongs to such stars as Dejan Stankovic (Inter), Nikola Zigic (Birmingham City), Nemanja Vidic (Manchester United), Vladimir Stojkovic (Wigam) and Ivica Dragutinovic (Sevilla).
Vidic is the team's top gun, widely believed to be one of the best "stoppers" in European football. 
He is so popular that Manchester United fans have created a song for him.
The younger, promising players include the Borussia Dortmund's defender Neven Subotic, a 22-year-old born in Banja Luka. 
Subotic was sought by the US, BiH and Serbian national teams.
Similarly promising is goalie Vladimir Stojkovic, who will face a Wigam teammate -- Richard Kingson -- in the match with Ghana.
"Of course, everybody hopes we will make it through the first round, but we need to be realistic," Olgica Nikolic, a sports journalist with the daily Danas, told SETimes.
"The game against Ghana is probably the break point and that team is weaker 'on paper' because of [Michael] Essien's absence and [Sulley] Muntari's injury. 
But African players are all over Europe, and now they have added tactical skills to natural speed and ball handling."
Moreover, Ghana coach Milovan Rajevac, knows Serbian football to its soul, Nikolic said.
"I'm sure that we will move to the second round," said ardent supporter Zoran Jovic. 
"I have confidence in Antic, as much as in Vidic and Stankovic. 
Half of our crew plays in England, and that makes a difference. 
If we can pull off a good game against Ghana and do not underestimate Australia, then we are at the next stage and everything is possible."
"Germany 2006 will not happen again, that's for sure," he told SETimes.
