05/10/2010
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 05/10/10
Haris Silajdzic, the outspoken Bosniak politician who had called for the abolition of Republika Srpska, has lost his post on Bosnia and Herzegovina's tripartite presidency. 
Voters opted instead for the Democratic Action Party's candidate, Bakir Izetbegovic, the 54-year-old son of wartime president Alija Izetbegovic.
Siladzic, who heads the Party for BiH, could not even manage second place. 
That spot went to newspaper owner Fahrudin Radoncic, of the Party for a Better Future (SBB).
The results reflect voter dissatisfaction with business as usual, experts say.
"Silajdzic is the biggest loser of the election, because everyone predicted he would win the race as a member of the Presidency. 
In addition, his party made a poor showing," explained political analyst Tanja Topic.
"The Social Democratic Party BiH, which for years was in opposition, won the most votes at all levels and will be an indispensable factor in forming the government," she told SETimes.
In contrast to his predecessor's hard line, often confrontational stances, Izetbegovic ran as a moderate. 
He has urged politicians to give up their "stubborn" policies and unite around interests that are unique to all citizens of BiH.
"Izetbegovic's election campaign called for extending the hand of reconciliation and a greater degree of tolerance. 
I believe that this will continue now, after he becomes a member of the presidency," Topic said.
Radoncic's second-place finish, only four percentage points behind the winner, was also a major surprise. 
Until a few months ago, the public knew him primarily as the owner of the mass circulation daily Dnevni Avaz.
His SBB -- like him, a political newcomer -- achieved remarkable success at all levels Sunday and seems poised to become influential.
Among Bosnian Croat candidates, meanwhile, there was no contest. 
Incumbent Social Democrat Zeljko Komsic beat his rival, nationalist Borjana Christo, by a massive 40% margin.
Christo, however, prevailed in many areas with a Croat majority population and will seek to rally his political base behind calls for a third, Croatian entity in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
