05/10/2010
(Reuters, RFE/RL, Euobserver - 05/10/10;
AFP, DPA, FT, The Economist, TIME, Guardian, New York Times, Euronews, Telegraph, Wall Street Journal, EurActiv, RFE/RL - 04/10/10)
Analysts and diplomats appeared sceptical Monday (October 4th) that the weekend general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) will help end the political stalemate and deep-rooted ethnic divisions.
Bakir Izetbegovic, son of the Balkan nation's wartime leader Alija Izetbegovic, scored an upset victory Sunday by winning the Bosnian Muslim seat in the tripartite presidency.
A moderate politician and deputy leader of the main Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (SDA), he is now set to replace Haris Silajdzic of the more hardline Nationalist Party for BiH.
Zeljko Komsic, candidate of the multiethnic Social Democratic Party (SDP), who represented Bosnian Croats in the presidency for the past four years, will keep his post for four more.
So will Nebojsa Radmanovic of the Bosnian Serb Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), who won the Serb seat again after narrowly defeating challenger Mladen Ivanic.
Izetbegovic and Komsic, also a moderate politician, both promote a unified BiH, while Radmanovic's party is strongly opposed to any moves towards that end and advocates secession.
SNSD leader Milorad Dodik, who won the presidential election in Republika Srpska (RS) on Sunday after serving as the entity's prime minister since 2006, has repeatedly threatened to call an independence referendum.
A day after the elections, the US State Department urged winners of the races "to find common ground in support of a better future" for all BiH citizens.
"We look forward to the formation of a government which is committed to tackling the outstanding constitutional and other issues needed to place the country on a firm path to Euro-Atlantic integration," State Department spokesman Philip Crowley told reporters Monday.
Citing the practice of the past 15 years, High Representative Valentin Inzko voiced doubt that a national coalition would be formed before February 2011.
"We will have no government yet this year," Reuters quoted the top international envoy in BiH as saying.
Some analysts say that the post-election situation will make any efforts towards finding common ground no easier than before.
"With such hardline positions, it will be difficult to find compromise," various reports quoted Bosnian political analyst Haris Abaspahic as saying.
"At the same time, a further radicalisation of the situation will not help anyone as it could push the RS into isolation."
Srecko Latal, Balkan analyst with the International Crisis Group, voiced hope that the win for a moderate Bosniak such as Izetbegovic, who has pledged to work for stabilising the situation in BiH, would help end the political deadlock.
"I hope [Izetbegovic] makes a difference," Latal said.
"Because if we have another four years like the past four years, this would put the country on the brink of disintegration.
And it's highly unlikely the country will disintegrate peacefully."
Were that to happen, the entire region would be affected, according to Ioannis Armakolas, director of a Balkans task force led by the Centre for Strategic and International Studies in Washington and the Athens-based Hellenic Centre for European Studies.
"A weakened and potentially unstable Bosnia will inevitably bring the region's mutually-reinforced ethnic problems back to the forefront, wiping out the progress achieved in the last ten years," TIME magazine quoted the analyst as warning.
