05/07/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/07/10
Relations between Serbia and the EULEX are strained following a bomb attack during a demonstration in Mitrovica. 
One person was killed and 11 were injured on Friday (July 2nd) after an unknown assailant threw a hand grenade at the protestors, who were rallying against the opening of a Kosovo government office in the Serb-dominated town.
Serbia's National Security Council held an emergency meeting and issued a statement decrying the attack as an "act of terrorism by Albanian separatists". 
It blamed International Civil Representative Pieter Feith, saying he had contradicted EU policies and positions by pushing to have the office opened.
Serbian President Boris Tadic described the attack as a "provocation of peace and a provocation of Serbia". 
At his request, the UN Security Council will hold a session Tuesday to discuss the situation in Mitrovica.
Outraged local Serbs, meanwhile, accuse EULEX of siding with Kosovo Albanians. 
The government of independent Kosovo has been trying to extend its authority in Mitrovica but has met with resistance from the Serbian population there.
"Failures to guarantee the security of Serbs in Kosovo will only serve to fuel calls for a tougher stance towards EULEX; with whom the Serbian government has to date largely been willing to co-operate in return for tangible rewards from the EU," said Ian Bancroft, founder of the organisation Transconflict Serbia.
Nevertheless, Bancroft told SETimes, Serbia is unlikely to alter its position radically before the International Court of Justice issues its ruling on the legality of Kosovo's self-declared independence. 
Dusan Janjic, head of the Forum for Ethnic Relations, believes that Serbia's ties with EULEX are influenced by Belgrade's determination to move ahead with the European integration process.
'That is why I believe Belgrade will go no further than tough rhetoric and will be appeased by the UN Security Council session," Janjic told SETimes. 
"However, after the incident the balance of power will certainly shift in northern Mitrovica. 
At the moment the parties comprising the Serbian government can form the local government there, but after this the balance of power is sure to shift."
Neither Janjic nor Bancroft expect Friday's incident to trigger a larger conflict. 
According to Janjic, however, it is crucial that the perpetrators are discovered.
"Similar cases have happened before, but they remain unresolved. 
Now is the right time to find out who is behind the attack. 
This case will at the same time be a true test for the agreement signed by Belgrade and EULEX upon the mission’s arrival in Kosovo," Janjic said.
Bancroft, on the other hand, does not rule out further problems. 
"As March 2004 most clearly showed, Kosovo is vulnerable to sporadic outbreaks of low-scale violence that only the presence of international forces is capable of stemming," he said.
"Friday's incident demonstrates the dangers of unilaterally imposing measures where inter-ethnic tensions are prevalent. 
This unfortunate security reality means that NATO must be extremely cautious in how rapidly it decides to draw-down troops," Bancroft added.
