10/08/2010
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 10/08/10
While the diplomatic standoff continues, a slight barrier may have been moved when Serbian Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic visited northern Kosovo on Sunday (August 8th).
Presenting a different stance than he had done previously, Bogdanovic stressed the need for co-existence between Serbs and Albanians. 
He said that Belgrade is prepared to start a dialogue with Albanians, and called on Serbs to reconcile with their Albanian neighbours.
"We are ready for compromise, dialogue on issues of status, and all technical issues related to the life and welfare of citizens," said Bogdanovic, who was in Kosovo to commemorate the anniversary of Serbs' return to the western municipality of Istog.
While visiting the village of Osojan, Bogdanovic promised funds from Serbia, and said he sees mutual compromise as the basis for resolving interethnic issues.
Many returnees, however, told him that they have had enough of Belgrade's manipulations and asked him not to politicise security issues.
"You're asking what the Serbian government could do for us? 
We do not want [the maximum], but the Serbian government offers us no minimum," said one Kosovo Serb who met with Bogdanovic.
Bogdanovic said he is familiar with the problems of Serb returnees in the village, and expressed the government's readiness to help.
"We have lived here four months and nobody from the Serbian government has visited us until now; nobody is interested in how I live, [not] even the president I voted for," one resident said.
The minister unveiled details of a project designed for the agricultural sector and a Serbian government investment worth 93,000 euros to improve the lives of residents in the area.
The visit coincided with an interview given by Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic on Sunday. 
Belgrade is ready for dialogue with Pristina institutions, Jeremic told CNN, but Serbia will not accept Kosovo's secession.
"The only thing we say 'no' to is the unilateral proclamation of separation," Jeremic said. 
Serbia is defending its constitutional, political and democratic rights, as well as avoiding a dangerous precedent, he added.
