10/05/2010
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 10/05/10
Since April 30th, crowds of Socialist Party supporters have been gathering every day at 6 pm to support their "heroes".
At least a dozen lawmakers and hundreds of activists have been staging a hunger strike outside the offices of Prime Minister Sali Berisha. 
Claiming a lack of transparency, they are demanding that the ballot boxes from the June 2009 general elections be opened.
That will not only resolve questions about the results, but help ensure that future elections are fair and transparent, the protestors say.
During the day, their tents are visited by journalists and handfuls of supporters. 
But as afternoon approaches evening, the crowds pick up and the noise level rises.
Doctors are on the scene, visiting the tents and keeping an eye on the hunger strikers' conditions. 
The health of some is becoming precarious. 
The leader of the Socialists, Edi Rama, has promised that he, too, will join the strike -- though he did not say when.
The protest will help democratise Albania, his party insists. 
Berisha's Democrats, meanwhile, say the Socialists are simply putting up one obstacle after another, at the expense of Albania's EU integration prospects -- and the promise of visa liberalisation.
Socialist lawmakers have been boycotting parliament since the June 2009 vote, demanding a recount. 
The deadlock has effectively brought government to a standstill, and EU leaders have been urging a solution.
"The EU perspective for Albania is at stake," Spanish Ambassador Manuel Montobbio de Balanz said earlier this year. 
Last Thursday, EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele warned that the standoff threatens the country's chances of being granted EU candidate status.
Berisha says he ready to talk with Rama. 
He has suggested either bringing the issue before the Supreme Court, or establishing a parliamentary commission to investigate the June vote.
According to the prime minister, the Socialists' demand to have the ballots opened is unlawful. 
"In every free country, and in the interest of citizens, even of those who protest, the decisions of the courts may be changed only by other court decisions, not by other instruments," he said.
Nonsense, argue the Socialists, saying the right of citizens to transparency is guaranteed by the constitution. 
Moreover, they add, the idea of establishing a parliamentary commission was already raised in March -- only to be rejected by Berisha's Democrats.
"Open the ballot or leave" is their call to Berisha. 
The majority in parliament is composed of the Democratic Party and the Socialist Movement for Integration, led by Ilir Meta.
Meta, who serves as deputy prime minister, called last week for his former Socialist Party colleagues to end the strike and choose the path of dialogue. 
"All possibilities are there to find a solution ... 
through respecting laws and the constitution," he said.
