08/09/2010
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 08/09/10
Macedonia's government began renovating the country's correctional facilities to address criticism from domestic and international groups over poor prison conditions.
The government says it wants to meet the highest correctional standards.
"By realising this project, Macedonia will overcome all objections such as prison crowding, inappropriate living conditions and the like," said Justice Minister Mihajlo Manevski.
"The prisoners here ...
[will] receive more humane treatment and optimal conditions to serve their sentences," he added.
The prison project will last until 2015 and is the biggest investment yet in the country's correctional system.
The government plans to completely rebuild Macedonia's biggest prison, Idrizovo, as well as renovate prisons in Kumanovo and Skopje and build a new correctional facility in Tetovo.
A new super-modern facility of 43,000 square meters will replace Idrizovo's old building and will house over 1,500 inmates.
Officials hope it will help address the main points of criticism -- overcrowding, hygiene, fights and limited opportunities for recreational and sports activities.
Macedonia's Ombudsman, Izet Memeti, has said that the population at Idrizovo is 30% over capacity.
A section of the prison that had a broken rooftop and windows was closed last February following a visit by EU Ambassador to Macedonia Erwan Fouere.
The inmates were relocated.
A new prison bakery was completed at Idrizovo last July;
it will also supply the Tetovo prison with baked goods.
Renovated thus far are sections of the Skopje prison -- popularly called "Shutka" -- including the detention section, attorney facilities, toilets and recreational facilities.
The estimated cost is 52m euros, of which 46m euros will be covered through a loan from the Development Bank at the Council of Europe (CoE).
An additional 2.5m euros will be drawn from the state budget and the rest from the EU's Instrument for Pre-accession Agreement and Norwegian government funds.
Government officials agree the CoE loan conditions are extremely favourable.
"The payback time is 20 years with a five years grace period.
The interest rate is exceptionally low, around 1.2%.
These are the best possible conditions on the market in such times of crisis," said Finance Minister Zoran Stavrevski.
The prison project is not solely about improving infrastructure.
Ombudsman Memeti also raised concerns that some inmates had not received health insurance as prescribed by law.
The project envisions training and education for correctional officers and, just as importantly, the hiring of new prison personnel.
