07/04/2010
(Bloomberg, FT, The New York Times, eKathimerini - 07/04/10; Reuters, AP, AFP, FT, BBC, CNNMoney, ANA-MPA, eKathimerini - 06/04/10)
Greece's borrowing costs hit a new high Tuesday (April 6th) following media reports that Athens might be seeking to renegotiate the terms of a recent EU-IMF deal aimed at helping the country overcome its debt crisis.
The news came a day before two IMF delegations arrived in Athens to look into progress the government has made in implementing its austerity measures. 
The missions are expected to spend about two weeks in the country and meet with Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou.
The Greek Finance Ministry immediately denied the speculations. 
"There has never been any kind of action on the part of our country to change the terms of the recent European Council agreement on the support mechanism," Papaconstantinou stressed.
Under the deal reached in Brussels on March 25th, Greece would be able to obtain bilateral loans from eurozone states and financial assistance from the IMF as a last resort, in the event it faced severe difficulties obtaining loans in the financial markets.
Citing an unnamed senior Greek government official, Market News International reported earlier Tuesday that Athens wanted to alter the details of the rescue package so that it would not have to turn to the IMF. 
Any involvement of the Fund is expected to be tied to new stringent measures on top of the already painful actions announced by the Greek government.
The news sparked a further drop in confidence in Greek bonds, and the country's ten-year borrowing costs rose by more than .5% -- closing on Tuesday at 6.995%.
The surge in interest rates fuelled uncertainty in financial markets about Athens's ability to repay 20 billion euros in loans maturing by the end of May without the EU-IMF deal being activated. 
Concerns also undermined confidence in the euro, which fell below the $1.34 level Tuesday.
Analysts said the latest developments reflect financial markets' concerns over differences among eurozone member states over specific aspects of the deal, whose details remain vague, as well as the fears about the state of the ailing Greek economy.
"The latest rise in yields is a major blow to hopes that Greece might yet manage to muddle through on its own. 
Needless to say, none of this is good news for the euro either," the AP quoted Jonathan Loynes, chief European economist at Capital Economics as saying.
Citing the lack of clarity about the terms of the Greece rescue plan, Citigroup economist Giada Giani told Reuters it "scares markets because they think that IMF involvement may entail debt restructuring". 
He also believed that the reactions of the markets were aimed at finding "the threshold for the activation of the emergency plan".
