07/04/2010
By BarisYilmaz for Southeast European Times -- 07/04/10
As Turkey mulls an overhaul to its constitution, power struggles between the Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party (AKP) government and the secularist judiciary remain a formidable obstacle to change.
On Monday (April 5th), after weeks of discussion, 265 AKP deputies submitted a revised reform package to the parliament.
The amendments would strengthen basic freedoms and democratic rights -- for example, making it difficult for the Supreme Court to ban political parties.
They also introduce stronger protection for children and women, prohibit discrimination against the disabled and ensure collective bargaining rights for public employees.
In addition, they pave the way for appealing decisions by the Supreme Military Council.
To the disappointment of liberals, however, the package includes nothing about opening a dialogue with Turkey's Kurdish minority.
Also absent is any change to the 10% threshold requirement which blocks minor parties from entering parliament.
Meanwhile, the country's judiciary is bitterly fighting attempts to curb its authority.
Supreme Court of Appeals President Hasan Gerceker says the legislation amounts to a "de-form package" rather than a "reform package".
The true aim, he said, is to cripple the judiciary.
"These changes ...
have nothing to do with EU criteria," Gerceker said in a television interview.
"If adopted, the changes will put an end to the separation of powers in our system and would introduce a monopoly of powers."
Among 29 proposed amendments, the most significant are related to the judiciary.
One particularly controversial change would give the executive branch selection power over ten out of the 17 top judicial posts.
Turkey's judicial system has long been criticised by the EU.
In a 2009 Progress Report, the European Commission expressed continuing concern over its independence, impartiality and efficiency.
Support for comprehensive reform of the courts is strong in Turkey.
But the ongoing political jockeying has made it hard to find a solution acceptable to all sides.
Critics say the AKP's reform package is designed to help the party consolidate power before the 2011 parliamentary elections and prevent a new closure case being brought against it.
The AKP, they charge, has paralyzed the armed forces with various investigations of alleged coup attempts and now has the judiciary -- seen by some as the "last bastion" of secularism -- in its sights.
AKP has 336 out of 542 seats at the parliament.
However, it falls short of the 367 needed to push the amendments through without support from other parties.
If it is unable to secure enough votes, the amendments will likely go to referendum.
Such a development would engender even more controversy, as voters would be asked to give the thumbs up or down to the whole package, and not to individual changes.
"How can we put the basic freedoms and rights, which are beyond discussion, to a referendum?" writes Milliyet newspaper columnist Mehmet Tezkan.
"If we vote against the proposed changes in the top judiciary [and the package fails] does this mean we are also against better protection of children?"
Some signs of a compromise are emerging, with the main opposition Republican People's Party extending a conditional olive branch.
Speaking on Tuesday, CHP leader Deniz Baykal said his party would support the package if President Abdullah Gül puts three of the more controversial articles -- related to the top judiciary -- to a referendum in which voters will decide on them separately.
"We will demonstrate our goodwill and conciliatory approach to the end" if Gul agrees, Baykal said.
Turkey's largest business association, TUSAID, has been calling on the Erdogan administration to work for a broad consensus.
"A constitutional package that does not result from a political consensus will complicate the process of making a new constitution in the future," the organisation said in a press statement.
"We expect the governing party to be open to new ideas, while the opposition ought to offer concrete proposals that will enrich the debate."
