09/08/2010
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 09/08/10
More than 8,000 books and over 3,000 titles are available for visitors again at a major historical landmark in Banja Luka.
A library founded originally by the Bosnian Sanjak-bey Ferhat Pasha Sokolovic has been re-opened at a site belonging to the city's Muslim community.
"We finally experienced a moment when a part of history, tradition and culture of the people from this area has been recovered," Imam Muriz Effendi Spahic said.
Sokolovic, one of the founders of Banja Luka, commissioned the Ferhadija mosque, built in 1579 in classical Ottoman style.
This mosque, known as one of the most successful architectural achievements of 16th century Bosnian architecture, did not survive the 1992-1995 conflict.
A Serb militia group blew it up, along with the nearby Arnaudija mosque complex, in May 1993.
Reconstruction recently got under way.
The head of the Islamic Community in BiH, Reis Mustafa Ceric, has backed the project, as has Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik.
Using ruins of the mosque kept in the city landfill, contractors have been reconstructing it stone by stone.
The library, meanwhile, was re-opened with the assistance of the BiH Federation government and the Sarajevo City Library.
"From this place we send a message that the century of violence and disrespect is behind us," said Mufti of Banja Luka Ethem Camdzic at the opening of Ferhat Pasha's Library.
"From government, present and future, we expect that Bosnia and Herzegovina will become an example of co-existence in one country."
Centuries ago, Ferhadija was not just a religious place where Muslims came to pray, but a symbol of the city, Spahic said.
Besides religious books, the library kept scientific works on topics such as mathematics and astronomy.
The library was the main source of information for the "Muvekits", as people engaged in scholarship were known.
"Ferhat-Pasha's library was the centre of literacy," Spahic said.
"It was not only used by Muslims, but was open for everyone."
To convey a sense of the library's history, Spahic quotes a verse by Behram.
I wrote a book with beautiful handwriting.
My life was hard, I've traveled a lot and learned a lot.
The time will come when I shall die in this place as a stranger, and my books will be sold in a mere trifle.
He said the old library contains books written in Arabic, Turkish and Persian languages more than 300 years ago.
Three years ago, the Islamic community started collecting samples from a book fund maintained by RS authorities, and some of the most valuable titles, including centuries-old copies of the Koran, have been returned.
