06/05/2010
By Esra Erduran for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 06/05/10
While the political and judicial aspects of constitutional reform in Turkey have received the lion's share of attention, many, especially women, are also following the debate over amending Article 10, which covers gender equality.
The government's proposed reform package would strengthen the existing language. 
"Women and men have equal rights. 
The state is obliged to implement this equality," the draft amendment reads.
While the existing constitutional article declared that all individuals are equal before the law regardless of race, colour, sex, political opinion, philosophical belief, or religion, it only required state institutions to "act in compliance" with the principle of equality, rather than having to "implement" it.
Activists have been demanding constitutional changes for years, saying stronger language is needed to ensure equal representation of women and men in political life.
The reform package also aims to strengthen the rights of children. 
The revision of Article 41, regulating family issues, covers the government's role as the protector of children against all kinds of abuse, including sexual abuse and violence.
Both sets of amendments have won public support, but not all women are convinced that simply rewording the constitution is enough to bring about change.
"Turkey needs these amendments for the improvement of women's working conditions," Gulcan Ozkan, a company human resource manager, told SETimes.
"But I have doubts about how these would be implemented. 
There are managers and workplace owners saying that if these improvements are going to be implemented, they'd prefer to hire male instead of female workers."
Ayfer Ulusoy, a married mother of two and a chief accountant at a major company, said constitutional reform -- including more freedoms and rights for women and children -- is a must for the country. 
But she fears that the reform package, which could strengthen the Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party's hold on power, will spur fundamentalist tendencies.
Noting that the number of women wearing headscarves has soared in the wake of the AKP's two general elections, Ulusoy said the image of Turkish women has changed rapidly and dramatically.
"Although I believe that the reform package will improve women's rights, I still fear that [it] may pave a way for theocracy," she added.
If the AKP is unable to muster the 367 parliamentary votes needed for adoption of the reform package, it will be placed before the public in a referendum. 
Analysts say voters are likely to give it the thumbs up.
Still, cautions journalist Mine Cevik, 30, many women may not be familiar with the package or understand how it would benefit them.
"It is important to raise awareness among women living in rural areas and women with low incomes and poor education," she said. 
"How else will they know that this reform will really improve their situation, and how would they make their decision in case of a referendum?"
Surveys show that in rural areas and on the outskirts of big cities, many women are illiterate and simply follow decisions made by their husbands or fathers.
Nurten Bilye, 40, who works as a cleaning lady, told SETimes "I do not have an opinion about the constitutional reform."
When asked how she will vote in a possible referendum, she said "I will ask the opinion of a person who knows better than I do."
