06/05/2010
(AP, Reuters, Bloomberg, FT, DPA, Guardian, MarketWatch - 06/05/10;
AFP, AP, Reuters, FT, BBC, RFE/RL, Euobserver, EurActiv, ANA-MPA - 05/05/10)
Three bank employees, including a pregnant woman, were killed in a fire-bomb attack on a bank in downtown Athens on Wednesday (May 5th), during a 100,000-strong demonstration against the Greek government's plans to impose further belt-tightening measures.
The protests came amid a 24-hour nationwide strike that paralysed the country, as flights to and from Greece were grounded, public transport, schools and government services were shut, and hospitals were left to operate with emergency staff only.
The violence erupted after hundreds of demonstrators broke away from the marches and tried to storm parliament and other buildings, hurling Molotov cocktails and stones, and clashed with police, who fired teargas and stun grenades at the rioters.
According to an AP report Thursday, 15 civilians and 41 police were injured in the riots that rocked the Greek capital;
25 people have been arrested so far.
The deaths of the three employees at the Marfin Popular Bank shocked the country and its leaders.
"Our country has reached the brink of the abyss," President Karolos Papoulias warned in a written statement Wednesday.
"It is the responsibility of us all to not allow the step into the void ...
History will judge us all," he added.
Prime Minister George Papandreou joined the president in condemning the bomb attack, vowing that the perpetrators will be brought to justice.
"We are deeply shocked by the unjust death of these three people, our fellow citizens, who were victims of a murderous act," the leader of the ruling PASOK party told parliament.
"This is where uncontrolled violence and political irresponsibility leads us."
He also made clear that his government will not bow to public pressure and abandon the planned austerity measures, aimed at putting the country's finances under control.
"We took these measures to save jobs, protect families, households and workers," Papandreou said.
Under a bailout deal reached on Sunday, the Greek cabinet has promised new taxes and spending cuts in return for a 110 billion-euro loan package from the eurozone countries and the IMF to help avoid a potential default on its massive debt.
The new austerity measures include freezing public sector pay until 2014 and reducing allowances in the sector by 20%, increasing VAT from 19% to 23% and excises on fuel, alcohol and tobacco by 10%, as well as introducing a one-off tax on profits.
In addition, the government has promised to impose new gambling, property and green taxes, to slash or freeze state pensions and increase the average retirement age from 61 to 63 years.
The government, which desperately needs at least several billion euros to refinance debt maturing on May 19th, hopes to push a bill on the new measures through parliament by Thursday night so the bailout plan can be activated.
"The only other alternative is to allow the government to go bankrupt and we will not allow this," Papandreou said on Wednesday.
But Greek trade unions are opposing any new belt-tightening measures on top of those already taken in recent months.
The head of Greece's main public sector union ADEDY, Spiros Papaspyros, warned that more strikes are likely.
"We will not abandon our fight against the measures," the DPA quoted him as saying.
Meanwhile, Greek bank workers went on strike Thursday to protest the deaths of their three colleagues.
