06/08/2010
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 06/08/10
Turkey's Islamic-rooted government won a victory this week in its simmering power contest with the country's secular military. 
Following a four-day meeting of the Supreme Military Council, the two top army posts remain empty after Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan blocked the promotion of senior officers implicated in alleged plots against the government.
In Turkey, which has suffered four military coups in the past 50 years, the army has been virtually free of civilian oversight, with military appointments merely rubber-stamped by politicians.
However this year, Erdogan refused to approve the army's choice for head of land forces, General Hasan Igsiz, after the officer was summoned to give evidence in an investigation into a plot to discredit the government using Internet propaganda.
According to some observers, the result of the week-long standoff surrounding the summit marks a victory for civil democracy. 
But opponents of the ruling Justice and Development Party say the government used underhand tactics to weaken the army in a bid to pave the way for an Islamic dictatorship.
"We have two sides of the coin," Yusuf Kanli, a political commentator aligned with the secular opposition, told SETimes. 
"On one side, there it's a major step for Turkish democracy because for the first time the civilian government is saying, 'I'm not a spectator, it's my responsibility and I will make the decision'."
"But on the other hand, they played dirty to strengthen their hand. 
The government isn't doing this to contribute to Turkish democracy, it's doing it to stop people it doesn't want appointed to key positions."
Igsiz was one of 18 senior officers summoned to give evidence regarding the alleged Internet propaganda plot.
General Isik Kosaner, the current commander of land forces, was slated to replace General Ilker Basbug, who is due to retire from the top post of Chief of Staff on August 30th. 
However, Kosaner's appointment was also held up as the deadlock over Igsiz continued.
Also omitted from the promotions list were 11 other officers who have been served with arrest warrants over an alleged plot to overthrow the Islamic-leaning government in 2003.
The supposed coup plan, code-named Sledgehammer, was revealed by the Taraf newspaper in February, and would have involved bombing mosques and provoking military tensions with Greece to create instability as a pretext for a military takeover.
In total, 102 officers were issued with arrest warrants last month over the plan, which the army claims was part of a military training seminar simulating a situation of internal unrest.
"In all these issues, there are criminals involved, but at the same time the government is exploiting the issue to silence its critics. 
In this country, we have to ward off military dictatorial ambitions. 
But it's civilian dictatorial ambitions that are more dangerous," Kanli said.
"It's certainly a step forward by democracy, but the problem is that the government is despised by some sections of society who traditionally see the military as the ultimate guardians of their interests," Mustafa Akyol, liberal Islamic commentator for the Star newspaper, said.
"It's time for them to learn to do politics without relying on the military. 
Turkey isn't a dictatorship. 
There's opposing media and opposing parties. 
The military should simply have no role."
