07/06/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/06/10
Milovan Rajevac is the third Serbian coach on Ghana's bench in the past eight years, following Milan Zivadinovic and Ratomir Dujkovic. 
Fans will be waiting to see if the team can repeat -- or surpass -- its achievement at the 2006 World Cup in Germany, when Dujkovic led the Black Stars to the round of 16.
It won't be easy. 
At Durban, Ghana is playing in the same group as three-time champion Germany, unpredictable Australia and the team representing Rajevac's home country, Serbia. 
With Germany considered a nearly sure bet, the Ghana-Serbia matchup may determine which other team from the group advances.
Can Rajevac put national loyalties aside and invest his heart and soul in the match? 
His answer is unequivocal. 
"There will be no discount for Serbia," he insists.
"Everyone must understand that I am not going to South Africa to sell matches, but rather -- if I can -- to repeat Ratomir Dujkovic's success," Reuters quoted him as saying. 
He also wished Serbia the best and said it's not out of the question that the two teams meet again in the round of 16.
Sports journalist Zoran Zeravcic, who followed Rajevac's early coaching career, agrees that the match will be tough. 
"The fact that he is from Serbia can only be a problem for our team, because that will additionally motivate him to prove himself. 
Rajevac is above all a great professional," Zeravcic told SETimes.
Rajevac, nicknamed Lale, was born in the small western Serbian town of Cajetina on January 2nd 1954. 
His playing career started in 1975, when he was signed by Cacak-based Borac. 
He then moved on to Red Star Belgrade and Vojvodina, and finally hung up his player's gear in 1986, while on the roster of Uzice-based Sloboda.
Since then, he has coached for each of his former teams. 
In 2004, after Red Star coach Ljupko Petrovic resigned, Rajevac stepped in and led the team to two wins. 
Management, however, passed him over for another coach.
A few years later, Lale led Borac to third place in the Serbian league and European cups -- the best showing in team history.
This is a man who can "take the blame for defeat and protect the players, which is why the guys he coaches love him", Zeravcic says.
Rajevac headed to Ghana in 2008 and led the national team to the World Cup, as well as to second place in the Africa Cup of Nations this past January. 
Although Ghana will be hobbled by the absence of captain Michael Essien, no one thinks it will be a push-over.
"My team will be a combination of youth and experience, given that the front line will comprise players the team has been relying on for years," Rajevac says. 
"It will also be an opportunity for the players who shone in the FIFA U-20 World Cup, where Ghana triumphed."
