05/08/2010
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 04/08/10
Kosovo officials, backed by US and British diplomats, said Tuesday (August 3rd) there will be no return to negotiations on the status of Kosovo. 
They called on the 15 members of the Security Council to replace the existing Resolution 1244 with a new one.
The new text "should reflect the reality of Kosovo's independence and its support by the International Court of Justice", Kosovo foreign minister Skender Hyseni told the Council. 
"Our application for replacement of 1244 is in line with Kosovo's final goal to become a member of the UN."
At the same session, Serbian representatives delivered a starkly opposing message. 
Belgrade would not recognise an independent Kosovo under any circumstances, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic insisted.
"Serbia is committed to working with Pristina and the international community to find a solution acceptable to both parties on all issues through peaceful dialogue," Jeremic said. 
"I believe that they should engage as soon as possible."
A draft General Assembly resolution presented by Serbia calls for re-opening the status issue in a new round of negotiations.
Britain, however, warned that any attempt to undermine Kosovo's independence would "lock Serbia into confrontation" with countries that have already extended recognition.
"Any effort to encourage the partition of Kosovo, or status talks, would be against the long-term interests of the citizens of Kosovo and Serbia. 
The United Kingdom would strongly resist such efforts," British Deputy UN Representative Philip Parham said.
With the legal process at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) now complete, the time has come to end the debate, he said, urging Belgrade and Pristina to begin a constructive dialogue on other issues.
The United States, meanwhile, expressed full support to Kosovo.
"Kosovo's independence is irreversible, its borders are inviolable," said US Ambassador to the UN Rosemary Di Carlo.
But Belgrade received a show of support from Moscow, which has traditionally sided with Serbia on the Kosovo question. 
Russia's UN ambassador, Vitaly Churkin, was sharply critical of the statements from Britain.
"We heard something that sounded like a threat of confrontation by countries that have recognised Kosovo," the Russian diplomat said.
Lamberto Zannier, head of the UN mission to Kosovo, briefed the Council on the security situation there. 
Delivering a regular quarterly report, he said the situation was comparatively stable but that dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina is needed in order to reduce tensions.
The ICJ advisory opinion "has had a positive response in Kosovo and the region and this should be a good case that Pristina and Belgrade to promote dialogue given the background of European integration on both sides," he said.
Kosovo officials said any topics other than status can be discussed at future talks, as long as these are held on the basis of two independent, sovereign states.
"There can be no talks on Kosovo's status," said Kosovo's Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuqi. 
"Such ideas are morally unacceptable and not adequate."
