05/05/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 05/05/10
Justice Minister Ivan Simonovic was appointed as the assistant UN secretary-general for human rights on Monday (May 3rd).
The post was established last year and Simonovic is the first to take the job.
It is the highest-ranking international position to have been held by a Croatian official.
"I have always been involved in human rights issues, even as justice minister," Simonovic told reporters.
"I have been interested in this field of work throughout my career as a diplomat and as a university professor."
Croatian President Ivo Josipovic said that he is "very proud of this achievement, not only because it is a big challenge for Simonovic, but also because it is a reward for Croatian diplomacy as well".
Extending her congratulations, Deputy Prime Minister Djurdja Adlesic said that Simonovic and his work are "almost irreplaceable in the government".
The appointee said on Tuesday that he would like to complete the judicial reforms necessary for Croatia's EU accession before taking up the new post in New York.
Simonovic enjoys high public approval ratings.
He has strived to make the country's judiciary more transparent, and the rule of law more evident.
He will be replaced by State Secretary for Justice Drazen Bosnjakovic, who worked side-by-side to overhaul the judiciary.
The UN said that Simonovic was chosen from 128 candidates from all over the world, and that he has "extensive experience in the fields of international development, human rights, peace building and development of national institutions, which he has addressed at the political and academic levels".
In the final stage of the nomination process, he and three other candidates held a video conference with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who discussed different international issues and human rights points with them.
Simonovic has served as justice minister since 2008.
Prior to that, he was deputy foreign minister and a law professor at Zagreb University.
He also served as the senior vice-president and president of the Economic and Social Council of the UN (ECOSOC) from 2001 to 2003.
