05/04/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 05/04/10
A complaint submitted by the Centre for Legal Resources (CRJ) and Interights last December at the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg over living conditions at Poiana Mare psychiatric hospital has come full circle.
The reports revealed 183 hospital deaths from 2002-2004, mostly in the winter, due to inhuman living conditions.
The organisations are asking the Strasbourg court to allow the NGOs to initiate the case on behalf of five victims.
The complaint for the five was submitted after the legal recourse was exhausted in Romania.
That is one of the prerequisites for submitting a complaint at the European court.
The current rules of the court, which allow only the families of victims to file cases, "represent procedural barriers to mentally-disabled persons' access to justice," state the CRJ and Interights in their complaint.
"The cases raise the issue of access to justice for the mentally-disabled, but also the failure of the authorities to prevent countless abuses committed against the persons admitted to social care institutions and psychiatric hospitals," said the NGOs in a press release.
The groups added that they are aiming for a favourable verdict to encourage social care services within the community as alternatives to state run institutions.
Catalina Radulescu, a legal counselor with CRJ, told SETimes about the background of the complaint.
"Poiana Mare was one of the hospitals visited by a CRJ team in February 2004 when we discovered the patients there were living in inhuman conditions, with no central heating when the outside temperature had dropped to -20 degrees Celsius, as well as scarce food -- they were only given canned peas, and medics would visit them once in a while," she said.
Radulescu said the CRJ informed the authorities, who began an investigation at Poiana Mare.
This did not lead to legal proceedings and was never completed.
So far, no one has been held responsible for conditions at the hospital.
The NGOs are not seeking compensations for the five victims, said Radulescu.
"We are asking for the state to be held responsible because it did not provide the patients with the necessary living conditions and medical treatment," she explained.
"If the EU Court rules in our favour, the Romanian state is compelled before the Council of Europe (CoE) to fix the situation.
There will be no dismissals or fines, but the diplomatic [ramifications] are significant," she added.
Poiana Mare is in an isolated village in southwest Romania, a former military base.
During communism, the hospital was also used as a detention center for political dissidents.
The hospital was visited three times by the delegations of the CoE Committee for Prevention of Torture -- in 1995, 1999 and 2004.
Each time, reports were released on the poor conditions suffered by hospital patients.
Despite the reports, living conditions did not change, according to the two NGOs.
