04/08/2010
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 04/08/10
For over 20 years, young people have flocked to the award-winning productions of Macedonia's Theatre for Children and Youth, entering a world of fantasy, emotion and folklore.
Through a repertoire including "Beauty and the Beast", "The Little Prince", "The Small Mermaid" and "King Marko", the theatre continues to dazzle audiences.
SETimes correspondent Marina Stojanovska sat down with director Ljubomir Cadikovski, who has been with the theatre since its beginning.
SETimes:
How does it feel to celebrate the theatre's 20th anniversary?
And how do you sustain interest among the toughest of audiences, namely children?
Ljubomir Cadikovski:
The feeling is endless when you know you have erected a temple dedicated to children.
Macedonia has had puppet theatre going back to 1946, but if you could witness the rise and fall of these shows, you would easily conclude that they face many challenges.
The beginnings were difficult in every aspect -- no educated actors, technique or space, just an enthusiastic love of the profession that persevered over time.
Twenty years of activity represent a magnificent period of endurance for a cultural institution – one which is well aware of its path towards the future, without forgetting the past.
In order to sustain attention among an audience of children, you should keep in mind for whom you are preparing the performance.
Among other things, you must make sure their ethical parameters are respected.
SETimes:
How do you make children's theatre into a brand?
Cadikovski:
To make a brand out of something requires hard work and a precise vision regarding permanent development.
One should have a wide repertoire and be able to present performances for an audience of 2 years old and above.
Children's attention must be stimulated by interesting replicas carrying educational messages, dazzling costumes and scenery, and good music.
Our task is to extract emotion and fantasy derived from fairy tales.
SETimes:
Your repertoire is full of world famous fables, but it also contains Macedonian folk tales.
Which category do the children prefer?
Cadikovski:
The age of the children determines our repertoire.
The girls are more romantic than the boys.
But that is why we have many performances, to satisfy the taste of every member of audience.
There are 24 alternating performances.
SETimes:
Several years ago your theatre's top play was "Macedonian tale".
What is it about?
Cadikovski:
We are talking about a performance that does not have a script, but does have dramaturgy.
It consists of singing traditional Macedonian songs and features folkloric items and ethnic costumes going back more than 100 years.
It is a puppet show that lasts 51 minutes with 5 actors.
At the end of the performance, the actors come out on the scene and play on two big drums, summoning at atmosphere imbued with the Macedonian traditional spirit.
SETimes:
How expensive is it to produce a theatrical play for the children?
What unique challenges do you face when creating costumes, puppets and scenes?
Cadikovski:
The most expensive play is the bad one.
A play that has been on the repertoire for 10-15 years speaks for itself.
Our plays are much cheaper than those for adults.
It is harder to develop the content of a play that lasts 50 minutes but has at the same time all the dramaturgical elements.
A child's attention span doesn't last more than an hour.
SETimes:
How much assistance did the theatre receive as a result of the visa liberalisation process and your travels throughout the Balkans and beyond?
Cadikovski:
We have traveled a lot and won many awards in the countries in which we performed, but the procedures for obtaining visas for 15 people were a real golgotha.
Visa liberalisation offers many opportunities for easier participation at the festivals in Europe, where all the arts represent Macedonian culture without difficulties.
SETimes:
You co-operate with many Balkan directors and costume managers.
Do you think that culture is a unifying factor?
Cadikovski:
Culture is the only thing that can bring us closer together.
The more you get to know each other, the more you respect one another.
A theatre is the most flexible asset for that kind of co-operation.
One project may involve the participation of many authors from different countries, and it does not reflect upon the final outcome of the play itself.
Such co-operation incites the beginnings of many amicable liaisons and exchange of many experiences.
It is simply marvelous.
