03/08/2010
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 03/08/10
Last month, the Turkish parliament changed a law under which children have been tried as terrorists and handed long jail terms, often for doing little more than attending demonstrations, throwing stones, or chanting slogans in support of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK).
The amendments were passed as the Justice and Development Party (AKP) government searches for a solution to unrest in the southeast after the PKK cancelled a 14-month ceasefire in June and resumed a 26-year insurgency that has so far left 40,000 dead.
But on Monday (August 2nd), lawyers and human rights activists told SETimes that draconian terror laws will continue to alienate the country's 20 million Kurds despite the amendments.
"The problem of unfair prosecutions under anti-terrorism laws in Turkey is far wider than the problem of the prosecution of children," said Andrew Gardner, Turkey researcher for Amnesty International.
"The crux of the issue is the definition of terrorism within the law and not one letter of these laws have been changed. 
It's going to mean that the countless unfair trials that we've seen are going to continue."
The government agreed late last year to change a law it introduced in 2006 allowing minors to be tried on terror charges. 
The decision came after a vocal civil campaign highlighted the plight of children in prison -- some as young as 12.
Thousands have been detained under the controversial law. 
Around 50 imprisoned minors were immediately released after the new legislation came into force on July 25th.
It will be applied retroactively. 
Minors who attended pro-PKK protests will have their prison sentences waived or reduced.
Support for the minors among the Turkish public and media rested on the campaigners' emphasis that they were children, rather than Kurds.
One leading campaigner, Mehmet Atak, a former Turkish film star, said: "We tried to tell the public that their children, their brothers, their sisters are all the potential victims of the anti-terror laws. 
Today it could be Kurdish children, but tomorrow it could be Alevis or Sunnis."
But Tahir Elci, a human rights lawyer who works in the main Kurdish city of Diyarbakir, and has represented more than 50 children facing terror charges, said Kurds will continue to mistrust the state as long as legal injustices continue.
"This was a good solution for the children in prison, but for adults, the problem of heavy punishments continues," he said. 
"Many people believe that the state and the judiciary look at them as an enemy, not as a citizen, and so this situation is making the Kurdish problem more difficult to solve."
Under Article 220 of Turkey's penal code defendants can be tried as members of an illegal organisation even if they are not, as long as they are deemed to have acted on its behalf.
Following a Supreme Court of Appeals judgment in 2008, anyone attending an event supported by the PKK can be considered to have acted on its behalf.
"These laws allow people to be tried as members of terrorism organisations without actually being members of them," Gardner said.
Turkish laws that make it an offence to spread propaganda or to praise crime or criminals "are arbitrarily applied in the prosecution of non-violent dissenting opinions", he said.
Campaigners now fear that following the improvements in the law relating to children, the whole issue now risks being swept under the carpet.
"The campaign for the children was a huge achievement, but there's a real danger now of this being sidelined. 
The government needs to look again at the definition of terrorism crimes," Emma Sinclair-Webb, from the Europe and Central Asia of Human Rights Watch, said.
Amed, from Diyarbakir, spent more than a year in prison after being arrested near a demonstration. 
"When you stay in prison your view of life changes," he told SETimes. 
"Even if you haven't done anything, it changes you."
