04/05/2010
(The Sofia Echo, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool -- 22/04/10 - 23/04/10;
BTA - 21/04/10;
Eurobarometer)
More than two-thirds of Bulgarians think there is a risk of being harmed by hospital or non-hospital care, according to a Eurobarometer survey on patient safety released in April.
Poor management and lack of professionalism are undermining the health system and immediate reforms are needed, according to the country's newly-appointed health minister, Anna-Maria Borissova.
"I want to provide high-quality health care everywhere in the country," she said on April 22nd, a day after taking up the post.
"Every patient in Bulgaria should get the best possible treatment."
The healthcare sector underwent a major overhaul in the late 1990s.
The communist-era system of funding and ownership was replaced with a new model and health care establishments were granted economic, legal and financial independence.
Doctors and hospitals became independent contractors of the newly created National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF), which assumed the functions of the payment agency.
But other changes that could help improve efficiency and quality have stalled due to lack of political will.
"We will hurry [with reform] because we are ridiculously late," Borissova told reporters in Sofia.
At the same time, she insisted that decisions would be made without rushing, and only after careful consideration and preparation.
As short term priorities, she cited defining the professional standards for employees in the sector and drawing up a "national health map" with complete information on the country's healthcare system.
Borissova, an endocrinologist and a professor at the Medical University in Sofia, replaced Bozhidar Nanev, who resigned at the end of March after being charged with corruption over a contract for the purchase of the antiviral medicine Tamiflu late last year.
A recent report on the ministry's 2009 activities said the launch and implementation of healthcare system reforms had been a top priority.
Nanev had warned that in addition to the spending cuts required in the sector due to the economic crisis, dozens of hospitals operating in the red would have to be closed down.
The number of hospitals in Bulgaria has grown from 293 to 414 in the last nine years, Borissova said.
This means that Bulgaria has about 4.6 hospitals per 100,000 people, compared to the EU average of three hospitals per 100,000 people.
"This is a huge increase, all these hospitals are draining public resources, and our resources have not grown, their level has remained unchanged," she said, but promised that none of the existing hospitals will be shut down.
Lack of professionals is another huge issue in the sector.
"Every single day there is one doctor who leaves Bulgaria," the Sofia News Agency quoted Borissova as saying.
"The number of nurses is only half of what Bulgaria actually needs.
This is a catastrophe."
Poor pay, the low social status of medical professionals and the poor management of the system are just a few of the problems in the health care sector, a Sofia-based doctor with a 22-year practice in otolaryngology told SETimes.
"The head of the health care system has been liquidated," said the doctor, speaking on condition of anonymity.
He blames the dire state of the system on the "non-working" models adopted at the start of the reform process more than ten years ago.
"The inefficient hospitals must be closed," he added.
But others in the medical profession disagree and feel encouraged by the new minister's promises that this will not happen.
