24/10/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 24/10/05
Most Macedonians would not say that they have seen much recent improvement in their daily quality of life.
New jobs are few, petrol, central heating, electricity and telephone charges have increased and salaries have not risen.
Polls consistently indicate that Macedonian citizens are above all concerned about the economic situation and the spectre of joblessness -- in a word, about poverty.
Yet economic indicators show that the economy is indeed recovering, as the country emerges from what has been a protracted transition period.
According to the finance ministry, the economic foundations for accelerated growth and better living standards have been put in place.
In late August, Standard & Poor’s raised Macedonia's long-term national investment grades of Macedonia from BB to BB+ in foreign currency and from BB to BBB- in local currency.
At the same time, the short-term investment grade in local currency increased from B to A-3.
According to the ratings firm, "prospects are stable".
Swift and stable progress towards political stability, marked by fulfillment of the Ohrid Accords, are a major reason for the upgrade.
In addition, the agency cites structural reforms, macroeconomic stability, a stable exchange rate, decreasing debt and reduced obstacles to growth as factors.
Efforts are under way to streamline management practices, free up the labour market and reform the country's judiciary, the firm notes.
Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski has been vigorously promoting Macedonia's prospects.
"This year, GDP will come up to around 4 per cent, a good basis for economic development in the upcoming period," he said during a presentation at Citigroup offices in London.
Bullish estimates are also coming from the IMF.
In its most recent semiannual report on World Economic Prospects, it predicted that Macedonia will see 3.8 per cent economic growth this year and 3.7 per cent in 2006.
By comparison, the IMF puts the growth rate of the world economy at 4.3 per cent in 2005 and 2006.
According to the report, the country's balance of payments deficit will be 6.5 per cent of GDP this year, decreasing to 5.2 per cent in 2006.
The IMF expects Macedonia to end this year with 1.2 per cent inflation, while in 2006 inflation will rise to 1.8 per cent.
Per capita GDP, according to the IMF, will be $2,380 this year, and in 2006 it will be $2,508.
Another positive economic indicator is a higher ranking in the UN Human Development report, the most recent of which placed Macedonia 59th out of 117 countries in terms of GDP, educational levels and health security.
The index records an upward trend in these areas over the past five years.
However encouraging the signs look on paper, they have yet to translate into a general improvement in living standards.
One reason, according to the USAID, is that Macedonia lags behind in technical development.
The country has only 60 Internet users per 1,000 inhabitants, whereas in many other countries the figure is between 250 and 600 users per 1,000 inhabitants.
Another factor, say experts, is the red tape entrepreneurs must deal with in order to start a business.
No fewer than 13 procedures are required, requiring 48 days and a cost of around $12,350.
The start-up costs and hassles pose a serious barrier to investors.
Macedonia has the lowest level of foreign investment in the region -- around $160m.
The government is taking steps to address the problem.
Starting on 1 January 2006, a one-stop-shop system for business registration will be in place.
Three out of 18 amendments needed to streamline the process have already been adopted.
The country has embarked on a path that will make it significantly easier to woo foreign and domestic investors, say officials.
The World Bank cites the inflexibility of Macedonia's labour market as another obstacle, ranking the country 123rd in terms of hiring and firing procedures.
True, Macedonian workers -- those who have jobs, at least -- enjoy security, but at a steep cost.
On a positive note, Macedonia ranks 53rd in terms of credit procedures, 58th in terms of taxes on enterprises, and 30th in protection of investors, the Bank found.
It is 81st overall, behind Bulgaria (62nd) and Romania (78th), but ahead of Serbia-Montenegro (92nd), Albania (117th) and Croatia (118th).
Inevitably, Macedonians are wondering when they will benefit from progress in economic performance.
The finance ministry says a solid starting basis has been created for future prosperity.
Addressing parliament, Buckovski argued that his administration has spent its first three years in office repairing the damage done by previous governments, not to mention the interethnic conflict that nearly tore the country apart.
The government has kept to a strict fiscal policy and disciplined budget policy in line with the IMF and World Bank recommendations, banking that it will be able to tackle unemployment through boosting the investment climate.
The Buckovski administration hopes to attract at least one large foreign bank, enabling lower credit interest rates, which in turn would spur domestic investment.
In the meantime, domestic exporters complain because of the high exchange rates of the denar (which is fixed to the euro), would-be investors point to the high interest rate, and citizens lament their lack of purchasing power.
Buckovski's government recognises that a more mobile economy is the ticket for a better future, and has already carried out tough reforms.
It is only a matter of time, officials insist, before citizens will see the results.
