03/03/2010
By Igor Jovanovic and Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina – 03/03/10
Serbia can continue its refusal to recognise Kosovo and still be on track for integration into the EU, the foreign minister of France told officials in Belgrade on Monday (March 1st).
However, Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner told his Serbian counterpart Vuk Jeremic, for the process to move forward, a compromise solution must be reached with Kosovo.
Jeremic said that accepting its former province as an independent state cannot be part of the solution.
Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia in February 2008.
"We want to work with France, Europe and the international community on finding a compromise solution that will enable lasting peace and stability and accelerate the European integration process for the entire Western Balkans," said Jeremic.
"That is the strategic priority -- European integration of the Western Balkans.
For that to happen, we need to reach a compromise."
Kouchner also met with Serbian President Boris Tadic and Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic.
Tadic's office quoted Kouchner as saying that France supports Belgrade's path to the EU, and stressed that there are no additional conditions for membership.
Serbian officials invited France to invest in the construction of a subway system in Belgrade along with a highway known as Corridor 10.
French investment is also sought in the energy and infrastructure sectors.
During his visit to Belgrade, Kouchner laid a wreath on the grave of assassinated Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic, murdered in 2003 by a gunman connected to organised crime.
After his meetings in Belgrade, Kouchner traveled to Kosovo and spoke at a special session of parliament.
He expressed hope that Serbia and Kosovo would one day make their way to the EU as independent states.
"So … the dialogue between these two states is a prerequisite for this path," he said.
"Kosovo's independence is irreversible.
Your independence is not to be questioned;
it is a historical step that no one can change and everyone should accept."
A former special representative to the UN secretary-general in Kosovo, Kouchner noted the huge challenge the country overcame to arrive at independence, and said reconciliation between Kosovo and Serbia is possible.
Parliament Assembly Speaker Jakup Krasniqi said Kosovo's institutions are undergoing reforms specified by the Ahtisaari Plan and noted co-operation with the International Civilian Office and EULEX.
The visit ended on a dramatic note when a Serb journalist -- Voice of America's Budimir Nicic -- asked Kouchner about his possible role in the trafficking of human organs from kidnap victims during the 1999 Kosovo conflict.
Kouchner lambasted Nicic, saying:
"Are you sick … you should consult a doctor;
don't talk nonsense like that."
The insult was condemned Tuesday by the Independent Association of Journalists of Serbia.
