04/10/2010
(World Bulletin, Anadolu Agency, Zaman, Sofia News Agency, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg, 24 Chasa - 04/10/10)
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan arrived on a one-day working visit to Sofia on Monday (October 4th) at the invitation of his Bulgarian counterpart, Boyko Borisov.
The Turkish leader was accompanied by the country's chief negotiator with the EU, Egemen Bagis, as well as by State Minister Faruk Celik, Energy Minister Taner Yildiz and Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim.
In an interview with the Sofia-based mass circulation daily 24 Chasa on Monday, Erdogan listed regional and international developments, as well as political, trade and economic issues, as some of the items topping the agenda of his talks with Borisov.
Ways to strengthen the two countries' co-operation in specific sectors, including energy, transport and tourism would also be discussed during the visit, he indicated.
"We are allies and our multilateral co-operation, undoubtedly, contributes to regional stability in the Balkans," Erdogan told 24 Chasa.
The Nabucco natural gas pipeline, Bulgaria's possible inclusion in the Turkey-Greece-Italy gas interconnection project, or the construction of a separate direct pipeline between the two countries, were among the issues expected to be discussed in greater detail at Yildiz's meeting with Bulgarian Energy Minister Traicho Traikov.
Speaking upon his departure for Sofia, eight months after Borisov's trip to Ankara in late January, Erdogan voiced hope that a final decision on the construction of a dam in the border region between the two countries would be reached Monday.
Erdogan also criticised circles in Bulgaria insisting that Sofia must block Turkey's EU bid unless it pays out billions of euros in compensation for the properties of ethic Bulgarians, who were expelled from the Ottoman Empire nearly a century ago.
"Under the treaty of friendship between Turkey and Bulgaria, signed in Angora in 1925, the issue found its solution after the two parties withdrew their claims for the period 1912-1925," said Erdogan.
Recalling that Turkey backed its northern neighbour's admission into NATO in 2004, he said he expected reciprocal support from Sofia for his country's bid to join the Union, in line with the principles of solidarity within the Euro-Atlantic community.
Bulgaria's EU entry in 2007 prompted an increase in bilateral trade between the two countries -- peaking at more than 3.6 billion euros at the end of that year, before dropping to nearly 3 billion euros in 2008, according to Erdogan.
The decrease in the trade volume between the two countries last year was due to the global financial and economic crisis, he said, adding that he expects the numbers to match the 2007 ones within months.
"We will catch it by the end of this year," the Anadolu Agency quoted him as saying.
Erdogan was also scheduled to meet with Ahmet Dogan, the leader of the Movement for Rights and Freedoms, a party supported mainly by Bulgaria's ethnic Turkish community, and with the head mufti of Muslims in Bulgaria, Mustafa Alis Haci.
