02/03/2010
(EurActiv, Euobserver - 02/03/10; AFP, AP, Reuters, Euronews, BBC, Guardian, VOA, ANA-MPA - 01/03/10)
Greece must take further austerity measures to tackle its debt crisis and meet its budget deficit target for this year, EU Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn said during a 24-hour visit to Athens on Monday (March 1st).
"I am asking the Greek government to announce new measures in the coming days," said Rehn following talks with Greek Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou.
Greece is the weak link among the 16 economies in the Eurozone. 
It is sitting on a huge public debt, which is expected to reach nearly 300 billion euros -- more than 120% of GDP -- this year. 
Shortly after defeating the conservative New Democracy party in the country's snap elections last October, the new centre-left PASOK government revealed that the 2009 budget deficit would soar to 12.7% of GDP, more than four times the 3% EU ceiling.
Amid fears that the crisis could spill over to other members of the Eurozone, Prime Minister George Papandreou's cabinet presented a four-year austerity plan earlier this year, pledging to cut the deficit to 8.7% of GDP this year and bring it to below the EU limit by the end of 2012.
The European Commission (EC) endorsed the plan, but insisted that the country needs to be closely monitored to make sure measures will be effectively implemented.
A team of EU, European Central Bank and IMF experts concluded following an audit last week that the public sector wage freezes, bonus cuts, tax hikes and other measures in the current package would help plug the 2010 budget gap by only 2% of GDP, instead of the promised 4%.
Following a whirlwind round of meetings with Papandreou, other key cabinet members and the chief of the Bank of Greece, Rehn told reporters at a news conference in Athens that additional measures are essential.
"It is of paramount importance for the Greek people to get their public finances back on a sustainable path," he said on Monday. 
"The risks related to macroeconomic and market developments are now materialising."
Greece, whose budget gap reportedly grew to unacceptably high levels due to the country's lingering recession, should focus on "structural reforms aimed at regaining the country's economic competitiveness," Rehn noted.
Earlier in the day, Papaconstantinou pledged that the PASOK government would do "whatever is necessary -- and that includes new measures" to slash the budget deficit by 4% of GDP this year.
Papandreou is expected to announce harsh new measures following a cabinet meeting Wednesday. 
According to reports, those are likely to include a possible value added tax (VAT) increase, additional reduction of benefits in the public sector, a further fuel duty hike, as well as cuts on Christmas and Easter allowances, referred to as the "13th wage" in Greece.
Appealing to the public to support the government in "the common effort to save our country," Papandreou noted that the "overwhelming majority" of Greeks are ready to join that effort.
The EC is due to present an interim report on the implementation of the Greek fiscal consolidation plan during a meeting of EU finance ministers on March 16th.
