03/05/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 03/05/10
Neighbours and fellow NATO members Greece and Turkey are making another push to improve relations, even as disputes over the Aegean continue to make waves.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan will visit Athens in mid-May for talks with Greek counterpart George Papandreou.
"We hope it will be an historic visit," Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said, seeking a "new vision in Greek-Turkish relations".
He and Greek Deputy Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas recently announced the launch of a high-level, Greek-Turkish strategic co-operation council.
Proposed by Erdogan, it includes ministers of foreign affairs, energy, the economy, EU affairs, transport, domestic affairs, education, the environment and tourism and culture.
It was also agreed that the two countries' presidents, prime ministers and foreign ministers will meet on the sidelines of international conferences.
Meanwhile, exchange programmes for young diplomats will be implemented.
Greece and Turkey are seeking to develop a new vision based not on perceived threats, but on mutual interests, Davutoglu explained.
"When we succeed in building this common future together, defence requirements will mutually cease to exist," he said.
Such words sound bold on paper, but putting them into practice is a thornier task, analysts caution.
"These are all glaring decisions," wrote Sami Kohen, a veteran foreign policy columnist at the daily Milliyet.
"However, two things are needed to implement them:
first, the political will, and second, mutual confidence."
Ankara and Athens have long sparred over a number of Aegean issues, including territorial waters, airspace, oil drilling rights, Flight Information regions and sovereignty over islets.
The countries came close to war in 1987 and in 1996, and their navies and air forces still challenge each other regularly, despite confidence-building measures taken in order to halt dangerous military incidents.
A senior Turkish military source quoted by Hurriyet said the prospects for resolving the quarrel remain slim.
"It's not really possible to restructure a security settlement in the Aegean given the current conditions," the source said.
However, the countries may be able to make progress if they concentrate on areas of common ground.
Both, for instance, are under pressure to trim their bloated military budgets.
With Greece requiring a massive international bailout to save its economy, the EU has been urging the country to slash military spending.
In late March, German Chancellor Angela Merkel suggested as much to Turkey, raising hopes that the two long-standing regional rivals will stop spending so much on armaments.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, the total military expenditures of both Turkey and Greece exceeded 15 billion euros in 2008 -- 8.7 billion euros and 7.2 billion euros, respectively.
