02/04/2010
(Cyprus Mail, Zaman - 02/04/10; CNA, Cyprus Mail, Famagusta Gazette, Hurriyet, World Bulletin - 01/04/10; AFP, VOA, Cyprus Foreign Ministry, TheParliament.com, British Prime Minister's Office, Zaman, Famagusta Gazette, CNA - 31/03/10; AP, DPA, CNA, UNFICYP, UN News Centre - 30/03/10)
A chorus of senior international and national officials have welcomed Tuesday's (March 30th) announcement by the leaders of ethnically-divided Cyprus that they had achieved "important progress" in reunifying the Mediterranean island.
UN-mediated negotiations on a comprehensive solution to end Cyprus's more than 35-year-old division were launched in 2008, less than seven months after Demetris Christofias won the presidential election in the Greek-run south. 
Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat have since met over 70 times, in a bid to find a mutually acceptable solution.
"After many meetings that have taken place to date … we are encouraged by the important progress we have made so far," Christofias and Talat said in a joint statement Tuesday. 
"We are convinced that with perseverance we shall achieve a comprehensive settlement."
The statement followed their last meeting before the scheduled Turkish Cypriot presidential election on April 18th. 
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said the talks should continue after the election.
If Talat loses the race to Turkish Cypriot Prime Minister Dervis Eroglu, as is widely expected, reunification would be put in doubt. 
Eroglu leads the hard-line National Unity Party. 
Observers note that he is opposed to a settlement that would make the island a bi-zonal and bi-communal federation, the basis of the current negotiations. 
Eroglu has said he supports a two-state solution.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon praised Christofias and Talat for their "stronger than ever commitment to a settlement". 
Ban said the leaders have taken "enormous political risks to carry the process forward" and encouraged them to keep pushing for a deal.
Ban's praise and encouragement were echoed in separate statements by top EU officials, including the head of the European Parliament, Jerzy Buzek, and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso.
"These achievements clearly demonstrate that a settlement is within reach and that there is a chance to finalise the talks in the next few months," said Barroso, noting that the EC is ready to provide any necessary assistance.
Cyprus has been divided along ethnic lines since 1974, when Turkish forces occupied the island's north following a brief Athens-backed coup to unite it with Greece. 
More than 30,000 Turkish troops remain in the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which is recognised by Ankara alone.
