03/05/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens – 03/05/10
The plea rising from the ranks of battered entrepreneurs amid the crippling debt crisis is both singular and urgent:
Do what it takes and do it now!
The situation on the ground is dire.
"Now you don't look at when a [post-dated] cheque expires, only if it will be paid," Yiannis Paretzoglou, the co-owner of a west Athens plant manufacturing women's footwear, told SETimes.
"Our greatest problem is uncertainty."
His comments came on April 27th, nicknamed "Black Tuesday", the day Standard and Poor's downgraded Greek bonds to junk status.
Add to that a record high interest rate gap between Greek ten-year bonds and the benchmark German equivalent, as well as the Athens Stock Market's implosion by 6%, and you have near disaster.
"What I need is someone to tell me, unequivocally, that things will take a certain course;
someone to make a solid prediction," said Paretzoglou.
He cited a decrease in his factory's revenue in the first three months of 2010, down nearly 20% from the same period last year.
An accountant in northern Athens calculated the decrease in business by retail companies and self-employed professionals at more than 25% so far this year.
When accounting executive Vangelis Katsiadakis was asked what he wanted to see the Papandreou government do to right the situation, he didn't mince words.
"They [business people] don't care about what specific measures are taken, just that measures are taken.
Whatever is going happen, let it happen now, don't have it drag on;
this affects consumption," Katsiadakis said "A great deal of insecurity is created.
When IMF-mandated measures are taken, no matter what they are, after two or three months things will stabilise."
While most of his clients -- primarily firms and shop owners -- are still avoiding layoffs, Katsiadakis said the emphasis is on compressing operational costs, particularly in renegotiating commercial leases.
In terms of prices, he said increased VAT rates -- which, under the proposed bailout plan, will jump to 23% -- have mostly been absorbed by businesses and not passed on to consumers.
Stefanos Lekatsas is a mid-sized merchant and wholesaler with a handful of apparel boutiques in Athens, Patras and the western city of Agrinio.
He emphasised that the one thing government and politicians must absolutely do is avoid "terrorising and panicking the public".
"Consumer and investor confidence is paramount;
if measures are necessary then take them immediately, this foot-dragging is lethal," Lekatsas told SETimes.
He said he managed to raise revenue in the first three months of the year compared to the same period in 2009, but only by doubling his merchandise and stock.
However, the 12% rise in revenue was below the corresponding increase in outlays, while an early Easter holiday boosted March sales.
"My main effort to keep [revenue] high, any way I can," Lekatsas said.
Lekatsas, who imports pret-a-porter (ready-to-wear) clothing from Italy, France and the United Kingdom, also warned that rents for stores in "prime areas" have not come down.
Additionally, the owners of smaller stores rely heavily on the rent they receive.
Because of the crisis, however, Lekatsas did not raise his rents even though he was legally eligible to do so.
In summing up the general consensus, Ian Gourley, president of the Hellenic Irish Business Association, said that regardless of which decisions are made "we need action yesterday, not tomorrow."
Pressed to come up with at least one measure that would directly and immediately benefit Greek exporters, Gourley noted the implementation of an electronic customs monitoring system.
He said the technology went online everywhere in the EU on April 1st, except for in Greece and Poland.
Two years ago, Gourley said, an IMF package for Romania did wonders in reversing an economic downturn.
If the same could help Greece, he said, then get on with it.
"Now there's a positive atmosphere [in Romania]," he said.
"Business is up again and higher economic growth is projected."
