17/09/2004
(Various sources – 10/09/04 - 17/09/04)
An IMF mission arrived in Turkey to assess the latest economic developments and measures related to structural reforms.
Turkey is preparing to sign a new three-year stand-by arrangement with the Fund.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Russia agreed to resolve issues concerning their interstate debts within six months.
BiH has wartime liabilities of 44.3m euros for gas deliveries from Russia, while Russia owes BiH 102.5m euros -- part of its Soviet-era clearing debt to the former Yugoslavia.
Croatia's economy minister, Branko Vukelic, announced that Russia intends to settle its Soviet-era clearing debt to Croatia by the end of 2004.
Representatives of the two governments are expected to sign an agreement on the settlement of the 151.4m-euro debt within weeks, he said.
Repayment will likely take the form of equipment supplies for thermal power plants and for construction of a gas pipeline, as well as supply of two BE-200 firefighting aircraft.
The European Investment Bank provided 2.4m euros in financing for the extension and modernisation project at the Albanian port of Durres.
The funds were used to purchase a travelling crane with a 120-tonne capacity.
Total cost of the project is estimated at 17m euros.
Cyprus hopes to cut its budget deficit and join the eurozone by 2008, Cypriot Finance Minister Makis Keravnos announced on 14 September.
He called for adoption of the cost savings plan outlined in Cyprus' EU convergence package, to reduce the budget deficit to 2.9 per cent of GDP by the end of 2005 and observe the EU ceiling of 3 per cent.
The IMF published the concluding statement from its 2004 Article IV Consultation with Greece, urging the government to act immediately to address the challenges resulting from Olympics-related spending.
Specifically, the Fund called for credible fiscal consolidation, policies to boost aggregate supply, and better alignment of real wages with productivity to help restore competitiveness.
Italy will extend about 65m euros in financial assistance to Serbia under a new economic co-operation programme.
The funds will be used for support of healthcare, energy, education, environmental protection, agriculture and welfare housing construction.
Macedonia's government will review a proposal to revise the state budget for 2004 at one of its next sessions, announced Finance Minister Nikola Popovski.
He described the overestimated inflation target as the main reason for the adjustment.
Instead of the initially expected 2.8 per cent, annual inflation for 2004 will stand at around 0.5 per cent.
Bulgaria's Finance Ministry and the IMF mission resumed talks on the country's 2004 budget execution and the draft budget for 2005.
At issue is the government's plan for a 25 per cent hike of the minimum wage in 2005, something the Fund opposes.
If no agreement is reached during this round of talks, further efforts will be made in December.
