02/03/2010
(Various sources -- 19/02/10 - 28/02/10)
Bulgaria must decide whether to continue building the Belene nuclear power plant with Russian funding until a new strategic investor is picked, or suspend the project, Bulgarian Economy, Energy and Tourism Minister Traycho Traykov said on Sunday (February 28th).
His remarks came less than ten days after Russia offered 1.9 billion euros to complete construction that needs to be finished by the end of 2011.
Bulgaria would not provide any state or corporate guarantees to receive that funding, Traykov said after talks with Russian Energy Minister Sergei Shmatko.
The talks, held February 19th in Sofia, were also attended by Sergei Kiriyenko, head of Rosatom, the regulatory body of the Russian nuclear industry.
Describing the offer as "unique", Traykov said again on Sunday that Bulgaria can neither afford -- nor is willing -- to put any more money into the highly controversial project.
Martin Dimitrov, leader of Bulgaria's right-wing Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), is a harsh critic of the project and the deal with Russia.
"[The entire] EU is focusing on alternative energy sources, only our government is building a second nuclear plant," said Dimitrov last week in calling for the immediate suspension of the Belene project.
"Bulgaria will have to pay a price for becoming Russia's Trojan horse in the EU."
The UDF leader -- chairman of parliament's economic committee -- noted that Bulgaria covers about 60% of its energy needs with current outputs of electricity.
There is no need for a new nuclear facility, he said.
Especially one, he added, using outdated Russian technology.
Environmentalists are also strongly opposed, noting that the town of Belene is located in an area with high seismic activity.
So the dilemma Bulgaria now faces is whether to take a loss on the 1 billion euros it has invested in the project so far and call it quits.
Or, said Traykov in an interview with Sofia-based Nova TV, find another way.
Right now, Russia appears to be that way.
On Friday, Traykov told parliament that if a decision was made to scrap Belene, the country would still face contractual payments that could reach another 1 billion euros.
If Russia's offer was accepted, he said, the loan would be paid back through profits -- if any -- from Belene.
"This is a risk that the lender will assume," he said.
Traykov has insisted that it is Bulgaria's intention to maintain a 50% stake in Belene, which may cost 10 billion euros to build.
The plan is for Russia to hold 15% to 20% of the shares in exchange for the nearly 2 billion-euro loan.
Last week, however, reports in the Russian media said the country could possibly wind up with an 80% stake in the plant.
"There is an option for the Bulgarian state to buy out that share, but if Sofia decides not to take advantage of it, Moscow will build the nuclear power plant and acquire a majority stake in it," reported the Russian daily Kommersant.
Bulgaria is almost fully dependent on Russian oil and gas.
If the Belene project comes to pass, it could become the first EU country with a nuclear power plant owned by Russia.
