04/06/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 04/06/10
On May 15th, nearly half a million people in Serbia tried a different kind of nightlife.
Instead of hitting cafes and clubs, they went to the museum.
More than 100 museums and galleries across the country were open that night, featuring unusual exhibitions, magic shows and other activities.
Museum Night has been held annually for five years.
In Belgrade alone, visitors could circulate among 68 cultural institutions with a ticket costing 2.5 euros.
"With a total number of 450,000 people who visited, Museum Night has become a very important cultural event," spokesperson Marija Randjelovic told journalists at a press conference.
"In the past five years, we were always afraid that people might not be interested in taking a walk into the museums or galleries, but luckily, each and every year we are pleasantly surprised to see that there are more and more visitors."
Interest has burgeoned since the event was first held.
In 2005, it drew 20,000 people in Belgrade.
Museum Night is the brainchild of art history experts Mladen Petrovic and Ana Jovanovic.
They were inspired by similar events held in other countries.
"The idea was born in Berlin in 1997 with the first museum night, and it's now held in 125 cities all over the world," Petrovic said.
The lines for the most popular exhibitions were hours long.
The varied programmes and distances between the exhibition venues required good organisation.
"I could include that night in my CV," quipped Jovana, a Belgrade medical student.
"I discovered my managerial skills during Museum Night."
One exhibition, dubbed "Between Magic and Chemistry", attracted several thousand visitors.
Science was entertaining rather than excruciating.
Visitors discovered that chemical experiments can create amazing colours, which come straight from a dream.
Even the most complicated experiments seemed easy to the youngest visitors.
The exhibit was hosted by the chemistry department at Belgrade University.
"Liquid nitrogen can ossify a flower and turn it into a mineral," preschool-aged Milos explained to SETimes.
"The flower becomes brittle and can be broken into small pieces."
The public's curiosity was an additional incentive for chemistry department students, who were "magicians" for the night, complete with big hats and wands.
"I'm glad that people are interested in science.
I do not find it hard to explain one thing 100 times," chemistry student Milica told SETimes.
The newly-opened Museum of Science also attracted a big crowd.
A "time machine" took participants back to the era of the first record players, and then onward again through technological history.
An exhibit on photographic techniques, featuring cameras dating from the 19th century, drew considerable interest, as did one on computer technology.
Visitors used to today's computers -- some of which can fit in the palm of a hand -- were surprised to see machines that took up a whole room.
Also popular was the Belgrade Ethnographic Museum's exhibition "Tell me how you play and I'll tell you who you are." It gave visitors the chance to re-experience their favourite childhood games.
"I enjoyed being a child again," said Belgrade lawyer Petar, 55.
