03/06/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/06/10
During the 1990s, Serbia's TV channels were flooded with shows in which psychics and healers offered instant solutions for all problems and prophesied the future. 
Although this phenomenon is less widespread now, it remains.
Milan Tarot and Kleopatra are just two of the most popular personalities who used the atmosphere of hopelessness that dominated Serbia in the 1990s to toy with a population suffering through wars, international sanctions and devastating poverty.
At the time, Kleopatra prophesied "Slobodan Milosevic's great victory in the election", while Tarot assured his clients they would be able to sell their apartments when they started listening to the Beatles.
Back then, the state did not penalise such obvious fraud, but after the collapse of the Milosevic regime in 2000, matters changed, and psychics and healers were dropped from TV programmes, with more rigorous legal sanctions envisioned against their brand of abuse.
Sociologists and psychologists believe the economic crisis provides a favourable environment for the return of psychics and healers, because many people seek a way out of their problems with desperate solutions.
"In times of great insecurity, people turn to fortune tellers. 
Every time that kind of story is launched means that the level of insecurity and lack of faith in certain regular systems has increased among people. 
That is when those who take advantage of people's troubles in an ugly manner surface," psychologist Biljana Lajovic told SETimes.
She says education is key to preventing the trend. 
"The more educated people are, the less they are likely to fall prey to these false readers of the future."
Sociologist Ratko Bozovic agrees that the severe sense of insecurity and desperation fuels the popularity of sorcerers and fortune tellers, as does a lack of information.
"In the 1990s, there was general confusion that also pervaded the media. 
The situation is not as dramatic today, hence the answer to our life problems and the fate of this country is not sought only in the observations and prophecies of so-called psychics," Bozovic told SETimes.
As for those victimised by charlatans, "I think only stupid and gullible people can fall for that kind of fraud. 
It is your fault if you let someone cheat you so blatantly and even make fun of you," Italian-language student Biljana Simic, 21, says.
Photographer Stanko Perisic, 37, disagrees. 
"I think any of us could reach for such solutions at a moment of desperation or in an impossible situation. 
The state should protect its citizens from such frauds," Perisic told SETimes.
