03/06/2010
The second in a two-part series by Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times - 03/06/10
As in most countries around the world, the majority of students in Kosovo and Albania go to public universities, the affordable option for families around the globe.
Among them is the University of Tirana, with a student population of 35,000 -- "the best students from all over Albania", says Dean Dhori Kule, who insists his facility has no peer among private universities.
"They are complementary to us, not competitors," says Kule, adding that his staff and students make the difference.
The university has its own curricula and gets 75% of its funding from the state and 25% from students, who pay about 205 euros a year in tuition.
One young woman, Blerina, studies medicine there.
"I couldn't afford a private university anywhere … however, I am quite happy here, " she told SETimes.
In comparison, is the relative newcomer, the European University of Tirana (EUT).
Established five years ago by a group of professors, the private school is financed completely by student fees, which amount to roughly 2,500 euros per year.
Enrollment stands at about 3,300, with 120 full-time teachers and about four dozen others.
"The university fee is quite expensive for the average Albanian family.
But it's the inevitable condition to a good education, mostly to ensure excellent staff and infrastructure," EUT co-founder Ermal Hasimja told SETimes.
He wants the government to re-examine the status quo.
"Currently students going to private universities are not benefiting from any state or public support as do students of public universities.
That's why we have urged the government to reform the financing system and build a more egalitarian one, giving the same support to both categories of students.
The idea is to shift from financing the schools … to financing the students, wherever they desire to study."
"Around 30% of our students take private bank loans and another part has constant difficulties in paying.
It means that studying today is a challenging struggle.
That's why we demand the intervention of the state in order to treat all students equally," Hasimja said.
In Kosovo, the public University of Pristina has about 40,000 students and more than 2,000 professors.
Tuition ranges between 100 euros and 500 euros a year.
Dean Muje Rugova tells SETimes the university differs greatly from the private ones, in part due to "the quality of teaching [and] the more strict criteria for the grades".
On the other end of the spectrum is the small American University of Kosovo (AUK), the only private and non-profit university in the country.
Courses are taught entirely in English.
Director of External Relations Ilir Ibrahimi says AUK grads "are 100% employed and in high demand".
The school partners with New York's Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), so AUK students "receive the very same degrees" as their RIT counterparts, Ibrahimi told SETimes.
AUK has about 540 undergrads and about 80 graduate students.
The tuition is 5,800 euros, steep by local standards but a deal elsewhere.
The same degree in the United States, for example, would cost around 24,500 euros.
Ibrahimi says the goal has been to offer a standard US education in Kosovo for much less, and "so far we have managed to do that."
AUK offers scholarships to those in need.
"This academic year we have offered over 400,000 euros in scholarships and we are working very hard to increase this number," Ibrahimi said.
