04/06/2010
(RFE/RL, Xinhua - 04/06/10; AFP, Reuters, DPA, EU, US Department of State - 03/06/10)
The EU and the United States issued a joint declaration Thursday (June 3rd), pledging continued co-operation in the fight against terrorism, based on their common values and principles and full respect for human rights, religious differences and the rule of law.
The interior ministers of the 27-nation bloc approved the document during a meeting in Luxembourg, on the eve of an EU-Pakistan summit in Brussels.
Spanish Interior Minister Alfredo Perez Rubalcaba, whose country currently holds the six-month rotating presidency of the Union, chaired Thursday's meeting and described the statement as "a message to the Muslim world".
"We will be firm in the defence of our values, but we will show our tolerance vis-a-vis other cultures," he told reporters. 
"It's a message for those who want violence to prevail ... 
It is important that Muslim countries know we respect their values, but terrorists know we have to counter their activities."
Thursday's declaration "provides a framework for deepening our already close and productive counterterrorism relationship", US Assistant Secretary of State Philip Crowley said.
Stressing that there are no circumstances that can justify acts of terrorism, the two sides reaffirmed their commitment to observe international law, international humanitarian law and refugee law in measures aimed at preventing or countering such acts. 
They also vowed to implement "prohibitions on torture, as well as on cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment".
The declaration further noted that the EU and the United States reserve the right to prosecute their own citizens charged with abusing prisoners, no matter where the alleged offences occur.
"To avoid impunity in the fight against terrorism, the state whose personnel are alleged to have committed abuses relating to efforts to combat terrorism generally has responsibility in the first instance for the investigation and consideration of criminal prosecution of such conduct," it said.
The EU and the United States stressed that their common efforts in the fight against terrorism "need to bring to bear a comprehensive range of action-oriented assets, including law enforcement, judicial co-operation, intelligence, diplomatic, financial and security".
According to the AFP, the EU interior ministers received on Thursday a report by the bloc's anti-terrorism co-ordinator ,Gilles de Kerchove, which noted that "terror inspired by al-Qaeda remains the greatest threat" to the Union. 
De Kerchove was also said to have warned that the number of radicalised EU citizens who attend terror training camps in conflict areas and then return to the continent is "not insignificant".
The EU and the United States "will build upon efforts to incorporate rule of law and human rights components into capacity building programmes", they said, also highlighting the importance of dealing with the threat of homegrown violent extremism and sharing of experience.
According to Cecilia Malmstrom, the EU interior affairs commissioner, the two sides are moving closer to a deal that could give US terror investigators access to the bank transfer data of European citizens.
"We've almost concluded negotiations and we hope to have a document ready at the beginning of next week," Reuters quoted her as saying.
