22/09/2004
(Various sources -- 15/09/04 - 22/09/04)
The Sibiu historical site in Romania has been included on UNESCO's World Heritage List, the Romanian Culture Ministry announced on 17 September.
A rebuilding project at the site has been under way since 1999, supported by the German government.
Two songs by Bulgarian singer Diana Dafova will be included in a new UN charity collection due to be released in 2005.
Revenues from sales of the recording will be used to aid poor children around the word.
The 2nd World Theatre Festival opened on 17 September in Zagreb with a performance of British playwright Martin Crimp's "Cruel and Tender".
The festival will feature seven plays by prominent world directors.
Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania finished in the top six at the 2004 International Olympiad in Informatics, which took place in Athens.
Over 300 pupils from 80 countries participated in this year's contest.
The 9th Banja Luka International Book Fair took place from 14 September to 19 September in the capital of Republika Srpska.
Printing and publishing houses from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Britain, Croatia, France and Serbia-Montenegro participated in the exhibition.
Ten Macedonian artists are participating in the Art Links 2004 Bread and Salt project, which began in Los Angeles on 19 September.
The project includes a 15-day workshop and an exhibition.
The Macedonian art colony Galicnik and the US-based Angels' Gate Cultural Centre are co-organising the event.
A permanent exposition of Bulgarian sculpture opened last week at the estate of Belgian private collector Hugo Vutain, located near Brussels.
The open-air exposition -- said to be one of the largest in the world -- is presenting over 300 works of prominent Bulgarian sculptors, including Valentin Starchev, Krum Damyanov and Emil Popov.
Croatian director Vinko Bresan's film "Svjedoci" (Witnesses) won the top award at the Film by the Sea festival in Vlissingen, The Netherlands.
Eighty films from around the world competed for the prize.
Another Croatian film, Zrinki Ogresta's "Tu" (Here) won the main award at the Milan International Film Festival.
