02/06/2010
By Marko Biocina for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 02/06/10
"First, I'm going to buy my friend Ana a drink, because she gave me good advice. 
And then I intend to spend the interest rate on a trip to Cuba." This is how Milica Gakovic, a resident of Zagreb, plans to use the money she gets from Slovenia's Ljubljanska Bank.
She recently won a legal battle over her accounts, which were frozen during the breakup of Yugoslavia. 
If the bank files no appeal, she stands to receive 1,173 euros plus interest.
Claims against the bank date back to late 1990, when banks across Yugoslavia put accounts on ice as the country disintegrated. 
Ljubljanska Banka not only froze funds belonging to Slovenian citizens, but also to depositors from other republics.
Out of around 130,000 Croatian depositors, only a few hundred were able to retrieve their funds as a result of court cases. 
In 1994, Slovenia's parliament made collecting the money even more difficult. 
It founded the "New Ljubljanska Bank", transferring all assets there and leaving the old institution without any property out of which to pay off debts.
A turnaround occurred last December, when Slovenia's Constitutional Court annulled Article 23 of the Slovenian Secession Fund Law. 
The existing law had stipulated that any lawsuits over the frozen savings should be suspended until an agreement on assuming responsibility for these savings has been reached.
New Ljubljanska Bank Board Chairman Borut Ozura said he is not surprised by the Ljubljana court's verdict.
"The court considered the relationship between the bank and the depositors, but took no account of succession, within which successor states must assume responsibility," he said. 
"The successor states should determine whether the deposited foreign currency that was sent from Sarajevo or Zagreb to the National Bank of Yugoslavia ever reached Ljubljana. 
We are convinced that it has not," Ozura said.
Bankers in Slovenia also insist that, aside from the frozen savings, Croatia owes their institutions about 400m euros in outstanding debts.
Slovenian Foreign Minister Samuel Zbogar agrees. 
"These questions should be resolved before the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in Basel [Switzerland]," he said. 
"Negotiations were held in 2001 and 2002 to deal with settlement of this question in Basel, but they failed and died due to Croatia's insistence that it is a property-rights question of depositors and the bank, and not a succession problem."
But some Slovenian analysts say it is high time to put the question to rest. 
"The biggest mistake which greatly injured Slovenia's economy was that Slovenian bank activities were obstructed in the markets of the states where there are debtors," Slovenian economist Joze Mencinger told SETimes.
Croatian legal experts, meanwhile, welcome the Slovenian court's verdict as a step forward. 
According to Mladen Sučević, secretary general of the Croatian Law Society, the relationship between depositors and the bank is a permanent obligatory legal relationship that is not subject to a statute of limitations.
"If the parties prove the justifiability of outstanding debts by Ljubljanska Bank, we expect that the court will pass a verdict on their behalf," he said."The question is what will happen if the bank turns out to be incapable of paying the liabilities, since the old Ljubljanska Bank owns no properties."
