03/06/2010
By Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade and Ljiljana Kovacevic in Banja Luka for Southeast European Times -- 03/06/10
Officials in Republika Srpska (RS) have been expressing dissatisfaction with Belgrade's actions in recent months, although they have been careful not to veer into open confrontation with the Serbian government.
The first reactions came after the Serbian parliament passed a declaration in late March, condemning the 1995 murders of about 8,000 Bosniaks in Srebrenica, committed by the Bosnian Serb armed forces.
"Serbia is an independent country and can pass what it thinks is right, but one should not pass something that would enable others to hide their crimes behind that declaration," RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik said of the move.
Dodik explained the concern that the declaration "may be interpreted as proof of the Serbian people's collective guilt", referring to the atrocities during the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The second cause for dissatisfaction was the April signing of a declaration in Istanbul by Serbian President Boris Tadic and BiH Presidency Chairman Haris Silajdzic, promoting security and political dialogue.
Both the RS government and the opposition immediately demanded the document's annulment.
However, their anger focused on Silajdzic, for failing to seek consent from the other two presidency members before signing the declaration.
Dodik said that despite Tadic signing the declaration, RS "will maintain close relations with Serbia".
Officials deny that ties are cooling, but analysts believe Belgrade and Banja Luka have grown apart.
Politics may be a reason.
Banja Luka Faculty of Philosophy professor Miodrag Zivanovic told SETimes that because the two declarations were signed before the upcoming October election in BiH, there was a strong reaction from RS.
Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences professor Aleksandar Mitic confirms that Dodik's Party of Independent Social Democrats is particularly unhappy.
However, he told SETimes that the party is channeling its dissatisfaction by using moderate diplomatic vocabulary.
"The Serbs in RS see these two declarations as completely unilateral -- to their detriment.
The problem is not the condemnation of the crime in Srebrenica, because that crime is so horrendous it cannot remain not condemned, but the problem is there is no declaration on crimes against the Serbs in BiH," said Mitic.
Most troubling, Mitic said, the Istanbul Declaration makes no mention of support to RS as an entity guaranteed by the Dayton Peace Accords.
"Instead of defending the Dayton Agreement, of which it is one of the guarantors, Serbia is stimulating Bosnia's membership in NATO through the Istanbul Declaration, which the majority of RS citizens are against," explained Mitic.
Nikola, 34, a Banja Luka lawyer, expressed a common sentiment.
He never completely believed the Belgrade authorities' honesty towards RS, he told SETimes.
"During the time of Slobodan Milosevic and today, [they] are ready to sacrifice RS and the Serbs in Bosnia for the sake of Serbia's improved international position," he said.
Dragan, 37, a Belgrade salesman, echoes the popular opinion that Serbia should consider the interests of Serbs outside it.
"We shouldn't have signed anything RS disagrees with," he said.
Others, like Vesna, 28, a computer programmer from Belgrade disagree, saying that nothing should challenge the fulfilling of Serbia's obligations on the path to EU membership.
"RS can only benefit from Serbia's accession to the EU," she told SETimes.
