02/06/2010
(Reuters, DPA, AP, RFE/RL, The Times, B92, MIA, Makfax, Focus News Agency - 02/06/10;
AFP, DPA, Telegraph, Guardian, Fena, MIA, Makfax, EU - 01/06/10)
Senior EU officials reaffirmed the 27-nation bloc's commitment to the Western Balkan countries and their Euro-Atlantic integration, during a high-level conference in Sarajevo on Wednesday (June 2nd).
"Integrating the Western Balkans into the European family of nations remains one of the last challenges to building a democratic and unified Europe," EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton said on the eve of the meeting.
The Spanish EU presidency initiated the forum to mark the 10th anniversary of the November 2000 Zagreb Summit, at which the then-15-nation Union launched the Stabilisation and Association Process and the European perspective for the Western Balkans.
Originally, the meeting was planned as a summit, but it had to be eventually reformatted as a ministerial conference with no state insignia to ensure the presence of both Serbian and Kosovo officials.
Serbia threatened to boycott the meeting if its former province participated as an independent state.
Wednesday's informal conference was attended by a total of 48 delegations from the region, the EU, the US, Russia, Turkey and a number of international organisations, including NATO.
The delegations from Western Balkan countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia -- were headed by their foreign ministers.
Croatia is furthest along in the EU accession process among the six nations and is expected to enter the bloc as its 28th member by 2012.
BiH, which cannot join the Union as long as it is overseen by an international high representative, and Kosovo, which is not recognised by five of the EU nations, lag behind the rest of the region on the European integration path.
Speaking ahead of the Sarajevo conference, EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele stressed on Tuesday that the process of expansion will continue, and that Brussels will keep supporting the region's efforts to meet membership criteria.
"I welcome the commitment expressed by the Western Balkans to intensify the pace of reforms in key areas and to further strengthen inclusive and efficient regional co-operation," he said.
"The [EC] will support the Western Balkans in these endeavours."
Other EU officials also sought to dispel concerns within countries in the region that the financial problems the bloc currently faces and the enlargement fatigue felt in some of its member states may affect integration prospects.
"It is important that we came here to firmly say that despite the fact that you might hear different noises from the West European society countries, the door is open for you," Reuters quoted Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt as saying in Sarajevo on Wednesday morning.
Due to the meeting's revised format -- in line with the so-called Gymnich formula used by the EU for informal and non-binding exchanges of views -- it cannot issue a formal declaration.
The Spanish EU presidency is instead expected to issue a statement at the end of the conference.
