22/10/2004
(Various sources – 15/10/04 - 22/10/04)
Three major deals were signed during French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin's visit to Bucharest on 18 October and 19 October.
French firm Vinci sealed a 480m-euro contract to build a 37km section of the highway linking Bucharest to Brasov.
Gaz de France signed a 311m-euro privatisation contract for a 51 per cent stake of the gas distributor Distrigaz Sud.
Finally, France's Alcatel signed a 60m euro contract with Romania's national railway company CFR Infrastructura for modernisation of the network's telecom equipment.
Deutsche Telekom's Croatian subsidiary, T-Mobile Hrvatska, paid 17m euros to acquire one of the country's two-third generation GSM licenses.
Telekom Austria purchased the second 20-year license.
Three candidates -- the Russian-UK consortium Basic Elements, Austria's West Alpina and an unnamed South African firm -- have submitted bids for the purchase of Serbia's copper smelter in Bor.
Authorities said Basic Elements has offered to pay 237.7m euros for the plant, provided its debt is reduced from 369.1m euros to 47.5m euros.
IMF mission chief Franek Rozwadowski arrived in Skopje on 18 October for ten days of talks with the Macedonian government.
The negotiations will focus on the 2005 budget and macroeconomic projections, as well as on the possibility of a new agreement between Macedonia and the Fund.
The EBRD published a tender announcement for equipment supply and instalment under Albania's Power Sector Reconstruction Project II.
The contracts, which cover the upgrade of municipal distribution networks in Berat and Lushnja, will be funded with part of an earlier EBRD loan to the Albanian power utility KESH.
Interested candidates are to submit bids by 1 December.
The EBRD announced on 18 October a new 7.5m euro loan for support of the Croatian transportation company Libertas Dubrovnik.
The funds will be used for purchase of new buses and other facilities aimed at easing traffic problems in Dubrovnik and meeting the demand created by a strong influx of tourists.
The British-Indian LNM firm Holding announced that it has initiated talks with the Croatian government regarding the possible purchase of the country's debt-ridden Sisak steel mill.
The previous investor in the mill, Russia's Mecelj, has recently withdrawn, claiming problems with the realisation of Sisak's production.
USAID said on 19 October that around 4.4m euros have been extended thus far under the Development Credit Authority (DCA) project in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The project, launched earlier this year, is aimed at supporting small and medium-sized businesses in BiH.
