01/06/2010
By Brian Salmi for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 01/06/10
After much back and forth, including a court ruling, the Board of Montenegro's Energy Regulatory Agency (RAE) addressed a letter to Parliament President Ranko Krivokapic late last month, asking him to intervene.
The letter came weeks after lawmakers from the ruling Social Democratic Party (SDP) said they will mount objections to RAE's decisions. 
Secretary of the Ministry of Finance Damir Sehovic announced that his party will vote to reject RAE's annual report.
"If the RAE annual report does not receive the needed majority of votes in the parliament, its Board of Directors will no longer have the legitimacy to perform its functions," Sehovic said. 
The SDP is demanding that RAE representatives testify before parliament.
The spectacle involving RAE and the Montenegrin Electric Enterprise (EPCG) began six months ago when the Administrative Court announced that EPCG, the country's electricity monopoly, had overcharged Montenegrin households and must return 40m euros to consumers via price cuts this year and next.
"The real, legal prices were much, much lower," said Stevo Muk, one of the consumers who filed a lawsuit against EPCG. 
"At the beginning of 2009, the RAE wrongly calculated the price EPCG can legally charge for imported electricity."
Following the court's decision, however, RAE allowed EPCG to increase service and distribution charges.
Muk, along with other consumers, asked the court to overturn the increased service and distribution charges calling them "enormous and illegal".
Due to the court-ordered price cut, "EPCG will receive 19m euros [less revenue] in 2010 than in 2009, which jeopardises the maintenance of energy systems in Montenegro," EPCG's PR Manager Mitar Vuckovic told SETimes.
Deputy Minister of Economy Miodrag Canovic argued that if the court decides to overrule RAE, the decision will "significantly increase the risk for future and present investors in Montenegro".
Italian energy giant A2A recently purchased 43% of EPCG with an agreement that it would be able to raise its legal profit margin from 2.5% to 4.9%.
Muk lambasted Canovic for his statement, saying he was "appalled" that a government representative would chide or caution the court for upholding the law.
Olga Nikcevic, president of the Centre for the Protection of Consumers, said her organisation objects to EPCG charging for stolen electricity. 
Unofficial estimates put losses to theft from the grid in the 30% range.
"If EPCG does not reduce the theft, they should feel that in their own budget," Nikcevic said. 
But without consumers strenuously objecting, the utility will have no interest in fighting this phenomenon, she added.
