01/03/2010
By Baris Yilmaz for Southeast European Times -- 01/03/10
It is a movie without an overt political angle.
And the plot is not sensational.
But "Honey" is a winner.
A beautifully photographed drama about a grade school boy and his father -- the work of 46-year-old Turkish director Semih Kaplanoglu -- "Honey" won the top prize for best film at the 60th Berlin Film Festival, also known as the Berlinale.
Comments from the international jury praised the film's simple, authentic approach to the human soul in a tale of a young boy who goes into the forest to find his missing father, an errant beekeeper.
The film was praised for beautifully wrought images of nature.
No artificial lighting was used in the movie and instead of a musical score;
Kaplanoglu used the sounds of nature.
"Honey" is set in the town of Camlıhemsin, a stunning landscape near the Black Sea, now under threat by plans to build hydro-electric plants.
"I hope with this prize we have received [that] we manage to protect the environment there as well," Kaplanoglu said.
"Honey" is the last in his film trilogy, following last year's "Milk", and "Egg" from 2007.
The projects -- each featuring a protagonist named Yusuf -- were launched in response to the director's quest for answers to his own existence, a journey that began in his early 40s.
"In these three movies, I have tried to uncover my character Yusuf through time, in a retrospective way," said Kaplanoglu at a Berlinale press conference.
"The first film is on his life during his 40s, the second movie is on his life during his 20s ...
and finally 'Honey' is on his life during the age of six."
"These films, in a way, had been a journey through a lost heaven, through purity … where people coexist with nature in harmony," he said.
In "Honey", Yusuf is played by 8-year-old Bora Altas.
Discovered by the director just a few weeks before shooting started, the boy has gone from a promising actor to one with newfound attention in film capitals around the world.
In the movie, Yusuf's father -- the apiarist Yakup -- makes honey to support his family.
One day, the bees disappear and Yakup sets out for remote mountains to find them.
In his absence, Yusuf stops speaking.
The boy's reading suffers and village schoolmates taunt him.
To deal with his crippling longing, Yusuf decides to look for his father, taking a journey not just into the forest, but the unknown.
Spirituality, said Kaplanoglu -- a very personal journey of the soul -- is the driving force behind his life and his art.
With film, the director said, he is trying to develop a "kind of spiritual language".
Kaplanoglu's "Golden Bear" is the second won by a Turkish filmmaker in the history of the Berlinale.
It follows the 1964 black and white classic "Dry Summer", the story of a greedy tobacco farmer for which director Metin Erksan won the prize.
According to Kaplanoglu, the transformation of Turkish cinema began in the late 1990s.
He said that since then, his generation of Turkish directors established themselves as the new wave.
These include Zeki Demirkubuz, Dervis Zaim, Yesim Ustaoglu and Nuri Bilge Ceylan.
In 2008, Ceylan won the best director award at the Cannes Film Festival for his movie "Three Monkeys".
The stories these artists are telling, and their ability to reach an international audience, Kaplanoglu said, proves that Turkish cinema has fully arrived.
