01/04/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 01/04/10
In a landmark declaration, the Serbian parliament has condemned atrocities against an estimated 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica, committed by the Bosnian Serb army and paramilitaries in July 1995. 
It was considered one of the largest massacres in Europe since World War II.
The declaration, which omitted the word "genocide" due to political wrangling, was passed by parliament on Wednesday (March 31st).
Debate lasted more than 12 hours, with the already tense atmosphere further exacerbated by a bomb threat outside the building. 
As police invested the tip, which turned out to be a hoax, debate continued inside. 
Eventually, a document was passed in which parliament expressed condolences for the victims while apologising to their families for failing to prevent the mass murder.
EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton and EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele said in a joint statement that the Srebrenica declaration is an important step for Serbia in facing its recent past, and will help to reconcile former Yugoslav republics.
Ashton and Fuele stressed that beyond the declaration, Serbia has more serious commitments to the victims and the international community, including the arrest of the two remaining war crime fugitives -- Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic -- and full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. 
All of these things, the EU has said, are crucial to Serbia's prospects for EU entry.
President Boris Tadic says the resolution is both a demonstration of patriotism and respect for the victims, while contributing to regional reconciliation efforts.
But Bosnian Serb leaders said there was no need for it, adamantly maintaining that the declaration highlighted the crimes at Srebrenica while neglecting others committed in the 1990s.
Since Tadic announced his intention to see the declaration adopted three months ago, the public has been divided on the issue, particularly as to whether the murders amounted to genocide.
The nationalist Serbian Radical Party insists that genocide did not occur and that Mladic -- the wartime commander-in-chief of armed forces loyal to Republika Srpska -- is a hero.
By contrast, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) led by Cedomir Jovanovic demanded that the declaration include the phrasing of the International Court of Justice (ICJ), which in a 2007 ruling on Bosnia and Herzegovina's lawsuit against the then union of Serbia and Montenegro, defined Srebrenica as genocide.
In the final version passed by parliament, the ICJ verdict is cited without using the term genocide.
Nationalist MP Slobodan Samardzic argued against "highlighting only the victims of one people" during the 1990s. 
Tomislav Nikolic, leader of the opposition Serbian Progressive Party, added that "an entire people should not apologise for the crimes of individuals".
Ruling coalition MPs, however, believe the declaration represents a turning point in Serbia's journey towards a modern, democratic and European society.
"By condemning the horrendous crime against the Bosniak population of Srebrenica, by paying respect to the victims and expressing compassion for their families, today we are taking the responsibility of lifting the heavy burden from ourselves which certain individuals left on our shoulders and the shoulders of our future generations," said Nada Kolundzija, a lawmaker from the party, For a European Serbia.
Dragica Misic, 50, a lawyer from Belgrade, said that by passing the declaration, Serbia has forgotten its own victims. 
"We have to respect all victims equally. 
This way it turns out that not a single Serb was killed in those conflicts and even if a Serb was killed, that member of one's own people seems to be less valuable," Misic told SETimes.
43-year-old salesman Mirko Selic thinks the resolution was unnecessary at this point. 
"Serbia has more important problems than past conflicts. 
All this concerning the declaration was just a waste of time," he told SETimes.
But Jelena Danilovic, a 22-year-old student, thinks otherwise.
"We have to be done with those matters from the past and move on, for that reason I think the document was rightfully adopted," she said.
