02/08/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 02/08/10
With influential Western media voicing alarm about Bucharest's drive to grant citizenship to Moldovans, the president of Romania has stepped forward to defuse concerns about potential flooding of EU labour markets.
"Let them have no worry, because most Moldovans who receive our citizenship stay in Romania," President Traian Basescu said. 
Acknowledging that around a million Moldovans are presently working in the EU, he said it was a "blood obligation" for Romanians to help them legalise their status.
According to media reports, up to 120,000 Moldovans have received Romanian citizenship and another 800,000 are slated to get it.
Responding to such statistics, Germany's Der Spiegel concluded the EU is being "stealthily expanded from the east -- without a referendum or any agreements from Brussels, Berlin or Paris".
Italy's Il Giornale, meanwhile, accused Basescu of "deceiving" the EU, while Britain's Daily Express warned that Romanians who "won the lottery" could rush to Great Britain in order to take advantage of its attractive social system.
To handle the enormous number of applicants, Bucharest recently opened two consulates in the Moldovan municipalities of Cahul and Balti. 
It also activated a Citizenship Agency, initially established in 2009, in order to process documents at five territorial branches.
Some Moldovan applicants say they are not primarily after economic benefits. 
"For me, it is first of all about regaining a right, while for other fellow countrymen it is about free circulation," 24-year-old Larisa Cojocaru told SETimes.
A recent college graduate, Cojocaru says she intends to pursue further studies abroad. 
"Romanian citizenship enables me to apply for a master's abroad where, as an EU citizen, I would pay only half of the tuition," she explained.
Moldovan political analyst Denis Cenusa says the media is exaggerating the issue. 
"In a clumsy and sometimes unconvincing manner, the European media wants to point out a certain irresponsibility of the Romanian authorities concerning the dissemination of citizenships," he told SETimes.
"Considering the rhythm and the amplitude of this process, they left the impression of a menace for Europe," he said. 
Eurostat figures, he added, show Romania is actually lags far behind other EU states when it comes to granting citizenship.
Cenusa doesn't see it as a long-term issue. 
"Eliminating visas for Moldovan citizens … will eventually lead to the settlement of the issue concerning Romanian citizenship, which will thus become useless," he said.
Romania is compelled to comply with the Schengen area requirements, and Bucharest will have to ensure a fair process of granting citizenship in order not to ruffle the feathers of the old EU members, he noted.
Still, there are risks. 
"There are European precedents like Hungary and Bulgaria which facilitated the process of granting citizenship, but the most simplified conditions yet are set by Romania. 
This can turn it into an attractive destination for organised crime, in search of new breaches in the Eastern border of EU," Cenusa said.
