01/04/2010
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 01/04/10
Juliana Pasha's "It's All About You" won the 48th annual Albanian national song contest -- better known as the national festival -- and will represent Albania at the Eurovision contest this year in Oslo.
Pasha came in first with 133 points, 13 more than Anjeza Shahini who performed "In The Mirror".
"It's All About You" is a love story performed against an energetic musical background.
Pasha describes the song's intensity as being about "giving a meaning to your world, and one you will never let go as you cannot live without it".
Pasha, whose career spans a decade, is well known in the Albanian show business industry and has built her reputation on live versions of soul and pop numbers.
This time around, she entrusted herself to composer Ardit Gjebrea, who cast her in a dance, R&B number.
The outcome was first place.
The video clip was produced by prominent Albanian producer Pali Kuke and his son Ergin.
The next stop for Pasha is Oslo.
"I won the national festival, although I did not expect to ...
and expect from my performance at the Eurovision to take us at least to the ten final songs," she said.
Fans share in her dream and speak of a vivid live show and a powerful voice in evidence on "It's All About You".
A Eurovision fan who goes by the name of Fabian told SETimes that the song is "typical for the Eurovision contest, and I am sorry I see no notes of Albanian music in it.
Still, it sounds powerful, which gives hope for a good position for us in the finals."
Pasha sees the rather political nature of the voting process as a barrier to winning a higher ranking in the Eurovision contest.
She and others believe tele-voting from the public mostly runs along national lines.
To temper this, the EBU Reference Group of the Eurovision Song Contest decided last year to introduce a jury's decision into the final vote.
The highest position reached by Albania in the popular contest was Anjeza Shahini's 2005 performance of "The Image of You".
"It's All About You" fulfills the standard Eurovision parameters in that it is three minutes long without pauses or back-up vocals.
There will be no choreography on stage, just the singer and a violin player.
Pasha will perform "It's All About You" on May 25th during the first Eurovision semifinals.
Other countries performing that night include Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Estonia, Finland, Macedonia, Greece, Iceland, Latvia, Malta, Moldova, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Serbia and Slovakia.
