01/06/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 06/01/10
Croatian President Ivo Josipovic made an unprecedented visit to Republika Srpska (RS) on Sunday (May 30th), paying tribute to war crimes victims from the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He stopped at three sites -- Sijekovac, Brisevo and Kozarac -- where mass killings took place.
"We are here to pay respects ...
and it is important that representatives of all three ethnic groups are here to do so," Josipovic told reporters in Sijekovac, a border village where the bodies of dozens of Serbs, allegedly killed by Croat troops, have been exhumed.
In Kozarac, hundreds of Bosniaks died at the hands of Serbs, and thousands remain unaccounted for.
In Brisevo, Serbs killed 60 Croats.
"Our common message is peace and the need for all the people to live together in peace.
It is very important that we came from different faiths and different nations to give our respect to the victims," said Josipovic, the first Croatian president to visit Republika Srpska.
Accompanying Josipovic were RS President Rajko Kuzmanovic, Prime Minister Milorad Dodik and Party of Democratic Action leader Sulejman Tihic.
Dodik stressed the need for co-existence, and called on Croats expelled from their homes to return.
On behalf of the RS government, he expressed condolences to the families of victims, regardless of their nationality, and voiced confidence that perpetrators of crimes will face justice.
Since the war ended, less than 5% of Bosnian Croats have returned to the area.
Before the war, 200 000 people of Croatian origin lived in what is now RS.
Tihic rejected the notion of collective guilt and insisted those responsible for crimes must face trial.
"This is an important moment for us.
Now we can talk about reconciliation," resident Ruza Trivic told reporters in Sijekovac.
"It is time to talk about living together," the leaders said, implying future joint efforts.
Josipovic has made promoting regional co-operation a priority, sometimes rattling other Croatian politicians in the process.
He said that although the idea that all countries in Southeast Europe could join the EU together is unrealistic, improved ties are a must.
"[Although] Croatia will enter the EU first, regional co-operation will be a positive impulse on the way," Josipovic said.
