01/10/2010
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 01/10/10
It's a sprint to the finish line for the more than 8,000 candidates registered for Sunday's (October 3rd) general election in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Voters will be choosing members of the state and entity parliaments, as well as cantonal parliaments in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH).
Nineteen candidates are running for the country's tripartite presidency.
Incumbents Haris Silajdzic, Nebojsa Radmanovic and Zeljko Komsic are hoping to hold on to their jobs, amid challenges from the likes of Bakir Izetbegovic -- son of the late Alija Izetbegovic, the first president of an independent BiH -- and former presidency member Sulejman Tihic.
Polls are inconclusive.
Some show that voters are fed up with incumbents, due to a lack of concrete progress over the past four years, while others suggest they maintain strong support.
Only the election results will tell.
When campaigning officially kicked off last month, all of the country's political parties vowed to trim spending due to the economic recession.
Despite that promise, Transparency International of BiH estimates that campaign costs will total nearly 2m euros.
By law, a political party must not spend more than 10 euro cents per eligible voter on campaigning.
But these rules are hard to enforce as there is no law mandating that the finances of political parties are transparent.
Parties mostly invested their funds in TV commercials and billboards.
Professor Miodrag Zivanovic, lecturer at the University of Banja Luka, says small and new parties have been blocked from getting enough space on TV stations in BiH, because the more established and influential parties have more money and power to provide that space for themselves.
In his opinion, that will influence the election results.
"Media have a great influence on common citizens.
Because our people, as I like to say, have TV sets instead of a brain.
Instead of reading newspaper, they read whatever is put in front of their noses," said Zivanovic.
The Bosniak Party for Democratic Action (SDA) spent more than 130,000 euros on its campaign over the past seven days.
"The main SDA activity is hiring a great number of its members to cover the lack of money in the field.
Overall financial cost would be surely less than what is proposed by the law," said party officials.
Earlier, during the first two weeks of the campaign, Republika Srpska's ruling Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) and the Federation of BiH's ruling Party for BiH (SBiH) spent the most.
Up to now, the SNSD spent around 140,000 euros, and SBiH around 130,000 euros.
"We will spend what we need.
That amount will be from 300,000 to 500,000 euros," SNSD Secretary-General Rajko Vasic said.
In total, 40,000 euros -- more than 100 times the average pay check in the country -- has been spent by parties for media ads this week.
