29/12/2010
(Dow Jones - 28/12/10; AFP - 27/12/10; MENAFN - 26/12/10; Zaman, World Bulletin, Kyodo, Yomiuri Shimbun, The Korea Times, Sofia News Agency - 25/12/10; Reuters, AFP, Bloomberg, Zama, Hurriyet, The Japan Times - 24/12/10)
Turkey and Japan signed a memorandum of understanding in Tokyo on Friday (December 24th) for the construction of a nuclear power plant in the Black Sea province of Sinop.
The non-binding agreement was inked by Japanese Economy, Trade and Industry Minister Akihiro Ohata and visiting Turkish Energy Minister Taner Yildiz, who voiced hope that a final accord could be reached within the next three months.
Friday's deal could pave the way for enhancing bilateral co-operation in other energy fields, as well as for joint Turkish-Japanese initiatives in third countries, Yildiz said at a joint news conference after the signing ceremony.
The plant would be the second nuclear power generation facility in Turkey, which wants to have both up and running by 2023 to meet its need for an additional up to 10,000MW of electricity, as well as reduce its dependence on foreign energy sources.
The first plant, with a capacity of 4,800MW and an estimated cost of $20 billion, will be built in the Akkuyu area, near the southern city of Mersin, under a deal signed with Russia in May.
According to Reuters, the facility in Sinop would have four reactors with an overall generating capacity of 5,600MW. 
The agency also cited analysts as placing the cost of the project at about $10 billion.
Yildiz said the plans were for the plant to begin operation in 2019, or shortly after.
Answering a question concerning the possible launch of construction in Sinop, Ohata said on Friday that the Turks want to complete preparations before the end of March, so they expect to start within the following three months.
Civil society groups have voiced opposition to the construction of nuclear plants in Turkey, which is prone to earthquakes, as is Japan.
Ohata noted that his country, where 54 reactors are currently in operation, uses British-developed nuclear technology allowing it "to make the power plants more safe in earthquakes".
Yildiz also voiced confidence. 
"There is no room for doubt that Japan's technology in reducing the effect of an earthquake's intensity is superior to that of other countries," he said.
Turkey opened talks with Japan on the Sinop plant in early December, just a few weeks after failing to reach a deal with South Korea.
Ankara and Seoul, which began formal negotiations in March, expected to sign an intergovernmental agreement during the G20 summit held in the South Korean capital in November. 
However, they failed to sort out their differences on several issues, reportedly including electricity prices, purchasing guarantees and share allocation, so the talks were put on hold.
