30/12/2010
(AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, New York Times, Washington Post, Der Spiegel, CNN, Dow Jones, UK Press Association, ANA-MPA - 30/12/10)
A powerful bomb exploded outside a court building in central Athens during rush-hour traffic Thursday (December 30th) morning, causing significant damage, but no injuries.
Police sources said the blast occurred at about 8:20am local time when the makeshift explosive device, planted on a motorbike parked near the building in the capital's residential Ambelokipi district, went off.
An unidentified person called Greek daily Eleftherotypia and private TV channel Alter just before 7:40am to warn that a bomb would be detonated outside the Court of First Instance in 40 minutes. 
That allowed police to evacuate the building ahead of the explosion.
"In both cases, the caller said the device had been strapped to a scooter outside the courthouse and gave the scooter's registration number," The New York Times quoted an Athens police officer as saying, speaking on condition of anonymity. 
"The explosion occurred two minutes after the deadline."
The blast shattered windows on the glass-and-steel court building's facade and those of nearby apartments and storefronts in the densely populated Ambelokipi district. 
It was so powerful that it could be heard across much of the city.
"The explosion was like an earthquake," German news agency DPA quoted Theodoros Ioannidis, who lives about 200m from the building, as saying. 
"There was a deep boom and then our house was shaking."
An owner of a kiosk just 100m from the building said all his merchandise fell off the shelves as the bomb went off.
"It goes without saying that we condemn this attack," the AP quoted Spyros Vouyias, a deputy public works minister, as telling private Skai television. 
"Violence does not solve anyone's problems."
While no one has claimed responsibility for the courthouse bombing, many linked it immediately to far-left extremist groups, whose violent attacks against government buildings, police stations and banks have increased since December 2008, when police killed a teenage boy in Athens.
Revolutionary Struggle, Conspiracy of the Cells of Fire and Revolutionary Sect are some of the most prominent militant groups that have staged numerous "urban guerrilla" attacks, as they call them, in recent months in a bid to overthrow the system through terror and chaos.
On January 17th, more than a dozen suspected members of the Conspiracy of the Cells of Fire will go on trial. 
The group has claimed responsibility for 14 mail bombs sent to embassies in Athens and to foreign governments abroad in early November. 
It recently called on extremists across Europe to step up their activities before the trial, which will be handled by a different court than the one targeted Thursday, as it is used for administrative purposes.
