28/12/2010
(Tanjug - 27/12/10; Euobserver, EurActiv - 21/12/10; FT - 20/12/10; Hungarian EU presidency website)
Hungary, which is due to replace Belgium at the EU helm on January 1st, has said that further consolidation and enlargement of the 27-nation bloc will be among the key priorities of its six-month chairmanship of the Union.
The country, which joined the EU in 2004, says a "strong Europe with a human touch" will be the motto of its presidency. 
It has listed four main topics that it will focus on during the first half of 2011, including the economy, farm reform, energy and EU enlargement.
Acknowledging that its six-month stint would be a "huge challenge", Foreign Minister Janos Martonyi insisted on December 20th that Hungary would follow the path laid by Belgium during the past six months.
"We even hope you might not notice too much the change in the rotating presidency," the British daily Financial Times quoted the minister as saying during a presentation of Hungary's EU presidency priorities in Brussels. 
"The team is young, and it's the very first time they enter in the arena. 
I hope we will not be the bull. 
We would like to be, with all due respect and very humbly, the torero."
Some specific tasks the Hungarian presidency will have to focus on during the next six months include giving a push to EU financial governance laws, implementation of the so-called Europe 2020 strategy, as well as opening talks on the bloc's post-2013 budget.
Although it has not joined the eurozone yet, Hungary has also pledged to assist efforts aimed at stabilising the 16-nation club in the wake of the debt crises in Greece and other members, and at reassuring markets that recently approved measures will not weaken the euro.
"The euro as a currency is not in crisis," Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban said following the year-end EU summit in Brussels earlier this month. 
"What is going on is a very conventional debt crisis in some member states."
Budapest has also pledged to help steer Croatia's accession talks with Brussels to a successful conclusion, and to help Bulgaria and Romania achieve their goals of joining the passport-free Schengen zone.
"Hungary wishes to pay particular attention to taking the enlargement process further and to providing an integration perspective for the Western Balkans region," according to a statement on the Hungarian EU presidency website.
"It is also a priority objective to strengthen the Eastern dimension of the neighbourhood policy, in the framework of which, Hungary will host the second Eastern Partnership Summit in May 2011," the statement adds.
Hungary is also expected to push for the launch of talks between Serbia and Kosovo.
The country will be the third former communist state to chair the EU since Slovenia and the Czech Republic's stints in 2008 and 2009, respectively. 
Furthermore, 2011 will be the first time when one Eastern European country will be succeeded by another at the helm of the 27-nation bloc within the same year.
