28/12/2010
A new cross-regional initiative brings together activists, policy experts and officials to find solutions.
Environmental degradation and air pollution have become increasingly common issues across the Balkans, but efforts to address them have often foundered because of national barriers and bureaucratic red tape.
A new and growing green movement -- Balkan Environmental Life Leadership Standard, known also by the acronym Bells -- has cut across national and political lines in seeking common solutions.
"In one year, Bells has succeeded in establishing parliamentary green lobby groups with 87 members from throughout the Balkans," says Dusko Hristov, the movement's co-ordinator for Macedonia.
"We will soon submit the platform to the newly-formed Directorate for Climate Change in Brussels which began work on December 1st," he told SETimes.
At the most recent annual Bells conference, held last month, participants addressed one of the most pronounced problems in the Balkans: air pollution. 
Antiquated electric and thermal plants supply energy needs and employ thousands, but at a significant environmental cost.
One such plant is located in the Macedonian city of Bitola. 
Another is in Obilic, Kosovo. 
Vlora, the port city in Albanian where the Bells meeting was held, is the site of a planned thermal plant which critics say is uneconomical, damaging to the environment and located too close to populated areas.
Partly as a consequence of the efforts by Bells, the power plant REK in Bitola has pledged to implement EU environmental standards over the next six years, according to Macedonian Environment State Secretary Lidija Zafirovska.
In Kosovo, Bells is working to find a solution for Obilic. 
"The goal is not to close the plant but help them adopt new technological advances which will remedy air pollution," Bells Kosovo co-ordinator Kushtrim Kaloshi told SETimes. 
But government regulation, legislation and adequate funding are needed, he added.
Bells is mostly financed by the government of the Netherlands. 
The Dutch Ambassador to Serbia, Loren Luis Stokvis, says his country has invested 22m euros in a bid to improve the environment in the region and expects concrete results.
"That is needed to enable the fulfillment of EU standards, and also to make the region stable and prosperous," Stokvis said.
Serbia's Environment Ministry State Secretary Ivica Radovic and other government officials echo the view that the region "can't achieve economic and social development if we repress the environmental problems".
Officials in Macedonia say progress is being made, but funding remains an obstacle. 
"Macedonia needs about 2 billion euros to fulfill the EU standards for environmental protection," says Environment Ministry official Jadranka Ivanova. 
"It passed 40 laws and 200 acts but needs an additional 100 acts to fully transfer to the European law."
"Macedonia's legislation now leads the Balkan states," MP Jovan Lazarev told SETimes. 
"Also, Macedonia has a national ecology strategy, and the municipalities passed local ecology plans."
