29/12/2010
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 29/12/10
Supporters of a Macedonian media organisation are crying foul after its owner was arrested last week together with several relatives and company managers. 
They say the A1 TV station and affiliated newspapers -- Shpic, Vreme and Koha e re -- are being targeted by authorities for political reasons.
"The TV station A1 has the capacity to continue its operations," vowed A1's main desk editor, Mladen Chadikovski.
Police detained owner Velija Ramkovski on December 23rd as they investigate allegations of fraud and organised crime. 
Also arrested were his daughter, brother and the former and current directors of the TV station.
Meanwhile, a warrant has been released for Ramkovski's son Hedi, who could not be located by law enforcement authorities.
The police action is part of "Operation Cobweb", aimed at tax evaders. 
Goran Trajkovski, head of the Public Revenue Office, alleges that Ramkovski acquired around 17.5m euros through dubious means -- including the operation of fictitious companies -- and concealed 4.5m euros in order to avoid paying taxes.
"Insolvent companies without employees issued invoices for performed services at enormous sums," Trajkovski said. 
"The minimum amount that we have currently recorded is 54 million denars, from a company with no employees with a blocked bank account."
Ramkovski and his organisation have long been a magnet for controversy, and not only because of alleged financial malfeasance. 
"It is evident that through the TV station A1, ethnic hatred is spread," says journalist Antonio Sazovski, attacking what he sees as the station's inflammatory reporting.
But A1 insists that media freedom, not the alleged fraud, is the real issue at stake. 
They say the authorities are determined to silence an outlet that has frequently criticised the ruling VMRO-DPMNE party and the government that it heads.
Some analysts say the authorities have failed to respect due process. 
"It is evident that human rights have been violated because the presumption of innocence was not respected, which is guaranteed by the constitution," said Sladjana Taseva, former head of the anticorruption commission of Macedonia.
Miroslav Vujic, a lawyer for the detained, told the media that police had failed to inform him about the arrests as required.
"Not a single thing ... 
suggests that the people tried to flee so that an order for detention would be necessary," he said.
The president of Skopje's Basic Court 1, however, said the procedure was completely legal.
"During the legal time period for a claim, 24 hours, no appeals have been filed for Velija Ramkovski," court president Lidija Nedelkova told SETimes. 
"Only three appeals were filed, for the manager of A1 TV and for other two managers, but the Court Skopje 1 rejected them as unfounded."
