27/12/2010
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 27/12/10
Milena knows first-hand what can happen when a spouse or parent turns abusive. 
The 35-year-old mother of three suffered beatings by her husband over a 12-year period, resulting in more than 40 visits to hospital. 
Besides the many scars on her body, she has lost sight in one eye.
"Last time beat me with a belt, naked, in front of the children," she tells SETimes. 
"The children were crying and begged him to stop. 
Then he tied me to a chair, and continued to beat the children. 
Our oldest son, aged 12, was forced to beat the two younger brothers. 
The youngest son, 6, ended up with a broken wrist."
"After four days, I escaped with the children to my sister's house in Nis, and later went to a safe house for women," she explains.
Studies suggest that as many as 54.2% of women in Serbia have experienced some form of violence within the family, and in 90% of these cases the perpetrator was a man. 
The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy has been conducting research into the problem, and the results are sobering.
Psychological violence, involving threats, insults or verbal abuse, is the most common form and will affect close to half (48.7%) of Serbian women at some point in their lives. 
More than one fifth of women, however, will suffer physical assault -- including being beaten, strangled, kicked, attacked with a knife or gun, or raped.
The number of reported cases has skyrocketed since 2005, according to researchers -- not because there is increasing abuse, but because more and more women are finding the courage to report what they have gone through.
Nevertheless, many women still take a passive attitude, regarding beatings or harassment as something a wife must accept, and in some cases transmitting such attitudes along to their children.
"A 50-year-old woman will tell her daughter who is 20 or 30 that 'it's nothing terrible, and if your father has maltreated me, he will eventually regret it'," says Vesna Stanojevic, co-ordinator of Counseling Against Family Violence, a support group. 
But the evidence, she says, shows that violence does not stop over time.
Serbia is no anomaly among Balkan countries when it comes to this issue. 
Research has found abuse is common throughout the region, including in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and Kosovo.
Authorities in Belgrade acknowledge that not enough has been done. 
"Official institutions in Serbia do not monitor accurately the distribution and frequency of family violence against women and the legal field is under-regulated," says Snezana Lakicevic, a deputy state secretary and project director at the Labour and Social Policy Ministry.
The ministry is preparing a national strategy to combat violence against women, which will be adopted in January 2011. 
Three ministries -- Labour, Justice and Police -- have signed a joint protocol for the implementation of this strategy.
