23/12/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 23/12/10
When the Milosevic regime fell in 2000, few thought the Socialist Party (SPS) that he led would emerge again as an important player on Serbia's political stage.
Ten years later, that is exactly the outcome.
The former dictator died in 2006 while in custody at The Hague. 
Ivica Dacic, once a close Milosevic aide, then took over the SPS. 
His stated goal: to transform it into "a modern party of the left, fighting for social justice".
In the 2008 general election, the SPS entered a coalition with United Serbia and the Party of United Pensioners of Serbia. 
Together, they won 7.5% of the vote and the SPS gained a kingmaker role in forming the new government.
The Socialists then faced a dilemma. 
Should they form a government with parties that questioned co-operation with the EU, or with those advocating the swiftest possible EU integration for Serbia? 
The party went with the pro-EU forces, joining a government coalition headed by President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DP).
The SPS and DP signed a declaration of reconciliation after which Dacic become interior and a deputy prime minister, while SPS personnel took charge of the education, infrastructure and energy ministries.
Many were confused and distrustful of such a government and of Dacic's transformation. 
But he has since used every opportunity to distance himself from Milosevic's policies, insisting that his party's strength is in its ability to learn from its mistakes.
"We cannot win a single vote in any election if we want to convince people we are faithful to our past -- such things belong in a museum," he said.
Political analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic says it is natural to see the former communists recast themselves as Europe-oriented social democrats. 
"Judging by the results achieved so far, they are doing well. 
Thanks to that transformation, the European capacity in Serbia's political scene has increased," he told SETimes.
The Socialists, he added, have also increased their coalition prospects.
"They are now close to all the openly pro-European parties. 
However, they are not too far from the increasingly influential Serbian Progressive Party, which has also quickly transformed after breaking away from the Serbian Radical Party," he said.
Public opinion is divided.
"I simply can't forget the way we lived and how miserable we were while that same Dacic was Milosevic's right-hand man. 
... 
[Dacic] should never have been appointed deputy prime minister and police minister," economist Sanja Momirov, 46, told SETimes.
Student Lazar Kolakovic, 21, disagrees, arguing the party should not be weighed down forever by its past. 
"Dacic is doing his job well. 
He has introduced order in the police and that service is now functioning much better," he said.
The most recent SPS party congress, held on December 11th, provided dramatic evidence of the party's makeover. 
It admitted as new members such figures as film director Srdjan Dragojevic and gay rights activist Boris Milicevic, both known for their earlier criticism of the Milosevic regime.
Through such changes, the SPS has managed to attract new members, particularly among youth. 
Whether it will also attract new voters remains to be seen in 2012, when the country goes to the polls for a general election.
