31/05/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 31/05/11
Given their role in the protest and spread of information in the uprisings of the Middle East, social media tools like Facebook and Twitter have been touted in recent months for their ability to place powerful political tools in the hands of repressed populations.
Turkey, a democratising country that boasts the fourth largest community of Facebook users in the world, is also in the midst of waking up to the social and political possibilities offered through social media.
Ozgur Uckan, a professor at Bilgi University, told SETimes that until recently social media had been utilised in Turkey in much the same way it has been in the United States and Europe -- to make friends, keep in touch and date.
However, this is changing.
"For the past two years, as the political environment has become more severe, the political weight of social media has increased," he explains.
"Blogs on the one hand and social media on the other have begun transforming into a political agora, a forum space."
Media artist Burak Arikan explains that online political activism in Turkey is approached not only through social networking sites, but also through anonymous private email lists, whose subscribers can number in the thousands.
A major factor affecting the politicisation of social media is the threat of increased internet censorship.
In the past years, a plethora of websites have been banned in Turkey, most famously the video-sharing website YouTube.
More recently, the popular blog host Blogger has been intermittently blocked, prompting the foundation of groups such as "Don't Touch My Blog".
Legislation scheduled for August 22nd that would impose filters on internet access has provoked a huge public outcry that culminated in a national, multi-locational protest on May 15th.
"I think we will see more of these sorts of interactions in the future," says Yaman Akdeniz, law professor at Bilgi University and founder of the nonprofit organisation Cyber-Rights & Cyber-Liberties, who also mentioned that political parties themselves have begun using social media in their campaigns.
Erdem Dilbaz, an organiser of the internet censorship protest, says that the type of activism he engages in is not limited to one target or pursued under the auspices of one group.
"I organise these events according to what's needed," he tells SETimes.
"I put classic protest methods to one side and organise alternative, attention-getting types of 'enteractivism'," he says, punning on the Turkish words for entertainment and protest.
Arikan believes that current activism springs in large part from fear.
In the face of events such as Egypt's revocation of internet access in the midst of anti-government protests, Arikan says, Turkish youth have become more aware that such a threat is possible in their own country.
"Many people are concerned now that the government can just shut down the internet," he says.
Since the publication of his article outlining online organisational strategies in the face of a coup, Arikan says, he is "being approached by younger people who want to organise workshops on this, who want to learn how to do this type of semi-long-distance networking," as a way to resist government crackdown.
There are dangers inherent in such internet activism, however, as both Uckan and Arikan emphasise.
Terms like "slacktivism" and "click activism" have been used to describe people who are active online but exert little effort to make concrete changes in the real world.
"I'm among those who believe there needs to be a connection between digital activism and the street," Uckan says.
"In some way, there needs to be a permeable relationship between these two parallel worlds."
