21/12/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 21/12/10
Kosovo police arrested five alleged counterfeiters Monday (December 20th) during an operation in Gjakova, Peja and Prizren. 
Police seized more than 5,000 bogus euros.
The case follows another earlier this month where 40,000 counterfeit euros, in 100 euro bills, were seized and two people were arrested.
Economic Crimes and Corruption Investigation Directorate (DECCID) Director Agron Nezaj spoke with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku about this new trend and actions his department is taking.
SETimes: Police seized 40,000 in fake euros. 
Is this the first case? 
Who were the perpetrators?
Agron Nezaj: DECCID has investigated many other cases -- it investigated 130 cases of fake money in 2010 alone -- 77 cases were sent to the prosecutor's office, 53 cases are under investigation, 35 suspects have been arrested, charges were filed against 85 suspects.
SETimes: How do the police investigate fake money cases; do you co-operate with police in the region?
Nezaj: Kosovo police work based on the legislation in power, authorisations and legal responsibilities; it also has good co-operation with the police in the region.
SETimes: Is this a Kosovo problem or a regional problem?
Nezaj: This is a regional and a global problem; in these cases, usually persons from several states are involved.
SETimes: How do you plan to fight against this phenomenon? 
With what means, structures, co-operation?
Nezaj: The Kosovo police have special units dealing with the prevention and fighting of this phenomenon. 
They closely co-operate with rule of law agencies, the Central Bank, Kosovo Customs and police from other states.
SETimes: Do you co-operate with Albania and Macedonia in these cases, and in general, in cases related to organised crime at a regional level?
Nezaj: Kosovo Police have very good co-operation with these two states, in preventing and fighting all penal acts, especially when it is about cases of organised crime. 
There have been cases when we had joint investigations with the police of these states.
