22/12/2010
(Euobserver, EurActiv - 22/12/10;
AP, AFP, DPA, FT, BBC, Deutsche Welle, RFE/RL, Euronews, Europolitics, Mediafax, HotNews.ro, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool - 21/12/10)
The interior ministers of France and Germany, Brice Hortefeux and Thomas de Maiziere, have officially asked the European Commission (EC) to postpone Bulgaria and Romania's accession to the Schengen area, according to reports Tuesday (December 21st).
The two Balkan countries are not prepared to join Europe's 25-nation border-free travel zone yet, so their admission would be "premature", the ministers insisted in a letter to EU Home Affairs Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom.
Bulgaria and Romania, which joined the EU in January 2007, have failed to deal with weaknesses in their judiciary systems and to show tangible progress in the fight against corruption and organised crime, they argued.
"We do not believe all conditions for an entry into Schengen by these two countries are being met," British daily Financial Times quoted the letter as reading.
"It would not be realistic nor responsible to make light of known shortcomings."
The Schengen area, named after a town in Luxembourg, includes all EU nations, except Britain, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Ireland and Romania, as well as non-EU members Iceland, Norway and Switzerland.
The admission of new entrants must be approved by all members.
Bulgaria and Romania were hoping to join the Schengen area in March 2011, which would make them part of the EU external borders.
Hortefeux and de Maiziere, warned however that allowing the two countries to join the zone would have "grave consequences" for EU security, the AP reported.
Copies of their letter to Malmstrom have reportedly been sent also to Belgium, which currently holds the rotating six-month presidency of the Union, as well as to Hungary, whose term at the helm of the 27-nation bloc begins on January 1st.
The move came ahead of a final assessment on the two Balkan countries' bids, due to be released in January, according to Brussels-based news portal Euobserver.
The experts drafting the report have so far given a green light to their accession, it noted on Wednesday.
The AP quoted an EU diplomat as saying on Tuesday that Paris and Berlin also want the next monitoring report under the so-called Co-operation and Verification Mechanism (CVM), which is due in February, to be taken into consideration when deciding on Bulgaria and Romania's bids.
The mechanism was introduced by the EC when the two countries joined the EU to assess their progress towards meeting their judicial reform and anti-corruption commitments, and in Bulgaria's case, in fighting organised crime.
While acknowledging that the arguments in the letter to Malmstrom refer to real problems, Romanian President Traian Basescu stressed that there is no link between the CVM and the technical requirements for admission to the Schengen area, which his country has already met.
The introduction of "additional conditionalities" for aspiring members is unacceptable for Romania, he added, warning that such attempts could set a precedent for future violations of a country's accession treaty.
"I believe that the Franco-German letter sent to the European Commission is an act of discrimination against Romania," Basescu said.
There were no immediate comments from senior Bulgarian officials.
