31/05/2011
(Balkans.com - 31/05/11;
Sofia News Agency, FOCUS News Agency, The Sofia Echo, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg, NATO - 30/05/11;
EurActiv - 10/12/10)
NATO wants to see all Western Balkan countries fully integrated into the Euro-Atlantic structures, Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said in Sofia on Monday (May 30th).
Last week's arrest of former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic is an "important step" that opens the door for the entire region's further progress towards the achievement of that goal, the NATO chief said following talks with Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov.
"This sends a very clear message that war crimes will eventually be punished," Rasmussen stressed.
"It has also removed a stumbling block on Serbia's road towards the EU and also on the road towards NATO."
Serbia is one of the five Western Balkan countries, along with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Kosovo, Macedonia and Montenegro, that has not joined the military pact yet.
More than a decade after the Alliance's intervention against Bosnian Serbs during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH and its air campaign to drive Serbian forces out of Kosovo in 1999, opinion polls in recent years have repeatedly shown that fewer than 30% of Serbs favour joining the pact.
While acknowledging that a part of Serbian society may still feel sceptical about NATO due to "historical reasons", Rasmussen argued that it is thanks to the Alliance's intervention in the Balkans in the 1990s that people in the region can live in peace, security and stability today.
"I would like to send a very clear message to the Serbian people -- your future is in a productive and mutually beneficial co-operation between Serbia on the one hand and the EU and NATO on the other, which might lead to full-fledged membership in both organisations," Sofia-based FOCUS News Agency quoted him as saying Monday.
According to the former Danish prime minister, Bulgaria could "play a constructive role" in bringing Serbia and the other Balkan countries closer to EU and NATO membership.
Rasmussen also took part in the NATO Parliamentary Assembly's spring session, which opened in Bulgaria's Black Sea city of Varna on Friday.
One of the issues he touched upon in his speech before lawmakers there was the Alliance's two-month-old operation in Libya.
"Our operation in Libya, Operation Unified Protector, is achieving its objectives," Rasmussen said, noting that, as a result of the mission, Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's "ability to kill his own people" is diminished.
He also stressed that NATO will not ease its pressure on the Libyan leader until he has withdrawn his forces and mercenaries, and has stopped threatening and attacking civilians.
"Gaddafi's reign of terror is coming to an end.
He is increasingly isolated, at home and abroad," said Rasmussen.
"Even those closest to him are departing, defecting or deserting.
As the international Contact Group made clear -- it is time for Gaddafi to go as well."
In Varna, the NATO chief held talks with Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov, Parliament Speaker Tsetska Tsacheva and Foreign Minister Nickolay Mladenov.
