21/12/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 21/12/10
An apparent electrical short circuit caused the fire that killed six newborns and injured five others in the intensive care unit of the state-run Giulesti maternity hospital.
Now prosecutors are going after those who they say could have made a difference that fateful August 16th and before.
On December 6th, Bogdan Marinescu, the suspended manager of the facility, nurse Florentina Carstea and three other hospital employees were indicted.
Carstea, the only one arrested after the incident, faces charges of negligent homicide for allegedly leaving the ward for 12 minutes during which the fire broke out in an improvised air conditioning electrical connection.
She says there were no other personnel available to replace her, given the dire staffing shortage at the hospital.
The other four -- Marinescu, a neonatologist, the head of the hospital's technical department, and an electrician -- are charged with negligence after allegedly failing to implement protective measures, observe safety regulations and maintain the electrical system.
"We expect the trial to linger, as goes the unfortunate trend Romanian justice has set.
And we also expect the whole blame will be put on the nurse," said Vasile Barbu, head of the Association for Patients' Protection.
"This is why we are looking into assisting her legally," he told SETimes.
Barbu says the main culprits are at a higher pay grade.
"In our opinion, most of the responsibility goes to the head of the ward, who, according to the law, has to ensure the quality of the medical act in all its aspects.
He is the one who signs a management contract with the manager of the hospital in terms of treatment, patient security, medicine supply and so forth."
Asked if the tragedy has taught any lessons, Barbu says he doubts it.
"They rushed to equip all the hospitals in Bucharest with fire detection devices.
But other than that, one can hardly see any change.
The main issue remains:
the hospitals and maternity wards, too, are as crowded and understaffed as before.
And the air conditioning systems, which by the way are household-designated ones, are in the same precarious state."
"It is sad," he continued, "that in the whole country there's only one maternity with state-of-the-art medical equipment and enough staff to cater to all the patients," referring to Bucharest's Polizu hospital.
According to the Association for the Patients' Protection, the fire spread quickly because of a wooden cupboard in the newborn unit.
Barbu stressed that flammable materials are strictly prohibited from intensive care units.
In the aftermath of the tragedy, the health ministry filled more than 2,000 medical jobs in public hospitals.
All of the openings had been kept vacant as part of the government's austerity programme.
Recent figures suggest on average, the number of doctors is down by about 35% in hospitals.
According to the Order of Nurses, Midwives and Medical Assistants in Romania, 10,000 nurses have left the country over the last four years.
That rate is accelerating amid recent salary cuts.
