31/05/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 31/05/11
With political tensions high over the disputed mayoral election results in Tirana, Albanians are awaiting a ruling expected on Friday (June 3rd) by the Electoral College. 
The opposition has filed an appeal there over the Central Election Commission's (CEC) decision to count ballots that voters cast in the wrong boxes.
The CEC's decision resulted in a narrow, 81-vote victory for Lulzim Basha, the candidate of the ruling Democratic Party. 
Before the extra votes were included, incumbent Edi Rama of the Socialist Party had been leading by ten votes.
Albania has been caught in a bitter political deadlock since the general elections in June 2009, with the Socialists staging parliamentary boycotts and street demonstrations over what they claim were serious irregularities. 
Depending on what happens Friday, the latest dispute could fan the flames further or help defuse the crisis, according to analyst Fatos Lubonja.
"If the Electoral College rules in favour of Rama, a more stable Albania will follow and the opposition would not demand anything else. 
If it rules in favour of Basha, contests, boycotts, lack of dialogue and co-operation would follow, just as in the past two and a half years," he told SETimes.
But there is little danger of Albania as a whole becoming destabilised, Lubonja added. 
"The fight is between interest groups and militants; common people are not involved."
Alexsander Cipa, editor of the daily Shqip, believes political conflict is likely no matter how the College rules. 
"If Rama wins, the opposition will pretend that the result supports the opposition's view on those elections. 
If Basha wins, the opposition would boycott the institutions," he said.
The best solution would be "a clear legally-based decision without political connotations", Cipa added.
The odds seem to favour Basha, Artan Gjergji of the Foundation for Economic Freedom told SETimes, adding he expects further protests throughout Albania. 
Only in this way, he said, can Rama exert pressure on the government for early elections.
In a post-election report, an OSCE observer team found the existing electoral code did not provide for the kind of situation that arose in the Tirana race.
The code, according to team leader Jonathan Stonestreet, does not "provide any procedure for reconciling ballots found in other boxes. 
There was no CEC decision or instruction regarding this issue prior to Election Day, nor did the CEC-approved counting manual address the issue, even though miscast ballots were an issue in previous local elections."
Voters cast ballots in four different boxes for Tirana mayor, municipal council, municipality, and municipality head. 
The ruling majority appealed to the CEC to count the additional votes once it realised some voters had cast their ballots in the wrong boxes.
In a speech to parliament Thursday, Prime Minister and ruling Democratic Party leader Sali Berisha called the events of the past two weeks "an absurd theatre". 
Opposition MPs were not present.
"Albanians voted with dignity on May 8th," Berisha said, "but after that, the CEC is besieged, roads blocked, there are threats and ultimatums. 
All this is based on one single reason --somebody does not want to recognise the vote of the citizens."
Rama replied the same day, calling Berisha an advocate of televised theft. 
"The language of pressure and threats against the opposition is constant after the painful loss for Sali, but it does not impress us. 
It increases our determination and insistence to go to the end with the battle for the future of Albanian democracy," Rama said.
