30/05/2011
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia - 30/05/11
EU leaders are set to address the thorny question of whether the rules covering the passport-free Schengen Zone should be revised in order to provide better control of migration. 
With thousands of North Africans fleeing the turmoil in Tunisia and Libya, calls for revamping the system have become more urgent.
Many of the refugees have ended up in Italy and Malta, both of which are Schengen Zone members. 
The Schengen issue is expected to figure prominently on the agenda when the EU holds its June 24th summit.
During an extraordinary meeting of the EU interior ministers in Brussels in May, the European Commission (EC) tabled a proposal that would allow countries in the Schengen Zone to restore border controls.
However, they would be able to apply that mechanism only as a measure of last resort and in "truly critical circumstances", according to a statement by the Hungarian EU presidency. 
Moreover, border checks would be introduced only on a temporary basis and in a co-ordinated fashion.
"We need to have increased clarity in rules, in order to avoid unilateral and disproportionate steps by member states," EU Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilia Malmstrom, who represented the EC at the meeting, said after the discussions.
Hungarian Interior Minister Sandor Pinter, who chaired the talks in Brussels, said the participants agreed that the Schengen system should be preserved.
"There was a clear position from every minister: the free movement of people is one of the Union's key achievements and we have to maintain and safeguard this," he said at a news conference after the special meeting on immigration.
For Bulgaria and Romania, the debate has particular significance. 
The two countries were originally scheduled to join the 25-nation border-free area together in March, but accession was delayed after a final evaluation report on Bulgaria found security shortcomings at the country's land border with Turkey.
Although Romania was found to have met all the criteria, its entry into the zone was postponed along with its neighbour's. 
Sofia has since taken steps to address weaknesses identified in the report. 
The Schengen evaluation working group decided in early May that Bulgaria was fully prepared to join the European border-free space.
Gunther Krichbaum, head of the Bundestag committee on European affairs, said that a decision on Bulgaria and Romania's bids would be taken this summer, after the EC issues its reports on their progress under the so-called Co-operation and Verification mechanism.
The European Parliament's (EP) Civil Liberties Committee also found the two countries ready for admission into the area, with Committee Rapporteur Carlos Coelho describing Bulgaria and Romania as "even better prepared" than some of the club's members.
Officials in Sofia and Bucharest have criticised older EU member states' attempts to make their countries' admission into the border-free area conditional on new political requirements, not included in the Schengen acquis.
"It is unacceptable towards Bulgaria and Romania," Bulgarian Parliament Speaker Tsetska Tsacheva said on May 15th.
According to Rumen Jordanov, a Sofia-based car dealer, his country's admission into the Schengen area will boost its image, but will have almost no effect on the way he does business, nor will it translate into any special benefits for his company.
"Bulgaria is a member of the EU, so there are no customs duties. 
We only go through passport control at the first point of entry into the Schengen Zone, which typically takes no more than two minutes," he told SETimes. 
"So, when we join the area, we'll be spared just those two minutes."
