30/05/2011
(Sofia News Agency, Fena, Albeu.com, Emg.rs - 29/05/11;
The New York Times, FOCUS News Agency, Mediapool, MIA, Albeu.com, Official Website of the Polish President - 28/05/11)
The transformation that Poland and other former communist states in Central and Eastern Europe underwent during the past two decades can serve as an example for Arab countries fighting for democracy, US President Barack Obama said on Friday (May 27th).
"We have taken great inspiration from the blossoming of freedom and economic growth in this region," he said at an official working dinner with the presidents of 20 countries attending the 17th Central and Eastern European summit in Warsaw.
He also assured leaders of the former communist states that the United States wants "to be a part of that process of strengthening your democracies, strengthening your economies and to be a full partner".
The summit, hosted by Polish President Bronislaw Komorowski, was devoted to the democratic changes in countries of the former Soviet bloc since they shook off communism in the late 1980s.
"Democracy is our common goal, achievement and challenge, and it is worth remembering that, close to the place where we now are, the Warsaw Pact was made in 1955," the Polish leader said in his opening speech.
"Our paths may have been different," Komorowski added, noting that the road towards freedom, democracy and EU integration has been "particularly painful" for the Balkan countries, including those that were part of the former Yugoslavia.
"In this light, striving to achieve full democracy and European integration is the best solution to the issue of lack of security in our part of Europe," the Polish president stressed.
Among the 20 European heads of state who took part in the Warsaw summit were the presidents of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Moldova and Montenegro.
Romania and Serbia boycotted the event because of Kosovo President Atifete Jahjaga's participation.
Slovakia, one the five EU nations that have not recognised Kosovo's independence, demanded that none of the country's state symbols, including its national flag or coat of arms, would be on display during the meeting.
The summit also provided an opportunity for a series of one-on-one meetings between the participants, including with Obama.
The diversification of energy sources was one of the issues Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov discussed with him on the sidelines of the talks in Warsaw.
He also called for more US investment in his country, arguing that "for a long time, we have been part of one and the same union and we see no radical change in the situation in terms of US business interest in the region."
One issue Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov discussed with Obama was his country's long-running name dispute with Greece, which has become an insurmountable obstacle on its path towards EU and NATO membership.
"As a country we have met all conditions for NATO accession and continuation of our EU integration process," Ivanov stressed.
"The Republic of Macedonia wants a solution," he said, adding that Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou "should be assisted in making a concrete step forward".
