30/11/2010
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau – 30/11/10
Prime Minister Vlad Filat's three-party Alliance for European Integration (AEI) won Sunday's elections in Moldova, but can it muster enough support in parliament to elect a president?
The pro-European alliance unites the right-wing Liberal, centre-right Liberal Democratic and centre-left Democratic parties. 
Together, they garnered 50% of the vote, according to results released on Monday (November 29th) by the Central Election Committee.
The opposition Communists, with 41%, got the most votes of any single party.
Sixty-one votes in the 101-seat parliament are needed to elect a president and overcome the country's longstanding political impasse. 
But the AEI only stands to receive 57 seats -- 31 for the Liberal Democrats, 15 for the Democrats and 11 for the Liberals.
That number is sufficient to form a government. 
Failure to elect a head of state, though, would mean the new parliament must be dissolved, with yet another round of elections to follow.
Some analysts remain cautiously optimistic that such a scenario can be avoided.
"I don't want to think about a deadlock again," said Leonid Litra, head of the Moldovan Institute for Development and Social Initiatives (IDIS). 
"I see possible alliances and I hope that the three members of the previous pro-European alliance of Moldova will continue their work."
"I know there were tensions during the election campaign between them, but it comes clear now that they have to use their communication skills as much as possible to overcome them. 
I hope as well that the Communist Party will be able to co-operate now with the alliance in electing the president," he said.
Nicu Popescu, the prime minister's adviser on European issues, acknowledged that bringing political parties together could pose a "challenge".
Still, he said, "I think there will be a coalition of pro-European forces in Moldova, and I hope it will not only continue the reforms, but accelerate them."
Turnout on Sunday was unexpectedly high, with around 60% of eligible voters casting ballots. 
Local authorities had to add voting boxes at several polling stations.
Some polling stations abroad -- in Moscow, Bologna and Paris -- ran out of ballots, and the CEC decided to allow voters to write down their choices on paper. 
At some locations in France and Italy, polls remained open two hours later than planned in order to accommodate the large number of voters.
According to some analysts, the surge may have been partly due to "get out the vote" campaigns organised on Twitter and other social media, aimed particularly at youth.
Despite some reports of violations, international observers evaluated the elections as fair and democratic overall. 
OSCE representatives and the European Parliament's election observer mission called the election "a positive step" in the country's democratic development.
"There is a huge openness shown now by the EU to Moldova, but the hard test is just coming for Moldovan authorities: is the political class in Moldova ready to grow up and adopt European values?" Popescu said.
"I think for the coming period, all of Moldovan society has a lot of work to do," Manole said. 
"Civil society has to [work to educate] the civic consciousness of people, while the political powers should work on bringing democratic values into people's lives."
