31/01/2011
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka and Jusuf Ramadanovic in Sarajevo -- 31/01/11
Renewable energy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) remains largely unexploited, but it's not for lack of potential, experts say. 
Rather, the country suffers from a lack of clear state-level legislation, and no government ministry has been specifically put in charge of the issue.
Other obstacles include a lack of field experts, antiquated technology, and the monopoly enjoyed by the three major electro-energy companies in BiH.
Mubera Bicakcic, who heads the energy department at the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations, said a study is under way that will yield recommendations for a state-level law setting criteria and guidelines.
"This study should be the basis for development of [the country's] energy strategy. 
It should provide us with instructions in this sector till 2020 and give an overview of energy resources," she said.
However, Bicakcic added, "it is hard to know when our politicians will adopt this law."
The BiH Federation's tourism and environmental protection ministry, meanwhile, says it has a strategy in place for the next decade, with entity legislation having been adjusted to harmonise with EU criteria.
According to Amer Jerlagic, executive director of the state electricity company Elektroprivreda BiH, current projects include the Vranduk and Janjici hydro plants, which are being built on the Bosna River in co-operation with the German bank KFV, as well as two other facilities in Olovo.
Near Tomislavgrad, in the region of Herzegovina, construction of the Mesihovina windmill plant has been under way since last September. 
It is expected to open in 2013 and to yield 33% windmill capacity, above the European average.
Indeed, it could achieve "the highest capacity among regional windmills", according to Matan Zaric, general manager of the Bosnian Croat Public Electricity Company of Herzeg-Bosnia.
But funding for some projects is still pending. 
Three thermo plants, a dozen hydro plants and three wind plants await the interest of foreign investors.
"Investors are still discouraged by the lack of a central state-level law on electrical energy, which should define obligations and conditions for distributors in transferring electrical energy from producers, and set the prices," said Faruk Mustovic, a leading energy expert in BiH.
Rich in rivers and forests, the country is sitting on a potential goldmine when it comes to renewable resources. 
BiH also has significant geothermal potential, especially near the towns of Bosanski Samac, Kakanj and Sarajevo -- insufficient for energy production, but usable for other heating purposes.
Tapping that potential while protecting BiH's natural beauty will present a challenge for years to come. 
And with political disarray hampering the formation of an overall national strategy, it may be some time yet before efforts get off the ground.
