30/05/2011
By Georgi Mitev Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 30/05/11
Protests organised by ultranationalist Serbs against the arrest and pending extradition of Europe's most wanted fugitive, former general Ratko Mladic, erupted in violent clashes Sunday (May 29th) on the streets of Belgrade.
Around 15,000 people gathered in front of the parliament building for the rally, organised by the Serbian Radical Party (SRS).
Its leader, Vojislav Seselj, also faces war crimes charges at The Hague-based International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, which is expected to be Mladic's destination as well.
The crowd shouted nationalist rhetoric, including threats against President Boris Tadic.
Meanwhile, Mladic's lawyer, Milo Saljic, has filed a request to stop the extradition citing His client's health.
A Belgrade court earlier ruled that he is fit to stand trial.
Mladic's son, Darko, told the crowd at the rally that his father, 69, is ill and in need of treatment.
He called on the crowd to remain peaceful and described his father as a "freedom fighter".
The protest turned violent when a group of demonstrators began throwing firecrackers, bottles and stones at the nearest police cordon.
Officers then intervened.
Interior Minister Ivica Dacic accused extremists of institigating violence in an otherwise non-violent protest.
"We again have a situation when extremist groups infiltrate large political rallies and attack police.
For security forces it is hard to adequately respond because of other peaceful demonstrators."
Sunday's events were reminiscent of a similar melee in 2008, when the arrest of former Republic of Srpska President Radovan Karadzic for war crimes led to riots and fatalities.
In both cases, young men wearing hoods instigated violence.
Unlike in the previous incident, however, police on Sunday quickly clamped down on the rioting and cleared the city centre within an hour.
"As we announced, anyone can feel free to express their political rights but no one can do it by violence," Dacic said.
But Radical Party deputy president Dragan Todorovic took a different view, suggesting the government sought to ensure that "protests don't end peacefully."
