20/12/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 20/12/10
Prosecutors in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have indicted six people on charges of terrorism and providing assistance to the perpetrators of a criminal act. 
The case stems from a June 27th bombing at the police station in Bugojno.
One police officer was killed in the early morning attack, and a woman in the administration staff sustained serious wounds. 
Several others escaped with minor injuries. 
Damage to the facility was severe.
The indictment, announced on Friday (December 17th), names Bugojno resident Haris "Oks" Causevic as the primary defendant. 
He is accused of setting up the explosives.
The five others indicted with him are Adnan "Maca" Haracic, Naser Palislamovic, Emin Osmanagic, Haris "Hara" Spago and Nedzad Kesko. 
Some media reports have linked them to the radical Islamic Wahhabi movement.
The accused "had a premeditated intention to kill some people and to cause major damage by timing their attack against the police administration in Bugojno on the day when an Islamic religious event in Ajvatovica was being held, knowing that on this day, a large number of police officers would be present in the police administration building in Bugojno for the purpose of securing this major religious event," the indictment said.
In addition to the terrorism charges, Causevic has also been indicted for alleged computer crimes.
Prosecutors say his laptop contained hacking tools that could be used to access the protected systems of government institutions, such as the Court of BiH, the Agency for Protection of Personal Data, and the National Assembly of Republika Srpska.
"By possessing the aforementioned penetration vectors, he has attempted to inflict major damage on the institutions of BiH" and cause serious destabilisation, the indictment alleges.
The defendant has denied wrongdoing.
"I am not a terrorist, I am the best hacker in BiH!" he reportedly declared following his arrest in June. 
"I have been studying computer systems and making internet sites for years now. 
I have four pensions, specifically from Germany, Croatia, Slovenia, and from BiH. 
I have the means for a living."
