20/12/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 20/12/10
Responding to claims of of intimidation and fraud at the ballot box, Kosovo's election complaints panel has called for a repeat vote in five of the country's 37 municipalities.
After reviewing hundreds of objections filed by various political parties, it decided to annul the results at 21 polling stations: 12 in Skenderaj, five in Drenas, one in Malisheva, two in Decan and one in Lipjan.
Voters in the affected municipalities will be asked to return to the polls on January 9th and make their choice again. 
Commissioners at the polling stations will be replaced and monitoring will be enhanced.
"There are complaints of serious irregularities," panel head Shukri Sylejmani confirmed to SETimes.
He said 40% of the objections came from Vetevendosje, a grassroots party that opposes international involvement in Kosovo, and which finished third in the December 12th vote.
But other parties, including the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) and Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) also filed complaints, Sylejmani said.
The alleged irregularities include multiple voting, stuffed ballot boxes, non-functioning ballot boxes, and threats made against individuals.
Valdete Daka, head of the Central Election Commission, confirmed that the panel had asked for election materials, including lists of eligible voters as well as copies of the voting register and official results.
Election observers, meanwhile, are levying criticism at each other over how the December 12th monitoring was handled.
The Kosovo Institute for Policy Research and Development (KIPRED) has announced it will pull out of Democracy in Action, a coalition of NGOs. 
It said the coalition failed to report objectively about problems at the polls.
Isa Mustafa, leader of the LDK, is demanding that the entire election be repeated in all municipalities.
Prime Miniter Hashim Thaci's PDK, which finished first, has denounced voting irregularities, including some which it said were perpetrated by its own members. 
Murat Musliu, a PDK candidate, said something went massively wrong with the process in Skenderaj.
He claims to have video demonstrating that commissioners in some voting centres did not even count the votes, but placed them "on a list imposed by powerful people and senior PDK officials, and local officials", the Telegrafi news agency reported.
