29/11/2010
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 29/11/10
Republika Srpska's new parliament has been formed, but with unexpected changes.
The ruling Independent Union of Social Democrats (SNSD) decided to nominate a member of a Serbian opposition party to serve on the three-person parliamentary presidency -- a move that Croats say shuts them out.
The entity constitution stipulates that it should include two members representing the three constituent nations -- Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks -- and a third representing other ethnicities.
Parliament president Igor Radojicic, an SNSD member, is a Montenegrin and thus eligible to serve in the third post.
The two vice presidents are Ramiz Salkic, a Bosniak from the Party of Democratic Action, and Snjezana Bozic, from the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS).
"We have chosen to elect one vice president from the opposition party so we could set a new parliament in a more democratic tone, and so that the SNSD -- as a ruling party together with its coalition partners -- could show a certain responsibility towards the opinion of the minority in RS parliament," said Nikola Bastinac, an SNSD parliament member.
But some Croatian politicians do not see things this way.
The HDZ 1990 party says the move is yet another sign that Croats are removed from the levers of power.
"It is the same with the RS vice president, Emil Vlajki, who is not a member of any Croatian political party -- i.e.
he was not elected by the votes of the Croats.
It is the same situation in the RS parliament.
This new situation in the RS presidency and parliament just demonstrates the further minimalisation of Croats in RS," said Veso Vegar, a party spokesman.
The Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina (HDZ BiH), a political ally of the SNSD, has declined to comment.
The SNSD says the problem stems from the current constitution and will not stay unresolved much longer.
The ruling party says it plans to have constitutional changes adopted by the end of this year.
Proposed changes include the introduction of a third vice president, with that post earmarked for a Croat.
Even if that happens, some Croatian parties may still be dissatisfied, as the SNSD will likely select one of its own members – Nada Tesanovic -- to be the Croatian representative.
The more nationalistic parties claim that Croats who belong to Serb-dominated parties are not truly representatives of the Croatian people.
Others, meanwhile, are concerned that the SNSD is increasing its hold on power, with the opposition weakened as a result.
