20/12/2010
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 20/12/10
Citing the need for a new parliament building, the Albanian government wants to tear down one of the capital's main communist-era landmarks. 
Parliament okayed the move in late October, but faces strong resistance from architects, opposition parties and the general public.
"We are the only country with a parliament seat consisting of a group of buildings that are inconveniently positioned one from another," Prime Minister Sali Berisha said in early November, at the first meeting of the New Parliament Building Committee.
The existing parliamentary complex "does not hold up to the standards of parliaments in EU countries or of those in the region", Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli said.
The area selected for the new project is currently occupied by the Albanian International Centre of Culture, popularly known as "the Pyramid" because of its distinctive shape.
The buidling was constructed soon after the death of the country's communist strongman, Enver Hoxha, and originally housed a museum commemorating his rule.
When the regime fell, however, the museum was closed.
The government claims that its proposal to demolish the Pyramid is motivated by economics.
"There are 30.000 square metres estimated at 2,000 euros per square-metre, which have no other value apart from 'Enverism nostalgia'," Berisha said at the committee meeting last month.
The replacement structure will house both the parliament and the Supreme Court, according to the government's plans.
Opposition parties are staunchly against the idea, saying the structure is a landmark and should not be torn down.
Many architects have also criticised the proposed demolition. 
According to Maks Velo, the building has "architectural value both in volume and shape and has well co-ordinated green spaces around it".
Some other site should be chosen for the new parliamentary facility, they say.
The Forum on the Protection of the Historical Heritage of Albania has launched a citizens' petition which will later be presented to the president, as well as national and international organisations.
The petition opposes demolition of a building which qualifies as historic, according to Artan Shkreli, a Forum member. 
The 22.6-metre pyramid was placed on a cultural heritage list in 2003.
