29/11/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 29/11/10
Kosovo's Central Elections Commission (CEC) is working to finalize voters' lists for the upcoming early elections and hopes to have the job done by the afternoon of Monday (November 29th).
Fehmi Ajvazi, spokesperson for the commission, said the final verified list would be announced at 5 pm. 
The total number of eligible voters is expected to surpass one million.
"Parties will start the election campaign on December 1st," Ajvazi told SETimes.
Media reports say various problems have held up finalization of the list. 
Deceased people were allegedly still found on the rolls, and updates were required from the municipalities and the interior ministry.
According to Ajvazi, such issues have been resolved.
"The issue is closed -- 29 political parties and initiatives are certified. 
The lists with all candidates are also certified. 
There are no problems with the candidate lists. 
All who applied have been certified," Ajvazi said.
"The same goes for those under investigation. 
They can run in the elections if there has been no final decision by the courts; a final decision means it cannot be appealed any further," he told SETimes.
Ajvazi said anyone who has been sentenced would not be able to run in an election for three years if the court decision was final, without chance of appeal.
The CEC says it is working extended hours to get everything ready.
"CEC preplanned the elections process early in the year, in preparation for regular elections. 
Parts of the plans have already been in place since then. 
We are working from 8:00am to 18:00pm, including Saturdays and Sundays," Ajvazi said.
Kosovo Serb parties and initiatives will also compete, and voting will be organised in the volatile north, even if the situation does not offer the conditions for a normal election process.
"We will do it through mobile teams if there are problems," Ajvazi said.
According to local media, the vote will be monitored by at least two international missions – the European Network of Election Monitoring Organisations and a mission of observers co-ordinated at a diplomatic level.
Kosovo NGOs have joined forces under the umbrella of the Kosovo Democratic Institute to monitor the December 12th poll.
They will be watching to see if the process is reliable and untainted by irregularities. 
Concerns have been raised following reports of possible vote buying and intimidation by political parties.
