20/12/2010
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 20/12/10
While the government has already adopted a plan to meet EU requirements -- particularly those relating to the decisive fight against organised crime -- analysts say that the time has come to implement the reforms.
On Friday (December 17th), the European Council granted Montenegro candidate status for EU membership.
But, that decision does not guarantee an easy journey towards joining the Union.
To obtain a date for launching membership negotiations, Montenegro must meet seven conditions -- harmonise electoral law with the constitution;
strengthen the administrative capacity and independence of the judiciary;
fight corruption and organised crime;
boost media freedom;
increase co-operation with the civil sector, mostly NGOs;
prevent discrimination;
and find sustainable solutions to close the refugee camp on the outskirts of Podgorica.
"The role of government is to build a system that relies on reliable and professional institutions, a system that guarantees the rule of law, providing security and protection of individual, minority, property, and all other rights and freedoms ...
Everyone must do their part," said Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic.
Foreign Minister Milan Rocen agreed.
"Candidate status is just a pre-qualification for the European race.
We need to mobilise in the European front all of Montenegro's mind."
Political analyst Daliborka Uljarević told SETimes "This is the beginning of dealing with genuine problems, with no space for reform simulation.
We now have a great opportunity to start to fix shortcomings of Montenegro society with help and support from the EU and to shape a democratic society.
It is important that we now cannot miss a chance, because we will not have opportunity like this soon."
She estimated that the Brussels conditions are more than a road map to obtain a date for negotiations.
"As long as the government members are sitting with criminals, businessmen and other controversial people, there will not be a decisive battle against crime.
Visible results will be when the prosecution, police and judiciary, free of political and other influences, begin to work only in accordance with the law."
Stevo Muk from the NGO Alternativa Institute says Brussels has given support to Montenegro for its strategic direction and reward for past efforts, but it will be hard to meet EU requirements.
"Previously, Montenegro was reluctant to perform reforms that essentially endanger organised crime and corruption.
I do not believe the situation will change overnight, but I believe that the government will have to do something.
The opening of investigations against high officials will be of the utmost importance," Muk told SETimes.
President of the European Movement in Montenegro Momcilo Radulovic says candidate status is a big commitment.
"We have a huge job that all the capacity of society must engage in," said Radulovic, pointing out that the EU wants concrete results.
Opposition Movement for Changes President Nebojsa Medojevic says the government cannot meet the EU requirements without the involvement of the opposition.
"The question is whether Montenegro has the political will to fight organised crime and corruption and to make necessary reforms of the judiciary, which will provide a sufficient degree of independence for this important segment of the government."
