29/04/2011
(ACTMedia, Moldpres - 29/04/11; Agerpres, Nine O'clock, HotNews.ro, Azi.md, ACTMedia, Moldpres - 28/04/11)
Romanian President Traian Basescu warned on Thursday (April 28th) that the continuing stalemate in Moldova needs to be resolved soon. 
Otherwise, the 27-nation EU might start losing interest, Basescu said following talks with visiting Moldovan Parliament Speaker and Interim President Marian Lupu.
The former Soviet republic has been without a full-time president since September 2009, when Vladimir Voronin of the country's Communist party stepped down. 
All attempts to elect a new president have since failed, as no candidate has been able to muster the required 61-vote majority support in the 101-seat parliament.
In line with the constitution, Lupu as parliament speaker is filling that post as well, serving as interim president until a new full-time one is elected.
Basescu voiced confidence that the West-leaning parties in the ruling Alliance for European Integration (AEI) will be able to put an end to the lingering stalemate quickly.
"This is an internal problem that Moldovan politicians will surely find the resources to solve, in national interest," the Romanian president said.
Lupu, whose Democratic Party is a member of the three-way AEI coalition, noted that failure to resolve the political crisis would have a "dramatic" impact not only on his country's relations with its European partners, but on domestic life, as well.
"I'm talking about citizens' losing trust in the political class and their own country, in the capacity of managing public affairs," he said.
The meeting between the two leaders focused on a number of issues, including the priorities in their bilateral relations, particularly in the energy sector, Moldova's EU integration hopes, as well as the upcoming talks on the Transdniester conflict.
"We tackled Moldova's priorities in its relationship with the EU and I assured President Lupu of our full support, both for the free movement agreement, the visa agreement … and for beginning negotiations in view of an association agreement," Romania's English-language daily Nine O'clock quoted Basescu as telling reporters after the meeting.
The two leaders also agreed that an action plan for implementing the declaration signed in 2010 on the strategic partnership for European integration between Romania and Moldova should be drawn up as soon as possible.
Lupu also voiced hope that the upcoming talks on Moldova's breakaway Transdniester region will result in a breakthrough. 
The next round of negotiations between the two sides, as well as Russia, Ukraine and the OSCE, is scheduled to take place in June. 
The EU and the United States are also involved in the process as observers.
"The Transdniester problem can and will be solved because, unlike many other frozen conflicts, this is not a religious or ethnic one, but is rather based on ideological reasons dating back to the early 1990s when the USSR was dissolving," the Moldovan leader said.
