27/05/2011
(Various sources -- 26/05/11 - 27/05/11)
As former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic underwent questioning at a Belgrade court following his arrest Thursday (May 26th), Southeast European leaders continued to react positively to what many describe as a milestone in the reconciliation process.
Mladic, 69, was captured in the village of Lazarevo, about 100km north of Belgrade, on Thursday morning, after nearly 16 years on the run. 
Accused of masterminding the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosniak men and boys, he has been indicted for genocide and war cimes by the ICTY.
An initial court session had to be suspended owing to the former general's "poor physical state", according to his lawyer, Milos Saljic. 
Questioning resumed on Friday. 
Serbian Deputy War Crimes Prosecutor Bruno Vekaric said on Thursday that Mladic must be extradited to The Hague-based UN tribunal within a week following his arrest In neighbouring Croatia, President Ivo Josipovic said this was a moment to remember all the victims of the Yugoslav conflicts. 
He also stressed the significance for Belgrade's integration prospects.
"This is a very important step forward for Serbia, especially regarding its ambitions towards EU integration and it's of great significance for the region," Euronews quoted him as saying. 
"Now Serbia is able to build better relations in the region, including bilateral issues with Bosnia and Herzegovina."
Prime Jadranka Kosor, meanwhile, described the longtime fugitive as "one of the worst criminals and henchmen in the history of mankind". 
She called on Belgrade to make sure that Croatian Serb wartime leader Goran Hadzic, the last remaining war crimes fugitive sought by The Hague-based UN tribunal, is also captured and brought to justice.
Leaders in Bulgaria, Romania and Macedonia also welcomed the news, with Bulgarian Foreign Minister Nikolay Mladenov saying "there can be no more doubt" as to Serbia's readiness to co-operate with the UN war crimes tribunal. 
Likewise, a statement from the Romanian foreign ministry called the arrest "a major token of commitment to the European path from Serbia".
Macedonian foreign minister Antonio Milososki said it was important that responsibility for war crimes be placed on the individuals who were involved in them, rather than burdening an entire people or state, or the image of the region as a whole.
In Turkey, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and other officials said Mladic's capture would help boost regional stability.
"We have been waiting for this day for a long time now," Ramazan Basak, Turkey-Serbia Friendship Parliamentary Group chairman, told SETimes. 
"As a country that execrates the massacre against humanity all around the world, we are very pleased with it."
"Many people in Turkey feel relieved and they greet today's news," said veteran Turkish Ambassador Ali Engin Oba, who served in the former Yugoslavia. 
"The arrest is not only good news for the Balkans, but for the stability of the region and gives new impetus to Serbia's EU accession process. 
It also shows that there is no way [to escape] from justice."
He added that the arrest itself "brings a positive impulse for negotiation between the Balkan countries, which Ankara was trying to moderate for a long time".
Members of the Turkish public, like Murat Seyret and Hilmi Halcaloglu, weighed in as well.
"It's a good thing he was caught," Seyret told SETimes. 
"But since they don't have the death penalty over there [at the ICTY], he won't get the punishment he deserves for his crimes." '
"It's overdue, but it's a good thing it happened," Halcaloglu commented. 
"Justice will be served. 
It will help contribute to the new, peaceful climate in the Balkans." '
Oba, however, noted that "there are still nationalists in Serbia who see Mladic as a hero."
"But the new, emerging generation in Serbia seems to be tired of the past and its wars -- they want to leave that behind and move forward to the future."
Hours earlier, about 500 of Mladic's supporters clashed with police in Serbia's northern city of Novi Sad during a protest against his arrest. 
Fewer took part in a similar protest in Belgrade, where 35 people were arrested for disorderly behaviour as police acted to prevent rioting.
Meanwhile, reports that the opposition ultra-nationalist Serbian Radical Party is planning to hold a rally in support of Mladic on Sunday coincided with news that Serbian authorities have banned all public gatherings and have heightened the security level across the country.
Correspondents Anna Wood and Alakbar Raufoglu contributed to this article.
