08/10/2004
(Various sources – 01/10/04 - 08/10/04)
Romania's government has extended the deadline for submitting bids in the privatisation tender for two power distributors -- Electrica Moldova and Electrica Oltenia -- from 6 October to 18 October.
The extension was made at the request of the short-listed candidate buyers:
CEZ (Czech Republic), EON (Germany), PPC (Greece), Union Fenosa International (Spain) and AES (United States).
Foreign direct investments in Croatia in the first half of 2004 declined by 46 per cent.
compared to the same period in 2003.
The largest share of foreign capital went to the trade sector, followed by the oil and gas extraction, plastics, beer and construction industries.
Bulgaria's Cabinet endorsed amendments to the tax laws, cutting the corporate tax rate 4.5 percentage points to 15 per cent and eliminating the road tax, which will be replaced by tolls.
Personal income tax rates will fall 2 percentage points, except for the top income bracket, where rates will drop from 29 per cent to 24 per cent.
Serbia's government has started a restructuring procedure for a Bor-based producer of copper, high-grade electrolytic cathode and wire rod, ahead of the future sale of the indebted company.
According to the privatisation agency, 35 per cent of firm's copper smelter will be sold, along with 35 per cent of the wire factory and 35 per cent of the copper mine.
Italy plans to approve a 10m-euro loan for support of Macedonia's small- and medium-sized enterprises (SME) sector, it was announced during a regional conference on SMEs held in Skopje.
The funds will be utilised via the European Business Association.
The European Commission decided to provide a total of 245m euros from structural funds to Croatia over two years -- 105m euros in 2005 and 140m euros in 2006.
The funds will be drawn from three pre-accession instruments:
PHARE, SAPARD and ISPA.
The Albanian electricity company KESH and the European Investment Bank signed an agreement on an additional 14m-euro loan for the construction and rehabilitation of the country's transmission network.
The sides have already agreed on a 30m-euro loan for construction of a thermal power plant in Vlora.
The Federation of BiH government announced it would launch a programme to encourage employment in the agricultural sector.
Under the 1.8m-euro project, employment for 460 families would be provided in the coming two years.
The international rating agency Standard & Poor's assigned a long-term foreign currency rating of BB to Bulgaria's National Electricity Company.
The agency said the rating was due to a weak economic environment, as well as the company's high financing needs and short record of operation.
