28/01/2011
(Zaman, Aysor.am, The Moscow Times - 28/01/11; AFP, Sofia News Agency, Focus News Agency, Dnes.bg, Tanjug, European Court of Human Rights - 27/01/11; Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe - 26/01/11)
Nine countries are failing to implement the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) in a timely fashion, Jean-Paul Costa, the president of the Strasbourg-based court, said on Thursday (January 27th).
"The execution of the judgments is fundamental," AFP quoted the French judge as telling reporters, hours after the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) passed a special resolution on the issue.
The document, adopted on Wednesday, said Bulgaria, Greece, Italy, Moldova, Poland, Romania, Russia, Turkey and Ukraine have shown "extremely worrying delays" in the implementation of ECHR decisions due to "major structural problems".
Citing what it said were repeated violations of the European Convention on Human Rights in the nine countries, the resolution said the need for a solution is urgent.
Most violations were related to excessive length of judicial proceedings or detention, deaths or ill treatment by law enforcement officials, as well as chronic non-enforcement of domestic judicial decisions, parliamentarians said.
They also urged each of the nine countries to "give priority" to tackling the specific problems they face. 
Excessive length of court proceedings was cited as a common weakness for Bulgaria, Greece, Italy, Poland, Romania and Russia.
Wednesday's resolution said problems concerning the implementation of ECHR rulings were identified in other CoE members as well.
"In a number of other states, inter alia, Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia and Serbia, the issue of non-compliance and solutions to outstanding problems should also be made a priority," it noted.
More than a third of all 1,499 rulings delivered by the ECHR in 2010 concerned cases lodged against four members of the 47-nation Council of Europe (CoE) -- Turkey (278), Russia (217), Romania (143) and Ukraine (109), according to the court's annual report.
The paper released on Thursday showed that the same countries also account for more than half of the nearly 139,650 applications that were pending before a judicial formation at the beginning of this year.
The vast majority of all judgments issued in 2010 concerned cases of at least one violation of the Convention by the respondent state.
