27/01/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 27/01/11
Marija Terzic knows what it's like to work without getting paid.
The 48-year-old former textile factory employee endured months of late paychecks -- and sometimes no paychecks -- after the company ran into financial problems and eventually went bankrupt.
"We should have left when we did not get paid the first time, which was over a year ago, but we kept thinking ' these are rough times, we should give some credit to the management'.
It made no difference," she said.
"After getting late payments for two to three months, I decided it was time to leave.
It was really humiliating."
Terzic, who now works for a small privately-owned farm, said she will not be seeking employment at a larger corporation again.
"It's just ruthless," she said.
Similar stories abound in Croatia, where the faltering economy has delivered a hard blow to many businesses.
According to data from the state employment agency, around 70,000 Croatians are currently working for no paycheck.
Some are just happy to have a job, even if the salary comes later rather than sooner.
With unemployment at its highest level since April 2005, hundreds of thousands of Croatians are scrambling to find ways to pay the bills and keep food on the table.
December data records the number of jobless at 319,845, out of a total population of 4.4 million.
Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor's administration insists that it is tackling the problem and that the steps it has taken will bear fruit.
Officials say that, despite the high figures, unemployment has already started to level off, with the rate around 20% lower than in 2009.
"The government will do its best and our measures will lead to creation of new jobs," Economy Minister Djuro Popijac told local media.
President Ivo Josipovic is less sanguine.
High unemployment remains a "worrying problem that indicates the government's recovery programme did not yield results," he told a recent gathering of leading business sector representatives.
"It is serious and dangerous, not only for the Croatian economy but for the entire society, and we need to find a solution."
Waiting in line at the Zagreb's unemployment agency, Zdravko Juric, 53, is looking to catch a glimpse of a possible job opening.
He says he feels somewhat ashamed as he searches through ads on the agency's window.
Juric worked in construction before the financial crisis hit.
As a family breadwinner, he was supporting his wife and a high school-age daughter and son.
He has some savings, he says, but needs to find a job soon.
"It's not like I get to choose, you know.
Whatever I can get is fine.
I feel healthy and energetic, but for the employers I'm in a risky group.
Who'll give a job to a 50-something worker?" he says.
His wife found a second job and the kids will not ask for pocket money until the family is back on its feet.
"Well, I can always collect plastic bottles and recycle them for some small money," says Juric bleakly.
Suzana, 35, agrees that people in older age brackets struggle to find opportunities.
"It's much more difficult for those over 50 years of age.
I don't think there is much hope for them," she told SETimes.
Still, she said, integration with the rest of Europe could provide a boost to employment overall.
"I hope it will get better when we enter the EU," she said.
"Maybe then it will be easier to find a job, if not in Croatia than elsewhere, in other member countries."
