26/05/2011
(Various sources)
Former Bosnian Serb commander Ratko Mladic is one of the most wanted indictees of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
He was originally indicted together with former Bosnian Serb President Radovan Karadzic, in July 1995. 
A second indictment was confirmed in November that year.
An amended indictment, covering the period between May 12th 1992 and December 22th 1996, was issued in November 2002.
Mladic "committed or otherwise aided and abetted the planning, preparation or execution of the intentional partial destruction of the Bosnian Muslim national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such, from Kljuc, Kotor Varos, Prijedor, Sanski Most, and Srebrenica", according to prosecutors.
The indictment charges Mladic, on the basis of his individual and superior criminal responsibility, with a total of 13 counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war, for the acts of persecution, murder, deportation and inhumane acts, terrorising and hostage-taking, in which he allegedly participated.
In addition, he faces two counts of genocide for -- including, but not only -- the massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim boys and men during the Serb onslaught against the UN safe haven of Srebrenica in July 1995.
The indictment also alleges that from May 1992, forces under Mladic's command used shelling and sniping to target civilian areas of the city of Sarajevo and its civilian population and institutions, killing and wounding civilians, and thereby also inflicting terror upon the civilian population.
About 10,500 people, including 1,800 children, were reportedly killed and 50,000 people were injured during the 44-month siege of the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) capital.
The former VRS chief, according to the indictment, acting individually or in concert with others, participated in a joint criminal enterprise within BiH seeking the "elimination or permanent removal, by force or other means, of Bosnian Muslim, Bosnian Croat, or other non-Serb inhabitants from large areas of the country".
Charging Mladic with superior criminal responsibility for acts and omissions between May 12th 1992 and December 22nd 1996, ICTY prosecutors said that being the most senior VRS officer at the time, he was subordinate only to the Bosnian Serb president.
"As such he had overall authority and responsibility for the functioning of the VRS. 
He was responsible for planning and directing all operations of the VRS, and for monitoring the activities of all subordinate officers and units to ensure that his orders were implemented."
Following the end of the war in BiH, Mladic returned to Belgrade, where he lived freely with the protection of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and was often seen at football matches, in restaurants and enjoying himself on the Montenegrin coast.
After a reformist government, led by late Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic, came to power following the overthrow of the Milosevic regime in October 2000, Mladic reportedly left Belgrade to avoid possible arrest and handover to The Hague-based tribunal. 
He continued to receive his military pension for years afterwards, however.
Mladic was born on March 12th 1943 in Kalinovik, BiH.
Following training at the military academy of the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) in Belgrade, he joined the JNA as a regular officer. 
He was posted to Knin, Croatia, in 1991 as commander of the JNA's 9th Corps. 
In April 1992, he took command of the JNA's Second Military District, based in Sarajevo. 
The following month he was appointed commander of the main staff of the VRS, a position he held until December 1996.
