26/11/2010
By Zlatko Kovach for Southeast European Times in Washington -- 26/11/10
Countries in the region can find a common language through culture even when their governments disagree, says Macedonian Culture Minister Elizabeta Kanceska-Milevska.
In an interview with SETimes, she discusses the importance of culture to Macedonia's EU integration process, steps taken by the current government to promote culture, and challenges which her ministry faces -- including the problem of artefact theft.
SETimes: What is the role of culture?
Elizabeta Kanceska-Milevska: In Macedonia, our culture is our identity, something that differentiates us but also makes us closer to, and connects us with the rest of Europe and the world.
For the first time since Macedonia's independence, culture is at the centre of -- and a function of -- the development of the state. 
This government treats culture as on a par with, say, foreign policy, which was not the case in the past. 
It allocates a base amount of over 65m euros annually -- a significant investment for Macedonia.
This increased care is evidenced by our building a new archeological museum in Skopje in which the major portion of the Macedonian heritage will be presented; a new educational museum complex to be completed in May 2011; and numerous investments, such as building a new concert hall for the Macedonian Philharmonic Orchestra.
In the past three years, we fully examined and researched the main 20 out of 5,000 archeological sites, including Stobi, Heraklea, Isar-Marvinci and Vardarski Rid.
I must add that culture also plays an important part in Macedonia's EU integration process. 
The latest annual EC report two weeks ago particularly praises Macedonia for its progress in the area of culture.
SETimes: Can you elaborate on the importance of culture in linking Macedonia with other Balkan countries and the EU?
Kanceska-Milevska: I am particularly satisfied that co-operation is very fruitful with the states in the region. 
We signed agreements in the area of culture with all regional countries through which we further intra-institutional and cross-country ties. 
While governments at times do not find a common language, cultural institutions continually do.
For example, renowned Macedonian movie and theatre directors Milco Mancevski and Slobodan Unkovski work with -- or in -- Greece. 
With Croatia, we have an intensive exchange of projects, including exhibits of 140 artists in the Museum of Contemporary Art.
Macedonia has also excellent relations with EU member states like Slovenia and Austria, with which we also concluded an agreement for cultural co-operation. 
We have signed an agreement with Estonia -- just like we had with Turkey in 2010 -- as Tallinn will be the European Capital of Culture in 2011. 
The exchanges are numerous and win-win for all concerned.
SETimes: Does Macedonia have a cultural policy?
Kanceska-Milevska: Macedonia has a clearly defined cultural policy and a strategy that can be summed up as: preservation, presentation and promotion. 
We implement activities in all segments of culture -- museums, galleries, theatres, libraries, the musical-scenic arts, film arts, international promotions and exchange, as well as local cultural development.
Culture can be and is also viewed as a useful industry from a political and an economic standpoint. 
There is a significant economic aspect to it depending on whether and how culture is directed. 
We are interested in developing an additional dimension as well -- cultural tourism.
SETimes: What challenges do you face in your work?
Kanceska-Milevska: A particular challenge is the significant theft of Macedonian cultural heritage. 
We passed laws and organised seminars to highlight and prevent these criminal activities, and continue to work closely with the interior ministry, but it is hard to bring some of the stolen artefacts back.
One way we tried to put a stop to the theft is through complete and systematic examination of the most important archeological sites. 
We did this for the ancient town of Stobi, for example, turning it into a national institution, and now there is a service that protects it.
Culture in itself is a challenge -- a live, moving matter. 
Every cultural event for us is a challenge as well as a measure of human success, even success for the country.
SETimes: Can you share a particular achievement that has made a qualitative difference?
Kanceska-Milevska: Changing the status of artists. 
We succeeded in better valuing the labour and the intricate complexities involved in their efforts to create art. 
Previously, artists were compensated per project. 
We have artists of the highest expression and those people in Macedonia are now full time employees. 
This approach can perhaps be examined by others in safeguarding regional artistic talent.
