28/04/2011
By Erl Murati for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 28/04/11
Though promising to respect gender equality and political representation, political parties in Albania have neglected calls to include women candidates in the May 8th local elections.
In all, only 17 out of the 768 candidates, or 3%, are women.
This comes three months after political leaders promised to respect the election law, which stipulates that 30% of candidates must be women.
"Unfortunately, we have a deep contrast between political parties' promises to raise women's presence in political decision making and the official lists of candidates," President Bamir Topi said at a meeting organised by the OSCE earlier this month on enhancing women's role in governance.
"This means that political parties still haven't transformed gender equality and representation into cultural behaviour.
Still, women are considered as unreliable candidates in such an aggressive political environment where, unfortunately, people don't always vote for the candidates' programmes and values," Topi said.
OSCE Ambassador in Tirana Eugen Wollfarth says "Improving the existing gap of gender equality in all governance structures remains a challenge.
All national and international partners have a considerable responsibility to help."
Women's rights activists have differing opinions regarding who is responsible for the poor representation of women in politics.
"Certainly, it is the political leaders' fault.
They are mainly responsible.
They do not leave equal spaces for both genders," Blerina Metaj, a member of a coalition for the encouragement of women, youth and minority participation in politics, told SETimes.
UN Women National Programme co-ordinator Fiorela Shalsi blames parties and the electoral code, which doesn't have the teeth to ensure quotas are applied.
"Global statistics show that one of the main difficulties faced by women and young girls to enter politics is the lack of support from political parties themselves.
So women in Albania do not run in elections because they don't feel supported by male politicians.
They fight against discriminating party mechanisms which deny women access to important and correct information," she said.
Equal representation in decision making is a long battle and intervention must be multidimensional, Shalsi says.
But not all activists agree.
Elsa Ballauri, head of the Albanian Human Rights Group, says women are their own enemy in this regard.
"The worst harm comes from themselves.
Women are the ones who do not understand how important they are and do not know how to show their feminine personality, especially in politics.
They change their personality and become masculine as they start to collaborate with men," Ballauri told SETimes.
"Women in the family are the ones who carry on the patriarchal culture, where men should be God.
And she does this, teaching to her daughter and son, respectively, how to obey and serve and the other how to benefit and lead."
