28/04/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 28/04/11
Since the rise of the governing Justice and Development Party (AKP) in 2002, opposition parties have not figured prominently in the development of Turkey's ambitious foreign policy agenda.
However, the political shake-up of the Republican People's Party (CHP) over the past year may change this trend.
In late March, five heavyweights from the main opposition CHP -- deputy chairmen Osman Koruturk, Gulsun Bilgehan, Umut Oran, Faik Oztrak and adviser to chairman Faruk Logoglu -- visited Washington to introduce the party's new foreign policy platform ahead of the June 12th election.
"We have been welcomed with extraordinary interest at the top level," Logoglu, former ambassador to the US, told SETimes after a series of talks with congressional and State Department officials.
"Our foreign policy platform that we introduced to the American partners is based on principles of faithfulness and transparency," he said, adding the AKP's diplomacy lacks realism and effectiveness.
Koruturk, son of Turkey's sixth President Fathi Koruturk, believes that while the opposition has been out of power, the AKP radically changed Turkey's image on the international stage.
"Today we have been asked unexpected questions about constraints on [everything] from human rights freedoms to Turkey's regional position in its neighbourhood," he told SETimes, adding that instead of maintaining a consistent foreign policy, the AKP uses diplomacy for its domestic political interests.
"For instance," he argues, "many in the West believe Turkey is not displaying the exact leadership role expected from it concerning the social movements in the Middle East, while the AKP tries to take advantage of this and get the votes of the [religious] believers in the country."
Logoglu is mainly concerned about Turkey's relationship with the West.
"We have seen that the most striking opinion about Turkey was the perception that the country's democracy was going backwards," he says.
AKP deputy leader Salih Kapusuz defends his party's policies, telling SETimes, "These are all the opinions of the opposition;
we have our own truth which is accepted by the whole world as Turkey's official position.
We keep no secrets from our people or international partners -- we do tell the truth in Washington, in the East, or in the heart of Turkey."
Concerning US-Turkish relations, Kapusuz says, "Our countries are partners, but is doesn't mean that we should support Washington's mistakes."
Yusuf Tekin, a political scientist at the Ankara based think-tank the Institute of Strategic Thinking, says as in every election campaign, all parties focus on foreign policy in their platforms, but this is the first time that -- due to the Middle East uprisings -- people are more interested in Eastern politics than Western.
"The AKP understands that very well," he told SETimes.
"Therefore it doesn't try to get support from the West at the moment."
"But with the CHP the situation is different," Tekin adds, arguing that as a party underpinned by secular policy, the main opposition seeks support from the West.
"Turkish people witness that the country's international point of view is gaining more authority, and it plays an important role in international relations," Kapusuz insists.
"The results of AKP politics will be shown at the June 12th elections."
The AKP is expected to win again, while the CHP will remain the main opposition party.
