30/06/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 30/06/11
The European Parliament (EP) voted last week to lift the immunity of Romanian Social-Democrat lawmaker Adrian Severin and refer him to a corruption inquiry in Romania for his involvement in what is known as the "money for lobby" scandal.
The vote came after a recommendation by EP rapporteur Francesco Enrico Speroni, whose report was approved by the Juridical Affairs Committee on June 23rd.
"The European Parliament decides to lift Adrian Severin's immunity […] and entrust the President to send this decision, along with the report of the competent committee, to specialised authorities in Romania," reads the conclusion.
Romania's National Anti-Corruption Department (DNA) launched an investigation in March suspecting Severin of accepting 100,000 euros from a consultancy company in exchange for intervening in a provision of a European directive for the reimbursement of depositors in a bankruptcy.
Severin asked for a first tranche of 12,000 euros for which he issued an invoice. 
However, two journalists from The Sunday Times were in fact posing as representatives of the consultancy company. 
Two other euro-lawmakers, Zoran Thaler and Ernst Strasser, fell into the same trap and soon resigned from the EP.
Severin refused to resign from his elected position despite pressure. 
He claimed all along he was the victim of a set up.
"I salute the EP's decision to lift my immunity because, after months of hesitations and baseless accusations, demagogy and lies, it opens the way to an investigation into a frame-up whose victim, instead of being protected, has been publicly executed, without the presumption of innocence in the right to defend oneself," Severin said in a press release.
"Romanian authorities will hardly shed light on an event entirely on a European level […] that produced no prejudice nor did it have any impact in Romania," he also underlined. 
Faced with the risk of expulsion from party ranks, Severin resigned in late March from the Social-Democrat Party.
But the EP acted in an exemplary manner, analysts say. 
"By lifting Severin's immunity, the EP clearly showed that, unlike Romania, the culture of corruption hasn't yet found a comfortable place among its members," Iulia Enache, deputy head of the foreign affairs department with Mediafax, told SETimes.
"By the swift and transparent actions that culminated with him being stripped of his immunity, the EP is also trying to gain some extra credibility among EU citizens after the scandals involving high absenteeism and the financial expenses of some members," she added.
Alina Mungiu-Pippidi, president of the Romanian Academic Society, a leading think-tank, says that Severin's referral to Romanian authorities is absolutely normal and refutes his argument in this regard.
"The question that arises in this case is which of the two parts has a better anti-corruption legislation, the EP or Romania? 
The EP is one of the places where corruption flourishes because it is an institution that is positioned among several jurisdictions and where the rules are not that clear," she told SETimes.
"Romania, in its turn, due to its corruption problems, has developed an anti-corruption mechanism over the last years with clearer laws and rules. 
On the other hand, Adrian Severin represents Romania in the EP and should be investigated by the country's authorities," she added.
"Anyway, Severin's political career is over," Mungiu-Pippidi concluded.
