25/11/2010
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau – 25/11/10
Moldova's parliamentary elections on Sunday (November 28th) will be the third such vote in the last 20 months.
The country has been in a political crisis since April 2009, with parliament unable to elect a president.
The most recent election, in July, gave pro-European lawmakers the majority but not enough seats to put their presidential candidate into office.
A national referendum, held in September, on giving citizens the right to choose the president by direct vote failed due to low turnout.
Moldovans are tired and confused.
According to the Institute of Public Policy, more than 20% of the population has already decided not to participate in Sunday's poll.
"I'm not going to listen to them anymore," said Igor Cojocaru, 42, an engineer living in Hancesti.
"There are 20 years of waiting for a better life in Moldova.
The parties are always coming with promises, and leaving us in poverty every time."
In a bid to overcome apathy and increase awareness, the Central Elections Committee (CEC) organised a special event -- the Fair of Political Parties -- in downtown Chisinau on November 21st, giving voters the chance to talk to the candidates in person.
"It is good that they come out with more information," said Chisinau resident Valentina Bolocan, 52, a mother of three.
"But there are almost 40 candidates on the list, and most of them new.
I would have to drop my job and my kids and spend a month to research and understand who is doing what."
Moldovan politics is split into two major camps:
pro-European and Moscow-oriented.
The media is divided along similar lines, with some outlets backing the Communist Party and others promoting candidates of the Alliance for European Integration of Moldova.
"Near the end of the campaign the dimension of political partisanship in media becomes very visible," says the Centre for Independent Journalism's interim director and head of campaign monitoring, Nadine Gogu.
"It is very complicated for the audience, because they have to watch multiple TV channels in order to understand the news."
Moldovan NGOs are also actively involved in the pre-election process.
"We name the candidates that held public office before and were accused of corruption, or did not properly declare goods acquired personally while having access to public funds," says Petru Macovei of the Civic Initiative for a Clean Parliament.
"The list is quite long and we would like to have a clear position from all political parties regarding such politicians.
In any other country there would be a huge media scandal, but not in Moldova," he said.
The international community is also observing the political process, with both the EU and the United States voicing support for democratic movements in the country.
Last week, the US Senate passed a resolution recognising Moldova's democratic accomplishments and expressing support for free and transparent elections.
"Moldova has overcome a daunting set of economic and political challenges to hold these elections;
their success is important, not only for Moldova, but for the region as a whole," Senator John Kerry (D-MA) said.
"On November 28th, I hope the people of Moldova have an election of the highest democratic standard that will produce a government capable of continuing necessary reforms."
Some politicians, though, have already complained about violations, with some even alleging kidnappings and a staged car accident.
"Society is very tense, and the government should be absolutely prepared for any challenge," said Igor Botan, head of the Association for Participating Democracy.
A total of 20 parties and 19 independent candidates are vying for 101 seats in parliament.
According to the latest polls, five to six political parties have a chance to take these seats.
