30/03/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 30/03/11
Kosovo's newly elected president, Behgjet Pacolli, is going through an ordeal similar to that of his predecessor, Fatmir Sejdiu.
The latter was forced to resign after the Constitutional Court ruled against him.
Now Pacolli also faces an unfavourable ruling.
On Monday (March 28th), the court ruled unanimously that his election was unconstitutional.
The issue had been brought before judges by the main opposition Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) with support from another party, the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK).
Article 86 of the constitution was violated during the process of electing Pacolli, the court said.
The president responded on Tuesday evening in an interview with the public broadcaster, RTK.
"As I have declared before, I will respect the decision of the Constitutional Court … the Constitutional Court is sacred and its decision should be respected," he said.
The violations in question have to do with the lack of a necessary two-thirds' quorum in parliament at the time Pacolli was voted into office.
Only 67 out of a total 120 deputies attended the session.
Pacolli secured 62 votes in the third round of voting, held after a pause was called following the two first rounds.
On Tuesday, he met with Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, but local media reports said no agreement was reached on how to proceed.
The court did not specify how the problem should be addressed and there is no time limit for the election of a new president.
His AKR party, which is in a coalition with Thaci's PDK, has not commented on the case.
But Klan Kosova, a local media outlet, reported on Tuesday that a new president should be elected by Friday or Monday because the state budget -- due to be discussed at Friday's parliamentary session -- must be signed into law by the head of state.
"I don't believe the decision of the Constitutional Court can destabilise the governing coalition," Koha Ditore quoted Agriculture Minister Blerand Stavileci, a PDK member, as saying.
"However, we are waiting for the new consequential developments and a decision by parliament."
"I don't know the position of the president:
will he resign or leave it with parliament to deal with this issue," said Xhavit Haliti, another PDK member.
In comments to Kosovo media, US Deputy Ambassador Michael Murphy urged all sides to respect the Constitutional Court's decision.
Meanwhile, EU commissioners Catherine Ashton and Stefan Fuele said in a joint statement that the EU respects the decision of Kosovo's highest court and expects all sides to work for a constructive solution.
