25/05/2011
By Ozgur Ogret for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 25/05/11
The nine year rule of the Justice and Development Party (AKP) and the ongoing Ergenekon and Balyoz (Sledgehammer) trials have divided the country into two camps -- one arguing Turkey is undergoing a democratic transformation and the other maintaining the country is sliding towards dictatorship.
Ergenekon and Sledgehammer are alleged plots by the so-called "deep state" to overthrow the AKP by inciting violence that would provoke a military coup.
Hundreds of suspects, including journalists, are being tried for alleged ties to one of the plots.
The most common charges against Turkish journalists are "exposing secret documents", "attempting to influence a fair trial" and "making propaganda of a terrorist organisation".
The first two generally concern reporting on indictments and hearings of cases like Ergenekon and Sledgehammer.
Much of the information in question is already public knowledge.
The third charge is a vague legal concept that has been selectively used against journalists reporting on the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).
Correspondent Ismail Saymaz of the daily Radikal has ten cases filed against him.
He faces potential prison terms of up to 80 years in total.
"There is a power struggle in Turkey.
Journalists on opposing fronts do not recognise each other as colleagues," he tells SETimes.
According to Saymaz, "the sovereign side" claims to be fighting a battle for democracy against the shadowy organisations that have their extensions in the press.
The opposing front, himself included, believes the old order stands, but it has just changed hands and "the journalists who oppose it are made targets".
Correspondent Hanim Busra Erdal of the pro-AKP daily Zaman has had 75 cases filed against her since 2008, all for reporting on Ergenekon and Sledgehammer.
She believes the coup attempt trials "are important steps in the name of democracy".
Even though she would like to see professional solidarity among journalists, Erdal says this is hard to achieve because "each side creates its own hero and perceives the process from that side."
Yildiray Ogur, editorial co-ordinator for the liberal and antimilitaristic daily Taraf, explained to SETimes that "Turkish newspapers are not involved with journalism only" and that is why there is no unified voice among the press.
Ogur maintains that journalists have supported military coups, been directly involved in the elevation of political leaders, or acted as spokespersons of either the state or the PKK on the Kurdish issue.
Some, he says, also cultivated ties with the police, military and intelligence organisations that go beyond journalistic purposes.
According to Ogur, this makes them "not observers, but political actors".
"I do not believe polarisation is a bad thing," Eren Keskin, chief editor for the pro-Kurdish daily Ozgur Gundem, told SETimes, arguing it is natural to take sides.
"The oppressed social circles shy away from defending some Ergenekon suspect journalists since they have "acted in the name of the system [of the past]", she added.
Orhan Erinc, head of the Turkish Journalists Association, says his organisation and others do not discriminate when supporting journalists on trial.
"We are following the trial of everyone who fits the term of journalist," he said.
However, he admits they may not be able to send representatives to each of the 5,000 ongoing trials.
