30/03/2011
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 30/03/11
After Facebook users in neighbouring Croatia launched a wave of anti-government demonstrations, similar ones followed in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
A 20-year old political science student from Banja Luka, Stefan Filipovic, organised the first such action, using the popular social media tool to organise a protest against the socioeconomic situation in Republika Srpska (RS).
The rally, which took place on March 19th, drew 500 people and was supported by activists from the civic associations Smart Zero and P'oktreta.
"My public engagement came after [RS President Milorad Dodik's] statement that he will discontinue all benefits of demobilised soldiers if they come out to protest and stand up for their rights," Filipovic told SETimes.
"I think it immoral that a president can say something like that to the citizens.
I understood the general message to be that anyone who stands up in protest will be denied benefits."
Demonstrators requested a 30% reduction in the wages of RS parliament deputies and said the resulting savings should be applied towards aid for disadvantaged citizens.
They also demanded tax cuts and the removal of convicted criminals from public office.
"If [the government is] working for the interest of people, they will listen to our demands, because we are here to create a better society, not destroy it," said Filipovic, noting that RS currently suffers from an economic crunch that has left hundreds of thousands without jobs.
"The young are leaving the country and we must act immediately."
Reaction from elected officials has been less than enthusiastic.
Some question whether the Facebook protestors speak for anyone but themselves.
"The question is why certain civic initiatives launch protests over an allegedly bad economic and social situation when the protest has no NGO representatives who stand for certain groups, such as trade unions, student organisations and others," said RS Parliament President Igor Radojicic.
But Filipovic vows that his "Voice of the People" initiative has only just begun."We want the voice of ordinary people who have something to say to the government to be heard, so as to create circumstances for a normal life," he said.
