30/03/2011
(Zaman, World Bulletin, RFE/RL, BBC - 30/03/11;
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, UN News Centre, NATO, Hurriyet, World Bulletin, Euronews, Euobserver, EurActiv, Guardian, Telegraph, Sofia News Agency, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg - 29/03/11)
Representatives of more than 40 governments and key international organisations have agreed to establish the Libya Contact Group, British Foreign Secretary William Hague said after a conference held in London on Tuesday (March 29th).
"This contact group will meet to provide leadership and overall political direction to the international effort, in close co-crdination with the UN, the African Union, the Arab League, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and the EU, to support Libya, to provide a forum for co-ordinating the international response on Libya," he explained.
The body will also serve as a focal point for contact with the Transitional National Council (TNC) in Benghazi and other Libyan groups opposed to Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's regime.
"Qatar has agreed to convene the first meeting of the [Contact] Group as soon as possible.
Thereafter, the chairmanship will rotate between the countries of the region and beyond it," Hague said.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his OIC and NATO counterparts, Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu and Anders Fogh Rasmussen, were among the participants in the forum.
Other senior international officials included EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton, UN Special Envoy for Libya Abdelilah Mohamed Al Khatib and Arab League Ambassador Hesham Youssef.
They were joined by the foreign ministers of 37 countries, including NATO's six Balkan members -- Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Romania and Turkey.
The London meeting was held two days after NATO allies decided to take full control of the military operation in Libya and amid mounting pressure on Gaddafi to quit after 41 years in power and to halt the attacks on civilians.
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said his country will be part of the Contact Group and that it has already established contacts with the Libyan opposition.
Istanbul-based daily Zaman quoted him as hinting on his way to London that Gaddafi might be able to avoid a harsher outcome for himself, if he puts an end to the bloodbath immediately.
"Of course, if there is a ceasefire it will be a test for him," Davutoglu said.
"If he respects a ceasefire and if he stops attacking civilians, then other things should follow afterwards."
Meanwhile, Davutoglu's British counterpart insisted on Tuesday that Gaddafi must face the International Criminal Court, but would not rule out the possibility of the Libyan leader going into exile as a solution to the ongoing crisis.
"That is up to him.
There is no doubt that if Colonel Gaddafi left power -- wherever he went -- there would be a major change in the situation, and that is what most of the world and probably most of the Libyan people want to see," Hague said in an interview with the BBC.
"That is up to him to decide.
That's not up to us to decide."
Participants at the London conference, who also discussed ways for stepping up the humanitarian assistance to war-torn parts of Libya, also stressed their "strong commitment" to the country's "sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity".
"The Libyan people must be free to determine their own future," the statement from the meeting said.
