01/09/2004
(Various sources -- 25/08/04 -- 01/09/04)
A review of sports, entertainment and other cultural news from the Balkans since 25 August:
Bulgarian director Zornitsa Sophia's film "Mila From Mars" was awarded the grand prize at this year's Sarajevo Film Festival in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The eight-day festival, which featured 180 films from over 40 countries, officially closed on 28 August.
Macedonia's Milan Tocinovski and Croatia's Marija Skarcic won the awards for best actor and best actress, while the special jury award went to Croatian director Anton Ostojic's movie "A Wonderful Night in Split".
The 9th Balkan Youth Festival will take place in Gabrovo, Bulgaria from 2 September to 7 September.
"Balkan Youth Today -- Europe's Future Tomorrow" is the slogan for the event, which is expected to draw over 500 participants from 12 countries.
The exhibition "Great Travelers in Athens:
15th-19th Centuries" opened at the Museum of the City of Athens last week, presenting depictions of the Greek capital by Western painters.
Another exhibition, "Views of Athens by Contemporary Greek Painters", is being held concurrently at the museum.
Twenty Macedonian publishing companies will participate in the International Book Fair in Moscow, presenting over 500 titles.
The Macedonian embassy and the Russian Ministry of Culture plan to organise meetings between publishers from the two countries as part of the festival, which takes place from 1 September to 6 September.
This year's Struga Poetic Evenings (SPE) in Macedonia saw the publication of 11 collections of poetry by Macedonian and foreign authors.
For the first time, SPE and UNESCO collaborated on a joint initiative to publish the debut collections of new Macedonian poets.
The prominent Croatian painter Ivan Lackovic Croata, a representative of Croatian naive art, died on 29 August at the age of 72.
Elements of his work "Four Seasons" can be seen at the Croatian National Theatre in Zagreb.
The 37th International Puppet Theatre Festival opened on 27 August in Zagreb.
The event, which lasts until 3 September, features theatre group performances from Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Italy, Russia, Serbia-Montenegro, Slovenia and the United States.
