29/06/2011
(Nova TV, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool - 29/06/11; Sofia News Agency, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, AFP, DPA, Reuters, Middle East Online, Xinhua, Official Web Site of the Bulgarian Foreign Ministry - 28/06/11)
Bulgaria and Croatia joined at least 19 other world nations on Tuesday (June 28th) in recognising the rebel National Transitional Council (NTC) in Benghazi as the only legitimate representative of the Libyan people.
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Nickolay Mladenov and his Croatian counterpart, Gordan Jandrokovic, announced their countries' decision in a joint statement, stressing that Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi's "era is over" and urging him to step down immediately.
"For more than three months the Libyan people have defended their right to freedom. 
Their legitimate demands have been met with violent attacks by the forces of Muammar Gaddafi," they said. 
"By brutally attacking his own people, Colonel Gaddafi has lost all legitimacy."
The announcement brought the number of countries that have publicly recognised the NTC as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people to 21, according to Reuters.
The two Balkan nations, both NATO members, also stressed their support for ongoing international efforts to protect the civilian population in Libya from the government forces' attacks, as well as to implement a no-fly zone and a naval blockade of the North African country.
They announced their move a day after the International Criminal Court (ICC) issued arrest warrants for Gaddafi, his son Saif al-Islam and Libyan intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi for crimes against humanity.
Explaining the decision at a news conference Tuesday, ICC top prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo urged Gaddafi's aides to arrest the Libyan leader and hand him over to The Hague court so that he can answer the charges pressed against him. 
The prosecutor also suggested the possibility of arrest warrants being issued against other Libyans as well.
Although officials in Tripoli rejected the ICC warrants, Bulgaria and Croatia voiced confidence that those charged with war crimes in Libya will face justice in The Hague.
"Those accused of crimes against humanity will be held to account before judges in a criminal court," Mladenov and Jandrokovic said on Tuesday.
They also noted that their countries' support for the Benghazi-based council "stems from the understanding that the NTC is able to lead the process of building a democratic and inclusive Libya, built on the rule of law and upholding the highest international human rights standards".
The announcement coincided with Mladenov's one-day trip to Benghazi, where he met with NTC Chairman Mustafa Abdel-Jalil and other council members, and representatives of NGOs in Libya's opposition stronghold.
According to Bulgarian media reports, the minister was accompanied by Delyan Dakov, who will serve as Sofia's special representative in Libya's rebel capital and will maintain regular contacts with the NTC.
