29/06/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Time in Pristina — 28/6/2011
With help from Turkey, the city of Lipjan in Kosovo is becoming an important educational centre. 
In 2000, Turkish investors opened the Mehmet Akif College, the first private school built after the armed conflict in Kosovo. 
Covering kindergarten through 12th grade, it provides instruction in Albanian, Turkish, and English, and also has campuses in Prizren and Gjakova.
The Turkish government also plans to open a university in Lipjan, pledging to invest more than 100m euros in its construction. 
The municipality has already earmarked 400 acres for what the mayor says will be the most advanced university in the region.
As projects such as these demonstrate, Turkey and Kosovo have developed a strong relationship in the educational sector. 
Not only is Turkey involved in building up Kosovo's educational infrastructure, but many young people from Kosovo are going to Turkey for their university education.
Privately funded scholarships, as well as those provided by the Turkish government, have made this possible for a growing number of students. 
Cultural affinities between the two countries also provide comfort for students looking for a home away from home.
Compared to their European and US counterparts, Turkish universities are much more affordable, but still offer a quality education. 
According to the Kosovo Embassy in Ankara, approximately 1,000 Kosovo students are currently enrolled in Turkish institutions of higher education.
Dritero Bala, a medical student from Kosovo, considers studying in Turkey a positive investment in his life due to the high quality of education and the friendships he has made.
Many agree that Turkey's welcoming atmosphere, as well as its shared culture and religion with Kosovo, make it an ideal place to study.
"It was easy to adapt to life in Turkey since I was born in Prizren, which has a large Turkish population and a rich history of Ottoman traditions," says Bala. 
"Whenever I tell Turks that I am from Kosovo, they welcome me warmly with the response 'bizim toprak' (our land)."
Fellow medical student Blerim Miftiu, currently at the University of Istanbul, explains that her prior knowledge of Turkey, as well as the proximity between Istanbul and Kosovo, led her to choose to study there.
"Being an Albanian in Turkey is no different than being a Turk from Istanbul," says Miftiu, adding that she "never felt like a stranger in Istanbul".
Like many, however, she worries that the situation back home will make it difficult to find employment despite the high quality of schooling she has received.
"I will specialise in nine months and my plan is to go back to Kosovo. 
However, considering that nothing is changing there, I wonder whether I should stay. 
Hopefully I will be able to find a job in Kosovo which allows me to utilise the skills I acquired in Turkey," Miftiu said.
Turkish Ambassador to Kosovo Songul Ozan says investment in Kosovo's education system remains a pillar of bilateral relations.
Commentator Fatlum Sadiku agrees. 
"There is no doubt that every month Kosovo and Turkey have closer relations. 
Turkey is investing in tangible areas that improve the lives of citizens and prepare them for the future," he said.
