25/01/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 25/01/11
If foreign investors were reluctant to enter Kosovo for fear their investments are not safe, the recent World Bank's Doing Business Report 2010 didn't help dispel that notion.
The report, released in November, ranked 183 countries in terms of their business climate.
Kosovo dropped one place from the year before to 119th.
Experts cite corruption, inadequate rule of law, high taxes and excessive bureaucracy as the main causes.
Serbia's blockade has also sown anxiety among potential investors, who worry they will not be able to trade regionally if based in Kosovo.
"The main problems continue to be in acquiring construction permits, protecting investors, starting a business, enforcing contracts and trading across borders," Balkan Policy Institute Executive Director Seb Bytyci told SETimes.
Bytyci said he considers fighting corruption a main priority, while talks with Belgrade should ease regional trade constraints.
Many believe, however, that Kosovo's economic development is not sustainable because it is based on the resources provided by international organisations and on remittances -- both of which are affected by the global financial crisis.
That is why the World Bank has recommended a shift in Kosovo's economic policies to focus mainly on natural and human resources.
Politicians promised that investments would flow into Kosovo after it declared independence.
But so far, only Telekom Slovenije has shown major interest, pumping funds into the country's second mobile phone carrier, Ipko.
Lack of protection makes Kosovo an undesirable investment destination, the World Bank report concludes.
The message to authorities is clear -- provide security if you want to reverse the situation.
The report is particularly critical of excessive red tape in registering a business.
Currently, businesses must take a fiscal instead of a tax number, which is given after the tax administration inspects the organisation's premises and resources.
The process usually takes more than six weeks and not only discourages investors but motivates officials to seek bribes to expedite the process.
Finance and Economy Minister Ahmet Shala told SETimes that "in general, the government has the same opinion as the World Bank," adding that the Bank's recommendations should serve as a road map for improvement.
Others voice skepticism about the government's political will to resolve the problem, saying the authorities have yet to take concrete action to improve the World Bank report's indicators.
A report from the newly established think thank GAP-Institute concluded that the economic and business environment continues to degrade, rather than improve.
"We raised the concern that the fiscal coffers are not distributed according to the rules of a free market economy, which has damaged businesses greatly, and which is also confirmed by the World Bank report," GAP Institute's Rudina Heroi said.
