29/03/2011
By Zlatko Kovach for Southeast European Times in Baltimore – 29/03/11
The first-ever US-Balkans Business Summit, held in Baltimore from Wednesday (March 23rd) to March 24th, brought together government and business leaders from Albania, BiH, Bulgaria, Montenegro, Macedonia, Kosovo and Slovenia in an effort to forge ties with US businesses.
Regional co-operation was a major theme, with participants resolving to work together to promote opportunities in the Balkans.
"The summit renewed business excitement for the region and offered American companies productive architecture with reliable points of contact and follow up," summit organiser Charles Dillon told SETimes.
While European firms are increasingly involved in the region, their US counterparts have often been held back by negative perceptions and a lack of reliable information -- problems which the Baltimore meeting sought to help overcome.
"Awareness of the many business opportunities and available funding and support mechanisms is surfacing," former US Ambassador to BiH Viktor Jakovich told SETimes.
"What is needed next is for Americans to become completely familiar with them -- and for the businesses to organise, co-ordinate and absorb that assistance."
Zoran Damjanovic of Montenegro Defense Industries said his firm met with potential investors interested in joint production of surveillance systems and software.
He added, however, that the interest of US investors is multilayered, as they also were interested in mountain tourism.
"We expect to further ties and also expect them to visit Montenegro in May to cement business in all three segments," Damjanovic told SETimes.
Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Mimoza Kusari-Lila said her delegation welcomed the opportunity to show potential investors what Europe's newest country has to offer.
"Being in direct contact, we are able to identify their needs and articulate better the competitive advantages we have," she told SETimes.
Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Peshevski, meanwhile, highlighted an Overseas Private Investment Corporation decision to place Macedonia among countries with a $250m financial instrument per project.
"This instrument will guarantee American investors safety in their investments," he said.
According to Peshevski, it is vital for Macedonia -- and the region -- to complete the transportation Corridor 10 (North-South) infrastructure which directly affects trade routes from the far East to Western Europe and beyond.
Currently, trade is conducted through the ports in Hamburg and Rotterdam, but if conducted through regional ports like Thessaloniki and via Corridor 10 the trade route shortens by two weeks.
"Even if a fraction of the trade is shifted through Corridor 10, opportunities for investments open up in light manufacturing and services, which is a very big deal for the regional countries," Peshevski told SETimes.
"Small is beautiful but size matters," he said, voicing the summit's overall emphasis on a Balkan-wide perspective.
Over 400 people from 60 regional and 240 US companies participated in the event.
Serbian businessmen were present, although Belgrade officially boycotted the summit because of Kosovo's participation.
Asked about whether he will organise another summit next year, Dillon said he is inclined to say yes.
"There is no event like this in the United States.
It is very important to keep furthering the dialogue," he said.
