25/01/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 25/01/11
International diplomats gathered at a 19th century Ottoman palace in downtown Istanbul on Friday (January 21st) to discuss Iran's controversial nuclear programme.
Although the two-day talks ended without an agreement, the door has been left open for further negotiations.
Ankara, as a mediator in the talks, didn't get a seat at the table among the negotiating parties – the United States, United Kingdom, Russia, China, France, Germany and Iran.
And some local analysts say Turkey's expectations were low from the very beginning.
Guntay Simsek, 43, a columnist with Istanbul-based Haberturk, says public opinion on Iran is split.
"On one side, there are some businessmen supported by the government, who have economic relations with Iran," he told SETimes.
"But others, basically the opposition, wonder if Turkey has more important problems."
Bilateral relations between the neighbours remain relatively close.
Over the past few years, trade and investment have been on the rise.
But according to Simsek, Iran's problems with the rest of the world have influenced attitudes in Turkey.
"There are people in both countries who see Turkey's involvement [in the negotiations] as a handicap," he says.
Arzu Celalifer Ekinci, an analyst at the International Strategic Research Organisation USAK, believes Ankara's policy on Iran is "great in theory, but very difficult in practice".
"Most people here see Turkey's involvement in Iran negotiations as an easing actor, rather than as a moderator," she told SETimes, adding that Turkey stands to lose the most if things deteriorate.
"If Iran manages to own nuclear weapons, it will not only impact Iran, but also a rivalry will start in the region.
Additionally, some people who believe Turkey in under Iran's political influence see the situation as even worse," she said.
While the West applies sanctions, Ankara seeks to capitalise on its diplomatic links, Ekinci said.
"This policy is supported by the majority of the Turkish people, who wish [for a] peaceful Iran," she added.
Itamar Rabinovich, former Israeli ambassador to the US, believes Turkey is not likely to be an effective mediator because it is presently too close to Tehran.
"Ankara's outlook on and interest in the Iranian nuclear programme is complex," Rabinovich told SETimes.
"At the end of the day Ankara does not want Iran to have a nuclear arsenal, but Ankara has drawn close to the Iranian-Syrian axis in Middle Eastern politics and does not want to see either a military attack or stiff sanctions imposed on Iran," he added.
