24/11/2010
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 24/11/10
Earlier this month, the Office of the High Representative (OHR) said it will stop vetting candidates for political posts in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), including the Council of Ministers.
High Representative Valentin Inzko said it is time for political parties to take more responsibility for the future of their country.
He called on them to recommend candidates whose records are clean.
"Now all parties participating in entities and cantonal government will be responsible for choosing candidates that were not involved in obstructing implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords, or accused of war and other severe crimes," OHR spokesperson Ljiljana Radetic said.
"The High Representative expects authorities at the entity and cantonal level to introduce their own means for checking these candidates, just like there are means to do so on the state level," she said.
Critics, however, say the move is premature.
The Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (SDA) argues that political parties must first show they have all necessary checks in place.
Most members of the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) also oppose the decision.
Positive responses came from the leading party in Republika Srpska (RS), the Union of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD).
"It is an act of liberation from occupation and protectorate", said the party's leader, Milorad Dodik.
Dodik responded immediately by signing a state-level co-operation agreement with the opposition Serbian Democratic Party (SDS).
If SNSD wins four seats on the Council of Ministers, they are willing to share them with SDS.
"We are offering the fastest way to form state institutions in the interest of all citizens, and we think it is necessary for other political factors in BiH to talk, especially SNSD and SDS," said Mladen Bosic, SDS leader.
The SNSD and SDS say their priorities are constitutional reform and NATO.
They will also work on sharing of VAT income, changes in election law, foreign politics and reduction of BiH armed forces.
Closing the OHR and a referendum on NATO membership is also on the agenda.
