25/01/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 25/01/11
Ana Pekmezi, an architecture student at the University of Tirana, says she has been carrying an Orthodox cross ever since she was in secondary school.
"I always considered it part of my outfit, not a symbol of a religious devotion and not as a key element of my identity," she tells SETimes.
But a new draft law proposed by the education ministry may force those younger than her to leave such accessories at home.
The measure, aimed at underscoring secularism in the educational system, would ban carrying or wearing religious symbols, including headscarves, in secondary schools.
More generally, it seeks to curtail any sort of ideological or religious indoctrination in schools, including the organisation of political party or religious activities among the school staff.
Displays of religious symbols would be prohibited except in schools where religious subjects are taught.
Both the Muslim Community in Albania and the Orthodox Church oppose it.
Freedom of religion is at stake, representatives of more than 70 mosques across the country said at a press conference in Tirana earlier this month, charging that the proposed law is discriminatory.
The Orthodox Church issued a separate statement saying that Article 36 – the clause which would bar religious symbols -- violates the constitution, "as well as the international conventions and resolutions, recognised and ratified by the Albanian state".
Rudina Hoxha, a teacher in Durres, disagrees, saying she is completely opposed to religious displays on school premises.
"The constitution forbids it, and secondly, God says 'pray without being noticed', without extensive actions or gestures which would attract the attention of those close to you," she told SETimes.
Political analyst Mentor Kikia says the draft law is on target.
"It is not just about protecting secularity, but I think school is a sacred place of knowledge and not of religion," he told SETimes.
"I am Muslim and my wife is Orthodox.
We exercise our religions within the family normally, but I will never accept having a teacher covered with the headscarf teach my children," he said.
That, he added, would amount to imposing her faith on her pupils.
"It is likewise unacceptable to have a cross or any other religious symbols hanging on the wall," he said.
But Laureta Spahiu, a media specialist covering parliament, cautions that applying the law "could affect religious co-existence".
The relative harmony among the country's faiths is "one of the most important values [for which] Albania has been internationally appreciated", she said.
Wearing headscarves in schools has been debated in neighbouring Kosovo as well.
In June, thousands of people protested in Pristina against an education ministry decision forbidding students from wearing the burqa in school.
They asked the government to reconsider, saying it is not a religious uniform, but a religious obligation, which does not violate the constitution.
So far, their efforts have failed.
Across the border in Macedonia, women can be photographed for official personal documents such as driver licenses wearing Muslim garb.
The interior ministry allows it for religious, medical or cultural reasons.
