24/05/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 24/05/11
Merve Kavakci Islam was elected to parliament in 1999, but was prevented from taking her parliamentary oath because she wears a headscarf. 
Then Kavakci's political party, Virtue [Fazilet Partisi], was shut down for violating the secularist articles of the constitution and her Turkish citizenship was revoked, banning her from politics for five years.
Now, the 43-year-old writer, a lecturer at George Washington University and author of the book "Headscarf Politics in Turkey: A Postcolonial Reading", regrets that "the problem of whether women wearing headscarves can have a seat in the parliament still remains unsolved in Turkey."
"All parties in the country finally have to take up the headscarf issue collectively," Kavakci said at a SETA Foundation conference in Washington last week.
In Ankara, headscarf supporters note that the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) nominated only one headscarf wearing woman among the 78 women candidates for the June 12th elections.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan admits his government has failed to end what he calls an "injustice". 
At an AKP rally in Istanbul last week, he reiterated his pledge to resolve the issue. 
"With Allah's will, the doors of parliament will open for them [headscarved women] and they will continue their struggle there."
But some analysts, such as Sarah Fischer from American University, who has researched the headscarf issue in Turkey for years, says the topic has not been nearly as prominent in this election cycle as in the past.
"In 2007 the issue was at the forefront of the campaign because if the AKP won, [Abdullah] Gul would be president and thus, the president's wife would wear the headscarf," she told SETimes."This election cycle the headscarf has received relatively little coverage."
However, she adds, headscarf wearing women in Turkey still face enormous discrimination when they attempt to live a normal, middle-class life. 
"The headscarf makes it harder for them to get an education, find a job, and [interact] in many social settings."
Jenny White, a prominent scholar on gender in Turkey at Boston University, explains that the political sensitivity of headscarves has to do with their increased visibility and appearance in places that had previously been off-limits to covered women.
"In the past," she says, "urban secular elites had viewed head covering as a lower-class or quaint peasant custom. 
Contrary to the widespread belief in Turkey that the percentage of headscarf wearing women has been on the rise," White told SETimes, "statistically, just over 60% of Turkish women cover, a number that has, in fact, decreased over the past decade."
Neslihan Cevik, post-doctoral fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Culture, University of Virginia, makes another point.
Initially, she says, the veil ban was seen as a practice to save victims from tradition, but with Islamic mobilisation, it became a political symbol, and the ban this time aimed to "save" the nation from "fundamentalists".
"When we look at Turkey today, however, we ask where these innocent victims of tradition and fundamentalists are?" she told SETimes.
She argues Muslim women who style their veil based on cutting edge modern fashion, work out in gyms with their hesofmans (proper Islamic fitness clothes) and open up Muslim women's associations to promote gender equality, certainly cannot be depicted as victims or fundamentalists who will take down the secular state.
Cevik believes, in the face of the upcoming election, even the secular main opposition party CHP is being more sympathetic towards the veil.
"If the CHP can show that it is genuine with its attempt, this will significantly contribute to the normalisation of the veil in Turkey," she adds. 
"However, normalisation also requires the removal of the ban in the long-term."
