29/03/2011
By Justin Vela for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 29/03/11
With NATO taking command of the no-fly zone over Libya, experts say Turkey can claim a partial policy success.
While acknowledging the need for involvement to prevent further bloodshed, Ankara has expressed reservations about the West playing too strong a role.
"When it comes to the no-fly zone issue, we are positive towards enforcement of this by NATO, but it has to be enforced 'only' by NATO," a Turkish official told journalists last week, according to Reuters.
Countries such as France insist a degree of control remain with a so-called international "Contact Group", of which it is a member along with the United States and United Kingdom.
Arab countries such as Qatar, Kuwait, and Jordan are also officially part of the group, but analysts say their influence is limited.
As the Alliance takes the strategic and political reins, Ankara's concerns appear to have been heeded.
At the same time, however, Turkey's call for an end to air strikes has not met with success.
Turkish policy has come under attack from some quarters for its alleged opportunism.
The country has billions of dollars worth of projects in Libya, and critics say it is hedging its bets while seeking to shore up its regional role.
While Turkish objections showed cracks in NATO unity, having an ally able to negotiate with opponents up to the last minute has proven invaluable for the West, with Turkey securing the release of several captured journalists and maintaining contact with Libyan strongman Muammar Gaddafi.
"This is the epitome of Turkey's 'zero problems with neighbours' policy," said Daphne McCurd, a senior research associate at the Project on Middle East Democracy.
"By cultivating relationships with all countries, even rogue states that draw the ire of the West, Turkey hopes to harness its unique position to help mediate conflicts between various countries and ultimately increase its influence on the world stage."
During the Cold War, Turkey served as part of the West's eastern flank against the threat of communism.
Today, Turkey's interests are much more mixed.
The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) follows a foreign policy that must balance the interests of allies that at times come into conflict.
"Libya, therefore, poses a challenge for [Turkish Prime Minister Reccep Tayyip] Erdogan," MK Bhadrakumar, former Indian Ambassador to Turkey and international relations expert, wrote in an op-ed for Asia Times.
"First, the international community's intervention in Libya sets a precedent ...
Ankara began rationalising that it is in Turkey's all-round interests to cut a role for itself in political terms in the international intervention in Libya rather than to stay aloof."
However, with Turkey playing a more assertive role, the debate over whether NATO or the so-called "Contact Group" take the lead in the Libya campaign leaves many wondering how effective NATO will be in the future if allies are coming from vastly different viewpoints.
"NATO is the institutional incarnation of the West.
There's nothing more Western than NATO," said French security analyst Francois Heisbourg, countering the Turkish comparisons of the intervention to the Crusades.
Turkish officials have accused France and other Western countries of seeking oil and other mineral wealth in Libya.
The second largest troop contributor to NATO following the US, Turkey called for NATO to take charge of operations in Libya following UN Security Council resolution 1973.
Initially hesitant to get involved in any military operations, Turkey has agreed to deploy four frigates, one submarine, and one reserve ship to enforce the arms embargo.
