25/01/2011
(Reuters, AP, DPA, AKI, Deutsche Welle, RFE/RL, VOA, Hurriyet, Human Rights Watch - 24/01/11)
A New York-based international watchdog criticised the UN and the EU on Monday (January 24th) for employing quiet diplomacy, instead of pressure, to persuade repressive regimes to respect basic human rights.
"The ritualistic support of 'dialogue' and 'co-operation' with repressive governments is too often an excuse for doing nothing about human rights," Human Rights Watch (HRW) Executive Director Kenneth Roth said upon the release of the group's annual World Report.
"The EU's 'constructive dialogues' are among the most egregious examples of this global trend."
The 649-page paper summarises major human rights issues in more than 90 countries and territories around the globe in 2010.
It found that several Western Balkan nations that are hoping to join the EU one day are still failing to adequately prosecute war crimes related to the conflicts of the 1990s.
In Croatia, the most advanced on the road towards membership in the 27-nation bloc, the number of investigations of war crimes committed against Serbs during the 1991-1995 war there has increased.
"But Serbs remain the majority of defendants in war crimes prosecutions, many in absentia, and concerns over bias persist," HRW said.
It criticised the EU for allowing Serbia to move forward on the accession path despite its failure to hand over former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic to the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague.
The group, however, acknowledged Serbia's progress in prosecuting war crimes cases within domestic courts.
One such example was the trial of nine former members of the Serbian security forces accused of killing more than 40 ethnic Albanian civilians during the 1999 conflict in Kosovo.
War crimes trials continue also in Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) special court in Sarajevo and in the local courts, "but they face numerous impediments, including staffing and funding shortages", HRW said.
It found that despite the EULEX mission's help in developing legal institutions and strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo, "investigations and prosecutions for war crimes and organised crime remain slow and erratic."
According to HRW, the EU should appoint an independent prosecutor to investigate the allegations in a recent Council of Europe report linking some senior members of the former Kosovo Liberation Army to abductions, transfers to Albania, executions and possible organ trafficking.
Other rights problems in the region highlighted by the report include abuses against Roma minorities, lack of progress on support and assistance for refugees and the displaced, harassment of journalists, the rights of people with disabilities, and country-specific issues.
"Everyone can agree that European integration is the goal for the Western Balkans," Benjamin Ward, deputy Europe and Central Asia director at HRW, said in a statement.
"But governments in the region need to understand that a greater commitment to human rights is an essential ingredient of those European aspirations."
The group found that the constitutional amendments approved in a September referendum in Turkey set the stage for further reforms to strengthen human rights in the country.
However, the ruling Justice and Development Party failed to address serious lingering problems, it said.
Those include unjustified prosecutions for alleged speech crimes, the arbitrary use of terrorism laws, unnecessarily prolonged pretrial detention, a clampdown on the legal pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party, and police violence against demonstrators.
"Turkey's foreign policy ambitions would be greatly reinforced by bold domestic reform on rights," Ward said.
"Showing that it is serious about human rights would bolster Turkey's credibility on the international stage, and deliver the change that people in Turkey deserve."
