28/06/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 28/06/11
A monument commemorating Soviet Army victims in World War II was transformed into a colourful depiction of modern-day cartoon characters this month, only to be returned to its original look by outraged activists and government officials a couple of days later.
Graffiti by an unknown artist on the night of June 18th turned the stone Soviet soldiers into Super Man, Santa Claus and the Joker, among others. 
Along the base, the artist wrote "Moving with the Times".
The transformation spurred huge interest in Bulgaria and abroad, as well as sparked a public debate about whether this type of modern art should be tolerated. 
Crowds of tourists flocked to take photos.
Facebook groups supporting the new look drew thousands of supporters and internet forums were filled with opinions, most of them defending the prank and proclaiming the artist a genius for managing to attract attention and spur discussion on a series of important topics.
Apart from noting its potential to become a tourist attraction, defenders of the "updated" monument argued it also poses serious questions about the values of Bulgaria's past, present and future. 
"These Hollywood characters are exactly what our kids are enslaved by," wrote Albena Hristova on the wall of one Facebook group uniting supporters of the monument make-over.
The prank also revived a long-time discussion about whether such reminders of the Communist past should be removed altogether. 
Ardent opponents of the pre-1989 regime saw the act as a good occasion to bring down that statue and similar monuments across the country. 
Others, however, argued this period is part of history and should be remembered.
Authorities reacted by saying they are launching a criminal investigation. 
Culture Minister Vecdi Rashidov, who is also a sculptor, slammed the incident as "vandalism" and a "crime".
"This is not tolerated anywhere in the world," he said, adding that "the debate whether this monument is necessary or not is a separate issue." If found and convicted of hooliganism, the "artist" could face jail time and a fine. 
'
Moscow weighed in as well. 
In a statement, the Russian Foreign Ministry expressed regret over what was done to the monument, adding these actions "do not reflect the attitude of the broad layers of the Bulgarian people, with whom we share historic relations of friendship, co-operation and mutual assistance".
Any debate about whether the monument should be left as it was or restored to its previous look stopped when activists from the Bulgaria-Russia Forum association brought machines and a workforce to clean off the paint.
They said their initiative was green-lighted by the municipality. 
Svetlana Sharenkova, chairperson of the forum, told SETimes that the act of "dirtying" the monument was a "provocation".
"Some call it modern art, but my personal opinion is that this was a desecration of an era and a people who gave so many victims for the freedom of all Europe. 
World War II was the most frightful war in the history of mankind. 
The monument had to be cleaned," she said.
But many disagreed, arguing Sofia lost a piece of art that could have benefited its tourism industry. 
They suggested repainting the monument, this time using permanent paint.
Social groups on the internet are uniting in defence of the unknown artist. 
Jay Boteff, the founder of one such group, told SETimes that arresting artists in the 21st century is a mistake.
"If Leonardo had been arrested in the 15th century for his scientific discoveries or Michelangelo for breaking the canons, what would have happened?" he asked.
