25/04/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 25/04/11
The Turkish humanitarian relief group IHH, responsible for organising last year's controversial Gaza flotilla, plans a similar action next month.
Government officials confirmed on April 14th that Israel has urged Ankara to stop the upcoming mission.
They insist, however, that they do not have the right to prevent the ships from sailing.
Eight Turks and one US citizen of Turkish origin died during the previous relief mission after a raid by Israeli commandos.
The IHH flotilla had breached a blockade of Gaza imposed by Israel, which said it was acting in accordance with international law.
Analysts say that while Turkey has also been critical of Israeli policies towards the Palestinians, its tone has hardened since Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his Justice and Development Party (AKP) came to power.
"In Turkey, people always cared for Palestinians but previously foreign policy makers did not pay much attention to public opinion," said Kemal Kirisci from Bogazici University.
"Now it is different.
AKP is very good at populism," he said.
In recent years, Turkey has been eager to play a mediator role between different groups in the Middle East and North Africa.
Earlier this month, Turkey said it could host a meeting between the two rival Palestinian groups, Fatah and Hamas.
"Turkey has said recently that it has a particular mission as a country that is strategically located in-between the Middle East and Europe.
Turkey sees itself as an order creator and a model for the rest of the region," Tarik Oguzlu, a professor at Bilkent University, told SETimes.
But according to Yair Hirschfeld of the University of Haifa, Turkey is undermining the official rulers of Palestine by talking with Hamas.
"It would be very important for Turkey to acknowledge the official Palestinian leadership.
Playing games around this and undermining the official leadership is not very constructive," Hirschfeld said.
Following last year's flotilla crisis, anti-Israel sentiment surged in Turkey.
A popular film released in January, Valley of the Wolves Palestine, portrayed Israelis as bloodthirsty villains.
Last December, there was a rare moment of co-operation, with Turkey sending aid to Israel during a forest fire on Mount Carmel that killed at least 44 people.
Despite the plethora of issues that must be resolved in order to improve relations, some experts are hopeful.
"The Turkish side must recognise that cornering Israel does not serve Turkey's interests," Kirisci explained.
"Turkey needs to regain Israel's trust.
This of course is difficult to achieve if Israeli domestic politics keep slipping further and further to the right and the Israeli government keeps hurting the people in Gaza."
"What we have to do is sit together quietly and to prevent stupid acts from both sides and see how we can translate the real common strategic interest into the region and into our co-operative policy," Hirschfeld said.
"Israel has many friends in Turkey and Turkey has many friends in Israel.
Finding a solution is an interest of both sides."
