28/03/2011
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 28/03/11
Old and poorly maintained public transportation vehicles have for years affected passenger comfort and punctuality in many Balkan cities. 
After decades of using antiquated buses that are prone to breakdowns, Macedonia's capital has finally acquired a new fleet.
"Skopje's Public Transportation Enterprise will be entirely equipped with new buses. 
From now on, we will have timely and comfortable public transportation," Skopje's Mayor Koce Trajanovski told SETimes.
Besides their practical benefit, the buses will introduce a distinctive visual element to Skopje. 
The fleet includes 202 double-deckers, designed in a retro 1950s style. 
Two roofless double deckers will cater to tourists.
It will not be the first time such buses have been seen on the capital's streets. 
In the 1950s, Skopje purchased the famous Routemaster buses from the city of London, but most were destroyed in the catastrophic 1963 earthquake.
City authorities say the goal is to bring back Skopje's "old flair". 
The move also dovetails with an ambitious government plan to revitalise the capital by constructing new buildings and monuments.
"The buses will be recognisable as unique to Skopje and will not be used elsewhere. 
They are not mass produced," Transport and Communications Ministry spokesperson Dragan Simonovski told SETimes.
Currently, many Skopje residents opt for taxis because of the better comfort and service. 
City authorities hope the new fleet will win them back, helping to defray the cost of the overhaul.
Vasko Hristov, a 66-year-old who recently underwent hip surgery, says he welcomes the move.
"I am glad they opted for easily accessible low-cut entry buses which accommodate the disabled and others like me, and also because they did not raise the bus fares," Hristov told SETimes.
The double deckers are being produced by a Chinese company, Yutong, which won the government's tender. 
Around 15 are already on the road. 
The new fleet will also include another type of low-floor bus which is being built by Ukraine's LAZ.
According to Trajanovski, city authorities decided to make the 35m-euro investment after conducting a thorough cost-benefit analysis.
"The new buses will save money that we used to spend on costly spare parts [for the old buses], as well as saving on gasoline," Trajanovski said.
Officials also say ecological concerns played an important role in the selection of bus types. 
The new buses fulfill the EU standards and drastically reduce emissions.
"They achieve "EURO 4" gas emissions levels, have digital displays as well as automatically managed ramps for wheel chairs and are air conditioned. 
They are much more versatile and comfortable than the buses currently in use," Simonovski said.
