23/05/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 23/05/11
Due to the torrent of Serbians seeking asylum in EU member countries, Brussels has warned Belgrade that the future of visa-free travel in the Schengen area is at risk.
Visa requirements were lifted for citizens of Serbia, Macedonia and Montenegro in December 2009.
Over the course of the following 12 months, 17,000 people from Serbia requested asylum in the EU, mostly in Sweden, Belgium and Germany.
They weren't fleeing political persecution, rather, they were poor people who believe that in the richer Western European countries, life would be eased by government subsidies.
About 95% are Gypsies, the rest mostly members of the Albanian minority in Presevo and Bujanovac in southern Serbia.
And in their zeal to move, many have become targets of corruption and fraud.
"My friend in Nis paid 1,500 euros to a police officer to get a passport, because he had no ID card, nor a permanent home address.
He wanted to go to Switzerland because he cannot find a job," Cakan Dujic, a member of the Gypsy community, tells SETimes.
"He never received the passport.
He must now pay back the debt because the money was borrowed, and the police officer pretends not to know him."
Serbian police have arrested 24 people, including 16 fellow officers, for allegedly issuing false documents necessary for obtaining passports.
Investigators say some of those police officers charged up to 5,000 euros for their 'service'.
After more than a year of recurring issues with bogus asylum seekers, Belgium sent a letter to the European Commission, which warned that it would request the annulment of the recently granted "white Schengen" for Serbia.
The real possibility that Serbians could lose this new right to freedom of travel has struck a chord.
"It is only by [this] we feel European, if we run out of that, we will again be like in the ghetto," said Goran Bozinovic, a student from Belgrade.
The government has announced new legislation that will tighten access to passports and travel outside the country, which immediately raised concerns about equal treatment and questions of discrimination.
"We must not apply stricter terms of travel to Gypsies and poor Albanians from southern Serbia than to other nationalities and citizens," said former State Secretary in the Ministry of Justice Marko Karadzic.
Beyond that, he added, "The state must create better economic conditions and provide greater rights to those people, so they would not be [seeking] it in other countries."
Interior Minister Ivica Dacic agrees, saying Serbia will work harder on behalf of the Gypsy minority.
"We want to work for the inclusion of Gypsies, [so they] feel equal with other citizens, and explain to them that asylum is not a solution," he said.
Serbia is also considering making it a crime to organise illegal migration, punishing groups that exploit people with false promises of asylum."Those who organise the departure of asylum seekers will be arrested and prosecuted," said Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic.
And at border crossings, police will ask for proof to determine whether travellers have return tickets, insurance, enough money to make the trip, where they are heading and why.
