23/11/2010
(EurActiv - 23/11/10; UPI, ITAR-TASS, Bloomberg, Reuters, RTTNews, Sofia news Agency, Oil and Gas Information Agency - 22/11/10; Reuters, BBC, Eurasianet - 19/11/10)
The EU conceded for the first time Monday (November 22nd) the likelihood of potential rivalry between the planned South Stream and Nabucco gas pipelines.
"South Stream is likely to compete with Nabucco in the long term," EU Energy Commissioner Guenther Oettinger was quoted as saying during a conference marking the 10th anniversary of the EU-Russia energy dialogue in Brussels.
Both projects are designed to bring natural gas to Europe, but from different sources. 
The EU, which gets nearly a third of its gas from Russia, supports the nearly 8-billion-euro Nabucco project, which is also backed by the United States. 
Currently about 80% of the 27-nation bloc's Russian gas imports is transported via Ukraine, whose price disputes with Moscow-based Gazprom have led to disruptions in supplies twice in recent years.
The 3,300km-long pipeline -- to run from eastern Turkey to the Baumgarten gas hub in Austria via Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary -- is to be completed by 2015. 
It is designed to transport up to 31 billion cubic metres of natural gas from the Caspian region and the Middle East to Europe annually, and is aimed at reducing the EU's dependence on Russian supplies.
First announced in 2007, South Stream is a joint project between Gazprom and Italian energy group ENI, designed to carry Russian natural gas to Europe, bypassing Ukraine. 
The pipeline will include a 900km-long offshore section running from the Beregovaya compressor station on the Russian Black Sea coast to the port city of Varna in Bulgaria. 
It will then fork into a northwestern branch ending in Austria and a southwestern one going to Greece and Italy.
The pipeline is due to become fully operational the end of 2015. 
It will have an initial annual capacity of 30 billion cubic metres, which is expected to grow to 63 billion cubic metres by 2018.
Although less costly than South Stream, whose price could reach 24 billion euros, according to some analysts, the Nabucco project has been stymied over finances and the need to find reliable suppliers.
The six-company Nabucco consortium, which is headed by Austrian oil and gas firm OMV and includes the national energy corporations of Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and Turkey, as well as German energy group RWE, is currently in talks to secure gas from northern Iraq, Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan.
Last week, Turkmen Deputy Prime Minister Baymyrad Hojamuhamedov said his country is ready to provide up to 40 billion cubic metres of spare gas annually for the EU-backed pipeline project. 
That amount alone would exceed Nabucco's projected capacity.
Speaking at the conference dedicated to the 10th anniversary of the EU-Russia energy dialogue on Monday, Russian Energy Minister Sergei Shmatko urged Brussels to put South Stream on equal footing with Nabucco.
"Obviously, Europe is looking for new routes of supply and new sources," said Shmatko. 
"And we of course understand that this is a fair approach by the EU to minimise any external risks."
