27/06/2011
By Mirjana Boskovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 27/06/11
Montenegro's ruling coalition comprised of the dominant Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) and Social Democrats Party (SDP) may have practically collapsed, but the two parties say it will not jeopardise their ability to rule at the state level until the next parliamentary elections.
Replacing incumbent Podgorica mayor Miomir Mugosa is among several key issues that have shaken relations between the two parties during their lengthy joint rule of Montenegro.
Another is the question of ownership over the Elektrodistribucija power company.
"It is a strikingly devastating approach to privatisation by the ruling (DPS) party of such an important economic segment as is Elektroprivreda," analyst Svetozar Jovicevic said.
Despite its flexibility, SDP cannot jump over the Elektrodistribucija problem without worsening relations, Jovicevic explained, but did not rule out finding a way for DPS to back down and implement its goals another way.
SDP President Ranko Krivokapic originally upped the ante by asking the government, police and prosecutors to take action against DPS' attempts to "tailor the will of the people" regarding the Podgorica mayoral post, before announcing the possibility of breaking coalition ranks at the state level.
Prime Minister Igor Luksic, a DPS member, did not want to answer whether the government should act, saying he fails to see the strategic problem that affects the functioning of the coalition.
Krivokapic has repeatedly stated that DPS' actions to impose Mugosa as Podgorica's mayor are destroying the democratic elections' legitimacy and therefore the foundations of Montenegro's European integration.
Professor Djordje Blazic, however, argues SDP claims are misplaced given the country's constitution.
"We do not have an electoral system in which citizens choose their representatives.
Citizens elect political parties that form the parliament and they have the legitimacy of the elections.
You can't hurt the legitimacy when you do not have it," Blazic told SETimes.
Analysts contend there are more pressing issues causing DPS to act independently in the expected early parliamentary elections.
The primary reason is to solely manage the monopolies over Montenegrin natural and economic resources that DPS gained during its rule, Professor Filip Kovacevic told SETimes.
DPS stands to profit handsomely from their sale, as well as to line the pockets of tycoons -- financial supporters -- who are connected to the party, some of them even being relatives or friends, he said.
"DPS needs absolute power to push through such projects ...
which are at the expense of the public interests of Montenegrin citizens," Kovacevic added.
Some of these projects include the submersion of the Moracha and Tara rivers to ready them for unplanned construction of hydropower plants or the construction of cable power lines through national parks.
While the SDP has said that at least on the issue of the mayor of Podgorica there is a clear suspicion of corruption, Professor Blazic criticised SDP for talking politics rather than dealing with corruption that erodes the country.
"It does not cross their minds to deal with substantive matters of corruption in this country and to begin dealing with it in a proper manner and from the right place -- that is, from top to bottom," Blazis said.
