24/01/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 24/01/11
The new US Ambassador to Turkey, Francis Ricciardone, arrived in Ankara on Thursday (January 20th) amid rumblings that US-Turkey relations are weakening. 
Ricciardone said he will take steps to improve relations.
"Turkey is a very important country both for its region and for the United States. 
Each passing day, it is becoming a more important, heavyweight and influential country," Ricciardone told a welcoming crowd at Ankara airport.
But the ambassador may have his work cut out for him, as the two sides continue to face serious challenges.
For years, the image of the United States among Turks has been a largely negative one A recent survey by Metropoll found that 42% of Turks see the United States as the greatest international threat -- the highest percentage for any country.
Such results are "distressing, but not surprising", former Turkish Ambassador Sukru Elekdag told SETimes.
"This situation is not caused by the domestic changes in Turkey," Elekdag said. 
"I have to state here a truth in all frankness: The United States has never lent Turkey support of a magnitude required for the dissolution of the PKK."
The veteran diplomat, who now serves as a member of the Turkey-US Parliamentary Friendship group, said it is time for the two countries to conduct a detailed assessment of their relationship and readjust as needed.
Nurreddin Avci, 28, a graduate student at Ankara's Middle East Technical University, said "opinions are changing, based on what we hear and see in the press."
"According to what we see on TV and in newspapers, Ankara has one world view, Washington another. 
But allies focus on future and work for the same goals. 
That's what makes them allies," he said.
Recently, the New York based American Turkish Society hosted a discussion on Turkey-US ties.
Speaking at the event, Joshua Walker, a postdoctoral fellow at the Crown Centre for Middle Eastern Studies, said that although relations were often weak during previous administrations, they have gained new momentum since US President Barack Obama took office.
The numerous official visits from Turkey that took place last year show how things have improved, he said.
Speaking to SETimes, Walker said Turkish perceptions of the United States are very much coloured by the media.
"The negative feelings can be attributed to perceptions that America's style and substance of foreign policy is contrary to Turkey's," he said. 
"Turkey's rising sense of self-confidence has led to a feeling that any difference and perceived slight should be dealt with by more force and nationalist arguments."
