24/01/2011
(AFP - 22/01/11; B92 -- 21/01/11 - 23/01/11; Radio Srbija, Focus News Agency -- 21/01/11 - 22/01/11)
Serbia is fully prepared for talks with Kosovo, Assistant Foreign Minister Zdravko Ponos said on Sunday (January 23rd), noting that Belgrade would enter the process with an open mind.
"All scenarios are possible. 
We've been ready for months; we're now waiting for Pristina," Belgrade-based B92 quoted him as saying. 
"We are entering the talks without prerequisites, without prepared solutions, because if we had them the talks would be meaningless."
His statement came after Borko Stefanovic, political director at Serbia's foreign ministry, was named on Friday as the head of the country's negotiating team.
The day after his appointment, the 34-year-old diplomat noted that the talks, for which a starting date has not been set yet, would focus on "all open issues" of importance to peoples' lives.
"At the same time, talks will be related to Kosovo status," Belgrade-based B92 quoted him as saying, though Pristina insists that is off limits.
"The negotiations will be long and hard, but Serbia is optimistic, will have a flexible approach and offer several alternative solutions for each issue," Stefanovic stressed.
His team is fine-tuning the list of issues to be discussed during the talks. 
According to B92, the Serbian diplomat believes that the negotiations should first focus on issues such as telecommunications, air traffic, cadastre and missing persons and the more sensitive, status-related questions should be addressed at a later stage in the process.
Stefanovic further noted that he does not view the talks as technical, arguing that while each issue has a technical aspect, it is linked to the status issue as well.
Kosovo Deputy Foreign Minister Vlora Citaku ruled out the possibility of any discussion on status.
"I see this as a political statement which is for internal use," she told B92 on Saturday. 
"All of our, and Belgrade's, partners in the world have stated very clearly that these are technical talks of mutual interest."
Citaku also noted that Kosovo is prepared for the upcoming negotiations, for which Pristina will appoint a special co-ordinator.
"We have been open for the possibility to sit down at the table with Belgrade for a long time now, but only as independent and equal states," she underlined.
A resolution on Serbia's EU integration adopted by the European Parliament last week welcomed the government's willingness to engage in renewed negotiations with Kosovo, saying the process should begin "without delay". 
It also urged Serbia "to enter into dialogue with Kosovo without any longer referring to new negotiations on its status".
Asked to comment on the EP's call, Stefanovic downplayed its importance, saying it was just a recommendation included in a broader political, but non-binding, document.
