24/01/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 24/01/11 Photos by Ana Pekmezi
Albania's institutional crisis deepened at the weekend in the wake of protests that turned violent on Friday (January 21st).
Three people were shot dead in the melee, reportedly while in the vicinity of the prime minister's headquarters.
State prosecutor Ina Rama has issued an arrest warrant against six senior members of the Republican Guard, including its commander.
But the warrant has not been carried out.
According to the prime minister, Sali Berisha, it contained technical errors.
The ruling party, meanwhile, is accusing the opposition of trying to bring down the government.
Mesila Doda, an MP from the ruling Democratic Party, accused the state prosecutor of collaborating with the political opposition.
The arrest warrants are "the last attempt of a coup d'etat which was well-structured", she said.
Rana, who was appointed to her post in 2007, has no formal political affiliation and received praise in the past from Berisha for her efforts at rooting out corruption.
Berisha and Socialist Party leader Edi Rama, meanwhile, exchanged fierce accusations, accusing each other of responsibility for the violence.
"Rama will be held fully responsible for what happened," Berisha said at a press conference.
"Tirana can never be taken with gangs and bandits.
Law, law and only law, this is our motto."
But Rama, who is also mayor of Tirana, insisted police had provoked the violence.
"We will continue our protests, our demonstrations, without violence, peacefully, with the solid power of the people's resistance," he said, calling for a new rally at the end of this week to honour the victims.
The three people shot dead were Faik Myrtaj from the southwestern town of Fier, Ziver Veizi from Gjirokastra in the south, and Hekuran Deda, from Dibra in the north.
A reported 113 people have been arrested and brought in for questioning.
US Ambassador to Albania Alexander Arvizu said Friday's violence could have been avoided.
"There is one hard truth ...
that is important for everyone to understand.
There were no winners.
There were only losers.
This was a dramatic setback, and from which the country needs to recover," Arvizu said at a press conference Saturday.
"What Albania desperately needs at this moment is political leadership.
We have repeatedly urged Albania's political leaders to search for compromise," he added.
The same message was conveyed in a joint statement by the US Embassy, the EU delegation in Tirana and the OSCE, issued on Friday.
"Violence and excessive use of force cannot be justified and should be avoided," the statement read.
"We urgently appeal for calm and restraint on all sides and to abstain from provocations.
We therefore renew our call for constructive dialogue and compromise to resolve the existing political differences."
