27/06/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 27/06/11
A plan that would give Kosovo Security Forces (KSF) some police duties has come under fire from the political opposition and civic organisations.
But the government insists it is constitutional.
"It is a project that will make the KSF more beneficial for the country.
It will strengthen co-operation and co-ordination in the security sector concerning KSF tasks," said Minister for Kosovo Security Forces Agim Ceku, whose ministry has proposed a draft memorandum on the topic together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
"The project will not interfere with the police, or policies of the KSF, even the changes, mission, status or character of KSF.
It will be a help for the police, after it is approved by the government and military presence (KFOR)," he said.
The Parliamentary Commission on Security Affairs says it supports any co-operation initiative among stakeholders in the security sector, as long as it is in accordance with the constitution and Kosovo laws.
The opposition Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), however, says the plan is reckless and harmful.
"The memorandum implies a dangerous trend that can be found only in states with non-democratic governance, and as such has not even the support of the partners of Kosovo, like NATO," said LDK member Gazmend Muhaxheri.
International Civilian Office spokesman Andy McGuffie, meanwhile, told SETimes that any KSF agreement should be in line with the Comprehensive Proposal on the status of Kosovo.
"We understand that this matter is still under discussion between the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the KSF.
The International Civilian Office, as usual, is ready to provide advice," he said.
"The Comprehensive Status Proposal (or Athisaari Proposal) provides that the KSF will be primarily responsible for crisis response, explosive ordinance disposal, and civil protection.
Any agreements entered into by the KSF will need to respect this provision," McGuffie added.
Ramadan Qehaja, executive director of the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, told SETimes that policing is outside KSF's scope.
The memorandum, he said, threatens to undermine relations with KFOR.
"KSF can perform police duties only in extraordinary cases when we have a dangerous situation and when security is not under control," he said.
"It would be better to have a memorandum which would mean a symbolic taking over of some of the duties from the outgoing KFOR.
The memorandum between the Kosovo Security Forces Ministry and Ministry of Internal Affairs, of course, has damaged relations between KSF and the NATO presence in Kosovo," he said.
He added that the KSF is not yet operational and should focus on duties outlined in the constitution.
"Although the writers of the memorandum had no malicious responses, they also have not done a preliminary assessment of the entire situation.
It is understandable that this memorandum was used even for a media onslaught of some newspapers and that there were also negative impact for the image of the KSF," he said.
Both the Athisaari Plan and the Constitution of Kosovo envision the KSF as a professional and multi-ethnic force with no more than 2,500 active members and 800 reserve members, possessing no heavy weapons.
