17/12/2010
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 17/12/10
The Human Rights Committee of the Council of Europe (CoE) adopted a report on Thursday (December 16th) presented by rapporteur Dick Marty of Switzerland, who has spent the past two years investigating headline-grabbing allegations involving, among other things, the trafficking of human organs.
The most explosive part of the report concerns incumbent Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, who was a political leader of the since disbanded Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) during the 1998-1999 conflict. 
The report essentially confirms the persistent reports that KLA members took prisoners -- Serb and Albanian alike -- across the border into Albania and removed their organs, mostly kidneys, for sale abroad.
Marty also asserts that after the war, the KLA's Drenica Group established an international network of organised crime involving drug trafficking, a violent heroin operation that continues even today, and alleges that Thaci maintains the role of mob boss.
The allegations hit just days after Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) party won the snap elections, though not by a wide enough margin to govern without a coalition.
Thaci was swift to react to the report, holding a press conference Thursday, denying accusations against him and against the KLA.
"The scandalous report of the CoE Parliamentary Assembly member Dick Marty is a text full of slanders and lies," said Thaci. 
He called Marty to provide facts, and called on other relevant panels to investigate Marty's claims.
Kosovo's government also hit back hard. 
"Kosovo calls on all member states of the Council of Europe to strongly oppose this defamatory and biased report and not fall to the side of those who, at any cost, want to prevent the stability, progress and good governance in Kosovo," government spokesman and Thaci adviser Memli Krasniqi said.
He added that the government and Thaci "will take all steps and actions necessary to counter the defamation of Dick Marty, including legal and political ways".
Acting President Jakup Krasniqi issued a statement expressing "deep indignation [about] this report filled with thrills and nonexistent facts". 
He described it as a "one-sided report" that includes "racist statements".
In Serbia, political parties have called for an international investigation to determine the legitimacy of the accusations.
War Crimes Prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic said, however, that the adoption of Marty's report by the CoE was an important day for the Serbian prosecution's work on the "organ trade" case, which has focused on the disappearance of around 400 people missing from Kosovo -- suspected to have been victims of organ trafficking.
Serbian President Boris Tadic says he is ready to talk with Thaci. 
"We have to negotiate with anyone elected by the Kosovo Albanians as their legitimate representative," Tadic said, stressing that the allegations in the report need to be checked.
EULEX spokeswoman Karin Limdal said the rule of law mission is studying the report.
"EULEX takes any allegations of war crimes and organised crime very seriously. 
However, the prosecution bases their investigations on evidence, and if anyone has concrete evidence to support the allegations put forward in the report, they should come forward with those to the appropriate authorities."
EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton's spokeswoman, Maja Kocijancic, notes that EULEX has investigated allegations regarding a farmhouse in Rripe, Albania -- the so-called Yellow House -- where prisoners were allegedly assessed, based on their health.
"But to date," she said, "our prosecutors have found no evidence or intelligence that would lead us to believe that 'organ harvesting' took place at this location."
"If Marty has obtained any relevant evidence into alleged criminal activities -- which is not obvious from his report -- we do encourage him to bring those forward to the relevant authorities," she said.
The report also implicates Albania's intelligence services in the trafficking and organised crime.
Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli fired back, saying the report is "unfounded in facts and shows abuse of office by Dick Marty". 
The Albanian government issued a separate statement, insisting the allegations are untrue and politically motivated. 
(Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report.)
