22/11/2010
By Maria Paravantes for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 22/11/10
In its efforts to cut massive spending and save 2 billion euros, the Greek government launched the country's first e-prescription programme last month.
It is being tested at the Organisation for the Insurance of Self-Employed Professionals (OAEE).
"Greece spends on medicines as much as a country with the population of Spain," Prime Minister George Papandreou said earlier this month.
Besides curbing spending on medicines, the electronic prescription system is a step towards modernising the country's multiple social insurance and health funds and keeping a tab on doctors who over-prescribe.
According to Alternate Labour and Social Insurance Minister Giorgos Koutroumanis, the pilot programme has thus far paid off since being implemented October 18th.
"We've found doctors prescribing 300,000 euros of medicines per month … the strictest penalty will be terminating their collaboration with the health funds," he told Ta Nea daily paper.
Expected to take effect on December 1st at the Social Insurance Fund (ΙΚΑ) and the Farmers' Fund (OGA) in the coming year, the system will apply to all of the country's social security and health funds.
Once fully implemented, it is expected to save up to one billion euros.
The government went a step further by slashing medicine prices in efforts to curb insurance fund spending by an additional 1 billion euros.
Labour and Social Insurance Minister Louka Katseli said wasteful spending cannot be curbed if evasion at all levels is not addressed.
The ministry's action plan against mismanagement of funds is wide-ranging.
Steps include cutting insurance funds' operational costs, tackling undeclared labour, curbing pharmaceutical spending, creating infrastructure for information and citizens' support, and setting a cap on prescriptions, depending on area of specialisation.
Advisers will be appointed to oversee the installation and operation of a computerised system for monitoring revenue and spending.
Partnerships between major insurance funds and diagnostic centres and clinics will facilitate the purchase of health services.
The government has already launched monthly inspections at ΙΚΑ and ΟGA, in an effort to detect over-prescription practices.
It is also proceeding with monthly checks of a random 5%.
Doctors at IKA are currently under investigation for writing out monthly prescriptions ranging from 60,000 to 250,000 euros.
One Athens doctor working for the public IKA fund was found to have issued 7,500 prescriptions amounting to 175,000 euros per month.
A total of 800 public fund doctors were found to have exclusive collaborations with a pharmacist of their choice.
Two lists of doctors and pharmacists in violation were made public last week.
In the meantime, Labour Ministry General Secretary Athina Dretta called on all doctors working for public health funds to proceed with prescribing the lowest-priced and most suitable treatments, and went on to stress that by the end of 2010, generics should make up 30% of each fund's total medicine spending.
According to Koutroumanis, the ministry has almost covered a deficit of about 3m euros, claiming that by 2011 the system will report a surplus.
In the meantime, the ministry is also promoting the creation in 2011 of a joint fund with the co-operation of the country's major insurance providers (ΙΚΑ, ΟΑΕΕ, ΟGΑ and OPAD), which will offer primary healthcare.
They will come under the authority of the health ministry.
