27/06/2011
(Euronews, BTA - 25/06/11; EU, Euobserver, EurActiv, Euinside, Sofia News Agency, AFP, DPA, Reuters, BBC, Bloomberg, Deutsche Welle, RFE/RL, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool - 24/06/11)
EU leaders agreed last week that Croatia is ready to join the bloc as its 28th member, saying all steps for completing the country' entry talks must be taken by the end of this month, with its accession treaty then signed by the end of the year.
The decision was announced on Friday (June 24th) in Brussels at the end of a two-day summit of the heads of state or government of the 27-nation bloc. 
It followed the European Commission's (EC) recent proposal for wrapping up the negotiation process with Croatia, which also recommended setting July 1st 2013 as an indicative date for the former Yugoslav republic's admission to the Union.
The EU leaders did not enter a date for Croatia's accession, but urged it to continue implementing the needed reforms "with the same vigour", so that it will "be able to assume fully the obligations of membership" from the moment it joins the bloc.
The areas where further efforts were needed in particular, according to the conclusions from the summit, were the "judiciary and fundamental rights".
"Monitoring up to accession of these reform efforts will give the necessary assurance to Croatia and current member states," the EU leaders stressed.
They also noted that Croatia's progress brings "a new momentum to the European perspective of the Western Balkans, provided these countries continue on the path of reform" and promised to discuss that matter at their December summit.
During a news conference with EU leaders Friday, Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor said Zagreb would stay the path of reform in order to fulfil its commitments.
The summit decision, which came on the eve of the 20th anniversary of Croatia's independence, was "an historic moment" for her country and the "greatest gift" for its citizens, she said.
"We hope everything will be ready to welcome Croatia as the 28th member of the European Union on July 1st 2013," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said after the summit.
Another decision EU leaders took in Brussels was to ask the commission to draft changes to the rules governing the Schengen zone by September of this year. 
The EC proposals are expected to allow for the temporary reintroduction of internal border controls within the passport-free area.
"A mechanism should be introduced in order to respond to exceptional circumstances putting the overall functioning of Schengen co-operation at risk, without jeopardising the principle of free movement of persons," the EU leaders said in the conclusions from the meeting. 
"It should comprise a series of measures to be applied in a gradual, differentiated and co-ordinated manner in order to assist a member state facing heavy pressure at the external borders."
"As a very last resort, in the framework of this mechanism, a safeguard clause could be introduced to allow the exceptional reintroduction of internal border controls in a truly critical situation where a member state is no longer able to comply with its obligations under the Schengen rules," the document noted.
The Schengen zone is comprised of 25 countries, including 22 EU member states and non-members Iceland, Norway and Switzerland.
The decision to revise the current rules came in the wake of the recent row between Paris and Rome following the increase in the influx of Tunisian migrants in Italy. 
In order to prevent refugees from the unrest in North Africa from entering its territory, France closed its border to its southern neighbour.
A further push to the idea for reforming the Schengen regime came in May, when Denmark announced its plans to re-impose controls on its frontiers with Germany and Sweden due to a rise in cross-border crime.
Bulgaria and Romania, which have met the technical criteria for joining the area, but have not yet been admitted, said the planned changes would not affect their bids and voiced support for them.
"Romania's position has been of participating and supporting these new proposals for strengthening Schengen from the perspective of a country inside the area, not outside it," Romanian President Traian Basescu said.
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov told reporters he expects a date for the two countries' entry to be announced at the end of a meeting of EU justice and home affairs ministers in September.
