22/11/2010
(Reuters, DPA, AFP, CNN, The New York Times, Washington Post, The Christian Science Monitor - 21/11/10; Reuters, DPA, BBC, RFE/RL, NATO - 20/11/10)
NATO and Russia no longer pose a security threat to each other, the former Cold War enemies agreed at a historic summit in Lisbon on Saturday (November 20th), announcing a fresh start in their relations and several initiatives for future co-operation.
"For the first time in history, NATO countries and Russia will be co-operating to defend themselves," NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said after the talks. 
"Our security is indivisible. 
We share important interests and face the same threats to our common security."
The meeting of the NATO-Russia Council (NRC) was held on the second day of the Alliance's Lisbon Summit, when the heads of state or government of the 28 member nations were joined by Russian President Dmitry Medvedev. 
The NRC was established in 2002 as a platform for co-operation between the two parties in areas of common interest. 
The high-level talks Saturday were the first since the Alliance suspended relations with Moscow following Russia's invasion of Georgia in August 2008.
More than two years later, the 29 NRC leaders vowed to "work towards achieving a true strategic and modernised partnership". 
The goal would be to contribute "to the creation of a common space of peace, security and stability in the Euro-Atlantic area", they said in a joint statement.
Endorsing a joint review of 21st century security challenges, NATO and Russia outlined terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the spread of missiles as issues of common concern, and put down in writing that they no longer pose a mutual threat.
In another key move -- a day after NATO leaders agreed on the first day of the summit to develop a common anti-missile system to protect all 28 member states against long-range attacks -- the two sides agreed on Saturday to work closely on the critical issue of missile defence.
According to Reuters, this shared protective network, which will link European Alliance nations' defence systems to radars and interceptors the United States plans to station in the Mediterranean, Romania, Poland and possibly Turkey, is to be built in phases by 2020.
On Saturday, Medvedev accepted NATO's invitation for Russia to explore opportunities for co-operation in the area of missile defence.
The NRC leaders "agreed on a joint ballistic missile threat assessment and decided to resume Theatre Missile Defence Co-operation," the Alliance said in a statement. 
"We see Russia as a partner, not an adversary," US President Barack Obama stressed.
His Russian counterpart agreed about the importance of the steps taken in Lisbon.
"This is indeed a historic event," Medvedev said. 
"I also use the term historic today, meaning we have travelled a long distance."
