25/06/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 25/06/11
As Palestinian groups Hamas and al-Fatah hammer out the details of a unity government after nearly five years of what some have termed civil war, Turkey has played a moderator role.
Its hand in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, however, may be weakened by poor relations with Israel, crisis in Syria, and a resurgent post-revolutionary Egypt.
In its efforts to act as a mediator in the region, Ankara has played host to Fatah and Hamas, often receiving criticism for its discussions with the latter, recognised by the United States, Israel and the European Union as a terrorist organisation.
From Ankara's perspective, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies at the center of the region's tensions and its resolution will foster stability in the broader Middle East.
"If we achieve unity in Palestine, this will be the main step towards peace in the Middle East," Turkey-Palestine Inter-Parliamentary Friendship Group Chairman Zeyid Aslan told SETimes, adding that Ankara is ready to host new meetings between the sides.
According to Aslam, solving the Palestinian problem entails fixing internal tensions and bringing democracy to the region.
"If we want to see democracy take root, we must respect the leaders that the [Palestinian] people elected," he said.
"Ignoring Hamas, who entered the [Palestinian] Parliament as a result of democratic elections, makes it impossible to solve the Palestinian problem… For that reason we organize meetings," he said, adding that other countries' characterization of Hamas as a terrorist organization "has nothing to do with us".
According to Ali Balci, a Palestinian analyst at the Sakarya University, Ankara is seeking to take over a role long held by Cairo.
“Turkey wants to relinquish Egypt’s exclusive mediation role in discussions between the al-Fatah movement and Hamas,” he told SETimes.
Former Israeli Ambassador to Turkey, Alon Liel, agrees.
"Such developments are very possible, as Turkey is trusted by al-Fatah and Hamas," he said, warning however that the shift might "harm the quality of the Turkish-Egyptian diplomatic relations."
Some analysts remain concerned that entering the Palestinian talks could compromise Turkey's image as an unbiased mediator in the region, especially in Israel.
"Israel will not like it, but it does not seem like that will bother Ankara too much," said Liel.
He explains that "the almost non-existent diplomatic link between Turkey and Israel would hinder Turkish mediation between Israel and Palestine or Israel and Syria."
Itamar Rabinovich, the former Israeli Ambassador to the US, agrees.
"While the decline of the Turkish-Israeli relationship diminishes Ankara's effectiveness as a mediator between Israel and the Arabs, Turkey can still be an effective mediator between Arab parties," he said.
