20/05/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 20/05/11
It was only a slight exaggeration when Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in a television interview last week that Syrian issues are considered part of domestic policy in Turkey.
Under the AKP government, Turkey has pursued a foreign policy of "zero problems with neighbours" that seeks to strengthen and improve what had previously been tense relations with some countries in the region.
These efforts have included increased trade, conflict mediation, strategic co-operation and, in some cases, the lifting of visa requirements.
Key to Turkey's approach was its relationship with Syria, which Gazikent University Professor and Center for Middle Eastern Strategic Studies representative Mehmet Sahin described to SETimes as "Turkey's example of model neighbour relations".
Now, however, Sahin says the Syria situation may become "the biggest difficulty for Turkey since the 2003 invasion of Iraq".
"Foreign policy makers in the US and Europe don't know how to cope, either.
Turkey is in the same situation," SOAS Emeritus Professor William Hale told SETimes.
Turkey's pragmatic concerns include an influx of refugees -- taking advantage of the visa-free border regime -- fleeing conflict in Syria, which would strain Turkish resources and potentially cause political unrest.
Also of crucial concern are the economic repercussions of civil unrest in Syria, which extend beyond the growing bilateral trade between Turkey and Syria.
Sahin and Hale emphasised Syria's geopolitical position as a land route to the greater Middle East, which Turkish policy makers had hoped to use as a stepping stone to other Middle Eastern markets.
Denied access to Syria, Turkey's trade with Jordan and the oil-rich Gulf could be compromised.
Yet the gravest risk for Turkey may come not in the form of short-term security or economic dangers, but rather as irreparable damage to Turkey's reputation and influence in the region.
What Hale calls "the centerpiece of the Middle Eastern neighbourhood policy", Turkey's relationship with Syria -- from the negotiations it mediated between Syria and Israel over the Golan Heights in 2008, to the attempt to share water resources equitably -- is symbolic of the type of relationship the state is trying to pursue with the rest of the Middle East.
If Turkey's relations with its "model neighbour" break down, the neighbourhood as a whole might suffer.
"If Syria falls away, Turkey is left with a serious gap in its Middle East policy," Hale warned.
Turkey is finding it difficult to articulate its political stance on Syria, trying to balance ideology and realpolitik, but also finding itself as an on-looker, with the only real option being to react to events over which it has very little control.
Hale argues the Turkish state has spent the last years cultivating a working relationship with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and turning against him now would create difficulties, particularly since it is unclear that he'll be leaving office any time soon.
Simultaneously, however, Turkey has no choice but to express support for democratisation, even if the democratising forces are attempting to oust an ally.
"Turkey simply cannot support someone who uses military force against the people," said Sahin.
Nor, it seems, can it directly support the people themselves.
And Turkey's lack of advocacy for the people in Syria will not go unrecognised in other Middle Eastern nations, a fact that will tarnish the administration's popularity in the region.
Hale says the zero problems policy has ultimately relied on Turkey's exercise of soft power, which has brought about many positive changes in the region to date.
Hale cautions, however, that "soft power is of damn little use in the face of a tank."
