24/06/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/06/11
The owner and director of an IT high school in Novi Sad, 32-year-old Nebojsa Jovanovic will be one of the first space tourists that will fly from the United States in 2012, organised by the British company Virgin Galactic.
Initially, Jovanovic had little hope of being selected, but soon after registering, received a phone call from London.
"I could not believe I entered the selection so easily," Jovanovic said.
When I realised that I'm indeed among the first in the world to reserve a seat for space travel, giving up was not an option!"
Jovanovic said he is an adventurer by nature.
He has visited many remote and inaccessible places in the world and the space tour will be the seal on all of his adventures, he said.
Shuttle Shift Space Two, a kind of passenger aircraft, will have six tourists aboard.
The carrier aircraft, run by experienced NASA pilots, will reach an altitude of 15km before separating from the plane with rocket engines and continue to fly at a speed of 4.500km/h.
At 115km engines are shut down.
Passengers unbuckle their seatbelts and experience weightlessness while enjoying the beauty of Earth and space.
The group, however, must meet certain psycho-physical criteria.
Jovanovic keeps a strict diet to lose weight and stay below 110kg.
There is a possibility that passengers may lose consciousness after leaving Earth's orbit, for which they will undergo special training at NASA's centre in Florida.
Jovanovic has the full support of family and friends.
Many in Novi Sad admire his courage.
His high school students are proud of their director.
"When he returns, he will tell us all about the space suit, weightlessness, how it is to view Earth and space from there," said Milos Boskovic, a Novi Sad IT high school student.
"Maybe some of us will decide to become real astronauts."
Virgin Galactic started work on a space flight programme for tourists in 2005.
The project takes place in the US states of New Mexico and California.
So far, the cosmic tourist travel has signed up 80,000 people of all ages from around the world.
The first tourist space flight will include Richard Branson, the Virgin Galactic owner and his family, including his 80-year-old mother.
The next tour participants will include world-famous names, such as Madonna, Ronaldo, Arnold Schwarzenegger and the renown physicist, Stephen Hawking.
"Natasa Pavlovic, a California-based Serbian-American actress, will travel to space before me," Jovanovic told SETimes.
"She will be the first Serbian woman in space, and I will be the first Serbian citizen in space."
