22/04/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/04/11
Until politics and war tore them apart, Vlade Divac and Drazen Petrovic were the best of friends.
Both men were basketball legends, stars of the former Yugoslavia who went on to international and NBA success. 
During the 1980s, the Yugoslav national team was one of the best in the world, and Divac and Petrovic were among its leaders.
Their personal ties, however, were sundered when the country broke up, and they never had a chance to reconcile. 
In 1993, Petrovic was killed when a truck on Germany's Autobahn lost control in rainy conditions and struck his car. 
Years later, Divac still misses his old teammate.
"I will always regret that. 
For a long time I couldn't accept that Drazen was simply no more," he told the Belgrade daily Blic following the release of a documentary film that chronicles their friendship.
The movie, "Once Brothers", first premiered on the US television station ESPN in December 2010. 
It has since been screened in Belgrade, Sarajevo and Banja Luka. 
Due to intense interest, it was shown three times at ZagrebDox 2011, a film festival in the Croatian capital.
Ticket sales in February and March garnered 5,900 euros which went to the Ana and Vlade Divac Fund, a charity organisation.
"I was very sad when I visited his grave, long before 'Once Brothers' was made," Divac said in the Blic interview. 
"I visited Drazen's parents in Zagreb, privately. 
Only then did it sink in that he was really gone. 
It's always hard when someone so young passes away. 
There was so much more he could've done."
The leaders of the time, he says, used propaganda to fuel hatred between the peoples of the former Yugoslavia. 
"For politicians the conflict was a game, and to them killing was nothing. 
But we ordinary people had to pick sides," he says in the film.
"As the conflict was gaining momentum, I asked my friends [that were non-Serbs] to have our friendship preserved. 
They wanted us to resume contact when things settled down a bit. 
I understood where they were coming from. 
For me, it was important that we stay in touch, no matter what," Divac said.
Today he is the president of the Serbian Olympic Committee, while his former comrade on the court remains a source of pride for Croatians.
For young people, the documentary is a window into an era they never experienced firsthand.
"I was born then, and now I'm hearing stories about that big country and great friendships. 
It all seems so unreal and faraway; in my mind that big Yugoslavia seems to never have existed. 
I'm only sure of one thing -- that war did not have to happen," Nikola Markovic, a 20 year-old student from Belgrade told SETimes.
