19/05/2011
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 19/05/11
Macedonia has amended its constitution to expand existing extradition provisions and close a loophole that allowed convicted criminals to seek safe havens in the region based on dual citizenship.
"The amendment establishes the carrying out of extraditions, accompanied by the signing of bilateral agreements with each country individually, specifying the principles for the extraditions' implementation, performed only by a court decision," Foreign Affairs Ministry spokesperson Borche Stamov told SETimes.
Shortly after adopting the changes last month Macedonia's police began the process to apprehend fugitives.
"International arrest warrants have been issued for 42 fugitives, who are sought for aggravated theft, robbery, premeditated murder and fraud," police spokesperson Ivo Kotevski told SETimes.
Most have sought to evade justice in neighbouring countries -- Serbia, Bulgaria and Kosovo -- but in other countries as well.
To expedite the process, Macedonia initially signed bilateral agreements with Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro, Justice Ministry spokesperson Mirjana Ilijeva told SETimes.
Justice Minister Mihajlo Manevski also met with his Kosovo counterpart, Hajredin Kuci, and signed an agreement for mutual legal assistance, extradition and transfer of convicted criminals.
Each signed agreement must specify the crimes which are subject to extradition, whether classified by name or a general clause, or a combination of the two.
"Macedonia accepted implementing the EU's European arrest warrant and is party to the European Convention on Extradition for Southeast Europe, and signed its Third Additional Protocol," Foreign Affairs Ministry international law state counselor Goran Stevchevski told SETimes.
However at times, countries do not co-operate for a variety of reasons and the process can become politicised.
"Extradition depends a great deal on the assessment of the competent authorities of which it is demanded," European University criminal law professor George Slamkov told SETimes.
"If they consider that his rights will be violated, or he will be prosecuted for political reasons, then it is possible not to accept the demand for extradition," Slamkov said.
The opposite can also be true, he added, referring to attaching conditions to handing over a convicted criminal for political or other gain.
However, Euro-Atlantic integration presupposes mutual co-operation among states, and the latter enables extradition to other states for the purposes of carrying out justice, Slamkov concluded.
Minister Manevski said Macedonia took a page from Croatia's book, which amended its constitution in June 2010.
Together with Serbia and Montenegro, Croatia exchanged some of the most notorious criminals with dual citizenship.
Croatian Justice Ministry spokesperson Vesna Dvoranic told SETimes the Croatian amendments specified that extradition occurs according to a specific decision for extradition, or according to an agreement for delivery of persons or EU acquis communautaire.
Based on Croatia's agreement with Serbia, Srecko Kalinic -- convicted of the 2003 murder of Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic -- was extradited to Serbia in August 2010.
"It is exclusively a judicial procedure in which the citizenship of the wanted person is not an obstacle for the court authorities," said Dvoranic.
"The application of this instrument in practice gave positive results, but in some states it takes a long time to carry out," she said.
