21/01/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Tuzla – 21/01/11
Before an assassin's bullet cut him down at age 39, Martin Luther King helped bring about crucial social changes that transformed the United States and have echoed the world over.
"King paid a great personal price, but his human rights legacy lasts in the United States ...
We are happy that different people in the world are united around the same ideals that King advocated," said US Ambassador to BiH Patrick Moon.
"There is still much to be done with human rights and reconciliation in the world and in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)".
Moon was in Tuzla on Monday (January 17th), celebrating King's birthday there at the invitation of Mayor Jasmin Imamovic.
Located in northeastern BiH, Tuzla has long upheld a tradition of tolerance among its residents.
That outlook has survived the violence of the war years, which included shelling by Bosnian Serb forces.
Seventy-one civilians died on May 25th, 1995, when an artillery piece fired from the nearby mountains detonated in the city.
A bust of Martin Luther King, donated to the city by the US Embassy in 2003, is a symbolic reminder of the late civil rights leader's ideals and their relevance to peacemaking efforts in the Balkans.
"The King bust in BiH is of great importance," Moon said.
"It affirms that the citizens of the United States and BiH share a common belief, and are ready to work on respect and development of human rights for all, and thus bring reconciliation among them," Moon said.
Imamovic said it was a great honour for Tuzla to be part of the historical movement represented by King.
"Our city is open for all those that want to pay honour to one of the greatest thinkers and advocates of world peace.
King's idea of a non-violent struggle is of great importance for all," he said.
Tuzla is the recipient of numerous recognitions.
The city received a special honour in 2010 when it hosted the 7th Conference of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights in the Cities.
BiH is the only non-EU member to have hosted the event.
Although more than 15 years have passed since the shelling, it will take time and effort before wartime wounds are fully healed in Tuzla, as elsewhere in BiH.
Meanwhile, Washington remains committed to supporting the process, Moon said.
"All people must understand and respect the rights of others, for it is the only way we can develop human kind that will create a world welcoming to all," he said.
"The United States will continue to work on reconciliation in BiH, and much is still to be done, but we are ready to be here and give our support."
