19/05/2011
By Dusan Teleskovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 19/05/11
Serbia and the IMF met this week to hammer out details of a so-called precautionary agreement, expected to be reached by autumn, after Serbia's stand-by loan expired last month. 
Under a precautionary agreement, Serbia would have access to IMF funds in the event they are needed, and IMF experts would step up monitoring of Serbian finances and provide advisory assistance to authorities in reforming of the pension system, education, health, fiscal policies and public spending.
"It is good there is a consensus on the need for such a new model in Serbia, but the process requires a vigorous reform. 
In short, these reforms include the start of private sector growth by improving the business environment, increase efficiency, and reduce excessive public sector spending," said IMF Representative in Belgrade Bogdan Lissovolik.
"It would be good to continue co-operation with the IMF. 
Serbia needs to strengthen the integrity of its international economy, and this kind of agreement with the IMF will certainly help that," said Jurij Bajec, economics adviser to Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic.
Bajec confirmed to SETimes that Serbia preferred a precautionary agreement.
"If you continue with negative tendencies, especially when it comes to inflation, in the banking system and public finances, it is uncertain that the IMF will be ready for a precautionary arrangement," economics expert Vladimir Gligorov of the Institute for International Economic Studies in Vienna told SETimes.
There are also concerns that with elections approaching in May 2012, the government may resort to dipping into IMF funds in order to boost its support at the polls, an eventuality Lissovolik says might not be a problem if all key political parties agree on the need for sound economic policy.
Bajec says that as elsewhere in the world, the government is more inclined to spend in an election year, and he therefore calls on the budget system bill and the newly created fiscal council institution to control implementation of the law.
"We have already defined that public debt should not exceed a certain level of GDP, and it was agreed that the deficit must be less than 4.1%," he notes.
Gligorov thinks the agreement with the IMF would not tie the hands of the government, at least not until the election, if the programme begins in the fall.
"After that the government may present the new arrangement as a success. 
Finally, it is not certain that there is money to buy the election, regardless of whether there is a programme with the IMF or not," he said.
