23/06/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 23/06/11
Life in the ethnically mixed city of Mitrovica remains dominated by ethnic loyalties, offering slim prospects for political and social reconciliation at a time when unfavourable economic conditions persist, according to a UNDP public opinion survey published last week.
The report, based on a poll of 1,000 respondents from across the ethnic spectrum, was published on June 17th.
Those surveyed saw "the stagnant economy, lack of jobs, and inflation" as the biggest collective issues, also citing specific problems such as power cuts, the water supply, inadequate services and facilities, and lack of environmental protection. 
Meanwhile, ethnic division continues to be a defining feature of life in Mitrovica.
"The gulf between the Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs continues to be wide," it found.
In addition to their cultural and linguistic divide, the report found that the two communities also perceive Mitrovica differently, with Kosovo Albanians tending to regard it more positively.
Kosovo security analyst Mentor Vrajolli tells SETimes that rule of law -- or its lack -- remains the main problem in the north. 
That, in turn, is a result of a political impasse.
So Mitrovica, which had an economic boom [from] 1970-1980, is "now the place with the worst economic prospects in Kosovo, and probably in the region," Vrajolli said, adding that this goes for both sides of the Ibar River.
Local institutions, he said, should undertake careful steps aimed at increasing their authority in this part of Kosovo. 
"It can be done by offering a concrete alternative in order to convince them gradually to have trust in our institutions," he said.
Political and financial support from the international community will help towards that end, Vrajolli added.
Local authorities in Mitrovica have been trying to induce some economic development. 
The municipality, headquartered in the southern part, decided to create a free economic zone where companies can operate tax free.
Mayor Avni Kastrati was quoted as saying in February that the idea was modeled after some powerful economies in Europe, which have generated jobs through such an approach.
"Progress was achieved through these projects also in solving inter-ethnic problems -- such as in Northern Ireland, which is first in Europe [in terms of] the number of free economic zones," Kastrati told the Kosovo daily Express.
Meanwhile, Belgrade is supporting local business in the north. 
Serbian Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic unveiled "incentives" to local businesses there on June 3rd.
Belgrade based B92 reported that this should create conditions to generate about 60 new jobs in Kosovo. 
"Bogdanovic said that over 34m euros worth of incentives have been allocated to 34 businessmen from Kosovo for production and service activities," the agency reported, quoting Bogdanovic as saying his government "is continuing to invest in Kosovo and that the only way for people to survive is for them to be able to have jobs and support themselves".
"We intend to allocate another portion of incentives by the end of the year, with a special emphasis on incentives for agriculture," Bogdanovic said.
