18/05/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 18/05/11
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic's comment to the Pristina daily Zeri on Sunday (May 15th) that the partitioning of Kosovo "is the only real option" has triggered a wave of reaction in Serbia.
While some believe Dacic should be sanctioned for violating the constitution, others claim the initiative should be debated seriously, both in public and in the government.
"I think the only real solution is to have the Serb-populated regions remain part of Serbia and separate the other, Albanian-populated part.
That is the only realistic way that can lead us to a quick solution.
Other solutions are a waste of time;
years and decades will pass in our attempts to resolve minor issues," Dacic told Zeri.
His position caused an uproar in Belgrade -- some suggested Dacic step down for publicly voicing a stance contrary to the government's.
However, the government's PR co-ordinator, Slobodan Homen, told the Belgrade media that Dacic would not suffer any consequences, as he had made it clear in the interview that he was voicing a personal opinion.
But Dacic's statement is not an isolated case when it comes to the opinions expressed by Serbian officials lately.
The head of the Belgrade team for negotiations with Pristina, Borislav Stefanovic, recently answered a journalist's question regarding the potential partition of Kosovo by saying that for Serbia "all options are open for discussion."
Reacting to Dacic's statement, Deputy Prime Minister Verica Kalanovic said the cabinet had not discussed division, but added that "the initiative should be reviewed".
On the other hand, Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said the talks with Pristina were "exclusively within the framework of the Constitution of Serbia", which defines Kosovo as an "inalienable" part of the country.
Dusan Janjic, with the Forum for Ethnic Relations NGO, told SETimes that the idea of partitioning Kosovo is not new on the political scene and was previously promoted by former Yugoslav President Dobrica Cosic.
"However, a public debate was never launched on the issue, hence it is impossible to say how the citizens would react to the idea," Janjic told SETimes.
He said that he thinks the idea of dividing Kosovo is supported by Serbian President Boris Tadic's circle, but said he does not think Belgrade could make that idea reality, since both the Kosovo Albanians and a number of influential Western countries, spearheaded by the US, are against it.
Former US diplomat Daniel Server told Radio Free Europe the US would not back the partitioning of Kosovo, as that would negatively affect the entire region -- primarily Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia.
Among the reactions from Kosovo, Milan Ivanovic, head of the Serb National Council of Northern Kosovo, where Serbs are the majority population, said the partition idea was anti-constitutional.
Ivanovic added that partitioning would be bad for Serbia, because it would get only 5% of the territory populated by Serbs, which has little economic resources.
The notion was also dismissed by Kosovo Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi.
"That is a backward idea, for which there is no room.
While we are trying to be part of a united Europe such ideas are unacceptable, both for our government and the international community."
