18/05/2011
(The Sofia Echo, Xinhua - 18/05/11;
UN Office on Drugs and Crime, UN Information Service, UN News Centre, AKI, Epoch Times - 17/05/11)
Citizens of the Western Balkans view corruption as the third most important issue, after unemployment and poverty that their countries need to address, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) said in a new study Tuesday (May 17th).
The report, "Corruption in the Western Balkans:
Bribery as Experienced by the Population", is based on a survey conducted last year among more than 28,000 people in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia.
The main focus of the study, funded by the European Commission (EC), was on the actual experience of administrative corruption, rather than people's perceptions.
According to the UNODC, "one in six respondents was exposed to some form of bribery with a public official in the 12 months before the survey."
Cash payments were found to be the primary form of bribery in the region:
two-thirds of all bribes were paid in cash last year.
But there were big differences among the countries.
In Albania, for instance, cash payments accounted for the vast majority of bribes, while the other types of bribery, such as the giving of food and drink, of valuables or other goods to a public official were described as "rare exceptions".
There were significant differences in the average amount of bribes paid in cash in the seven Western Balkan countries, ranging from 103 euros in Albania and 174 euros in Kosovo to 1,212 euros in Macedonia.
People in BiH had to pay 222 euros for a public service, while those in Serbia paid 349 euros, and those in Croatia and Montenegro -- 410 euros and 480 euros, respectively.
Of those who admitted to have paid at least one bribe last year, 28% said they had done so to receive better treatment.
As many respondents cited speeding up a procedure as the reason for this, while 16% said they resorted to it to avoid paying a fine;
12% said the money helped them finalise a procedure.
UNODC Executive Director Yury Fedotov praised the countries for acknowledging the need to conduct the survey and for their efforts to curb corruption.
"The areas highlighted in this report provide us with a realistic viewpoint of the on-the-ground situation, which is so critical to authorities as we collectively work together in countering corrupt practices at all levels," he said.
According to EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele, the study "offers a very useful assessment" of the corruption situation in the Western Balkans.
"The European Commission has been following this issue very closely and attaches great importance to this issue, undoubtedly one of the most important benchmarks for any candidate or potential candidate country wishing to fulfill its European perspective," he noted.
