22/06/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 22/06/11
In the small Turkish town of Masukiye, about 120km east of Istanbul, a 32-year-old woman named Ozlem has her fortune told.
Tradition holds that after finishing a Turkish coffee, the cup is flipped over and a fortune is read from the grounds.
"This is your last chance," the woman reading the fortune says.
Ozlem, who is worried that she will never get married, has just begun a new relationship.
In Turkey, women on average get married at the age of 23.
Ozlem feels that she is becoming too old and hopes this relationship is successful.
Many Turkish women feel pressured to get married and have children -- from family, society, and even Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who has urged every Turkish woman to have at least three children.
Many women stop working after getting married and starting a family.
Ayse Gunasuy, feminist and executive committee member of the Human Rights Association of Turkey, explains that it is not so much Turkish society that pressures women to get married and have children.
Rather, she argues, the pressure comes from inside the women themselves.
"The perception of a woman as a wife and mother before everything else is so internalised that there is no need for pressure from the society, women themselves prefer leaving their jobs to take care of their children," she said.
Gunasuy highlighted that women with children, not just in Turkey, but also all over the world, tend to think of themselves as mothers before anything else.
"Many women can feel that [they are being judged as bad mothers for not quitting their jobs], due to the age old perception of women as a mother, not only in Turkey, but everywhere in the world," explained Gunasuy.
According to the 2010 paper, "Recent Trends in Female Labour Force Participation in Turkey", written by the State Planning Organisation of the Republic of Turkey and the World Bank, only about 25% of working age women are active in the labour market.
Most of the women who do work are in the agricultural sector, which explains why women living in the cities have lower labour participation rates (21.4%) than women living in the countryside (35.8%).
However, Gunasuy said that the number of working mothers is actually rising, not just among wealthy families, but also lower-income sections of the society.
"Some industries such as textiles, for example, [are] heavily dependent on mother workers," she said.
In a rapidly changing country with a young population, however, traditions are not for everyone and are constantly being challenged.
A married woman in her late 20s, Seyda Gunduz Inan, says she will never give into pressure to stop working after she has children.
"Life is expensive where I live and to raise a kid without enough money is difficult," she explained.
"I am a well-educated citizen and I should use it for the sake of my nation."
Banu Karakas, a 23-year-old student in Istanbul, says she will not marry, despite parental pressure.
Instead, she aspires to be a teacher.
Even if she decides to give birth she will not give up a meaningful job.
"Marriage in Turkey is part of the chain of life," she added, saying it is a chain she hopes to break.
For others tradition holds.
Ozlem will finally get her wish.
In July she marries.
