24/03/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 24/03/11
That the Serbian public has high expectations from Moscow was demonstrated this week by the lavish welcome given Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin. 
He arrived in Belgrade on Wednesday (March 23rd) to meet with President Boris Tadic and other top officials.
Hundreds of people gathered outside the Palace of Serbia, where the talks were being held, to greet the Russian leader. 
When Putin showed up at a football game between two youth clubs --Belgrade's Red Star and Moscow's Zenit -- local fans began singing the Russian song "Kalinka" and unfurled banners with messages of welcome. 
The game ended with a highly diplomatic score, 1:1.
In recent years, Russia's influence has been buoyed by major investments, such as Gazprom Neft's purchase of a majority share in the oil company NIS, and by plans for the South Stream gas pipeline to run through Serbia. 
Prospects for investment and economic co-operation were high on the agenda during Putin's visit as well.
He confirmed that Russian companies will help Serbia build railroads. 
Serbian construction workers, meanwhile, will take part in preparations for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi and the 2018 FIFA World Cup.
"We would like to utilise the great experience of our Serbian partners in the construction of tourist facilities," Putin said.
Tadic said he received assurances that the South Stream project would be implemented in the coming years. 
The pipeline, he said, is of great importance for the entire European continent.
He went on to say that Gazprom's investment in NIS yielded results, as the company is generating profits. 
Both countries are interested in the participation of NIS in regional markets, Tadic said, adding that he expects future investments in the Pancevo oil refinery.
He expressed Serbia's gratitude to Russia for providing a $200m loan to help Serbia cope with the global economic crisis, and for backing Belgrade on the Kosovo issue.
According to political analyst Vladimir Goati, however, the public should not overestimate Moscow's ability to help the Serbian economy.
Russia, he said, "is dealing with its own problems; hence one should not expect it -- despite its desire -- to invest in Serbia more than it has been doing so far," he told SETimes. 
The Russian leadership sometimes overestimates its economic and diplomatic capabilities, fuelling high expectations, he added.
Energy remains the driving force in the Belgrade-Moscow relationship regardless of any other issues that are put on the table, Goati said.
"It is necessary for Serbia to have the South Stream pipeline pass through its territory and that is where, in my opinion, the importance of Putin's visit lies," he said.
EU integration was also a key topic of discussion during the visit. 
The Russian leader insisted that Moscow is not worried about Serbia's ambitions to join the bloc.
"We will carefully monitor and work together on preventing European integration from damaging Russian-Serbian relations," he said.
Tadic replied that although Serbia is determined to attain membership, it also has a "strategic interest in co-operating with Russia".
"I see no way of the EU resolving its energy issues without partnership with Russia," Tadic said. 
"Serbia will be part of that arrangement too."
