22/06/2011
(The Sofia Echo, Europolitics, AKI, Beta, EU - 21/06/11)
Praising Montenegro for its reform progress, EU officials said on Tuesday (June 21st) that the Adriatic republic could get the green light for starting entry talks with the Union by the end of this year.
"We are very happy about the developments in Montenegro -- a country closest among the Western Balkan states to start membership negotiations," Hungarian Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Zsolt Nemeth said in Luxembourg.
He made the statement at a joint news conference with Montenegrin Foreign Minister Milan Rocen and EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele, following the second meeting of the Stabilisation and Association Council held between the 27-nation bloc and Montenegro.
Montenegro gained formal recognition as an EU candidate country in December 2010, but was not given a starting date for its membership negotiations.
It was told instead that it must meet requirements in seven priority areas -- rule of law, judicial and public administration reform, combating organised crime and corruption, media freedom and minority rights -- before the talks can begin.
"Today, Montenegro convinced me again that it will fulfil the criteria and can start negotiations soon," Nemeth said.
Podgorica's progress in meeting the requirements will be assessed by the European Commission (EC) in a report, due to be released in October.
If that assessment is positive and the bloc's Brussels-based executive arm recommends opening accession talks with Montenegro, the EU leaders are expected to endorse a decision to that effect during their summit in December.
Promising that the EC report will be "both rigorous and fair", Fuele praised the Balkan nation for its "sound efforts" to meet criteria for joining the bloc, as well as for its "constructive and stabilising" role in the region.
"The new openness demonstrated by the government towards civil society and the media is highly commendable, as they play a major role in the country's EU integration process," he said.
"Furthermore, a number of decisive reforms and important legislative changes are under way.
What is now needed is to complete this process and ensure that reforms are coherent and sustainable."
Rocen was confident that Podgorica will take the needed steps in the next few months in order to secure a positive assessment in the fall.
"This is an encouragement, and we are hopeful that if we keep up the hard work, we can start accession talks after October," he said.
Brussels officials also underscored the need for "hard work" by countries hoping to join the Union in statements during the annual Western Balkans Forum held in Luxembourg on Monday.
The conclusion of Croatia's membership negotiations was one of the most important among them.
The arrest of former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic was another crucial development, which brightened Serbia's EU horizon.
Macedonia's June 5th elections "were perhaps the best in the last decade", according to Fuele.
"This year is an opportunity to renew momentum in the enlargement process," he said, urging the Balkan countries "to redouble their efforts, to deliver reforms in key areas, and to tackle regional issues".
Reforms of the judiciary and public administration, strengthening the rule of law and the fight against corruption and organised crime have often been cited as priority tasks for most of the Balkan countries.
