24/03/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 24/03/11
Nihat Ozgun missed several business trips to EU countries last year, but not through negligence on his part.
Rather, he says, his required visa repeatedly failed to come through in time.
"Each time we applied to the [EU] consulates they somehow forgot, or failed to finish the visa processing in time," he told SETimes, calling the procedure "broken and unjust".
The 46-year-old project manager at the Samsun-based IT Company, on the Black Sea north coast of Turkey, says that when he and his colleagues attempted to meet with their European partners, they had to wait more than two months for their visas to be approved.
"It is time the [EU and Turkish] governments set aside all their political interests and think about common citizens," he said.
"It is absurd that citizens of Serbia, Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina all enjoy visa-free travel to Europe, whereas Turkish businessmen are often denied visas to attend trade fairs, and students cannot study here."
After nearly five decades of waiting in Europe's ante-room, Turkish businessmen are getting impatient.
Last month, EU interior ministers agreed to start a dialogue with Ankara on the issue, but there's a hitch:
Austria, Cyprus, France, Greece, Germany and The Netherlands all say they oppose lifting visa requirements for Turkish citizens.
Ankara, meanwhile, insists it will not sign a readmission agreement until those requirements are removed.
"Turkey in no way accepts different treatment," the foreign ministry said in a statement.
According to Ulas Doga Eralp, an assistant professor at Sabancı University, the impasse is symptomatic of an "overall negative stance towards Turkey".
"At a time when Turkish public opinion is questioning the viability of the EU as a partner, the bloc's interior ministers' insistence on maintaining the unfair visa regulations could not have come at a more inconvenient timing," he said.
The current policy hinders trade relations while restricting freedom of travel for citizens of a candidate country, he said.
Meanwhile, the EU collects billions of euros annually in visa fees.
Alexander Burgin, assistant professor at Izmir University of Economics, takes an optimistic view.
"Turkey is now in the comfortable situation to demand talks about visa liberalisation because it can refer to the link between a readmission agreement and visa liberalisation talks that the EU made in recent readmission agreements with third countries," he told SETimes.
Visa waivers are likely for some groups, such as students and researchers, and multiple-entry visas could be provided for business executives, he said.
And even if quick progress towards visa liberalisation cannot be expected, Burgin said, it is significant that the European Commission was able to secure the political backing for initiating a dialogue.
That, he added, could bring about a new dynamic in the stalled EU accession talks.
For Ozgun, however, time is of the essence.
"If we wait for more than a year I might lose my partners in Europe and our company will have to switch to local markets or Asia," he said.
