24/03/2011
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 24/03/11
Macedonia's newly formed Information Technology and Administration Ministry is responsible for professionalising the country's public administration and bringing it up to EU standards.
Ivo Ivanovski, who heads up the ministry, spoke to SETimes about the upcoming reforms and their importance to Macedonia's EU integration.
SETimes: What are the main changes brought about by the new law on public administration?
Ivo Ivanovski: The law will enter into force in April, and all public institutions must submit data within three months on the number of employees, gender, equitable employment and employee profession. 
In short, we are creating a public institutions registry.
Unlike past governments in Macedonia, this government will conduct an analysis of public institutions to make the administration more efficient. 
It is an exceptionally important issue for us and will be a central part of the government's 2011 activities to be able to satisfy citizens' demands.
SETimes: What institutional changes will take place?
Ivanovski: We moved many employees from other ministries to the new ministry of IT and administration which now numbers 144. 
It will carry out a significant number and quality of reforms more quickly.
Regarding efficiency, in the next three to four years, the ministry will initiate many projects to completely transform the concept of how public employees work. 
Our goal is to satisfy the requirements of the citizens and the business community: a timely response by public institutions to every question or request, and a more skilled work performance.
Also, we will introduce IT technologies and practice for public employees, which will make their work easier and more efficient as well. 
Citizens will get most services electronically, saving time and travel. 
We live in an era of technological interconnectedness and must keep up with the advances.
SETimes: Given claims that the public administration is politicised, how can it be depoliticised?
Ivanovski: The main goal of the reforms in the administration is depoliticisation. 
Macedonia must have a skilled and responsible administration able to deal with political and economic challenges ahead. 
The new law sets much higher criteria for hiring public employees. 
We want to prevent politics from interfering with public administration and stand ready to implement the criteria which are part of the European Community's values and are preconditions for membership.
SETimes: To what extent did the government tap international experience as well as contacts abroad regarding reforms in public administration?
Ivanovski: Surely international experiences and contacts helped us in finding applicable solutions through the new law. 
For example, last year we examined closely the IT reforms by the Estonian government which helped professionalise and make the work of public servants more efficient. 
We examined the possibilities for implementing their best practices in Macedonia. 
Those are processes which will allow for greater transparency as well. 
Estonia achieved them at the highest level by excluding or reducing the number of people in decision-making. 
In addition, we examined the US and other European countries' best practices.
SETimes: How can public servants advance under the new system and at the same time have increased responsibilities?
Ivanovski: Under the new law, public employees will be able to advance much more quickly, but they must go through a newly introduced system of a "trial year" on the job. 
In addition to the standard tests, we are also introducing psychological and personal integrity tests. 
The candidate's education and grade average are already factored in.
We also have not made it easier to fire employees. 
If a public worker is removed from his position because of failure to perform his work, the Agency for Administration will act as a secondary commission and will determine whether, based on the person's complaint, he can return to work. 
The procedure's timeframe -- which used to be very drawn out -- will be significantly reduced. 
A commission will be formed which will determine based on relevant evidence whether the employee acted responsibly on the job, and the Agency may -- or may not -- bring the civil servant back to the job in a much shorter time.
