22/06/2011
By Henry Shapiro for Southeast European Times in Athens – 22/06/2011
Syntagma Square, which lies directly opposite the Greek national parliament building in Athens, is strewn with hundreds of signs articulating the diverse voices of the protest movement against Greek government austerity measures and deals with the EU and IMF.
"Democracy and Capitalism: Incompatible Concepts." "Nazi Merkel, Nazi Sarkozy." "Parliament, TV, and the bankers: They work together." "Signatures for Referendum: Democracy Now." These are a small sample of the slogans that meet the eyes of Greek lawmakers as they look out towards the square.
Together they imply distrust of the government, belief that it has been corrupted by the interests of a financial elite, and conviction that Prime Minister George Papandreou is a stooge of foreign interests. 
But they don’t articulate an alternative solution to the budget dilemma faced by Greek parliamentarians.
Conversation with protesters in Syntagma reveals, however, that most do have a common vision for how the government should respond to the crisis.
Babis Syriopoulos, a union member distributing stickers that read, "We do not owe, we do not sell, we do not pay," explained to SETimes that the people of Greece were not responsible for the debt, and that it is not them who should pay for it. 
He urged default.
When asked about the suffering that would entail for public sector employees, recipients of public services, and pensioners, he responded: "Most of the money we borrow goes to the banks," not to the Greek people. 
"At first it will hurt, but afterwards a new system will emerge, and the problems will be solved."
Dimitria, who sat near a banner reading, "When the people demonstrate peacefully, they disperse them with chemicals," complained of unemployment among Greek youth, police brutality, and government suppression.
She loathed the "three hundred bastards in parliament", calling them all corrupt. 
She also urged default, saying that the debt belonged to "the bankers", not to the Greek people. 
When asked about the consequences of default, she said that the government was not trustworthy and that Greece will be bankrupted in either case. 
"Better to suffer in freedom than in prison."
Sophia Tzadari, a member of a group called the “New Left Current” who was camping out in Syntagma, said that she protested because Greek youth face unemployment and poverty. 
She also urged default.
When asked about the consequences of default for the Greek people, she said that the Greek government had more money than it lets on. 
"It’s a matter of priorities," she said. 
"Instead of taking from pensioners, they could take money from the Church and army. 
This would be a big political change, but that’s what we want: big change."
On June 28th, the Greek parliament will decide on the currently proposed austerity measures, passage of which are a condition of further IMF and EU support. 
The protesters in Syntagma would prefer to default on the debt and to accept the consequences, hoping that the shock could catalyze the rise of a more equitable system. 
Or, as one sign declares in English: "You got the disease, we got the solution: Revolution."
It is likely, however, that the measures will pass and Greece will receive some IMF and EU support. 
In that event, protesters vow to stay in Syntagma indefinitely. 
As one Greek sign reads, "The protests will last until victory."
