21/06/2011
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 21/06/11
When The Economist magazine urged voters to back the opposition CHP in Turkey’s recent general election, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan hinted Israel could be to blame.
“The international media, because they are backed by Israel, wouldn’t be happy with the continuation of the AK Party government,” said Erdogan, who won re-election on June 12th.
Having been lauded for years by international media organisations as a democratising force driving Turkey towards EU membership, the party faced a barrage of negative coverage in the lead up to the poll.
Among those to harden their lines were the Financial Times and Wall Street Journal, which compared Erdogan to the autocratic Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad.
Fears of growing authoritarianism underpinned much of the criticism, and some analysts point to the arrest in March of two high-profile investigative journalists as marking a watershed in liberal Western attitudes to the AK Party.
"When I spoke to my liberal friends in Washington up until a few months ago, they would say about the AK Party, 'Aren’t they taking Turkey into the EU?' Now when I ask them what they think, they say, "Aren’t they the ones arresting journalists?'" said Soner Cagaptay, director of the Turkey Research Programme at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
Aengus Collins, an Istanbul-based political analyst, believes the journalists’ arrests led to a long-overdue change in media attitudes towards Turkish politics.
"The way the foreign media works, narratives and filters through which things are viewed become quite fixed and events on the ground can move on quite significantly before the filters get adjusted," said Collins.
"Everything in relation to Turkey was always pitched in terms of Western civilisation versus Islamic civilisation. 
People are now twigging that that’s not necessarily the spectrum that matters in Turkey. 
The buzzword at the moment is 'authoritarianism'."
But Andrew Finkel, a veteran journalist who has been based in Turkey for more than 20 years, believes the surge of criticism is as much a reflection of Turkey’s growing independence on the world stage.
"Turkey was always authoritarian," he said, pointing to the power granted to the state by the constitution, which was drafted by army officers following a coup in 1980, and which the AK Party has pledged to replace.
"One of the electoral messages of the government was that they were no longer a government that receives advice but one that gives advice. 
It was a slightly swaggering stance because the problems that existed in Turkey eight to 20 years ago still exist to some extent," he said.
Becoming more active in the world inevitably means attracting more criticism, he added. 
"As Turkey becomes genuinely powerful and more prosperous in its own right, it becomes a global actor, pursuing its own interests, and it becomes as hypocritical as everyone else."
But while thumbing its nose at the West may have helped the AKP win nationalist votes, if it cannot regain its good image, it could store up trouble for itself, Cagaptay believes.
"Turkey is a part of the global economy and much of the AKP and Erdogan’s success has been driven by the phenomenal economic growth they have delivered, and that’s built on the fact that the AKP is seen as a friendly face to the West," he said.
Collins worries that if Turkey’s dialogue with the West deteriorates further, its democratisation process could suffer. 
"The biggest danger is a narrowing of the field of vision in terms of democracy and what democratisation requires," he said.
"The EU relationship was all about democratic reform. 
This isn’t the case with the relationship between Turkey and the countries of the broader Middle East."
