23/03/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times – 23/03/11
A week has passed since gunmen opened fire on one of Turkey's most beloved entertainers, singer Ibrahim Tatlises.
Police say they are investigating leads that tie the attack to the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), which has been threatening Kurdish intellectuals and public figures who do not agree with its policies.
Eighteen people have been detained in connection with the Tatlises case, including prime suspect Abdullah Ucmak.
A longtime adversary of Tatlises, he allegedly solicited the services of the alleged hitman in the shooting, Ersin Altun, and driver Yunus Ayik.
Seven of those detained are said to be members of the PKK, while three -- including lawyer Ruhsen Mahmutoglu -- belong to the pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP).
E-mails that connect the shooting to the PKK were found on the lawyer's computer during the investigation, police sources say, adding that there is also evidence of direct contact between Mahmutoglu and Ucmak, as well as a blueprint of the Maslak Acıbadem Hospital, where Tatlises is receiving treatment for a gunshot wound to the head.
Ucmak was previously jailed for two attacks on the singer, in 1998 and 2003.
The ex-wife and ex-girlfriend of Tatlises were also shot and injured in separate incidents several years ago.
"Whatever the motive, this very well prepared attack suggests long-time connections," says Kemal Ocak, a veteran police investigator from Istanbul.
"These detentions demand a serious investigation."
"Of course, authorities should also pay attention to every single signal that comes from the rebel groups," he said, adding however that shadowy business dealings should not be overlooked as another possible factor in the shooting.
"Our police are accommodated very well to investigate such kind of cases," he said.
Tatlises, who is involved in the construction and restaurant business and even owns his own bus company, was among several prominent Kurds who attended a high-profile meeting with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan a few months ago.
The event helped promote the Turkish government's "Kurdish opening" reform initiative.
Yagmur Melek, an Ankara-based investigative journalist, says that although probes into Turkey's business underworld are common, the Tatlises case is unusually complex.
"Besides being a Kurd, a singer, a businessperson and now a political figure who is going to run for election, Tatlises has for a long time been a target of criminal groups.
All the links suggested so far by the investigation are both plausible and implausible," he said.
The incident, Melek added, should serve as a reminder that Turkey's recent prosperity and development have not eliminated its criminal underworld.
Joshua W. Walker, a researcher on Turkey at Brandeis University's Crown Center for Middle East Studies, agrees.
"This story reveals that there are still skeletons in the closet of Turkish business, just like the deep state that has been so feared in Turkey," he said.
"The government has shown a willingness to take on significant actors," Walker told SETimes.
"But like all democracies, the parties in power have their own business constituencies to look after and only time will tell how serious Turkey as a whole is about combating the underworld of the Turkish business community."
"It's unfortunate that it takes a crisis like this to reveal the darker side of Turkish business, which has generally been a force for democratisation and growth," he said.
Tatlises' condition has improved significantly, according to a statement from Maslak Acıbadem Hospital.
The singer has already started to listen to music again, his doctors said.
