23/03/2011
(Euobserver, RFE/RL, The Guardian, Euronews, ACT Media - 23/03/11;
NATO, VOA, CNN, BBC, Telegraph, Sofia News Agency, NATO - 22/03/11)
Turkey has offered to provide ships as part of a NATO operation aimed at enforcing an arms embargo the UN imposed on Libya, the state-run Anadolu news agency reported Wednesday (March 23rd), citing alliance and government sources.
Ankara says it can contribute four frigates, a submarine and a support vessel.
In all, six countries have offered to send as many as 16 vessels to help keep the embargo in place, NATO General Pierre St-Arnand said at a press conference.
They include an Italian command ship, frigates from Turkey, Britain, Spain, Greece, Italy, Romania, Canada and the United States, submarines from Turkey, and auxiliary ships from Italy and Turkey.
On Tuesday, NATO ambassadors agreed on the plan to deploy vessels and planes to the area off Libya's coast.
"They will conduct operations to monitor, report and, if needed, interdict vessels suspected of carrying illegal arms or mercenaries," NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said as he announced the decision.
Consensus was reached after two days of difficult talks on the 28-nation alliance's role in an air campaign launched last week in order to enforce a UN-mandated no-fly zone over Libya and protect civilians from attacks by Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's regime.
Ahead of Rasmussen's announcement, Romanian President Traian Basescu convened the Supreme Council for National Defence (CSAT), which approved the country's participation in the Libya action, Bucharest-based ACTMedia News Agency reported on Wednesday.
"On March 20th, the operational plan for the imposition of the embargo on arms sales to Libya was approved.
Today, the operational plan for the no-fly zone was approved," it quoted Basescu as saying.
He said a frigate carrying 205 Romanian sailors and two naval officers would participate in the naval blockade in the Central Mediterranean.
"The CSAT decided to get Romania involved in enforcement of the embargo on Libya with the King Ferdinand frigate and two Navy staff commissioned officers," he further noted.
"This means Romania will deploy 205 troops aboard the King Ferdinand and two staff commissioned officers."
A three-month operation in the Mediterranean would cost Romania 4.5m euros, Basescu added.
