21/06/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/06/11
Visit the Facebook pages of most Serbian political parties and you will find photos of the key figures and their messages to citizens. 
You may also be able to view video clips of recent rallies, party meetings, interviews and other media appearances.
President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DP) boasts about 2,900 Facebook fans and about 1,700 Twitter followers. 
The party uses social media to promote activities of its state officials, enabling visitors to keep abreast of visits and speeches by the president, the environment minister, the defence minister and the mayor of Belgrade.
"No serious party can survive on the political scene unless it runs a campaign on the internet and constantly communicates with the citizens," says DP spokeswoman Jelena Trivan."[Social media] is the simplest way of communication without mediators and providing answers to some important questions."
The internet also provides a venue for airing topics and problems that are not routinely covered in other media, Trivan added.
The main opposition Serbian Progressive Party (SNS) has around 1,800 Facebook fans and over 300 Twitter followers. 
Apart from space for posting statements by party officials from news conferences and other party activities, the SNS Facebook page serves to communicate with supporters.
In one recent campaign, the party has used its Facebook page to ask Serbs whether they favour their country joining NATO.
SNS officials claim the party is being shut out from the mainstream media. 
Facebook and Twitter, they say, can help them get their message across.
"The state of the media in Serbia is such that there has never been such a great media blockade and control by the regime as now, which is why the internet is the only way for us to present our members, supporters and citizens our party's positions on all current political topics," the party's head of IT communications, Aleksandra Djuric, told SETimes.
"The SNS is interested in what the citizens have to say and the internet enables us to assess the citizens' mood and problems in a realistic way," she added.
At the same time, Djuric said, opponents of the party have also turned to the web and social media to launch malicious attacks. 
"We've even seen examples of abuse with the opening of Deputy President Aleksandar Vucic's internet profile, accompanied by malicious postings. 
When we tried to contact those people, it proved fruitless, so we ended up reporting the matter to the police, which resulted in the shutdown of the profile," she explained.
The SNS understands that the internet is the most efficient way to attract young people, who would rather log on to Facebook than read a newspaper or watch a political show on TV, Djuric said.
"Some young people have contacted us on Facebook and expressed a desire to join the SNS and become volunteers, and gain knowledge that they can later use in finding a job. 
We have always helped them and will try to pass our knowledge and experience on to them," she said.
With Serbia gearing up for next year's general election, there is growing pressure on politicians and candidates to become more Facebook-aware. 
With tight races and fierce campaigning ahead, the ability to harness social media could be the decisive factor.
