19/11/2010
(Bloomberg, The Irish Times - 19/11/10; Reuters, AP, AFP, FT, The Wall Street Journal, BBC, ANA-MPA - 18/11/10)
Greece unveiled the final draft of its 2011 budget Thursday (November 18th), pledging further austerity measures to meet the terms of a 110 billion-euro bailout from the IMF and the EU.
The need for additional state spending cuts arose after a revision of the country's 2009 public deficit by Eurostat, the EU statistics office, on Monday showed it as standing at 15.4% of GDP and not at 13.6%, as previously thought. 
This "has changed the starting point", Prime Minister George Papandreou said at a cabinet meeting Thursday.
Under the first draft of the 2011 budget, drawn up last month, Greece was planning to reduce its budget deficit by 2.2 billion euros next year. 
But the new figures released this week forced it to consider bigger cuts to meet its commitments to the EU and the IMF.
The finance ministry said the goal is to narrow the budget gap by 5 billion euros to 17 billion euros in 2011, or 7.4% of GDP. 
Under the bailout deal, the country's 2010 public deficit was to stand at about 8% of GDP. 
The figures released on Thursday showed however that it is expected to be much higher, with the forecast set at 9.4% of GDP.
In order to meet the 2011 targets agreed with the EU and the IMF, Greece's ruling PASOK party is planning to raise the VAT rates from 11% to 13%, to cut government, health sector and defence spending, as well as to impose a nominal pension freeze. 
It is also promising to significantly reduce the operational and wage costs of money-losing public utilities and to step up the fight against tax evasion.
"This is a difficult budget that continues on the course of the previous year, one that continues the effort after the country could no longer borrow on the market, one that strives to maintain job creation and growth," Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou said.
Under the final draft of next year's budget, the economy is forecast to contract by 4.2% in 2010 and by 3% in 2011, rather than by 2.6% as projected last month. 
According to Greece's national news agency ANA-MPA, the government's expectations are that the country will post a positive growth of 1.1% of GDP in 2012 and of 2.1% of GDP the following year.
The figures in the budget draft also suggest that unemployment is expected to grow from 12.1% this year to 14.6% in 2011, with Papaconstantinou admitting on Thursday that, although it was not the government's goal, it might be forced to cut public sector jobs.
"To reduce the deficit in a state enterprise, you either have to increase revenues or reduce costs," the AP quoted him as saying. 
"We are not starting out with plans to cut jobs, but each (public enterprise) will be considered case by case."
In a bid to boost revenues in tourism, a key sector for the Greek economy, the government has decided to nearly half the VAT rate on tourist services from the current 11% down to 6.5%.
"We have not yet won the battle but we are now in a better position to deal with the real problems ... 
a wasteful state, problematic state companies and tax evasion," Reuters quoted Papaconstantinou as saying at a news conference after submitting the budget to parliament. 
He said specific measures to curb tax evasion would be announced later this month.
The country's 2011 budget will be put to a final vote in parliament on December 22nd, and is expected to pass easily, as PASOK enjoys a comfortable majority in the legislature.
Meanwhile, private sector workers are planning to stage a 24-hour general strike a week ahead of the vote to protest the planned austerity measures and are likely to be joined by public sector employees, according to Reuters.
"Our fears are confirmed," the news agency quoted Yannis Panagopoulos, the head of the private sector union GSEE, as saying in a statement.
