20/06/2011
By H.K. 
Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 20/06/11
Eurozone finance ministers did not commit Monday (June 20th) to a critical 12 billion-euro tranche of the 110 billion-euro bailout for Greece, vowing instead to wait until the country passes an austerity package and tax increases before signing off on the loan disbursement.
"We cannot make an engagement without knowing if the Greek parliament ... 
endorses the commitments made by Greece," chairman of the 17-member minister group, Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker, said.
The BBC reports stock markets and the euro fell on Monday due to the lack of a resolution.
The decision is a culmination of a frenzied week in which embattled Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou reshuffled the government Friday (June 17th) amid a failed attempt to work out a power-sharing agreement with the centre-right opposition and intensified international anxiety of a Greek sovereign default.
Meanwhile, Papandreou announced his intention to hold a referendum in the autumn on reforms to the constitution and political system.
Foot-dragging by Papandreou's socialist government to convince Greek society that the latest austerity measures, tax hikes, accelerated reforms and privatisations are imperative to stave off bankruptcy exacerbated the gloomy forecasts about the economy in the eurozone and beyond.
EU Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn tried to calm the situation by saying the EU and the IMF would nevertheless release the upcoming the 12 billion-euro tranche in early July.
Even more importantly, a conciliatory Angela Merkel retreated last Friday from Germany's insistence that private sector bondholders share a significant part of the burden of a second Greek bailout.
On Friday, a front-page opinion of the respected Athens financial daily Naftemporiki -- referring to the Spanish-inspired "Indignados" sit-down protests in Athens' main square -- expressed the common sentiment.
"The third Hellenic democracy is dead ... 
whatever comprised its core lies as an unburied corpse in Syntagma Square. 
The peculiar dance of the 'indignados' stubbornly refuses its burial in the name of defending vested rights from the 'good old days of credit-based prosperity' ... 
Yet, the stench of this corpse is poisoning the country's present and threatening to cause irreversible damage to the national body."
It argued this daily "people power" phenomenon sapped support for the government's austerity package.
Outspoken neo-liberal free press publisher Giorgos Kyrtsos is equally biting. 
"Failure to re-negotiate the Memorandum does not exclude, but rather mandates the improvement in its content, by replacing specific economic measures with other measures of equal fiscal value. 
Despite the obvious difficulties, we are obliged to act based on the European system, so that we are not faced with the Balkanisation of our economy and political life," Kyrtsos said.
To avoid such a prospect, Papandreou announced his intent to swear-in a new government last Wednesday, hours after reportedly telling conservative opposition New Democracy party leader Antonis Samaras that he was willing to step aside in a possible "consensus" or all-party government. 
The confirmation of the remark by a government spokesman caused a local media frenzy, forcing Papandreou to rule out the prospect on national television.
A vote of confidence is set for June 21st and the government is aware it faces collapse if it does not get backing for the austerity measures.
The eurozone ministers' decision puts additional pressure on the Greek parliament to pass the 28 billion euros in spending cuts and tax increases which were agreed to with international lenders in May.
The only highlight of Friday's reshuffle was the replacement of Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou by Defence Minister Evangelos Venizelos, a previous internal party rival of Papandreou.
Papaconstantinou was a vociferous critic of the repeated downgrades by Moody's and Standard & Poor's.
Even if Greece receives the 12 billion euros to prevent a default in mid-July, the eurozone finance ministers acknowledged Athens will require a new bail-out to ensure the country will not default early next year.
