20/06/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 20/06/11
In the 1970s, his cassettes were smuggled across borders and passed surreptitiously from hand to hand. 
Now, Kurdish musician Sivan Perwer's songs can be heard with a single click of the mouse and performances of his protest music can be watched on his MySpace profile.
Such is the change that social media have brought to the Kurdish population of Turkey, a group long denied the right to express itself socially, culturally and politically, and one that continues to fight for equal rights as citizens. 
Websites like Facebook and Twitter offer the younger generation of Kurds in particular a comparatively safe avenue of expression and a means to learn about and share aspects of their culture.
Ozgur Uckan, communications expert and professor at Bilgi University, notes that online political activism is correlated with the extent of political repression that the population faces. 
This, he says, explains why social media are so important for those in countries like Tunisia and why, in Turkey, "Kurdish youth are ahead of their Turkish peers when it comes to political awareness."
Mesut Gul, a Kurdish student from Adiyaman in southeastern Turkey, finds that articulating his Kurdish interests and identity "is easier on the internet, at least for now". 
Citing social and political pressure to assimilate, as well as the threat of physical violence, Gul explains that, "while you can find a secure environment on the internet, on the street you can't find it."
Emre Sahin, a Kurd who recently returned to Istanbul after studying in the United States, was raised speaking Turkish and is newly learning Kurdish. 
He says the internet has provided opportunities to learn about Kurdish culture and language, including an educational website his language teacher recommended.
A myriad of Kurdish Facebook pages exist, covering everything from traditional bread to politics. 
Today, the Facebook group Kurdish Culture boasts over 180,000 fans, Kurdish Language over 27,000 fans, and Kurdish History and Civilisation over 40,000 fans.
The utility of social media is not limited to increased cultural awareness, however. 
This is something Adnan Celik, a primary school teacher in the predominantly Kurdish city of Diyarbakir, is quick to emphasise. 
For him, as not only a teacher but an active member of a variety of civic organisations, such tools have enabled communication with a wide variety of people, event organisation and the efficient spread of information. 
Receiving online updates from the Kurdish news agency ANF also allows him to keep track of events that are largely ignored in the mainstream Turkish media, Celik says.
Gul describes being abroad when a Kurdish civilian was killed at a political protest earlier in the year and watching the Kurdish community react online, using social media tools. 
"The next day protests took place in different cities, and on the internet I could clearly see the mobilisation," he recalls.
"You're better able to watch and contribute to the agenda of debate and expression related to the Kurdish issue," Celik says. 
"Online, I can express much more loudly and forcefully a number of views and opinions that my teaching profession demands I keep silent about."
Sahin is more ambivalent about the efficacy of social media in his life and for Turkey's Kurds in general.
"It is important for people to be informed and for news to be disseminated quickly," he says, "but in Turkey not much has changed on the issues that I care about, and I am not sure as to what extent my web activism is effective."
