20/01/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 20/01/11
As is family tradition, Croatia's Ivica Kostelic stays in the top ten of international men's alpine skiing. 
From the look of things, however, 2011 could a year in which he proves dominant.
Kostelic won a World Cup super-combined event Friday (January 14th) in Wengen, Switzerland, followed by a triumph in the slalom -- his third and fourth victories in two weeks.
"This seems to be one of the best weekends in my life," he said after the races.
Kostelic, who plays electric guitar and enjoys rock and roll in addition to skiing, was named Croatian Sportsman of 2010. 
The award, he says, gave him the additional impetus to start winning big in 2011.
He picks up from where his sister, Janica Kostelic, left off when she retired in 2007 at age 25. 
Janica, a four-time Olympic champion who also won 30 times at the FIS World Cup, is one of Croatia's most beloved sports figures.
Ivica and Janica trained together. 
Their father, Ante Kostelic, also served as coach and mentor, demanding great discipline and commitment. 
Janica's career took off like a shooting star as she began racking up victories while still a teen.
Her brother also experienced success, though not to the same degree. 
But some say that he brings his own distinctive approach to the sport.
"Ivica is actually full of surprises. 
When you think that it is not his day and he will not win the race, he wins. 
Amazing," says Josipa Jakic, a student from Zagreb.
"What I like about him is the fact that he seems to be a very ordinary, normal guy. 
He is one of the top skiers in the world but does not show off like others. 
Just look at the football players," said Mario Lazic of Zagreb, a retired teacher who also likes skiing himself.
Kostelic's fans cheered for him fervently at the Sljeme Snow Queen Race at the beginning of January. 
Sljeme is his favourite race track as he started his training here, on the 1,033m-high mountain, just north of Zagreb.
Still, as if it were a curse, he placed second, as he has for the past three years.
"I know that one day I will win this race too. 
Even my father, who would surely complain if he could, did not say anything. 
This means I was skiing the way I should have and the result will come in the future," Kostelic said.
