16/12/2010
(FT, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg - 16/12/10; Bloomberg, Reuters, DPA, Deutsche Welle, The Sofia Echo, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool - 15/12/10)
All Bulgarian ambassadors and consuls who served as agents for the country's communist-era secret service will be recalled, Prime Minister Boyko Borisov pledged on Wednesday (December 15th).
"We must part ways with those people," he said a day after a commission concluded that nearly half of the current top diplomats abroad had collaborated with the former Darzhavna Sigurnost (State Security) before the 1989 fall of communism.
"Imagine these agents in Western European countries. 
They once worked against them as ideological enemies and now they are representing our government there," Borisov noted.
The so-called Dossier Commission said on Tuesday that a total of 218 individuals, or 47% of all 462 who have served as Bulgarian ambassadors, deputy mission chiefs and consuls during the past 21 years, were affiliated with the notorious secret service. 
Among them were 26 people who have already died and whose names could not be revealed under law.
The remaining 192 are identified as former agents, including more than 40 senior Bulgarian diplomats currently serving in Britain, Germany, Italy and ten other EU member states, in several Balkan countries, the UN and elsewhere in the world.
Foreign Minister Nickolay Mladenov said he was surprised to see that 45% of the current ambassadors are former secret agents, and that, instead of dropping, the number had actually increased in recent years.
"This is totally unacceptable. 
Bulgaria is a member of the EU and NATO, and this situation undermines confidence with our allies," Mladenov said.
He also noted that the government would table new legislation on diplomatic appointments early next year to eliminate the possibility of former communist collaborators serving as the country's representatives abroad.
He said the government asked President Georgi Parvanov, who approves all ambassadorial appointments, to recall all Bulgarian envoys abroad who have been involved with the former secret service.
By law, the foreign ministry nominates candidates for ambassador, but appointments, as well as dismissals, are subject to the president's approval.
Parvanov, whose second five-year term in office ends next year, rejects demands to recall the diplomats. 
Insisting that they contributed to the country's admission into NATO and the EU, he said he did not believe in "political purges". 
He did say that he was prepared to look at the diplomats' records to see if there was any grounds for reproach.
Speaking in an interview with private national Nova Television channel on Thursday morning, Mladenov stressed however that in the future, the government will not allow Bulgaria to be represented by ambassadors linked to the former secret service.
This practice must stop now, he said, warning that Bulgaria risks its reputation.
