18/11/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 18/11/10
Kosovo currently is without a parliament, and all eyes are on the upcoming snap elections, set for December 12th.
As parties form coalitions and prepare their candidate lists for the Friday (November 19th) deadline, public figures are airing their differences.
Local experts say the political landscape is volatile, and dramatic changes may be in store.
"Pre-election coalitions and statements by some of the coalition leaders signal a change of political alliances," political analyst Muharrem Nitaj told SETimes.
"There is an open possibility of the current prime minister forming an alliance with the New Kosovo Alliance, and probably with the minority parties.
A second possibility is that of a coalition between the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), together with the minority parties," he said.
Many will be watching the trajectory of Uke Rugova, son of the late President Ibrahim Rugova.
He and Bujar Bukoshi, who served as prime minister in Kosovo's government-in-exile during the Milosevic years, bolted from the LDK following a power struggle within the party.
Rugova and his family have accused the party and its new president, Isa Mustafa, of humiliating them with a late offer to add the late president's son to its candidate list.
He and Bukoshi are now fielding an alternate list, and have joined forces with Ramush Haradinaj and the AAK.
Haradinaj, who is in The Hague awaiting a retrial on war crimes charges, is one of several candidates who are either under investigation or facing a court case -- a fact that concerns EULEX.
"[When] someone is publicly known to be under investigation or judicial procedure, it would be better and more honourable, and better for the reputation of Kosovo, if they would not present themselves for public office until they have cleared their names," EULEX deputy chief Andy Sparks said on November 12th.
Two other candidates, Nexhat Daci and Albin Kurti, have had brushes with the law.
Daci, who tops the Democratic League of Dardania's (LDD) candidate list, was found guilty by a panel of two EULEX judges and one Kosovo judge for misappropriation in office.
Kurti, sentenced by EULEX for "obstructing official persons in performing their official duties", leads his Citizens Initiative List, which has proved a magnet for young people who feel cut out of politics.
Fatmir Limaj, a PDK candidate, responded to Sparks's statement.
Kosovo parties "stick to the law and not to the mood of individuals", he said.
The AAK, likewise, issued a statement saying the law does not prohibit Haradinaj from leading the party and being on the candidate list.
Almost all of the parties have begun making their pitches to voters, even though the campaign doesn't officially get under way until December 2nd.
Those hoping to shake up the status quo are vigorously blaming outgoing Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and his PDK, together with its former coalition ally the LDK, for mismanaging Kosovo's affairs.
But the outcome is far from certain, and none of the key players can be counted out.
According to Nitaj, the likely future coalition will be forged by those leaders who have a strong political base.
"Thaci and Haradinaj cannot be excluded," he said.
