18/06/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 18/06/11
"This road leads to Syria," the driver said.
The car goes up a road surrounded by hills of olive trees and dramatic valleys. 
Turkey's Hatay province has taken centre stage after a mass of Syrian refugees fled to the border area last week.
So far, more than 9,000 refugees have crossed the border into Turkey. 
More are expected to cross in the coming days, fleeing the army of Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad as it advances through the country's north.
"It is out of the question to close the door to our Syrian brothers," said Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu on Wednesday (June 15th) during his visit to Hatay province.
Most Turks have welcomed the refugees. 
Halit, a resident of Kolcular village, helped five Syrian refugees by driving them to Turkish authorities after they came across the border.
"They are good people, I have relatives in Syria," he said. 
He stood with two reporters looking at the border area for some time. 
In some areas it is open fields, separated only by barbed wire. 
Here dense shrubbery and trees made the exact borderline difficult to ascertain. 
"The river marks the border," Halit said, pointing to a small valley where a river flowed.
So far, the Turkish military has demonstrated they can secure the borders and handle the refugee crisis in a relatively organized manner by transporting them in trucks to camps or in ambulances to a local hospital if they are injured.
Still, despite the porous nature of the Turkish-Syrian border and cross-border familial ties, only small groups have been able to cross, bringing into question whether or not Turkey would be able to contain mass refugee flows.
At Guvecci, a mainly Arab village just across the border, the Turkish flag waves at a nearby military outpost. 
But despite the army's presence, a number of Syrians have been entering Turkey almost every day in order to get bread and bottled water.
The refugees are officially forbidden from speaking to the press, and the police and military will intervene if they see journalists conducting interviews. 
Turkey has been criticized by local and foreign media for not allowing reporters or human rights organizations other than the Turkish Red Crescent into refugee camps.
Many more Syrians will come across the border, said Mohammed, a Syrian man from a village in Idlib province. 
He estimated that there were around 5,000 people hiding in the mountains across the border, having fled the onslaught of the Syrian military.
Mohammed fled his town after government forces attacked, killing at least 32 people. 
"The village is empty now," he said.
Other refugees tell similar stories of violence. 
All of them say they would return their homes in Syria if it was safe to do so and democracy was established.
"We want democracy," said a Syrian man who is being treated in the Antakya state hospital. 
He was shot in the leg by Syrian security forces during a demonstration in his town.
"Turkey has been treating me very well. 
The people have been very kind," he said. 
"Turkey is a beautiful country," he added.
