17/05/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 17/05/11
Kultur Shock, a Seattle-based rock band with strong Balkan musical roots, concluded its 2011 Balkan tour in early April while promoting a new album, "Ministry of Kultur".
Their concerts in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, and Turkey confirmed that Kultur Shock has a devoted audience that will sing, dance and jump for more than two hours, while enjoying strong, loud, yet emotionally provoking sounds.
"I just love them.
Their music is breath-taking, and Gino, when you see him on stage singing, playing the tambourine and giving his all to us -- it's amazing," Zagreb student and concert goer Ana Jezic told SETimes.
"I would like them to play at my wedding some day," she added smiling.
Yet, Kultur Shock is not exactly a wedding band.
The group has strong roots in the Balkans as the band's frontman, Gino Yevdjevich, is from Sarajevo.
After the siege of Sarajevo he moved to the US with the help of Joan Baez, and in 1996 founded the band in Seattle.
Before immigrating, Yevdjevich had a successful career as a pop musician under the name "Gino Banana".
Initially, when Kultur Shock started, the music became stronger, the rhythm faster, and Yevdjevich sang in six different languages.
In the mid 1990's, Yevdjevich was influenced by Seattle grunge music and a friendship with Nirvana bass player, Chris Novoselic, who is of Croatian origin.
SETimes caught up with Yevdjevich at Zagreb's Boogaloo Club.
"It is not up to me to say why we are special but, the fact is that, probably, there is no other act or musical project like ours.
We have no goal.
Our only goal is to exist and continue working.
We don't want to become rich and famous.
We were already rich and famous with what we did earlier;
almost each one of us," the charismatic frontman says.
The band boasts a strong energetic presence, and Yevdjevich is always emotional when he sings for audiences in the Balkans.
He comes across as an alternative musician, but with a soft spot for all things Balkan reflected in the songs.
The band has six members, including two women -- American Paris Hurley plays the violin, Guy Davies from Indonesia plays bass guitar, Val Kiossovski, originally from Bulgaria plays the guitar, Amy Denio from Detroit plays the clarinet and saxophone, while Chris Stormquist from New York plays drums.
Former band members include musicians from Southeast Europe, Japan, and elsewhere.
"If you want to play in Kultur Shock you have got to have a cosmopolitan outlook and play a different kind of music.
That can happen only with people who have seen the world.
This is why we are fortunate to work with each other and be each other's best friends, brothers and sisters," Yevdjevich explains.
"I'm very proud of the band because we are really doing what we want to do and enjoy it," adds Yevdjevich.
