27/12/2004
(Various sources – 17/12/04 - 27/12/04)
The prime ministers of Albania, Bulgaria and Macedonia are scheduled to sign a memorandum of understanding regarding the Trans-Balkan pipeline project on Tuesday (28 December) in Sofia.
The pipeline is to carry oil from the Bulgarian port of Burgas to the Albanian port of Vlora and is part of Pan-European Transport Corridor VIII.
The international rating agency Standard & Poor's raised the long-term foreign currency rating of Croatia from BBB- to BBB.
The move followed the EU's recent decision to start accession talks with Zagreb.
Croatia's short-term foreign currency rating was affirmed at A-3 and local currency ratings at BBB+/A-2.
Standard & Poor's upgraded the long-term foreign currency ratings of the state development and reconstruction bank (HBOR) and the City of Zagreb to BBB.
Serbia and the EU signed an agreement eliminating EU quotas on Serbian textile trade, particularly quotas for exports of Serbian textile products into the EU.
The deal also envisions Serbia gradually lifting all import duties on EU textiles over the next three years.
Croatia's Telecommunications Agency selected the Swedish-Croatian consortium Treca Sreca as the winner in the tender for the country's third mobile operator.
The consortium includes the Swedish telecom company Tele2 and nine domestic companies.
The winner has pledged to cut prices by 20 per cent to 50 per cent.
The EU extended 405m euros of pre-accession assistance to Romania under the PHARE programme for 2004.
In addition, 2m euros were granted for support of the Romanian nuclear safety system.
Serbia will launch a restructuring process in 2005 for eight large-sized enterprises, including the oil and gas industry NIS, the power utility EPS and Telecom Serbia, Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus said on 21 December.
The cabinet plans to cut state subsidies to these companies while seeking improved productivity.
Turkey's government disclosed details about the tax cuts planned to start in 2005 under a new programme prepared with the IMF.
Value Added Tax rates on food, health and education items will be reduced to 8 per cent from the current 18 per cent, while corporate taxes will be lowered to 30 per cent from the current 33 per cent.
Standard & Poor's upgraded the rating outlook of the leading Bulgarian GSM operator MobilTel to positive from stable, affirming the latter's BB+ foreign currency rating.
The agency cited MobilTel's forthcoming acquisition of MobilTel by Telekom Austria.
