18/06/2011
By Georgi Mitev Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 18/06/11
Following a lengthy string of setbacks, experts now say Serbia's portion of the huge pan European highway, Corridor 10, will not be completed until 2016, more than a decade late. 
What started out as billed as an attractive foreign investment opportunity has been tarnished by scandal.
In the latest installment, one of the leading state construction partners was recently arrested along with the former assistant minister of infrastructure and energy in charge of road transport, Milorad Ilic.
Nibens Groups chief for Serbia, Milo Duraskovic, the owner of six road building companies with 4,200 workers, has been in custody since mid-May, facing corruption and financial embezzlement charges.
Other road builders in the country have concerns of their own: the state still owes them for jobs completed years ago.
Then there were the archeological sites that were uncovered -- the ancient Roman Via Militaris on the southern route for example -- or the threat of lawsuits by those demanding the highway be rerouted.
Every delay in roadwork means the revoking of a contract and higher costs due to price hikes in fuel, bitumen, steel, and other materials. 
Initially, the Horgos-Novi Sad highway was estimated to cost 84m euros. 
By now, the total cost may be 50% higher.
Money, apparently, now is not a problem. 
Minister for Infrastructure Milutin Mrkonjic says that 1.2 billion euros in loans have been provided, mostly from the European Bank for the Restoration and Development, the European Investment Bank and the World Bank.
Despite the string of problems in building Corridor 10, road construction companies remain highly interested in the project, mostly due to its size in this time of global crisis.
Competition usually brings better offers, but in Serbia this does not simplify matters. 
General Manager for Roads of Serbia Zoran Drobnjak says contractors start with low prices in their tenders, with an aim to later, with additions and "unexpected work", increase prices to realistic levels.
These tactics may clarify unusual figures for the building of one stage in the southern part, where a Greek company bid half what a Serbian consortium bid, and one third lower than the minimum price estimated by the state, according to documentation.
Corridors of Serbia, one of two state-run companies responsible for the construction, agrees that when contractors make a deal with an unrealistically low price, it puts job completion at risk, but stress that the most important factor is to win the tender with the lowest bid.
The fallout from construction delays has been enormous, perhaps immeasurable. 
South European cargo transit suffers, as it is easier to arrive from Turkey to the Central Europe bypass and further across Bulgaria and Romania than through Serbia. 
The local economy has felt the brunt of this reality.
Serbian tourists heading to the coast of Greece and Turkey, their favorite summer destination, also suffer.
Stanko Bogdan, a Croatian truck driver, says that because of bad roads and the poor Customs set up, he would rather pass tours from Croatia to Romania and southward to his colleagues.
"The trip to Birmingham, England or somewhere in France is much longer but is not so burdensome. 
Customs officers address you politely, with 'Mister', and do not look for some 'small fee', or putting you 'on hold', from early morning to late afternoon the next day, or even from a Friday to the coming Monday," says Bogdan.
