17/05/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 17/05/11
Months in the making, President Traian Basescu made it official this month, announcing that the country's Supreme Defence Council decided to allow 24 US missile interceptors to be installed at the old Deveselu air force base, in a distant farming area of southeast Romania.
The decision comes more than a year after the country first agreed to host the US complex, part of an Obama administration plan to counter the threat of short-to-medium range missiles by building a shield over Europe.
Analyst Cristian Campeanu, head of the foreign affairs department of the Bucharest daily Romania Libera, tells SETimes the ballistic missile defence system (BMDS) brings enormous benefits to Romania in terms of security, as well as a degree of responsibility.
"For Romania, the significance of having installed elements of BMDS on its soil is I think threefold.
First, it is clear that Romania has reached the highest level of security in its entire history.
Not only is it a member of the NATO Alliance but it also has a special partnership with the United States that, after six rounds of negotiations, has resulted in additional security guarantees in exchange for hosting the shield," he explained.
"Secondly, by simply hosting the interceptors, Romania has gained strategic weight in the Black Sea region, a long sought after goal of the current leadership.
This shift in the strategic balance of the region is most certainly not going to be taken lightly by the traditional power players in the Black Sea -- the Russian Federation and Turkey," Campeanu said.
Lastly, "If Romania wants to be a regional player, it has to live up to its own expectations," he said.
"In his announcement, President Basescu said the cost of the missile shield for Romania would be close to nothing.
This is not entirely true.
The cost of hosting the shield per se is insignificant but the cost of becoming a respected regional power would be highly significant.
"
"Simply put, if Romania wants to be taken seriously as an emerging regional actor, it has to increase its military spending dramatically.
But Romania has been hit by the economic recession much harder than others in the region.
To fulfill its aspirations of regional weight, Romania should achieve a very fast growth rate -- equaling Turkey's at least -- which under current circumstances is utopian," he concludes.
A minimum of 200 US soldiers will be deployed at the base, with the option to increase the number to 500.
Costs -- an estimated $400m to deploy the system and annual maintenance costs of $20m -- will be footed by the US, Basescu noted.
The final agreement may be signed this fall, Foreign Minister Teodor Baconschi said shortly after Basescu's announcement.
