20/01/2011
(Blic, Danas, The Sofia Echo - 20/01/11;
DPA, AKI, AFP, Xinhua, Beta, B92, Tanjug, New Kosova Report, Focus News Agency, European Parliament - 19/01/11)
Senior Belgrade officials welcomed the ratification of Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU by the European Parliament (EP) on Wednesday (January 19th) as a strong signal of support for their country's bid to join the Union.
"The EP ratified the SAA with an overwhelming majority of 90%, which is a great success for our citizens and our country, as the vote shows the great support our country enjoys in the EU," Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic said.
"The fact that all countries and all political groups voted in favour of ratification shows the unequivocal support for future steps on our European path."
The accord will open up trade between Serbia and the 27-member bloc once it enters into force.
For that to happen it needs to be ratified not only by the EP, but by each of the EU states as well.
The SAA, which will also give Serbia access to increased pre-accession assistance, was signed in April 2008, but the EU ratification procedure was not launched until June of last year.
Since then, 11 of the 27 member states have completed the process.
Echoing a call by the EP for the remaining 16 nations to "swiftly proceed with the ratification procedure", Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic voiced hope Wednesday that they will be encouraged by the EU lawmakers' move to do so in the coming months.
Serbia submitted its official application for EU entry in December 2009 and hopes to gain formal recognition as a candidate for membership by the end of this year.
Stressing the importance of Wednesday's move for their country's EU bid, Belgrade officials viewed it as encouraging further reform efforts.
"Of the many steps that await us on the road to the EU, this is an exceptionally important one," Belgrade-based B92 quoted Milica Delevic, the head of the Serbian government's EU Integration Office, as saying.
"Even more importantly, it is a signal to us in Serbia to keep working and continue reforms, which, in addition to bringing changes in the country, also secure us support and continued acceptance in the process of European integration."
In addition to the decision ratifying Serbia's SAA, which was adopted by a show of hands, the 736-seat EP also passed a separate resolution on Serbia's EU integration process in a 612-38 vote, with 28 abstentions.
The document, drafted by the EU legislature's rapporteur for Serbia, Slovenian MEP Jelko Kacin, welcomed Serbia's reform progress and steps "in the process of raising awareness of the atrocities that happened in the recent past and of regional reconciliation".
The MEPs also stressed however that full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia remains "a fundamental condition for Serbia to progress on the path to EU membership", the EP said in a statement.
Noting that development of regional co-operation and good neighbourly relations is a key priority for the EU, the resolution urged Belgrade to follow a constructive approach in that area.
It also called for talks between Serbia and Kosovo to start "without delay".
