17/05/2011
(FOCUS News Agency - 17/05/11; BTA, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, FOCUS News Agency, Public Service Europe, Europol, Official Website of the Bulgarian Interior Ministry - 16/05/11)
Europol Director Rob Wainwright commended Bulgarian authorities Monday (May 16th) for their efforts to fight organised crime and co-operation with his organisation.
"The last two years have seen many positive signs of response to organised crime in Bulgaria," he said at a joint news conference with Prime Minister Boyko Borisov and Interior Minister Tsvetan Tsvetanov in Sofia.
Thanking the two officials for their efforts, Wainwright added that they "are sending a very clear message that they are firmly resolved to combat organised crime in order to make Bulgaria and Europe a safer place for their citizens".
The head of The Hague-based EU law enforcement agency arrived in Sofia three days after Bulgarian police and Europol busted a crime group printing counterfeit money. 
It involved raids on print shops in Plovdiv and the nearby town of Parvomay. 
During the operation Friday, police arrested six suspects and seized very high-quality fake euro banknotes totalling over 717,000 euros, including 200,000 euros in 500-euro bills.
Friday's operation was conducted as part of a joint investigation, also involving experts from Spain and the EU justice agency, Eurojust, according to a statement Europol issued on Monday.
"I am pleased to see that, through international co-operation, we were once again able to hit some advanced criminal structures -- the disruption of this organised crime group is a very significant hit against euro counterfeiting," the agency quoted Wainwright as saying.
"The success of this operation was made possible because of the excellent work of the Bulgarian authorities and their co-operation with Europol and other partners."
During his meeting with Borisov and Tsvetanov on Monday, Wainwright discussed ways to boost co-operation between his institution and Bulgarian law enforcement authorities.
"We are considering a possibility for dispatching a Europol official to Bulgaria for a certain period of time in a bid to expand our co-operation with police authorities in the country," the Sofia News Agency quoted him as saying at Monday's press conference.
Citing one of the findings in Europol's Organised Crime Threat Assessment released on May 4th, Wainwright noted that the crime syndicates operating across Europe "are becoming smarter, more resourceful and more challenging to police" throughout the continent.
"And we find the situation in Bulgaria the same as reflected elsewhere in Europe," he said. 
"Powerful organised crime syndicates that are changing their methods, becoming harder for police authorities to fight."
