15/12/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic in Belgrade, Klaudija Lutovska in Skopje and Nedjeljko Rudovic in Podgorica -- 15/12/10
The EU abolished the visa regimes with Serbia, Macedonia and Montenegro on December 19th 2009, facilitating travel from the Balkans to EU countries.
But possessing a new biometric passport is one of the requirements of visa-free travel.
In Serbia, citizens traded the long lines outside EU countries' embassies and loads of paperwork for crowded police stations where the new biometric passports are issued.
A representative from Serbia's interior ministry told SETimes that around 2.8 million biometric passports have been issued thus far.
"I made good use of the visa annulment and went on several short trips ...
to the Netherlands, Germany, Spain and Hungary.
I'm also planning a brief winter vacation in Austria," Web administrator Tijana Dragas, 27, said.
Belgrade teacher Predrag Tomic, 52, told SETimes that many of his friends have traveled throughout Europe this year like never before.
"But what good is the annulment of visas when I don't have enough money to travel anywhere?" Tomic said, summing up the predicament of a growing number of Serbs adversely affected by the economic crisis.
In Macedonia, one million biometric passports have been issued since 2007, according to Interior Ministry Passport Department Chief Borce Petrevski.
"From January 1st to October 30th ...
Macedonian citizens crossed the borders 4.25 million times.
That is an increase of 20% as compared to last year," Interior Ministry spokesman Ivo Kotevski told SETimes.
Tourist agencies confirm the positive effect of abolishing the visa regime.
"The most attractive destinations for Macedonians were Italy and Hungary," Zorica Atanasova of Atlantik Tours told SETimes.
Atanasova explained that the young travel to all Shengen-zone destinations, while older travellers mostly visit friends and relatives in neighbouring countries, along with others.
"I obtained my first passport and went to Greece and Bulgaria.
Next summer, I plan to visit the Beer Fest in Germany and very likely the Louvre in France," Irogce Ristevski of Bitola told SETimes.
Due to visa liberalisation, regular air travel -- outside of business and VIP travelers -- has increased 14%, said Alexander the Great Airport's Security Director Zoran Dorevski.
In contrast, Montenegro Ministry of Foreign Affairs official Zeljko Stamatovic told SETimes that he can't confirm that visa liberalisation has significantly influenced Montenegrins' travel habits.
"The visa abolition allowed those who previously traveled to travel more easily.
Border police analyses show that around 30,000 people in the past year traveled in the Schengen countries and the EU," Stamatovic said.
However, Montenegro tourist agencies such as Gorbis report an increased number of bookings this year, despite a lower standard of living than in 2009.
"The number of trips has increased at least twice, and most involve cruise ships.
It is not because people have more money but they now have the opportunity to travel more easily.
It is the citizens who were definitely planning to travel before, but did not dare because they had to wait for a visa," Gorbis Director Svetlana Sabovic told SETimes.
Montenegrins traveled mostly to Luxembourg, Germany, Austria and Sweden.
Twice a week, buses from Rozaje and Berane crossed those borders with a full passenger load.
"This summer I sat in the car with my wife and children and visited Slovenia, Austria, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Hungary.
The only thing that I had to do was to prepare the car and book accommodations," bank employee Mirko Perovic said.
As for the experiences at the border crossings, Perovic said "it makes you feel welcomed, and after that you see some foreign countries as your own."
