21/03/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 21/03/11
EULEX, the EU's justice mission in Kosovo, disclosed arrested eleven individuals last week as part of a war crimes investigation. 
They are suspected of involvement in killings, torture and other offences against Kosovo Albanian and Serb civilians and prisoners of war at a detention centre.
Meanwhile, the deputy leader of the ruling Democratic Party of Kosovo, Fatmir Limaj, was also issued an arrest warrant and has been in communication with prosecutors, the EU justice mission said. 
He reportedly appeared in court Wednesday (March 16th).
An indictment against Limaj charges him with ordering the summary execution, via gunshots to the head, of two Serb policemen captured by Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) fighters in 1998.
The veteran politician's situation is complicated because of the legal immunity granted to members of the Kosovo Assembly. 
Limaj has vowed not to use that status, however. 
"With this decision, I once again express my willingness to co-operate with justice," he said.
According to the speaker of the Assembly, Jakup Krasniqi, an arrest warrant against Limaj would present a constitutional problem.
"Investigations of any person can continue, but that does not mean that immunity will be taken away," he said, adding that the Assembly has not seen any such request.
In a further twist, State Prosecutor Ismet Kabashi issued a statement casting doubt on whether Limaj could claim immunity in the first place. 
"No members of parliament, including Fatmir Limaj, enjoy immunity for actions committed before he became an MP," Kabashi said.
Some politicians and local analysts are disturbed with how EULEX has handled the process. 
Ahmet Isufi, deputy leader of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, compares it to a public relations stunt.
"Some actions which are taken by EULEX are done just for propaganda," he said, denouncing what he termed a "continued war against those who fought for the liberation of Kosovo".
For his part, President Behgjet Pacolli says he trusts that the allegations against Limaj and other former KLA members "will be found ungrounded and their innocence confirmed, as has happened many times so far".
Limaj, a close ally of Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, was tried by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and acquitted in 2005.
