21/04/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 21/04/11
Turkey is currently negotiating with the Taliban to open an office in Istanbul, Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan's foreign policy adviser Ibrahim Kalin confirmed last week. 
While the government has not yet officially agreed to the proposal, many experts see it as a possible vehicle for resolving the conflict in Afghanistan by diplomatic means.
Hoping to foster peace negotiations, Afghan President Hamid Karzai suggested in December 2010 that Turkey host such an office. 
Since then, the debate has continued in Turkey over the merits of a proposition some consider risky.
According to senior policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations Professor Daniel Korski, Turkey is in many ways an ideal place for the proposed Taliban office.
"[Turkish] relations with a range of parties in Afghanistan are long-standing and the Turkish government has for a long time sought to pursue a political solution," said Korski. 
"But this advantage does not mean Turkey will be accepted by all the players."
Turkey has taken an active role to end the ongoing war between Taliban and NATO forces on the Afghan-Pakistan border. 
Since February 2007, Turkey has been hosting annual summits between the two countries, with both sides saying that they are determined to work for peace.
"We'll be facilitators to any format that leads to peace," Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari said during a visit to Ankara on April 13th.
Turkey has extensive bilateral, military and cultural ties with Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
Afghanistan was the first country after the Soviet Union to recognise the Turkish republic. 
Turkey has around 1,800 soldiers in Afghanistan, none of which take part in active combat operations.
Koc University Professor Timur Kocaoglu believes that Turkey's credibility as a secular state and NATO member makes the country a reliable mediator in Afghanistan.
"[Turkey is a] respected state in international conflicts with its so far balanced, objective, unbiased political stance, and most significantly, its deep historical roots and good past relations with Afghanistan, both before and after 1920s," Kocaoglu said.
Amidst the crises in the Middle East and North Africa, Turkey has sought to enhance its image as a negotiator in countries with unrest. 
As the only Muslim member of NATO, Turkey often has an advantage over its Western allies.
"Turkey's main foreign policy has been zero problems with neighbours," explained Turkey-Afghan relations expert Salih Dogan of the Ankara-based think tank USAK. 
"Security in the region is very important for Turkey's own interests since the problems in the region have an effect on Turkey, both economically and politically."
According to Kocaoglu, however, opening the office in Turkey still seems very unlikely.
"I don't think Turkey will ever take this kind of step," he said. 
"The Taliban continues to be a symbol of the most repressive regime. 
Turkey will lose credibility internationally by allowing such an inhumane group to open an office in Turkey and gain no benefit for peace in either Afghanistan or Pakistan."
Korski agrees. 
"A Turkish initiative hopefully advances the importance of a political track. 
But it is unlikely to be decisive."
