17/06/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 17/06/11
It is a life of extreme poverty and unemployment, made all the more challenging by the need to reintegrate back into Kosovo society, say Roma refugees who have been repatriated to Kosovo from Europe in recent months.
Their repatriation is part of the readmission agreements signed between Kosovo and Germany, Switzerland, the Benelux and other countries in order to develop a visa liberalisation strategy.
Yet as authorities in the host countries began deporting the Roma, Kosovo human rights organisations and activists sounded the alarm to stop the move.
"There are no direct political obstacles or threats to returning to Kosovo, because violence cannot be used anymore as a reason for seeking asylum," the Council for Human Rights and Freedoms (CHRF) said in a statement.
"However, the economic and social situation in Kosovo is extremely inconsistent with the possibility of accepting such a large number of refugees."
The CHRF explained the lack of infrastructure makes integration very difficult and would negatively impact the refugee's wellbeing.
"Unemployment and extreme poverty does not create an environment for the sustainable return of refugees and their integration into society," CHRF said.
Illustrative is the case of Ibish Bajrami, 43, who now lives with his family in the Roma neighbourhood in Podujevo, 30km northeast of Pristina.
He says German authorities summarily deported him without warning, together with his wife and three children.
"No one told me that I will be returned.
They came early in the morning with the police and told me 'you have 30 minutes to take the necessary things because you will go to Kosovo.' It was something I could not have imagined [happening] in that way, even though we knew that one day they would deport us," Bajrami told SETimes.
Like virtually all returnees, he is unemployed, which makes the task of survival more difficult given the huge number of jobless people in Kosovo -- recorded at 45%, the highest in Europe.
Bajrami says he is barely able to make ends meet by collecting and selling scrap metal.
He also explained that after 13 years in Germany, he faced many difficulties upon his return, particularly in adjusting to daily life in Kosovo.
His children experienced the most difficulty he said, as they could not understand the language of instruction in school.
"For more than two months my children did not go to school, because they do not speak Albanian very well, and the Roma school in our neighbourhood [also] has Albanian as the language of instruction.
They had difficulties learning and during exams.
The youngest, Esat, 14, stopped going to school because it was impossible for him to switch from a German school [to one] in Kosovo, a total change," Bajrami said.
Last year, the Council of Europe passed a resolution calling on member countries to stop the return of asylum-seeking Kosovo Roma unless their safety -- as well as economic and social conditions for living a normal life -- are guaranteed.
This has not stopped the deportations though, and more Roma have been voicing grievances about the difficulty of integrating into Kosovo society.
Among them is Afrim Krasniqi, 27, who was also deported by Germany.
"There is no future for me here.
I have no job, no education and they returned me without providing any help," Krasniqi told SETimes.
Given the sense of helplessness and lack of assistance offered by Kosovo's institutions, Roma returnees see returning to the EU as their only viable option.
"In December, I tried to go back to Germany, but they arrested me in Hungary for crossing the border illegally.
I paid 3,000 euros just to go there, and as soon as I get more money, I will try again," Krasniqi said.
