21/03/2011
(Zaman, ACT Media, Euobserver - 21/03/11; Hurriyet, ANA-MPA, Albeu.com, Bulgarian Foreign Ministry website - 20/03/11; Sofia News Agency, The Sofia Echo, Zaman, Croatian Times, Bulgarian Presidency website - 19/03/11; UN News Centre - 17/03/11)
Balkan leaders have voiced support for UN Security Council Resolution 1973, approving the establishment of a no-fly zone over Libya and the use of "all necessary measures" to protect civilians from attacks by Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's forces.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), currently the only Balkan member of the key 15-nation body, was among the ten countries that voted in favour of the decision, which was adopted Thursday (March 17th) after four weeks of bloodshed in the North African country. 
The other five Council members -- Brazil, China, Germany, India and Russia -- abstained.
Speaking at Thursday's meeting, BiH Ambassador to the UN Ivan Barbalic voiced concern about the rapidly deteriorating situation in Libya and called for an end to the violent repression of demonstrators.
The resolution, he noted, came in response to requests from both the Libyan people, as well as some regional organisations, such as the Arab League, for the imposition of a no-fly zone over the country.
Turkey, which had earlier expressed opposition to such a move, eventually changed its stance, as the Tripoli regime continued its crackdown on protestors, shunning the international community's repeated calls for an immediate end to the violence.
"We have expressed at the highest level our heartfelt support for the Arab League's call to the UN Security Council for … a no-fly zone," Istanbul-based daily Zaman quoted Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's office as saying in a statement Friday.
Speaking at a meeting in Saudi Arabia two days later, Erdogan criticised Gaddafi for disregarding Ankara's calls to respect the will of the Libyan people, as well for failing to heed its advice to step down after 41 years in power.
"We have passed that point. 
Gaddafi is contradicting himself," Erdogan said at the gathering in Jeddah on Sunday (March 20th). 
"He said he was not officially the leader of Libya. 
What is expected of a person who is not officially in charge is to hand over (power in) Libya to a person who has an official leadership position."
The leader of Turkey's main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP), Kemal Kilicdaroglu, voiced support for the latest UN resolution on Libya in remarks Sunday, hoping a more democratic regime would take over there.
"No administration should exert pressure on its own people and shoot them," the CHP leader stressed.
Other Balkan nations, including Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece and Romania, also welcomed Thursday's resolution, vowing to help enact the measures aimed at protecting Libyan civilians from further repression.
"Albania stands ready to provide necessary facilities to the international coalition in its mission that is important for freedom, peace and stability in the Mediterranean," Prime Minister Sali Berisha's office said in a statement Sunday.
Speaking on national public television, TVR, the same day, Romanian President Traian Basescu said Bucharest has "made it very clear that Romania respects Resolution 1973 resolution ... 
which states a no-fly area to protect civilians". 
He also indicated that Romania will join any NATO action in Libya.
"When NATO acts, Romania will be there," Basescu said.
While welcoming the international community's action against the Gaddafi regime, the president and prime minister of neighbouring Bulgaria, Georgi Parvanov and Boyko Borisov, both said it is long overdue.
Such measures, they said, should have been taken years ago when the Libyan regime sentenced six Bulgarian medics to death for their alleged role in infecting about 400 Libyan children with the HIV virus.
"There is hardly anyone who is more interested than us Bulgarians in the removal of the Gaddafi regime since six innocent Bulgarian citizens suffered for years from the arbitrariness of the Libyan regime," the president's office said in a statement Saturday.
Speaking after a meeting on the situation in Libya on Sunday, Borisov reiterated Bulgaria's condemnation of the violence against civilians.
"Bulgaria supports a solution based on international law and the UN Security Council resolutions. 
We will definitely fulfil our obligations as allies within NATO and the EU," the prime minister said.
