25/05/2005
(Various sources -- 18/05/05 – 25/05/05)
An exhibition of works by the ten-year-old Albanian painter David Pashaj opened last week at the National Gallery of Arts in Tirana.
Pashaj has won several contests for young artists.
The sixth European Literary Meetings took place from 19 May to 20 May in Sarajevo.
The event, hosted by the French Culture Centre, drew over 100 Bosnian and foreign participants.
A roundtable discussion on culture in Western Balkan countries was part of the programme.
A concert titled "Hear Bulgaria" and dedicated to the Day of the Bulgarian and Slavic Letters, 24 May, took place at the National Palace of Culture in Sofia on 22 May.
Performers included the Mystery of Bulgarian Voices folklore ensemble, clarinet virtuoso Ivo Papazov, jazz singer Yildiz Ibrahimova, and the Karandila brass orchestra.
A new project commemorating Bulgarian poet Nikola Vaptsarov, who was murdered by the fascist regime in June 1942, envisions the translation of his work into 43 languages.
The project was launched by the Bulgarian printing house Viara, under the patronage of Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov.
"Master of Your Own Body", written by Slavko Kolar and performed by the Komedija theatre from Zagreb, was named Best Performance of the Year at the 12th Actor's Festival in Zagreb on 22 May.
Vanja Ciric received the Best Female Role award for her appearance in the same play.
Croatian triple Olympic skiing champion Janica Kostelic has been elected a member of the European Olympic Committee's Athletes Commission.
She is the first Croatian to be elected to the commission.
Greek composer Mikis Theodorakis will receive the International Music Council Music Prize for 2005, UNESCO announced on 20 May.
Theodorakis, who turns 80 this year, is being honoured for his global contribution to music and arts.
The 23rd edition of the annual International Children's Art Festival began on 23 May in the Macedonian town of Bitola.
The event includes participants from Belarus, Lithuania, Macedonia, Russia and Turkey.
The Romanian Information and Documentation Centre of the OECD opened on 24 May at the Romanian Academy's National Institute for Economic Research in Bucharest.
The centre -- the first OECD centre of its kind in Southeast Europe -- will provide real-time access to OECD documents and publications.
Romanian fencer Mihai Covaliu won a gold medal in the Men's Sabre category during the 48th edition of the Luxardo Trophy, held in Padova, Italy on 23 May.
Covaliu, Olympic champion in the 2000 Sydney Games, defeated Hungary's Zsolt Nemcsik.
Italian tenor Luciano Pavarotti performed in Belgrade on 21 May as part of his world tour.
Over 3,000 fans gathered at Pionir Hall for the concert.
