19/01/2011
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 19/01/11
Turkey and the EU may be close to finalising an illegal migrant readmission pact following talks in Ankara last week.
The agreement, which would allow the EU to send back illegal migrants proven to have entered the Union through Turkey, could bring Turks a step closer to a long-coveted goal: visa-free travel to Europe.
"We are close to the solution on the re-admission agreement," Cecilia Malmstrom, EU Commissioner for Home Affairs, wrote on her personal blog last week. 
"This agreement will open the way to starting a serious visa dialogue with Turkey."
An outline of the deal being negotiated in closed-door talks has yet to be made public, but analysts believe that the EU's use of the visa issue as a carrot has helped broker the deal.
According to Cengiz Aktar, chairman of the Department of EU Relations at Istanbul's Bahcesehir University, the EU's past reluctance to liberalise its visa regime has caused "huge damage" to its perception in the country.
"Turks are systematically humiliated with visas," Aktar told SETimes. 
"EU businessman can jump on the plane in the morning, sign the deal, and that's that, but the Turk simply can't do that: he's queuing at the consulate."
While a host of Balkan countries -- including Serbia, Albania and Bosnia Herzegovina -- have recently secured EU visa waivers, Turks have been forced to look on with envy, despite being a membership candidate, and holding a customs union with the EU since 1996.
But Aktar believes that with a re-admission agreement imminent, progress on the visa issue is also likely. 
"The co-operation is there more than ever," he said.
Ayhan Kaya, a professor of political science at Istanbul's Bilgi University, says the visa issue has been a gift to the country's anti-Europe lobby. 
Resolving it, he says, could strongly improve Turks' perceptions of the Union.
"If the EU makes a radical decision about the visa regime, that could bring about a change in the Euro-skeptic discourse which is very dominant in Turkey."
But others, such as Ceren Mutus, an expert on Turkey-EU relations at the Ankara-based think tank, the International Strategic Research Organisation, warn that visa liberalisation will not necessarily follow an agreement over re-admission.
She said EU member states with large Turkish immigrant populations -- Germany, France, Austria, and The Netherlands -- are likely to remain opposed to a visa deal.
"I don't believe it will be inevitable, but it will be a step towards visa liberalisation," she said. 
"The EU Council has to give a mandate to the Commission to negotiate it, but up until now, there is no such sign of that."
Ankara may be waiting for this development before sealing the readmission pact, she added.
Mutus says the EU is making a mistake by linking visa liberalisation with the re-admission agreement -- a model of negotiation it has used with Balkan states -- and pointed out that the 1963 Ankara Agreement established Turks' right to visa-free travel to Europe.
"There are agreements signed between Turkey and EU on this issue, but they are still claiming that there's a linkage with re-admission."
She believes the visa issue cuts to the heart of Turkey's relationship with Europe.
"It tests the countries' willingness and sincerity in regard to the accession process," she said. 
"If the EU sees the membership process as gradual integration between people, cultures, and policies then the visa issue at present constitutes one of the main obstacles to this."
