15/12/2010
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European times in Pristina -- 15/12/10
Kosovo's first general elections since the country's 2008 independence -- held on Sunday (December 12th) -- were marred by irregularities. 
A European Parliament (EP) Election Observation Delegation expressed doubts Monday about voting in a pair of Kosovo's 37 districts.
"We are talking about two municipalities, Drenas/Glogovac and Skenderaj/Serbica," EP member Doris Pack said. 
Both are strongholds of incumbent Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) and in both places, turnout was twice that of the average turnout. 
Other noted problems included stuffing ballot boxes, multiple voting and defective verification ultraviolet lamps.
As a result, many parties say they refuse to accept the results.
"Hashim Thaci has endangered the safety of citizens with his early statements that he is the winner, which is a violation of election rules and which might have caused clashes between supporters of both parties," Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) leader Isa Mustafa said. 
He said his party will not accept the results in Drenica, Drenas, Malisevo, Mitrovica, Prizren and Stime.
The Central Election Commission's (CEC) preliminary results, released on Monday, showed that the PDK attracted 33.5% of the vote, the LDK 23.6%, Vetvendosje 12.2%, Alliance for Kosovo's Future (AAK) 10.8% and Kosovo New Alliance (AKR) 7.1%. 
Kosovo Initiative for Stability Executive Director Engjellushe Morina told SETimes that legally, the party with the most votes has the right to form the government, in this case, the PDK.
However, runner-up LDK has said that they will not form a coalition with PDK. 
Hence, PDK must reconsider two or three other coalition partners – either the AAK and/or the AKR, and minorities.
But Ahmet Isufi, the deputy head of AAK, says that his party will not join a coalition with PDK either.
AKR's Ibrahim Makolli was outspoken about election irregularities and meeting international standards.
"We cannot talk about a fully democratic process [with these elections]. 
The CEC did not guarantee the integrity of the elections. 
Kosovo has no mechanisms to protect the votes, and for a long time we have been asking for cameras in the voting centres."
His party announced that it has not drawn any lines regarding a possible coalition, but will wait for the CEC's decision on Drenica and other areas.
Seb Bytyci, executive director of the Balkan Policy Institute, says the elections have taken Kosovo into a new political situation and opened a new chapter in the country's relations with Albanian and Serbian political parties.
He predicts revotes will be required in contested districts and polling stations and that the future government will likely include the PDK and the Serbian Liberal Party. 
AKR, the smallest Albanian party, will probably be in the coalition along with parties presenting minorities, Bytyci says.
Deputy Foreign Minister Vlora Citaku seems to agree, saying it is possible that PDK will include a small party and minorities in the future coalition.
