18/01/2011
(B92, Emg.rs, The Sofia Echo - 18/01/11;
AFP, Beta, Focus News Agency, Serbian Government, European Parliament)
Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic voiced hope Monday (January 17th) that his country will begin accession talks with the EU early next year.
Belgrade submitted an official application for membership in the 27-nation bloc in December 2009.
About ten months later, EU leaders forwarded the country's bid to the European Commission (EC) for its opinion.
Shortly after, the EU executive arm sent a questionnaire containing nearly 2,500 questions to Serbia to be able to assess its readiness to become an official candidate for membership.
According to reports Monday, the Serbian government will present its responses to EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele in Brussels on January 31st.
Djelic expressed hope Monday that the opinion the commission is expected to release in October will pave the way for his country being recognised as an official EU candidate by the end of this year.
"The goal of Serbia is obtaining candidate status for membership in the EU and, even more importantly, setting the date for the opening of pre-accession negotiations for the spring of 2012," he told members of the European Parliament's (EP) foreign affairs committee.
He addressed the EU legislature's foreign affairs committee a day before a plenary debate in Strasbourg on Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the Union.
The 736-seat EP is due to vote on a resolution ratifying the key accord on Wednesday (January 19th).
The ratification procedure was officially launched in June last year.
So far, 11 out of all 27 EU nations have ratified the accord.
A draft EP resolution on Serbia's EU integration process, which is also expected to be approved by EU lawmakers on Wednesday, urges the remaining 16 members to swiftly complete the ratification process.
The document, submitted by the EU legislature's rapporteur for Serbia, Jelko Kacin, also called on Belgrade to address issues of critical importance for accession progress, including the development of regional co-operation and good neighbourly relations.
The EP "urges the Serbian government to dismantle Serbian parallel structures in Kosovo that undermine the decentralisation process and prevent the full integration of the Serbian community into the Kosovo institutions", it said.
The document, approved by the EU assembly's foreign affairs committee last month, also stressed that the participation of Kosovo Serbs in the electoral process is essential to preventing the community from being marginalised.
It further reiterated that full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) – and specifically the capture and handover of Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic -- remains a key condition for Serbia's progress towards eventual EU membership.
The EP "underlines that only apprehension and extradition of the remaining two fugitives to The Hague can be deemed the most convincing evidence of full co-operation and calls for more systematic efforts to arrest them", said the document.
