18/01/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 18/01/11
Beating government targets and market forecasts, the economy grew more rapidly than expected in 2010, the Turkish Statistical Institute announced at the beginning of the year.
At the same time, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government, which is seeking re-election in July, outlined ambitious targets for 2011.
Turkey has the largest national economy in Central and Eastern Europe, according to the IMF.
Its economy grew 5.5% in the third quarter of 2010.
The IMF expected Turkey to grow 6.3% for the year.
The growth rate for the whole year will be announced in March, but the projection is 6.8%.
The government's target is a 4.5% expansion in 2011.
Some local analysts, like Professor Omer Faruk Colak, a prominent Turkish economist, say there is more to consider.
"These are just numbers, but there are other numbers the government doesn't like to talk about," Colak, who is a chairman of the Employment Research Association and a lecturer at several universities, told SETimes.
"Turkish people can't benefit from this development properly."
"They say unemployment is 11%, but there are approximately 2.6 million people working for barely any pay," he said.
According to Colak, Turkey has still been unable to develop a flourishing middle class because of languishing small-business reforms.
A veteran finance expert and researcher from Istanbul, Cavit Kemal, says society is becoming more polarised as the rich get richer and the poor see diminished prospects.
"Everyone says we are developing, but not yet," he tells SETimes.
"We don't need to be a leader in Europe or in the world;
we need jobs, money."
Ayshe Kaplan, 38, a former bank employee from Adana, one of the largest cities in Turkey, lost her job in 2001, when the crisis struck the banking sector.
Since then, she has worked on and off as a street vendor.
When she applied for a credit line last year in order to open a small business, the bank turned her down.
Each year it becomes harder and harder for educated people to find work, she said.
Official statistics record that one out of four people in Adana lost jobs last year.
"But in fact, every one of two became jobless," Kaplan told SETimes.
"Turkey is the champion country when it comes to giving out credits at the highest interest.
Only in Istanbul, where 70% of the population are foreigners, can people benefit from this policy," she said.
Some economists, however, insist the government is on the right track and further progress is just a matter of time.
Kaan Nazli is a specialist on Turkey and Southeast Europe at New York-based Medley Global Advisors.
He says the government has confronted past crises and come up with a solid strategy for the years ahead.
The banking sector issues Turkey now faces are routine, he added.
"As long as banks' incomes increase by 20%, loans will also increase by 30%.
Economic growth is real, though it has its own risks," he told SETimes.
Mehmet Cavli, an Ankara-based economist, agrees the economy is improving.
But international pressures will continue to exert a strong influence this year, he cautions.
"In 2011, the global economy will be shaky and this will impact every single country that participates in global trade," he told SETimes.
