17/06/2011
(Reuters, RTE - 17/06/11;
BBC, CNN, Los Angeles Times, Washington Post, Sky News, Guardian, ABC Online, CBS News, RFE/RL - 16/06/11;
FBI)
EEgyptian physician turned terrorist Ayman al-Zawahiri was named as the new leader of the al-Qaeda network on Thursday (June 16th) following Osama bin Laden's death last month.
The announcement came in a statement warning that the group would continue to fight a holy war against the United States and its allies under its new boss.
Analysts question, however, whether Zawahiri will be able to hold together the loosely based global al-Qaeda network in the face of internal rifts and competition from increasingly prominent franchises in Yemen and North Africa.
Meanwhile, the popular uprisings and demands for democracy and basic rights in the Middle East have shown that people across the region turned against al-Qaeda's violent tactics of al-Qaeda in favour of civil disobedience and peaceful protest.
In the face of this, al-Qaeda's message of holy war against the West carries little traction for populations struggling against authoritarian regimes at home and worsening socio-economic conditions.
According to some counter-terrorism experts, Zawahiri, who is neither as charismatic as his predecessor, nor as highly esteemed by members of the group, might consider ways for boosting his image within the organisation.
Therefore, he could, initially, become more dangerous, some warn.
"Zawahiri will certainly try to prove his bona fides by pushing for attacks and reprisals while finding ways of taking advantage of the chaos and disillusionment resulting from the Arab Spring — with a focus no doubt on Egypt," the Los Angeles Times quoted Juan Zarate, who served as a counter-terrorism advisor to President George W. Bush, as saying.
Commenting on Zawahiri's appointment as leader of al-Qaeda on Thursday, Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, said that that he would face the same fate as his predecessor.
"As we did both seek to capture and kill, and succeed in killing bin Laden, we certainly will do the same thing with Zawahiri," he said.
Zawahiri, who turns 60 on Sunday, had been serving as bin Laden's right-hand man, as well as al-Qaeda's chief ideologist and second-in-command for many years.
Zawahiri was born to a prominent upper-middle class family in Cairo, where he was trained as an eye surgeon.
In the late 1970s, he became one of the founders of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad (EIJ), an organisation opposed to the country's secular regime and seeking its overthrow through violent means.
The Egyptian authorities arrested him following President Anwar Sadat's assassination by Islamic militants in 1981.
He was released after serving three years in jail and then headed to Pakistan in 1984 to fight against the Soviet occupation in Afghanistan.
It was during that period that he is said to have met bin Laden for the first time.
In 1988, the two founded al-Qaeda in Pakistan's northwestern city of Peshawar, the base of the anti-Soviet resistance at the time.
They then planned the August 1998 bombings of the US embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, in which more than 220 people were killed and several thousand wounded.
Zawahiri, whose EIJ is said to have merged with al-Qaeda in 1998, is also believed to have been one of the masterminds of the suicide bombing of the USS Cole off the coast of Yemen in 2000, and the "brains" behind the September 11th attacks on the United States.
The United States, which has indicted him for his alleged role in the 1998 bombings of its embassies in East Africa, has offered a $25m reward for information leading directly to his capture or conviction.
