17/11/2010
By Barıs Yilmaz for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 17/11/10
Turkey's Islamist-rooted conservative government introduced another 30% tax hike on alcohol in late October, drawing protests from drinkers, cafe owners and beverage producers.
The price of alcoholic beverages has shot up 129% since the Justice and Development Party (AKP) came to power eight years ago.
By contrast, the Consumer Price Index rose 79% during the same period.
A one-litre bottle of raki now costs about $35.
That's a lot to pay in a country where the minimum annual wage is around $400 and the average monthly income is around $1000.
More and more Turks are opting for beer and wine, which are cheaper than the traditional raki.
"There has been a 34% decrease in alcohol consumption from 2003 to 2008," reports a study by the Bahcesehir University's research centre BETAM.
"Parallel to the tax hikes, sale prices are increasing and consumption is decreasing."
BETAM's study shows that the government successfully boosted its revenues by almost 50% in the last seven years by imposing and consistently increasing the Special Consumption Tax on alcoholic beverages.
Critics charge there is a hidden agenda behind the increases.
The AKP, they say, is trying to exert pressure against lifestyles that are not in line with the party's Islamic worldview.
"The AKP government is trying to suppress restaurants that serve alcohol and shops that sell these beverages, through tax hikes, de facto bans and social pressure," writes economist Mustafa Sonmez in his blog.
The government denies there is any religious motivation behind its policy on alcohol taxes.
The party does not publicly advocate a ban on alcohol and has repeatedly expressed its committment to non-interference in the private lives of individuals.
Nevertheless, a number of AKP-run municipalities have banned alcoholic beverages from municipality-operated restaurants and cafes, and alcohol licenses for private enterprises are reportedly becoming harder to obtain in some areas.
A 2009 study supported by the Open Society Institute showed an increasingly conservative trend in the society.
The study, titled "Being Different in Turkey", revealed various cases of intervention in lifestyles and increasing social pressure against alcohol consumption, especially across Anatolia.
Sonmez warns that the government's tax hike policy against alcohol is not only threatening particular lifestyles, but also the economy and public health.
"There are reports that teenagers who cannot afford alcohol are opting for drugs;
these claims should be carefully investigated," he warns.
"Illegal production and their consumption is another dangerous threat."
In 2003, 8% of households in Turkey were consuming alcohol.
That number dropped to 6% in 2008.
Around 300,000 households, for one reason or another, stopped alcohol consumption altogether due to social pressure.
