28/01/2005
(Various sources – 21/01/05 - 28/01/05)
Greece's private Alpha Bank announced it has acquired an 88.6 per cent stake in Serbia's state-owned Jubanka for 152m euros.
Jubanka is the country's seventh-largest bank, with a market share of around 4 per cent.
The Greek financial institution said it will try to buy the remaining shares in the bank from approximately 1,600 small shareholders.
The acquisition is part of a strategy of expansion in Southeastern Europe.
Unemployment in Bulgaria stood at 12.2 per cent in December, falling by 1.36 per cent year-on-year.
According to data released by the ministry of labour and social policy on Wednesday (26 January), unemployment averaged 12.7 per cent during 2004.
The government plans to reduce this figure to 12.5 per cent in 2005.
The parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted a flat VAT rate of 17 per cent.
Each of the entities previously had its own tax regulations.
The new tax was introduced as a way of combating the grey economy.
High Representative Paddy Ashdown said it "clears the way for BiH to move forward decisively in securing a modern and efficient indirect tax system that meets EU requirements".
Greece's Piraeus Bank completed talks on the acquisition of 99.7 per cent of Bulgaria's Eurobank.
No official details about the price were unveiled, but local press said it was between 40m euros and 50m euros.
Croatia's INA is one of nine candidate buyers for the Albanian state-run oil processing company ARMO.
The list of potential bidders also reportedly includes Italy's ENI, Greece's Motor Oil and a consortium of Samsung and the South Korean state oil corporation.
The privatisation deal for ARMO is expected to reach $58m.
An IMF mission arrived in Montenegro for three days of talks as part of the fifth review under the stand-by arrangement between Serbia-Montenegro and the Fund.
The IMF, which reviews the performance of the republics separately, has already carried out a similar mission in Serbia.
Macedonia's government decided on 26 January to privatise the power utility ESM as one integrated structure, rather than splitting it into two separate businesses before the sale.
The tender is expected to take place this year, with the aim of selecting a preferred candidate buyer by the end of December.
