20/04/2011
By Justin Vela for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 20/04/11
Thousands gathered in Istanbul on Tuesday (April 19th) to protest the disqualification of 12 pro-Kurdish politicians from the upcoming parliamentary elections.
Turkey's Supreme Election Board (YSK) found them unfit to be candidates, based on past convictions for links to the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), which the Turkish state has been fighting for over 26 years.
"We will take to the streets, we will not be stopped," a 27-year-old protester named Serkan said.
Kurds also staged protests in other cities, including Diyarbakir, Hakkari, and Van.
At times they turned violent, as protesters armed with Molotov Cocktails, stones and fireworks destroyed property and clashed with riot police.
A human rights lawyer and columnist for the local Today's Zaman, Orhan Kemal Cengiz, told SETimes that while the politicians have criminal records, he did not understand the timing of their disqualification.
Two, he notes, are current members of parliament.
"They say these candidates have criminal records, preventing them from being elected.
If they have criminal records, this should have prevented them from being elected before, not now," said Cengiz.
The disqualification of the candidates is an example of the continued "deep-state mentality" in Turkey, he said.
"They do not like the idea of the Kurds having political representation in parliament.
Turkey is part of the European Court of Human Rights.
If they had good will, they could have interpreted the existing law [disqualifying the candidates] in a different fashion under international human rights obligations," Cengiz added.
Michael Gunter, the secretary-general of the EU Turkey Civic Commission and author of several books on the Kurds, says the disqualifications may spark more trouble.
"It does allow for further unrest.
I am always optimistic and hoping for the best, but this is certainly not for the best," he said.
"It will make many ethnic Kurds in Turkey very angry."
Following the disqualifications, the Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party announced that it might boycott the upcoming elections.
Both Cengiz and Gunter said that doing so would have serious consequences, yet view the Kurds as being placed in an increasingly difficult position.
"The [election] council is saying to Kurds that they should go to the mountains, they don't have any place in parliament, they don't have any place in politics.
It is extremely dangerous," said Cengiz.
Gunter said he hoped the election commission would reverse its decision to ban the candidates.
"You want to participate in elections.
You want to be in parliament.
You reach a point where you have no alternative.
When the other side doesn't allow you to play by the rules, what are you going to do?"
