16/05/2011
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 16/05/11
Republika Srpska (RS) dodged possible sanctions by the Office of the High Representative on Saturday (May 14th) when the entity's president, Milorad Dodik, decided to postpone organising a referendum on BiH's court and prosecutor's office.
He did so after a meeting with EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton, who pledged that a special committee will be formed as a step towards restructuring the judiciary. 
The committee, Ashton said, will make recommendations on how to address issues in the sector within the context of the EU accession process.
"We are convinced this dialogue will provide solutions for specific problems and put the country back on the path to Europe," she said.
Bosnian Serbs have complained that the existing system lacks a process for addressing war crimes committed against Serbs during the BiH conflict, among other concerns.
"We consider this to be a significant step after many years of our constant warning about these issues," Dodik said after his talks with Ashton. 
"We understand this is the beginning of a dialogue concerning the judiciary system, in which we would discuss all the problems with the BiH judiciary system."
Reactions so far have been mixed. 
Government leaders hailed what they described as a victory for Dodik. 
On the other hand, the opposition Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) still wants the referendum to be held.
Another opposition force, the Party of Democratic Progress (PDP), said postponing the referendum is Dodik's biggest political failure.
"It was clear referendum would not be held as long as [Dodik's] SNSD is the governing party, because the SNSD and Dodik now have clearly proved they are acting accordingly to international community orders," said Mladen Ivanic, leader of the PDP.
After Banja Luka, Ashton went to Sarajevo. 
There, she met with BiH Presidency members Bakir Izetbegovic and Zeljko Komsic, as well as with Zlatko Lagumdzija, leader of the Social Democratic Party of BiH, and representatives of the Party of Democratic Action (SDA).
"I am pleased that this acute problem in BiH had been solved, but I said to Lady Ashton that the permanent problem has not been solved, namely the accumulation of anti-Dayton and anti-state actions and statements," Izetbegovic said. 
"The decisions and authority of the high representative are being questioned, as well as some institutions formed in the BiH parliament, and even the Srebrenica genocide."
Zdravko Grebo, a professor of law at the University of Sarajevo, believes there may be more to Ashton's visit than has been announced so far. 
In the next few days, he said, it will become clear whether her talks with Dodik yielded a deal on forming a state-level government, still elusive seven months after elections were held.
