20/04/2011
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 20/04/11
Although guarantees exist on paper, non-compliance with the standards and principles of gender equality remain an obstacle for women in Republika Srpska, advocates say.
"Every country has different forms of gender discrimination and Republika Srpska (RS) is no exception.
It is the duty of the state to take measures to eradicate existing inequalities," Dijana Tepsic of the Centre for Gender Equality told SETimes.
In RS, experts say, the most common forms of discrimination against women are domestic violence, violation of women's labour rights, and participation in public and political decision-making.
"The situation is the worst in the labour market.
Women's rights are more violated when it comes to motherhood, and they are often the first affected by an economic crisis.
Women also are not in an equal position when it comes to the job search, because they are primary caretakers in the family and are often forced to work in the so-called 'gray economy', and take low paid jobs under the worst conditions," Tepsic said.
According to the RS Ministry of Labour, women are a minority among employed citizens.
"That does not mean they work less.
On the contrary, daily activities of women are burdensome, unpaid and socially unrecognised," Tepsic says.
Meanwhile, many face the prospect of harassment, abuse and violence.
The Law on Protection from Domestic Violence of the Federation of BiH/FBiH does not seek needed public funding to shelter women and children, victims of [domestic] violence.
They subsist almost entirely on donations from international organisations, one-off donations from the entity budgets, with almost no support from local communities.
"There is also a problem of insufficient accommodation capacity for the treatment of drug addiction, which is a common cause of violence [in RS]," said Mara Radovanovic of the Bjeljina-based NGO Lara.
The position of women in urban and rural areas differs greatly, with significant marginalisation of women with disabilities, single mothers, refugees, and Roma women.
According to RS Gender Centre data, women make up only one-third of all pensioners with a regular retirement.
Few women in RS are in managerial positions or are owners of property, making it difficult for them to have access to credit and financial incentives, while a large number of women in rural areas have no pension or health insurance.
Progress, however, is visible in terms of women's participation in public and political life.
Currently, the RS parliament has 21% women, while local assemblies have 16% women deputies, and 5% as city mayors.
In the new RS government, out of 16 ministries, five ministerial seats went to women -- a significant improvement from only two women ministers previously.
Female victims of domestic violence account for more than 30% of the total number of people killed in RS.
Victim information hotlines in the entity recorded 17,234 victims of violence over the past five years, out of whom 98% were women and young girls.
