16/05/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 16/05/11
The Belgrade Higher Court accepted the plea bargain between the prosecution and one of Serbia's most popular singers, Svetlana Ceca Raznatovic, according to which she is obligated to pay 1.5m euros and spend eight months under house arrest. 
The May 9th deal came after Ceca pleaded guilty to embezzling money from the sale of players of the Obilic football club during her time at the club's helm.
The hearing lasted only 15 minutes but launched a protracted public debate on whether justice was served by the plea bargain.
Some were especially angry that the singer would remain under house arrest in her luxury villa in the centre of Belgrade, the value of which is estimated at several million euros.
Explaining the plea bargain, Judge Sladjana Markovic said the penalty had been "defined by the application of particularly mitigating circumstances", since the singer had never been convicted before and is a single mother of two. 
Ceca's husband, Zeljko Arkan Raznatovic, was the leader of the Tigers paramilitary unit during the Yugoslav wars of the 1990s and was assassinated in January 2000 in Belgrade.
Ceca was charged with illegally earning 4m then German marks and about $3.5m from the sale of ten Obilic football players between August 14th 2000 and May 21st 2003. 
Since the club did not file charges against her, the singer must only pay the amount embezzled from the state.
Uros Piper, a Belgrade journalist who reports on organised crime, told SETimes that the plea bargain left the Serbian public without a trial at which it could have learned about connections among politicians, sports figures and people from the entertainment world.
"The investigation against Ceca lasted … eight years. 
Such a long process is odd even for the usually slow Serbian judiciary, which all leads to the conclusion that Ceca enjoys some sort of protection in political structures," Piper said.
Sociologist Ratko Bozovic told SETimes that for the public, it is particularly important to see that all are "equal in the eyes of justice and can be held legally accountable regardless of their status".
"However, it is questionable whether justice was served in this case. 
I am against the possibility of allowing wealthy people to redeem themselves by paying a certain amount of money, especially in a poor country such as Serbia. 
But that option is not typical only of Serbian legislation, rather it was taken over from more developed countries," Bozovic said.
However, State Attorney Zagorka Dolovac denies claims that plea bargains "enable the rich to buy justice".
"Money cannot substitute for a sentence. 
Whether someone is rich or not has no influence over the closing of an agreement," she told the Belgrade media, adding that state interest was protected in Ceca's case.
However, not everyone shares that opinion. 
Danijel, 37, a programmer from Belgrade, told SETimes that "the plea bargain is ridiculous".
"If I stole 2.5m euros, would they let me pay the state 1.5m and keep the rest in exchange for sitting at home for eight months? 
Besides, what kind of house arrest is that in a villa worth several million euros, while at the same time half of Serbia is starving," he said.
But Ceca's fans disagree. 
Nikola, 30, a salesman, says he does not believe the charges against the singer. 
"Had she stolen the money, I'm sure Obilic would have sued her too. 
In this case, with the approaching election, the authorities need a big name to demonstrate their alleged consistent fight against crime," he told SETimes.
