16/06/2011
(Reuters, AP, Bloomberg, UPI, BBC, Independent, eKathimerini - 16/06/11; ANA-MPA, eKathimerini, Reuters, AFP, BBC, DPA, Bloomberg, VOA, RFE/RL - 15/06/11)
Prime Minister George Papandreou is expected to present a new government on Thursday (June 16th) and put it to a vote of confidence in the coming days, hoping to also win support for an austerity plan aimed at preventing the country from defaulting on its debt.
He announced the decision to form a new cabinet at the end of a day of speculation and violent protests in Athens on Wednesday, and after talks on a coalition government between the ruling PASOK and main opposition New Democracy (ND) failed.
"With dedication our government has been waging the struggle for the country's rescue for the past 20 months," said Papandreou. 
"We took the sins of others on our shoulders."
In May last year, Greece secured a 110 billion-euro rescue package from the EU and the IMF, agreeing in return to implement a series of unpopular reforms to prevent the country from defaulting on, what was at the time, a debt of over 215 billion euros.
However, Greece's sovereign debt has since grown to 340 billion euros. 
Its budget deficit was recently revised up to 10.5% of GDP, well above the 7.5% target set out in the rescue programme.
The IMF, the European Commission (EC) and the European Central Bank (ECB), which have been monitoring the country's progress in implementing the prescribed reforms, said in early June that further austerity measures were needed to meet the objectives of the rescue deal.
Meanwhile, the yield on Greece's 10-year bond has more than doubled since May 2010, hitting a record high of 18.4% on Wednesday, as eurozone officials ended more than six hours of talks on a second bailout plan without reaching a consensus.
To secure the new funding deal, which could reportedly reach 120 billion euros, Papandreou's government approved a new medium-term austerity programme and submitted it to parliament last week.
The measures cover 2012-2015 and envision a significant reduction of public sector jobs, tax hikes and further spending cuts, as well as a 50 billion-euro privatisation plan. 
The government hopes the programme would help plug a funding shortfall of about 30 billion euros next year.
Many Greeks, including some PASOK members, fiercely oppose the new plan. 
Thousands of people joined a general strike Wednesday and protesters in Athens tried to blockade parliament to prevent lawmakers from entering.
The rally turned violent as demonstrators hurled stones and petrol bombs, smashed windows and clashed with police, who used tear gas and stun grenades against the rioters. 
The protest left nearly 50 people injured, including 36 officers.
Following Papandreou's announcement that he would form a new cabinet, two lawmakers from his party, including former Public Order Minister Giorgos Floridis, resigned their seats, dealing a new blow to the prime minister.
