16/06/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/06/11
The indictments last week of Kosovo Post and Telecom (PTK) manager Shyqri Haxha and four other senior company officials for "damaging the company", may have a major effect on the company's privatisation.
Haxha and PTK board chairman Rexhe Gjonbalaj were accused of "entering into harmful contracts, abusing official position and misuse of economic authorisations," EULEX spokesman Blerim Krasniqi said of the June 8th charges, stemming from two multi-million contracts between PTK and Dardafon Mobile for obtaining telecommunication licenses.
Krasniqi told SETimes that the indictment followed investigations begun last year by the Special Prosecutor of Kosovo, with the assistance of EULEX. 
The court has not requested arrest warrants for the indicted officials.
The indictments come as the government is in the final stages of privatising a 75% stake in the company, with Croatia Telecom and Austrian Telecom the main contenders in the privatisation race.
"This is not a good time for the country, since Kosovo is going through a crisis and a hard time for private investors. 
The reason for privatisation, on the other hand, is about debt, and in my opinion, the sale of debt is self-depreciatory, leaving the country with selling urgency," Lumir Abdixhiku, executive director of the Pristina-based Riinvest Institute told SETimes.
Experts argue that, under the circumstances, the privatisation should be stopped, as it undermines the image and price of the company during the process.
Though the Kosovo opposition and civil society have requested an interruption of PTK's privatisation, it is unclear what will happen, because the planned revenues from the privatisation process are to be included in the budget.
Stopping the privatisation could trigger a financial crisis for the government.
The Organisation for Democracy, Anti-corruption and Dignity (COHU) urges authorities to suspend the privatisation. 
COHU chief Avni Zogiani told Radio Free Europe (RFE) that the Kosovo Assembly should launch an investigation.
"We are dealing with indictments against PTK managers, whereas the [privatisation] contract is actually prepared by the politicians. 
We all know that the current PTK officials had a condition that if they wanted to become PTK managers, they had to sign the Dardafon contract, which was prepared much earlier than this management entered office," Zogiani told RFE.
The government expects to add 300m euros to the 2011 budget from PTK's privatisation. 
However, analysts say revealing government revenue expectations is a mistake, as potential investors may have been willing to offer more.
"Predetermining the revenue of the country's potential financial documents will give potential investors an idea of what we expect to get from the PTK privatisation. 
If the 2011 budget revenue from the sale is 300m euros, then it is clear that our expectations are approximately 300m euros and any potential investor will offer no more than the expected price, and we have done everything to devalue PTK," Abdixhiku says.
He adds that in routine cases, the privatisation process would be stopped, but in Kosovo that will not happen because the revenues from the privatisation will finance the country's deficit.
As damaging as the indictments may be to the process, they show the government is serious about fighting corruption, as it presents important evidence against senior officials at PTK, the country's biggest company, and for many years considered the most successful after the 1999 conflict.
