17/01/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 17/01/11
Ilir Meta, a veteran Albanian politician and former prime minister, has resigned his posts in the current cabinet following the broadcast of a video that purportedly shows him trying to rig a public tender.
Announcing his move on Friday (January 14th), two days after the footage was aired, Meta said he wished to face justice as an independent citizen and not as an official with government duties. 
He had been serving as deputy prime minister, economy minister and deputy speaker of parliament.
He denied any wrongdoing and lashed out at political rivals, whom he accused of staging the scandal.
"Organised crime, which leads the Socialist Party and has taken hostage its chairman, Edi Rama, has failed in its criminal editing," Meta said, saying he will press charges against former minister Dritan Prifti, who allegedly recorded the videotape.
The tape has now been turned over to prosecutors. 
Local media reports said the Albanian authorities plan to ask US specialists to help determine if the video is authentic, though this has not been confirmed. 
In the meantime, it is being analysed by local experts.
The European Commission is urging that no obstacles be placed in the way of a thorough investigation. 
Natasha Butler, a spokesperson for Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele, told Top Channel that Brussels will be watching to see if the legal system functions in an unbiased way.
The Commission welcomes any step that helps the investigation and makes a positive contribution to strengthening the rule of law in Albania, Butler said.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Sali Berisha has accepted the candidates nominated by Meta's Socialist Movement for Integration to fill his positions. 
The new deputy prime minister will be current Foreign Minister Edmond Haxhinasto, who will hold both posts simultaneously.
The new economy minister will be Nasip Naco, while Vanghel Tavo will serve as deputy speaker of parliament.
"Meta gave his resignation; I accepted his resignation," Berisha said, insisting that the ruling coalition remains intact.
Rama and his Socialists, however, are demanding a change in government and say they will mount a new round of demonstrations to push for that goal. 
"I invite the government to resign and I invite you all, on January 21st, to protest against the mud of the government which plunders people every day," Rama said on Friday, after Meta stepped down.
He threatened that more scandals will come to light if Berisha and his administration do not comply.
Writing in the local press, political analyst Mentor Kikia lamented the sight of statesman behaving "as though at a farmer's market, while talking about thousands and hundreds of thousands of euros as though they were talking about potatoes".
Another commentator, Mentor Nazarko, said the public has shown no strong reaction to the controversy. 
"What seems to be true is that the society and the politics of the country smells like something rotten, with which we all co-exist, giving it a routine and normal character. 
As it is, change seems to be far away," he wrote.
