16/06/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 16/06/11
Serbia's efforts to put the Yugoslav conflicts behind it were highlighted again this week when the country hosted a conference of NATO strategic military partners.
The event, held in Belgrade through Wednesday (June 15th), brought together representatives of around 60 nations, as well as from NATO, the Partnership for Peace, Mediterranean Dialogue, Istanbul Co-operation Initiative and Russia.
The choice of venue, experts say, was highly indicative of the changes that have taken place in Serbia and the region.
Only 12 years ago, Belgrade was bombed by NATO as part of an international operation against Slobodan Milosevic's military forces.
"The NATO conference in Belgrade has great symbolic significance," military analyst Ljubodrag Stojadinovic told SETimes.
"It is a kind of reconciliation of Serbia with the modern world and its region, a clear sign that we are no longer inclined to conflict, but global security co-operation."
According to the Chief of Staff of the Serbian Army, General Miloje Miletic, the event confirmed that Serbia is now "recognised as a reliable partner in global defence and security".
"We want to use NATO's experience and their commands, together, to build skills in the area of doctrine, military organisation, training commands, officers and units.
We want to develop leadership and military-economic co-operation with countries that have an interest," Miletic said.
NATO representatives, meanwhile, described Serbia as a key partner and said the relationship brings benefits to all sides.
"We are pleased with the new direction that Serbia and NATO are taking," said the chairman of the NATO Military Committee, Giampaolo Di Paolo.
Serbia has been a member of the Partnership for Peace since 2006.
The country's army has undergone a thorough overhaul, making it compatible with NATO standards.
In 2007, Serbia adopted a resolution on military neutrality.
But according to the Supreme Commander of Allied Command Transformation, General Stephane Abrial, this poses no obstacle to co-operation with NATO.
"Serbia is a key factor to security in the Western Balkans, and NATO is open to co-operation.
We want the same level of co-operation as Serbia and fully accept the decision of each sovereign country," Abrial said at the conference.
NATO is still a sensitive topic among many Serbs, with right-wing parties and nationalist organisations staunchly opposing closer ties with the Alliance.
On the eve of the conference, opponents organised protests and set the NATO flag on fire.
"The government is trampling over painful memories of the Serbian people by introducing the country through NATO's back door," Deputy President of the Serbian Radical Party Dragan Todorovic told SETimes.
Speaking at the conference, however, Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovic rebutted such claims, saying co-operation with the Alliance is part of a more general effort to build international ties.
"Serbia has significantly improved relations with NATO, but also its co-operation with all friendly armies in the world," Sutanovac said.
"NATO fully respects our position of military neutrality and the door of co-operation is fully open, and the level and modalities of co-operation are a matter of our decision," Miletic noted.
