16/11/2010
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/11/10
European Parliament member Tanja Fajon, rapporteur for the visa liberalisation process, sat down with SETimes correspondent Muhamet Brajshori to discuss where countries in the region stand.
SETimes: EU interior ministers approved visa liberalisation for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) earlier this month. 
How will that affect Kosovo?
Tanja Fajon: First, I'm glad to have that positive decision -- it's very important news on the whole, and especially for Albania and BiH. 
On the other hand, Kosovo remains a serious concern. 
I believe we have to focus all our effort to bring Kosovo close to the EU, to find a solution on how to engage it in visa liberalisation. 
Kosovo still needs to complete many necessary reforms, and authorities should take all efforts to fulfill them.
SETimes: Recently, many EU countries have faced problems with refugees from Serbia and Macedonia. 
What measures will be taken by the EU to avoid the same experience with Albania and BiH, and what will the role of the governments of those countries be?
Fajon: The increased number of asylum-seekers, especially from Serbia and Macedonia this year, was a serious concern. 
The governments in Albania and BiH have launched information campaigns to inform the citizens what visa liberalisation really means.
The EU Commission will follow the implementation of standards, not just in Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, but in the entire Western Balkans, so they will continue to follow the safety of borders and safety of documents and with a special mechanism.
With this mechanism, member states that are affected will have a chance to take some measures in all of the Western Balkan countries. 
So it's very important for the governments in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Macedonia and Montenegro to inform their citizens about their rights and obligations when they travel. 
The responsibility on the side of the governments is very big.
SETimes: The EU commission published progress reports on Western Balkans countries recently; do we see progress there?
Fajon: We see good messages in the reports, but there are many concerns. 
Of course there has been progress, but there are challenges that the governments must face. 
All of the Western Balkan countries need to strengthen efforts against organised crime and corruption and make further efforts to strengthen their administrative capacities and judicial systems.
On Kosovo, there is an emphasis on the media situation, the lack of media freedom.
Because of the political crisis in Albania, the message [was not as] positive as the government wishes to see. 
I think that the political situation is putting the image of the country in a very bad position in the EU. 
I hope the political sides in Albania really find the strength to develop a good dialogue, because it's affecting the image of the country.
SETimes: The Western Balkan countries have a lot of challenges that they must address, but do you think the EU is ready for them?
Fajon: With the financial and economic crisis in the EU, governments are facing domestic difficulties, and it's getting more complicated to argue why enlargement is necessary. 
I believe that the Western Balkans are needed by the EU, and have a clear EU perspective.
The countries of the Western Balkans must have the European perspective high on their agenda and must continue with the reforms which will bring closer them to the EU. 
The visa liberalisation decision on Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of many positive steps towards the EU, and if you do all the tasks, you can have really positive benefits.
I believe that the EU will be committed, and will remain committed, to bringing the Western Balkans countries to the EU with a clear perspective for membership. 
As much as the Western Balkans needs the EU, the EU needs the Western Balkans.
