16/11/2010
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 16/11/10
In its annual progress report, the European Commission says that Macedonia has continued to meet its Stabilisation and Association Agreement obligations. 
Brussels recommends that the country enter the next stage of the accession process -- but only if it is able to resolve the name dispute with Greece.
"In order to begin negotiations, a commonly accepted solution on the name issue is needed under UN auspices," EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele said.
Otherwise, the report is positive overall, although it identifies areas that need improvement, such as dialogue among political parties. 
The Ohrid Framework Agreement remains an essential element for democracy and rule of law, it said.
Reforms of the judiciary and public administration, and the fight against corruption and freedom of expression are areas in which the EC expects progress in the coming year.
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski called the report clear evidence and acknowledgment of Macedonia's commitment and responsible approach to attain its strategic priority.
"The positive evaluation and the confirmation of the recommendation from the start of the EU accession talks represent recognition that Macedonia is moving forward; the reforms are continuing, and the country is achieving the level of political, economic and social development required for the next stage of the Euro-integration process," he said.
The report is particularly positive about Macedonia making additional progress in establishing a functioning market economy by reducing trade barriers and improving the courts' capacity and efficiency in economic-related cases.
If Macedonia vigorously implements the reform programme to reduce significant structural weaknesses, the country should be able to cope with competitive pressures and market forces within the Union in the medium term, it said.
Progress is also noted in legislation concerning the work of the public administration, but considerable effort is needed to ensure its independence, transparency and professionalism.
Macedonian authorities were irritated by use of the term "official language" instead of "Macedonian language" in the report, saying the EU has sided with Greece.
EU Ambassador to Macedonia Erwan Fouere appeared in parliament to apologise for any misunderstanding and went on to praise the government for preparing an action plan to address the areas specified for improvement.
The public may not seem so forgiving. 
"Our path to the EU is blocked by Greece because of the name issue. 
Whatever we try to meet the criteria for membership, it seems that it is not crucial. 
If the EU doesn't bring Greece to reason, we will be forced to stop the negotiations. 
I don't think there is another way," Skopje resident Vladimir Bogoev, 45, told SETimes.
Macedonia established diplomatic relations with the EU in 1995 and was granted EU member candidate status in 2005.
