16/06/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 16/06/11
With the advent of the internet and the ability to communicate instantaneously from any corner of the world, it seems the old adage "All politics is local" is in need of revision. 
Today, all politics is global.
It is with a belief in that view -- that the events in one country are now not only visible to an international audience, but are personal and politically galvanising -- that an amorphous online group of anarchists and hackers known as Anonymous has taken up virtual arms.
They are protesting what they see as violations of freedom of expression, no matter the locale. 
The group's recent targets have included Iran, Egypt, and, as of this month, Turkey.
Nearly a month after as many as 50,000 Turks took to the streets to protest an upcoming law that would filter internet access, Anonymous began its own protest against the August 22nd legislation.
"Citizens of Turkey, Anonymous now fights with you," a computerised voice announces in a warning video released on June 6th. 
"Turkish government, expect us."
The cyber-attack commenced on June 9th, and was directed at the national Department of Telecommunication and Communication (TIB). 
Anonymous used a common hacking tactic known as Distributed Denial of Service Attack (DDoS), which prevents intended users from accessing a website or using its services.
Though TIB's official statement declared that the institution was unaffected, its website was intermittently unavailable following the attack.
Even so, the effects have been far more muted than Anonymous' threats had implied, thanks largely to government preparation for the event. 
Some users reported seeing the website go into maintenance mode before the cyber-attack began.
"The country's official institutional IT security infrastructure is much sturdier, and the authorities have the means to render these sorts of attacks ineffective," Bilgi University professor Ozgur Uckan told SETimes. 
"As a result, we'll only be seeing short-term interruptions on institutional sites."
Another explanation for the unremarkable attacks is that a counter-organisation of nationalist Turkish hackers, known as the Ayyildiz Team, has worked to prevent Anonymous' access and nullify its efforts.
Though Anonymous introduced itself to Turkey via a proclamation of solidarity, it is a message that can also be interpreted as neocolonial, implying that the Turkish community needs the help of more advanced international groups to overcome its domestic issues. 
Its illegal methodology also bothers many, even those who are ordinarily opposed to censorship.
Political blogger and Bianet contributor Burak Tekin tells SETimes that though he normally opposes acts like DDoS, as "they are the internet equivalent of shutting someone's microphone off or simply muzzling them", he makes an exception for Anonymous' actions.
"The problem with Turkey is that a state-sponsored autonomous institution has the authority to ban any website, without court decision, that it deems to be 'obscene', and that term is not clearly defined in the pertaining law," Tekin says. 
Because of the arbitrary nature of the state's rulings, such attention-getting tactics, though illegal, may be necessary to wake people up to the severity of the issue.
Uckan warns that while the group has already proved successful in bringing the issue of Turkish censorship to the international agenda, its plans may backfire in another way.
"It's clear that this attack will intensify our leaders' fear of the internet, which is already rooted in their mental structure," Uckan explains, adding, "Now the voice of the chorus demanding state control of the internet will likely be louder."
