24/06/2005
(Various sources -- 17/06/05 – 24/06/05)
Albania's Finance Ministry sealed an agreement with ABN Amro and several local banks on 20 June, which would provide a total of $76m in loans for an infrastructure modernisation project.
The money is designated for upgrading the Tirana-Durres rail line and building the Mother Teresa International Airport spur line.
General Electric is the contractor for the projects.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Refugees and Human Rights Minister Mirsad Kebo announced on 20 June that BiH authorities and international agencies plan to spend over 100m euros for refugee returns and related activities this year.
UN data suggests 1.7 million refugees have returned to their pre-war homes, while 187,000 remain in limbo.
The Bulgarian Telecommunications Company (BTC) reports consolidated net profits of 34m euros in the first quarter of this year, a decline of 13 per cent year-on-year.
BTC says the drop was due to increased investment in core operations, as well as extra spending related to the future launch of a mobile phone operator.
The Croatian government and the IMF have agreed to raise the public deficit target for 2005 to 4.2 per cent of GDP, instead of the previously set target of 3.7 per cent.
The news was announced on 22 June after a Croatian delegation led by Finance Minister Ivan Suker returned from a visit to IMF headquarters in Washington.
A National Council for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises was established in Greece last week.
The new structure will operate as part of the development ministry and include 27 members representing all parties and agencies involved in the sector.
A new one-window system for registering trade companies and legal entities will be introduced in Macedonia on 1 January.
It is expected to reduce both time and costs related to the registration process and is aimed at boosting the domestic business climate.
US pork meat producer Smithfield Foods will invest some $800m in Romania, according to company vice president Michael Cole.
Smithfield Foods entered the Romanian market last March.
Turkey's largest construction company, Enka Insaat, has taken over a project to build an additional terminal at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport, Aeroflot announced on 20 June.
The price of the deal has not been disclosed, but according to local press reports, costs could reach $400m.
