19/04/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 19/04/11
The American Association for Vascular Surgery named Serbia's Dragan Milic, 44, the 2010 best young vascular surgeon outside of the United States.
"I am so happy, because I received this award from the professors whose books and works I've studied," Milic said.
The American Association for Vascular Surgery, the leading medical authority on vascular surgery in the world, selects the best doctors from outside the United States every year. 
This is the first time a Serbian doctor has received this honour.
The association's decision was based on Milic's four original works, which were published in the well-known American Journal of Vascular Surgery over the past three years.
"This should be an example to all of my young colleagues," Milic said. 
"They have to be persistent, follow the latest developments in medicine, publish their works, and attend medical conferences."
Milic works in the Department of Vascular Surgery in the Clinical Centre of Nis, where he is extremely popular among patients.
Vinka Jovanovic, 63, had battled leg pain before she met Dr. 
Milic.
"I hardly moved, I didn't sleep many nights because of pain," she remembers. 
"Thanks to my doctor, I can now walk again."
Milic is known for treatment using the multi-layer compression bandage method with Tubulcus. 
He has cured thousands of people across Serbia and surrounding countries.
"Patients come from all over the region," said the head nurse of the Clinic for Cardiovascular Surgery of Nis, Marica Bajovic. 
"Some of them are even coming without an appointment, but Dr. 
Milic receives everyone and takes care of them."
Milic is highly respected among colleagues as well, Bajovic said. 
He is a good manager and the clinic's staff enjoys working with him, she said.
"He always finds sponsors; he has managed a free healthcare plan for our employees," Bajovic said. 
"He often organises parties in our clinic. 
It's fun working with him."
As one of the world's best doctors, Milic has received several highly-paid job offers from world renowned clinics, but he is not going to leave Nis.
"Money is not the main motivation for me," Milic said. 
"I have enough income in Nis. 
I can live on my salary."
He plans to continue his practice there and learn more from his colleagues abroad. 
With the $7,000 prize, Milic plans to attend a conference of US vascular surgeons in Boston this June.
"After the conference, with my mentor Peter Gloviczky, the chief vascular surgeon at Mayo Clinic, I will be able to spend a few months in various American clinics and learn about the latest treatment methods in vascular surgery," Milic said.
