13/12/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/12/10
About 12,000 people had to be evacuated from their homes in northern Albania this month as roads turned into raging torrents of water and 14,000 hectares of land surrounding the swollen Lake Shkoder were inundated.
More than 90 members of Kosovo Security Force (KSF) are in northern Albania helping with evacuations, medical support, transport and distribution of aid.
Ibrahim Shala, director for media relations, told SETimes that 59 members of KSF were sent in December 2nd, followed by dozens more on December 7th.
"There are 95 KSF members, with equipment and transport vehicles. 
We sent troops twice: 59 troops the first time, with full technical support, medical support, lorries, rescue boats, a specialised unit, divers with diving equipment, a whole search and rescue unit," Shala said.
KSF Minister Fehmi Mujota and Commander Sulejman Selimi visited Shkodra on December 6th, and met with Albanian Defence Minister Arben Imami.
"They visited the units in the field and met Minister Imami and assessed the situation. 
On December 7th, we sent 36 additional forces, 15 lorries with troops, three ambulances from the Kosovo Health Federation and two [KSF] ambulances to work on taking and distributing aid in the field," Shala confirmed.
"Our troops have been very much welcomed there, and highly appreciated by NATO monitors in the ground," Shala says, adding that Kosovo troops will continue to stay and help for as long as they are needed.
The Kosovo government has allocated 1m euros to assist its neighbour. 
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said he had been in contact with Albanian counterpart Sali Berisha concerning the situation.
"The KSF is doing responsible work, patriotic and humane to help the citizens. 
Albania, as never before, needs overall help to overcome this hard situation," Thaci said, adding that logistics and medical units from Kosovo will also be sent.
Thaci also appealed to Kosovo citizens in the border areas to open their doors to Albania's citizens if needed.
