13/12/2010
(Trud, 24 Chasa, Emg.rs, B92, Hurriyet - 12/12/10;
AFP, AP, The Sofia Echo, Sofia News Agency, ANA-MPA, BNR, Dnes.bg, Xinhua, Official Website of the Serbian Government, Official Website of the Bulgarian Foreign Ministry - 11/12/10)
The foreign ministers of Bulgaria, Greece and Serbia, Nikolay Mladenov, Dimitris Droutsas and Vuk Jeremic, pledged on Saturday (December 11th) to work together towards the Western Balkan countries' EU accession.
"The European integration of the region is the only way for strengthening democracy and consolidating the rule of law, stability and prosperity for all in South East Europe," a joint declaration adopted during the ministers' trilateral meeting in Sofia stressed.
The document also backed Athens' proposal calling for setting a timeline for the Balkan EU hopefuls' entry into the 27-nation bloc during Greece's EU presidency in the first half of 2014.
The aim of the so-called Agenda 2014 initiative is to "encourage and moblise" the countries in the region "to reach tangible progress in the accession process within a feasible timetable, on the basis of a targeted road map", according to the declaration.
Noting that EU hopefuls must fully abide by the bloc's basic values, principles and standards, it also stressed that regional co-operation and good neighbourly relations are key to aspiring nations' advancement.
"Strict compliance with all accession criteria and requirements remains a prerequisite for the successful European integration" of all candidate and potential candidate countries," said the declaration.
Voicing emphatic support for Serbia's EU bid in particular, Bulgaria and Greece also vowed to help their neighbour join the club.
"We reiterate our full commitment and full support to the future of Serbia within our European family," Droutsas told reporters at a joint briefing with his Bulgarian and Serbian counterparts after the talks.
He was also quoted as telling Jeremic that Serbia could join the EU in 2018, which would coincide with Bulgaria's first-ever presidency of the bloc and the 100th anniversary of the end of World War I.
Jeremic said he hopes his country will gain formal recognition as an EU candidate and will begin its membership negotiations with Brussels as early as next year.
"This could be the year when Croatia ends their talks and the year when Serbia starts our talks," the AFP quoted him as saying.
Serbia, he added, would "work very hard to make sure that this happens in 2011".
Next year, according to Mladenov, will be critical for all Western Balkan countries' aspirations for membership in the bloc, as they will have to take important steps for their integration progress.
After Saturday's meeting, Droutsas told reporters that Greece would like to see Macedonia in the EU soon.
"This is what we are working for and we also hope that Skopje realises what has to be done in order to join us in the EU family," he said.
