18/04/2011
(AGI, The Irish Times, Irish Independent, Irish Sun, CNBC - 18/04/11;
ANA-MPA, eKathimerini, The Globe and Mail - 17/04/11)
Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou denied on Sunday (April 17th) that Athens has asked the EU and the IMF to open talks on restructuring its debt, saying such a move would be disadvantageous for his country.
"The pain and cost of restructuring would be bigger than the benefits," he told reporters after a meeting with IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn in Washington.
"Restructuring is not the position of the Greek government."
He made the statement amid growing market speculation that Greece will not be able to avoid a default on its debt, now standing at 340 billion euros and expected to rise to 375 billion euros in 2013.
The country is currently implementing a programme of austerity measures that it agreed to about a year ago in exchange for a 110 billion-euro rescue package from the EU, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the IMF, which effectively implies more loans.
But the measures have not produced tangible results yet.
Last week, Greece outlined its plans for budget savings of 26 billion euros over the next five years, and for raising 50 billion euros from asset sales, promising to announce the details of that privatisation programme after the Easter holidays.
Meanwhile, as the rumours of a possible debt restructure continued to spread, Greek 10-year bond yields rose to a record 13.83% on Friday.
This fuelled further doubts that the country will be able to return to the international capital markets by early 2012 to borrow the 27 billion euros it needs for debt-service payments.
In recent days, there has been speculation that the EU-ECB-IMF troika may defer the next instalment from the 110 billion-euro loan package due to delayed reforms.
A report by the Wall Street Journal on Sunday quoted two unnamed sources as saying that Athens had recently tabled the debt restructuring idea to the EU-ECB-IMF troika, but that European officials had rejected it due to the move's potential negative impact on other eurozone countries.
But the daily Eleftherotypia reports that Greece has already made a request to that effect and quoted a senior IMF official as saying that the talks on the issue were likely to begin in June.
After voicing confidence Thursday that Greece is moving in the right direction, Straus-Kahn backed Papaconstantinou at the weekend, saying there would be no need to restructure its debt as long as Greece sticks to its programme.
"Nothing has changed.
Period," he said.
EU Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn also rejected the possibility of a Greek debt restructuring in comments Thursday, saying the Union does not see this as "an option".
But German officials made some ambiguous remarks on the issue last week, when Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble told Die Welt newspaper that "further measures may have to be taken" if Greece fails the next troika audit in June.
German Deputy Foreign Minister Werner Hoyer was also quoted as suggesting that a Greek debt restructuring "would not be a disaster".
