18/04/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 18/04/11
Addressing a large rally in Belgrade on Saturday (April 16th), opposition leader Tomislav Nikolic announced he was launching a hunger strike in order to push for early elections in Serbia.
Now he is at a private hospital in Belgrade, after being transferred there on the second day of his fast.
Nikolic, head of the Serbian Progressive Party, vowed that he will refuse both food and liquids.
"I will not take a single drop of water until I get a date for the election from [President] Boris Tadic," he told supporters at Saturday's rally.
Tadic "has dismissed all proposals for the date of the early election", Nikolic said.
"I am making him the last offer -- Boris, call the election when something happens to me."
Organisers claim around 120,000 people from all over Serbia attended the event, while while police and the media say the number was closer to 50,000.
Whatever the case, they came to Belgrade with a single demand:
that Serbia hold a snap election.
Currently, general elections are scheduled for May 2012.
With unemployment in some parts of Serbia reaching 70%, Nikolic and his party are tapping into public discontent over the state of the economy.
"There are six of us in the household and we have all lost our jobs during this regime.
Let President Tadic see how a six-member family in which no one earns any money lives, while during Slobodan Milosevic's rule we all worked and lived well," 50-year-old Dragana Nikolic, a resident of Topola, told SETimes.
Tadic, who visited Nikolic at the hospital, said he would decide on the early elections immediately after the country obtained EU membership candidate status.
He said he had asked the Progressive leader to end his hunger-and-thirst strike because it "sets up a precedent in public behaviour that would lead us astray".
"If that precedent were established, we would find ourselves in an unsolvable situation," Tadic said, adding that Serbia could not be a society "living under extortion".
But Nikolic insists he is determined to press ahead.
"That is my decision and an Orthodox and Christian way of fighting for a better life in Serbia," he said.
"Serbia deserves a sacrifice to be laid before it," the veteran politician declared.
Although Nikolic is refusing any sort of treatment, Health Minister Zoran Stankovic said that in certain situations a medical doctor is obligated to treat the patient against his or her will.
That, the minister explained, is necessary in two cases -- when a patient's life is in danger or when the patient is incapable of normal reasoning.
