17/03/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 17/03/11
A Hungarian law that makes it easier for ethnic Magyars to obtain citizenship has caused a stir in Romania and elsewhere.
The measure removes a permanent residency requirement: applicants must only prove they speak Hungarian and have Hungarian ancestry. 
But many see the law as a veiled attempt at supporting political and territorial autonomy in neighbouring countries.
"The Hungarian citizenship formula is just a trick they use to overtly express their obedience to Hungary and betrayal of Romania," said the vice president of the opposition Conservative Party, Bogdan Diaconu.
The opposition is demanding that all high-ranking officials who obtain Hungarian citizenship be removed from their posts.
The government's position is more measured, largely because the largest ethnic Hungarian diaspora party, UDMR, is a member of the ruling tripartite coalition. 
It continues to insist that the Hungarian citizenship law should "meet international standards".
Hungarian community leaders in Romania however, say the fears are baseless. 
People seek Hungarian citizenship for practical reasons as well as to maintain their family tradition, they say.
"Romania has had a very positive experience with granting citizenship to Moldavians over the last two years. 
Therefore, any fear regarding what some call a regional destabilisation is groundless," Romanian Chamber of Deputies Foreign Affairs Committee head Atilla Korodi told SETimes.
"They are all speaking about practical advantages -- travelling to the US or Canada visa-free, or getting a job in Hungary or anywhere else in the EU much faster," Bucharest accountant Borbala Kovacs, 50, told SETimes.
Adopted by the rightist Fidesz government in Budapest last June, the law met with fiery criticism in Slovakia, home to around half a million ethnic Hungarians.
In Ukraine, ten opposition parties in the south-western Zakarpattia region, where the Hungarian community is concentrated, drafted a manifesto calling the law "a threat to national security".
An assessment by the Magyars' Democratic Union (UDMR) -- the Hungarians' main political party in Romania -- estimates over three fourths of Hungarians will apply for citizenship.
The Hungarian Embassy in Belgrade said it estimates nearly a fourth of the 300,000 Hungarians in Serbia will apply, as will most of the 150,000 Hungarians in Ukraine.
Romania's ethnic Hungarians have been striving to achieve cultural autonomy in the Covasna and Harghita counties where they form a majority. 
The most radical faction, seeking territorial autonomy, is composed of the National Szeklers' Council. 
It has proclaimed a "Szeklersland" encompassing the two counties and neighbouring Mures county.
