14/06/2011
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 14/06/11
According to Minister of Finance Zoran Stavreski, unemployment is one of the greatest economic and social problems in Macedonia.
In the past two years there has been a slight but significant reduction of the unemployment rate, with an important 2011 contribution from the UNDP in the design and implementation of the government's active employment measures.
"The idea with this proposal is to have a 'win-win situation', from which all should profit:
employees, employer and the government," Blerim Zlatku, manager of the Chamber of Commerce for Northwestern Macedonia, told SETimes.
The creation of about 700 jobs is expected from the self-employment programme, for which 147.5m MKD are set aside.
"The government introduced ten programmes to reduce unemployment, which would employ 7,000 citizens.
The budget amounts to 10m euros.
Employment programmes will promote employment in all sectors, particularly self-employment," said Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Pesevski.
The UNDP team is in charge of a two-day training session in business plan preparations.
If the applicants withdraw on their own after participating in the training, they will be removed from the unemployment list at the Employment Agency for a term of three years.
The nation's Employment Agency is responsible for active policies and measures of employment, as a part of the government's 2011 Operational Plan.
The measures apply to unemployed persons and employers interested in participating in this active employment measure.
In 2010, 2,590 people registered for self-employment grants, out of which 690 have prepared successful business plans and registered firms, and 779 applied to formalise their business, of which 249 companies have been registered up to now.
"The percentage of registered companies that have received funds from the UNDP programme, so far, is 61%, which is a much higher figure compared to other European countries," says UNDP's Snezana Damjanovska.
According to the UNDP official data, 80% of companies that have registered through this measure in 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010 are still active today.
The statistics show that the highest unemployment rate in Macedonia is among people with primary school education, women and youth.
Since 2007, over 12m US dollars were invested in job creation, of which 95% are financed by the Macedonian government.
During the four years of implementation, employment programmes supported the creation of 1,742 companies.
In the region, UNDP is working on similar programmes with the governments of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Albania and Kosovo.
Minister of Labour and Social Policy Xhelal Bajrami admits that the interest of the Albanians and their companies is very low.
He says that the allocated funds for opening new businesses are being misused and individuals and companies must return the full amount from this programme.
In neighbouring Bulgaria, according to Ivaylo Najdenov of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, an active labour market policy, by preparing annual national plans, led to lower unemployment.
Annually, around 100m euros are planned in Bulgaria for implementation of employment measures.
One of the many success stories is the travel agency Globus Travel, a participant in the self-government project, supported by the UNDP.
Owner Elena Loteska Naumoska started her business in tourism and has been successfully working for the past two years.
"Though travel agencies exist, their number is still small and we have a good opportunity to develop tourism to its highest potential, not only in summer, but year round.
The agency is working successfully and I'm pleased with its achievements."
