14/06/2011
(Wall Street Journal, ZDNET - 14/06/11;
Reuters, FT, The Telegraph, BBC, Guardian, Los Angeles Times, Financial Post, Security Week, PC Magazine, CNET, Hurriyet - 13/06/11;
Time - 10/06/11;
Zaman -- 09/06/11 - 13/06/11;
FBI - 12/04/11)
The Turkish authorities have detained 32 people believed to be involved in online attacks on government web sites by members of the Anonymous international hacktivist group, according to a report by the country's state news agency Anatolia on Monday (June 13th).
The suspects, including eight minors, were arrested on Sunday during police raids in Ankara, Istanbul and ten other Turkish cities on suspicion of "illegally entering the communications system".
The move followed a complaint by Turkey's telecommunications authority, whose web site was inaccessible for visitors for several hours on Thursday after a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack.
The websites of at least one other government agency was also reportedly hit and blocked on the same day.
The raids, which coincided with Turkey's national poll on Sunday, took place amid suspicions that the group was planning to attack the web site of the country's electoral board.
Local cyber-security expert Huzeyfe Onal claimed Thursday that there had been numerous attacks targeting Turkish web sites over the previous two days, in which more than 90,000 computers compromised by hackers had been used.
"This is a scary number," Turkish daily Zaman quoted him as saying.
"This means that in an organised attack, the number could be as many as 1 million computers.
This would be a disaster for Turkey's internet infrastructure."
Cyberactivists of the Anonymous collective, which insists that it is not an organised group, said the attack against the telecoms regulator was in protest of its plans to introduce a new internet filtering system in August.
The plan triggered street protests across Turkey after it was announced in May.
Viewing the plan as a step towards more censorship, Anonymous argues that the new system will allow the authorities to keep track of people's activities on the internet.
"Though it remains opaque why and how the system will be put in place, it is clear that the government is taking censorship to the next level," Reuters quoted the group as saying in a statement.
"We will bring our support to circumvent censorship and retaliate against organisations imposing censorship."
Sunday's raids in Turkey followed the arrests in Spain on Friday of three alleged activists of the notorious group, which is believed to be responsible for attacks on numerous websites across the globe, including those of the Sony PlayStation, of banks, companies and governments.
In retaliation, Anonymous attacked the main web site of the Spanish police, knocking it down for several hours on Sunday morning.
Anonymous is also being investigated by the FBI, which blames the group for hacking the website of a US security firm in March, as well as for stealing nearly 72,000 emails from that company and then posting them online.
"This attack was in response to the claim that a researcher at the company had identified key members of Anonymous," Gordon Snow, assistant director of the FBI's cyber division, told a US Senate Statement committee in early April.
The loose cyberactivist collective was also singled out in a NATO report last month, which described it as the leading and most sophisticated group among those involved in such activities, Time magazine reported Friday.
