17/03/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 17/03/11
When communist Albania began opening up 21 years ago, the regime hoped to retain power while introducing reforms.
It chose a diplomatic strategy of "equidistance" in which it cultivated relations with both Washington and Moscow.
That stance "caused a delay in establishing diplomatic relations with the United States", former Albanian diplomat Genc Mlloja tells SETimes.
But time was not on the communists' side.
In March 1991, when Albania and the United States signed a Memorandum of Understanding at the State Department, the Albanian delegation included representatives of the emerging opposition, which came to power a year later.
"It was the first time something like that had happened since 1946," Mlloja said.
The delegation felt free to talk about Albania's difficult economic situation, breaking a long taboo in which only the successes of communism were to be mentioned.
The two opposition members at the meeting were Sali Berisha, who is now prime minister of Albania, and the late Gramoz Pashko.
Twenty years later, ex-diplomat Mlloja joined Berisha at a ceremony commemorating the 20th anniversary of the renewed ties with Washington.
Everyone's contribution to achieving the final outcome was important, according to Mlloja.
"The winner from the re-establishing relations between the Albania and the United States is the Albanian nation," he said.
Marking the anniversary, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton characterised the 1991 event not only as a turning point in bilateral relations, but also in the development of Albanian democracy.
"This anniversary commemorates our partnership, reminds us of the progress made, and underscores the promise of Albania's future, especially as you take the necessary steps to achieve the goal of membership in the European Union," Clinton said in a press release.
She added that even during the darkest years of the Cold War, Albanians and Americans did not forget their deep bonds of friendship, and she praised Albania's contribution to regional stability and support for Kosovo.
Referencing the ongoing political deadlock in Albania, Clinton urged leaders in the government and the opposition to work together to move the country forward.
She said they should maintain accountability and transparency, and strengthen the rule of law and human rights.
US Ambassador to Albania Alexander Arvizu has also called for the opposing political forces to find avenues for co-operation, saying differences can be a source of strength.
