16/03/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 16/03/11
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan reacted sharply on Monday (March 14th) to criticism that media freedom in Turkey is taking a turn for the worse. 
He accused the international press of creating a "defamation campaign", and urged journalists to analyse events properly.
"There is no balance in this report," Erdogan said of a document issued last week by the EU which criticised what it said were pressures being put on the media. 
"The wording of this report does not reflect the press freedom in Turkey."
The debate has heated up since the recent detention of seven journalists for alleged involvement in the so-called "Ergenekon" plot to topple the government.
On Sunday, thousands of Turks marched down Istanbul's crowded Istiklal Street, protesting the arrests. 
It was the largest of several recent demonstrations arranged in support of press freedom in Turkey.
"Many journalists have been captured. 
Some of them have been in prison for two years," said protestor Guzide Dondar Efe, a 40-year-old teacher at Bilgi University.
"They put them in prison for nothing," said demonstrator Ikem Kaykan, 29. 
"We are here for their freedom. 
They were defending democracy and the freedom of speech."
So far, according to local media, 68 journalists have been arrested for alleged links to Ergenekon.
The government claims that only 27 journalists are in jail.
Most of those arrested were open critics of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP). 
However, the recent arrest of two journalists -- Ahmet Sik and Nedim Sener, known for their condemnation of the 1980 military coup -- was a shock to many.
The move was "too much for everybody here", said Dondar Efe, who describes herself as a friend of Sik's. 
"If you accused Ahmet of [being part of Ergenekon] everybody would laugh at you."
Prosecutors said on Sunday that the arrests of Sik and Sener had nothing to do with what they have written in the media. 
But they refused to explain why they were detained.
The recent arrests have some questioning whether press freedom is declining in Turkey. 
Some journalists claim that since the elections are only three months away, the AKP is becoming more forceful in its efforts to silence critics.
Turkey's president and one of the AKP's founders, Abdullah Gul, voiced his own concern over the recent arrests last week.
"The impression I get is that there are certain developments that the public conscience cannot accept. 
This is casting a shadow over the level that Turkey has reached and the image that is lauded by everyone," Gul said.
