16/03/2011
(EurActiv, Euroalert.net, The Sofia Echo, FOCUS News Agency - 16/03/11;
Euobserver, Deutsche Welle, European Voice, RFE/RL, VOA, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, European Parliament - 15/03/11)
EU energy ministers, atomic energy regulators and industry officials agreed on Tuesday (March 15th) that all nuclear reactors currently in operation on the territory of the 27-nation bloc should be subjected to thorough safety checks.
The decision was announced after an emergency meeting in Brussels, called by EU Energy Commissioner Guenther Oettinger after Friday's magnitude 9.0 earthquake and tsunami in Japan.
Since then, a series of accidents have occurred at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, about 250km northeast of Tokyo, sparking fears of a new disaster equal in proportion to the one caused by the explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear station in April 1986.
Speaking after the talks, the German commissioner explained that, under EU law, the stress tests could only be carried out on a voluntary basis, but that most of the 14 member states with atomic reactors on their territories had indicated they would join the initiative.
Non-EU members Russia, Switzerland and Turkey would also be invited to take part in the exercise.
"We want to organise a series of tests, very comprehensive tests, throughout the Union," Brussels-based Euobserver online news portal quoted Oettinger as saying Tuesday.
"We also want tests for our partner states, our neighbours."
According to the European Nuclear Society (ENS), as of January 2011, there were 143 nuclear reactors in operation within the Union, with 58 of them, or about 40% of all, located in France.
The UK is next with 19, but in terms of total net capacity, it followed Germany, which decided this week to switch off seven of all 17 reactors on its soil.
In addition to the existing facilities, another six nuclear reactors were under construction at the beginning of this year -- two each in Bulgaria and Slovakia, one in Finland and one in France, according to the ENS website.
Turkey has contracted Russia's Rosatom agency to build its first nuclear power plant, while there are five already in operation in Switzerland and Russia is building a further 11 units on top of its existing 32.
Oettinger, who spoke before the European Parliament's (EP) Energy Committee later Tuesday, told MEPs that the European Commission (EC) would prepare the assessment criteria for the stress tests by June.
The purpose of the exercise, which should be completed by the end of this year, would be to check the nuclear facilities' resistance to earthquakes, tsunamis and terrorist attacks.
He also drew special attention to the 2,000MW Belene nuclear power plant under construction in Bulgaria, saying the project needs to be reassessed in light of technical and geological safety issues.
"We are all affected by the situation in Japan," an EP statement quoted the commissioner as saying.
