16/03/2011
By Ksenija Jurkovic for Southeast European Times in Sibenik –16/03/11
Croatia's potential for the development of renewable resources is vast, but still underused, at least when it comes to solar, wind or geothermal sources. 
The situation, however, has been changing in recent years.
"We currently produce 40% of our energy from renewable sources, thanks to the hydroelectric power stations. 
We are much worse off with consumption because we must buy around 30% of our power," explained Nikola Ruzinski, state secretary at the Ministry of Environmental Protection.
The "new renewables" are increasingly stirring interest among private, mainly foreign, investors, especially when it comes to wind energy exploitation.
The first windmill power plant in Croatia was built on the island of Pag in 2004. 
The company, Adria Wind Power, installed windmills with the capacity of 5.9550kW on the island at Ravna.
The greatest strides in the development of wind power have been made in the coastal region, particularly in the Sibenik area, where the German company Enersys has invested in two new plants.
The first was built in 2006 in the Trtar-Krtolin hills; the second was constructed last year on the hill of Orlice.
One hundred zones across Croatia have been designated for the same purpose, though most are in the coastal Dalmatia region.
Solar energy presents a different picture, having been underutilised despite its extensive potential.
According to data provided by Zdeslav Matic, of the Energy Institute Hrvoje Pozar, Croatia is home to about 15,000 square meters of solar collectors. 
It is estimated that the total generating capacity of these solar cells is about 52 kilowatts.
"Exploitation of solar energy in Croatia doesn't have systematic support and is left to the enthusiasts," the president of the Eko Kvarner Association, Vjeran Pirsic, told SETimes.
Various energy lobbies, including wind power proponents, are blocking further development of the solar alternative, he said.
"Practically, the whole quota for renewable energy was given to wind power, which simply makes no sense," says Pirsic. 
"Wind energy itself is a much worse choice for our country than solar energy, especially in the south."
The economy ministry currently has almost 700 applications for development of renewable energy source projects. 
Completion of these would result in the production of nearly 6500 MW of power, but the existing distribution system can cope with only part of that capacity.
An outdated energy infrastructure and a sluggish bureaucracy are just some of the obstacles to developing renewable energy sources in Croatia.
"Over 60 different certificates and permits are necessary if someone wants to set solar devices on his own roof. 
Among them is even a certificate for a good conduct," Pirsic told SETimes.
Despite these difficulties, Economy Minister Djuro Popijac is optimistic.
"Croatia currently spends 18 Terrawat hours of electricity annually. 
More than 3.5 Terrawat hours will be included in Croatia from renewable energy sources by 2020," said Popijac.
Investing in renewable energy is important to Croatia's EU future. 
To meet the bloc's stringent energy requirements, the country has pledged to meet at least 20% of its energy needs, in production and consumption, from renewable sources by 2020.
