14/06/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 14/06/11
Bulgaria's economy lost about 100m leva (50m euros) in May, spurring a national debate on whether it might be time to reduce the number of official days off. 
Losses come from work stoppages, lower productivity and higher wages for those who have to work during the holidays.
However, some sectors generate higher revenues during holiday, among them tourism, entertainment, transport and retail in resort areas. 
Seasonal revenues, however, are not enough to make up for the overall loss, analysts suggest.
"It is hard to speak of concrete losses, while some businesses suffer, others are benefiting. 
Whatever figure we may be able to provide, it won't be accurate and precise," Aneta Alashka, head of the public relations department at the Bulgarian Industrial Association (BIA), tells SETimes.
She notes the situation now is better than it was several years ago.
"For years we insisted on a clear schedule of the public days off before the start of each year to help employers make their plans for the year ahead. 
What we wanted was implemented last year," she said, adding that the employers' organisations are "satisfied with this state of affairs for the time being".
Tzvetelina Nepochatih, who manages a stone processing business, said that the three public holidays this May hurt the company's profits.
"Our business targets people with high revenues, who usually go travelling during holidays," she explained, adding that holidays slow down transactions with public institutions and banks that are closed during such periods. 
"This is hard to explain to our foreign partners," Nepochatih added.
Longer breaks also cause gaps in productivity, with workers needing time to return to a normal work pace, she said.
Many employers do not have the funds for overtime payments. 
Some companies force their employees to work during official holidays without any additional payment or bonuses.
"The boss just tells us 'you have to work, otherwise you lose your job. 
There are plenty waiting for your place, '" said one Bulgarian employee, who spoke on condition of anonymity out of fear of losing his job.
Even if a company can afford to pay for overtime, many overstressed employees prefer to take a break instead of earning extra cash.
Now that the May holidays have past, the debate over the length and frequency of official days off has quieted down. 
That is, however, until the next series of long breaks causes further economic losses.
