13/06/2011
(EurActiv - 09/06/11;
European Commisssion, Transparency International, RTTNews, Euobserver - 06/06/11)
With billions of euros lost each year as a result of corruption, the EU is seeking to bolster its efforts to fight the problem.
On June 6th, the European Commission (EC) adopted a new package of measures.
"No country in the EU is totally free from corruption," EU Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilia Malmstrom said at a news conference.
"Four out of five EU citizens regard corruption as a major problem in their country.
This is a serious challenge, socially, politically and economically."
The central initiative in the package presented by the Swedish-born commissioner is a new mechanism, called the EU Anti-Corruption Report, under which the EC will monitor and assess the performance of the 27 member states in that area.
The Brussels-based commission will publish its evaluation of their efforts every two years, with the first one due in 2013.
The report will be based on information provided not only by the national governments of the countries in the Union, but also from a host of other sources, including NGOs, independent experts, as well organisations , such as the UN, the OECD and the Council of Europe.
Unlike other bodies and watchdogs producing similar reports, the EU one will not rank countries, but will likely "name and shame" those failing to make sufficient efforts in combating corruption.
Malmstrom has acknowledged that that approach alone is unlikely to produce any tangible results.
But if it is tied to some specific "consequences", it could turn into a useful tool, according to her.
Every year, the 27-nation bloc's economy loses an estimated 120 billion euros, or 1% of EU GDP, due to this type of crime, the EC said in a statement.
That figure, it added, comes to just a little less than the Union's annual budget.
In its latest annual report on corruption perceptions in 178 countries in the world released last October, Transparency International (TI) named Denmark as the cleanest in both the EU and the world, along with New Zealand and Singapore.
The leading Berlin-based watchdog gave crisis-hit Greece the worst mark within the Union, ranking it lower than Bulgaria and Romania.
The authorities in a number of other EU countries appeared to be losing ground in the fight against corruption, according to its October survey.
Brussels' new reporting mechanism "will also facilitate the exchange of best practices, identify EU trends, gather comparable data on the EU 27 and stimulate peer learning and further compliance with EU and international commitments," it argued.
Furthermore, it "will prepare the ground for future EU policy initiatives in the area of anti-corruption".
While welcoming the new reporting tool as an indication of the EU's increased political will in the fight against corruption, a TI expert said there was much more that needed to be done.
"After paving the way for a more concrete anti-corruption policy, it is now time to define the details and benchmarks of measurement if member states' anti-corruption efforts are to be evaluated properly," Jana Mittermaier, the head of the group's EU office, said.
A number of anti-corruption legal instruments are already in place at the EU and international level, but implementation within the bloc's member states remains overall insufficient, the EC noted in an explanatory note on the new package.
As part of this new push for stronger efforts in the fight against corruption, the EC will revise the existing legal framework on confiscation and recovery of criminal assets and will submit it for adoption later this year.
It will also draw up an action plan for better crime statistics in the coming months and plans to have a strategy to improve criminal financial investigations in member states in place by 2012.
"We should make sure that there is a stronger focus on corruption in all relevant EU policies," Malmstrom said.
"Fighting corruption successfully is a constant struggle, and the measures we propose today are only one part of a more comprehensive response to the challenges that corruption poses to our societies."
The EC also promised to strengthen its co-operation with relevant EU agencies, including Europol, Eurojust and OLAF, the body tasked with fighting money laundering and embezzlement within the bloc.
