13/01/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/01/11
Eleven law schools in South Eastern Europe (SEE) have formed a consortium of sorts, with an eye trained squarely on future EU membership.
In co-operation with the German Agency for Technical Co-operation (GTZ) and the Open Regional Fund for South East Europe - Legal Reform, the schools have developed the first regional master's programme on EU Business Law.
The joint programme should "increase the international competitiveness of European higher education, particularly with regard to curricula development, inter-institutional co-operation and integrated programmes of study at a regional level," Veronika Efremova, team leader in the GTZ Open Regional Fund for Southeast Europe Legal Reform, told SETimes.
So far, 86 students are enrolled at four institutions, the law schools of Skopje, Tirana, Belgrade and Mostar.
Law professor Goran Kocevski, a faculty member at the University of Skopje, says he's impressed by what he's seen.
"I had an opportunity to deliver lectures in Tirana, Mostar and Belgrade.
The experience was fantastic, since I had a chance to exchange my knowledge with students coming from different political, economic and social environments."
"It was not easy to initiate such a programme, since there are a lot of Faculties of Law from the region of SEE involved," he said.
"Thanks to GTZ, things went more smoothly."
The endeavor has been years in the making.
The original Co-operation Agreement for Organisation and Delivery of a Regional Master Programme on EU Business Law was signed in May 2008.
The Regional Master's Programme on EU Business Law will serve as a solid ground to create and develop similar programmes in other legal disciplines or academic fields in the region," Efremova told SETimes.
GTZ is already planning a new programme, the South East European Law School (SEELS) network, for early this year.
It may include Kosovo.
"One of our visions in the short-run is to establish a SEELS to institutionalise academic co-operation in the fields of legal education, scientific research and publishing, and to increase the mobility and networking of academics, students, researchers and legal professionals across borders," she said.
"SEELS [will improve] the connections of the SEE legal community to distinguished academic institutions in Europe and the world, and thereby, increase the international visibility of member law schools," she added.
