12/05/2011
(The Sofia Echo - 06/05/11; Mediafax, FOCUS News Agency - 05/05/11; Swissinfo, Nine O'clock, Mediafax, Dnevnik.bg, FOCUS News Agency - 04/05/11; EurActiv - 03/05/11; Mediapool - 30/04/11; European Commission; Website of the Swiss Federal Department of Justice and Police)
Switzerland announced last week it will not lift restrictions on Bulgarian and Romanian jobseekers until at least the end of May 2014. 
In a supplement to its agreement on the free movement of persons (FMP) with the EU, Bern is allowed to maintain quotas on workers from the two Balkan countries for two years.
Switzerland and the EU signed a FMP accord in 1999. 
In a supplement to the FMP following the entrance of eight Central and East European countries -- the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia -- in May 2004, Switzerland was allowed to keep restrictions on the new EU citizens until the end of April this year.
Following Bulgaria and Romania's EU entry in January 2007, Swiss voters approved in a February 2009 referendum a protocol covering the two newcomers. 
The protocol entitled Bern to introduce special quotas for Bulgarians and Romanians until the end of May 2016.
Currently, there are three criteria that must be met by jobseekers from the two countries to be issued work permits in Switzerland. 
First, there must not be other candidates with the required skills and qualifications among those that have already been admitted to the domestic labour market. 
Second, the wage and employment conditions must be in line with the specific regional and sectorial standards. 
And third, quotas for the two countries must not be exhausted already.
According to Swissinfo, an arm of the Swiss Broadcasting Corporation (SBC), there were nearly 8,700 Bulgarians and Romanians living in Switzerland at the end of last year.
Bulgarian and Romanian jobseekers face similar hurdles in ten EU member states, where they typically need to obtain a work permit to enter the labour market.
Community FMP rules allow countries in the bloc to impose restrictions on workers from new member nations for transitional periods of up to seven years following their admission into the EU.
Pursuant to that rule, Austria, Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta and the Netherlands should open up their labour markets to Bulgarians and Romanians by January 1st 2014.
On May 1st, those ten countries lifted all restrictions on the movement of workers from the other eight former communist countries that joined the bloc in 2004.
