15/04/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 15/04/11
International qualms over press freedom in Turkey have come to the fore again, with the OSCE and the US ambassador to Turkey both weighing in on the issue.
According to the OSCE media office, 57 journalists have been detained in Turkey on charges of abetting extremism -- a trend which it noted with concern.
Meanwhile, at a breakfast meeting Wednesday (April 13th) with the Ankara-based Diplomatic Correspondents' Association, US Ambassador to Turkey Frank Ricciardone also brought up the detentions.
"We ask the same questions that you do -- what is this all about?" he told the group of reporters, according to the Embassy web page.
Pro-government politicians didn't wait long to respond.
"Similar events take place in any normal country, including the United States," Harun Tufekci, an MP from the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), told SETimes.
"Media independence in our country is no worse than in the United States and Europe."
"Sometimes even we officials get criticised in the media to a far extent," he added.
Two well-known investigative reporters, Ahmet Sik and Nedim Sener, were arrested recently in connection with an alleged ultranationalist plot to overthrow the government.
Copies of a new book by Sik were confiscated from its publisher, and both men have been jailed pending trial.
A third prominent journalist, Soner Yalcin, has since been charged in the same case.
Critics argue that the arrests are part of an effort to silence or intimidate media critical of the AKP government, which has a huge majority in parliament and controls the levers of state power.
Earlier last month, the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) requested that parliament look into the journalists' arrests, but the appeal was denied.
Oguz Oyan, a CHP MP who drafted the motion, says the government is imposing its will on the media from two directions -- on the one hand by detaining reporters, and on the other by applying economic pressure on media organisations.
"The govenment is creating a media loyal to itself while opposing the free media, such as the Dogan Group and others," he said.
"By treating journalists in such way, the AKP endangers the country's foreign relations and international image," he told SETimes.
Zeynep Gurcanli, Ankara bureau chief of Hurriyet Internet and head of the Diplomatic Correspondents' Association, says the meeting with Ricciardone will help open up the debate over media freedom.
"The ambassador's messages are very important and strong," she told SETimes, adding that Washington and Ankara are at odds over the issue.
Tufekci, however, said he doesn't see any "abnormal problems" when it comes to bilateral ties.
"We have a long-time partnership," he said.
"And we are able to overcome all of the misunderstandings."
