09/12/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 09/12/10
Nearly half of all workplace injuries in Serbia happen because employers fail to apply adequate protective measures, or because employees lack proper workplace safety, the country's labour inspectorate estimates. 
The agency also faults the judicial system for being slow to fine violators.
"Only 20% of reports submitted by the Labour Inspectorate receive a court hearing and charge fines," said its director, Radovan Ristanovic. 
He estimates that around 650,000 employees in Serbia are not registered as employed.
Fines for employers and employees failing to abide by safety regulations range from 100 euros to 10,000 euros, but enforcement is hampered by a lack of personnel. 
According to Ristanovic, there is an average of one inspector for every 1,100 employees.
Reports submitted by the inspectorate often become outdated before any action is taken, and employers are given only the smallest possible fines.
Serbian employers, however, paint a different picture. 
They say they are voluntarily working hard to promote safety and that the penalties are too strict. 
According to Zoran Bunusevac, a representative of the Union of Employers of Serbia, employers invest considerably in the safety of their workers, but get little support from the state.
"It's in the interest of every employer to have healthy workers and invest in workplace safety. 
The majority of employers follow safety regulations, fearing large fines, but also trying to avoid job and profit losses," Bunusevac told SETimes. 
"Employers need and want a safe workplace -- only a healthy and safe worker brings profit."
Businesses have a hard time investing in protective equipment because it is taxed too much, he said.
"We asked the state to lift the 18% VAT for the procurement of protective equipment, but that never happened," Bunusevac added.
The government, meanwhile, plans to beef up workplace health and safety standards to meet EU standards.
"We will continue to follow European directives. 
The key is to adopt about 20 more elementary directives in 2011," Administration for Workplace Health and Safety head Vera Bozic-Trefalt said.
