12/01/2011
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 12/01/11
According to a recent survey, to meet their basic needs in December, a typical family of four needed about 900 euros.
But the average monthly salary in RS is somewhere around 395 euros.
In these early days of the new year, the price of basics such as bread, sugar, oil, fruit, telephone and utility services all went up, as did cigarette prices.
"The standards of living in RS sink lower every day, because RS authorities -- in the last two years -- have failed to do almost anything to prevent negative fallout of the global economic crisis," economic analyst Damir Miljevic told SETimes.
Given the price hikes on food staples, he predicts 2011 will "be far more difficult" than 2010.
He also warns that the public can expect mass layoffs because the economy will not be able to withstand additional strain in the form of taxes and contributions.
According to him, there will be less revenue to fund pensions and salaries of employees working in state institutions.
In RS, which has 1.3 million people, there are about 142,000 unemployed.
Vinka Gavrić, 48, is one of the comparatively lucky ones.
A clerk in local government, her husband is a guard at a private firm.
Even with two incomes, it's hard to make ends meet.
"When we pay our bills for electricity, telephone, utilities and the monthly loan installment, we have very little money to live.
We are also supporting our son, who is a student," she said.
How did they afford to splurge a bit at Christmas?
Belt-tightening she said, for treats "like fruit, candy and stuff ".
Vesna Bjelakovic, 50, is a doctor.
What she and her husband earn has been sufficient to cover only basic expenses for their family of four.
There is no room for luxury.
"At Christmas the children buy some small gifts for the family.
We go to my parents and my husband's family, so we do not have high costs for the day.
One day, our children will also gather here," says Bjelakovic.
The Serbian Orthodox Church -- which follows the Julian calendar -- just celebrated this most festive Christian holiday, complete with Yule logs and Christmas roasts, on January 7th.
The Christmas season is a time of giving, and members of Serbian Sisters, organisations that operate within the church community in RS, distributed food to the socially vulnerable and disadvantaged.
Given the new economic realities, their numbers may grow in the days and months ahead.
