18/02/2005
(Various sources – 11/02/05 - 18/02/05)
Albania and Germany sealed an agreement on a German loan of 13.28m euros for support of the Albanian power sector.
The loan will be used for reconstruction of the power supply system in southern Albania and is part of a wider German financial assistance programme totalling 33.74m euros.
Greece sold its first syndicated bonds following the country's credit rating downgrade last year, attracting strong demand.
According to bankers, the 5 billion euro issue of 10-year bonds drew bids of almost 12 billion euros.
Lehman Brothers, HSBC, Alpha Bank, Merrill Lynch and EFG Eurobank were the lead managers.
The Romanian government announced that it is seeking to seal the privatisation contracts for power distributors Moldova and Oltenia by March.
Final offers for the two units of the former Electrica company were submitted in November by, respectively, Germany's E.ON and the Czech firm CEZ.
Talks between the Albanian government and representatives of the World Bank and IMF have focused on the servicing of the country's external debt, according to media reports in Tirana.
The international financial institutions are urging the government to strengthen tax collection and ensure timely payments on the debt, which stood at 1 billion euros at the end of 2004.
Public administration wages in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) remain the main issue under discussion during talks between the government and the IMF mission in Sarajevo, according to Prime Minister Adnan Terzic.
The two sides are negotiating a new stand-by arrangement for BiH.
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's  privatisation agency has extended the deadline for submitting binding bids for a 67 per cent stake in the entity's largest fuel retailer, Energopetrol, to 18 March.
Six domestic and foreign companies have shown preliminary interest in the privatisation tender, and two more -- one from Turkey and the other from BiH -- are expected to join.
Croatia's Privatisation Fund said it would offer for sale minority stakes in 50 companies via the Varazdin and Zagreb stock exchanges by the end of this month.
The list includes state-run minority stakes in organic paints producer Chromos, meat producer PPK Vinkovci and the Jadran hotel chain.
The Turkish state-run petrochemical company Petkim posted a $46.4m net profit in 2004, according to a government announcement on 16 February.
The cabinet plans to sell a 20 per cent stake in Petkim through a public tender in the future.
