11/11/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- /11/11/2010
Croatia is meeting the political criteria for EU membership and has made progress in many areas, but still needs to ramp up the fight against organised crime and corruption, intensify judicial and administrative reform, boost protection of minorities and facilitate refugee returns.
Those were the conclusions in the European Commission's latest report on the country's progress. 
Croatian leaders are hailing its overall positive tone.
"This is the best report ever and a very promising one. 
It clearly recognises the changes and efforts made," Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor said Tuesday (November 9th) after the report was published.
"It is clearly noticed in Brussels that we have done a lot of work ourselves and took a heavy burden upon our shoulders. 
But this is something that first and foremost we did for ourselves and our own future," she told local media.
Croatian President Ivo Josipovic shares her optimism. 
He met with the head of the EC delegation in Zagreb the day the progress report was published.
"Our main challenges ahead, related to our EU future, are fighting the economic crisis and strengthening the rule of law, freedom of expression, national minority rights, reconciliation and regional co-operation. 
In many of these areas Croatia has made a significant step forward," Josipovic said.
The EC report says that Croatia has advanced significantly in many areas, including rule of law, but that work remains to be done.
"The capacity of the parliament to scrutinise the legislative process needs enhancing. 
Judicial reform has continued but significant challenges remain, especially relating to judicial efficiency, independence and accountability," it reads.
The EC found that public administration still suffers from shortcomings, including complex administrative procedures and weak human resources management.
Tangible results require stronger political commitment and improved co-ordination between key stakeholders at central, regional and local levels, it said.
Benchmarks aside, one of the challenges Croatia must face is convincing its own people of the benefits of membership. 
Enthusiasm remains shaky, with the latest poll by Promocija Plus showing less than half of Croatians favour joining the EU.
To boost public suppport, state institutions plan to launch a strong campaign as the accession process nears its end.
Croatia hopes to conclude the negotiation process by the end of 2010 or early 2011 at the latest. 
This report is expected to be the last on Croatia's as candidate country.
