14/03/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast Euroepan Times in Pristina – 14/03/11
International Civilian Representative and EU Special Representative to Kosovo Pieter Feith defines his primary function as supporting the supervised independence of Kosovo, while maintaining neutrality on Kosovo's status as a part of his daily duties.
Approval of the budget, the decentralisation process, dialogue with Belgrade and economic development are priorities for the new government, he told SETimes.
SETimes:
You have urged Kosovo politicians to exclude anyone who is indicted or under investigation from the future government.
Has that goal been met?
Pieter Feith:
With its international credibility in mind, Kosovo's government should be composed of politicians who have high integrity.
Kosovo needs committed leadership that leads by example.
SETimes:
What are the biggest challenges facing the new government?
Feith:
It is urgent that the budget for the next fiscal year is passed.
The government should act swiftly and firmly to tackle its reform priorities, in particular to strengthen public administration, enhance the rule of law and ensure the integration of all communities.
The decentralisation process will continue, the new municipality of Mitrovica north must be established, and a full framework for the protection of religious and cultural heritage should be defined.
The new government will have to work hard to justify the trust of the citizens and fulfill its promises of a better future.
The focus now should be on issues that matter most to the citizens -- jobs, health services, and schools.
Economic development is a top prority.
We welcome the new government's commitment to the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue, which we hope will bring progress in the quality of life issues which matter to people here.
SETimes:
Pristina and Belgrade launched talks on March 8th.
What do you expect the outcome to be?
Feith:
The dialogue is an opportunity for both Pristina and Belgrade to resolve some practical issues of mutual interest.
Both will benefit from a constructive dialogue, as far as their European perspective is concerned.
SETimes:
How will the process impact [European Parliament member Dick] Marty's allegations, and how soon will EULEX investigate?
Feith:
Mr Marty's report should be taken seriously.
People have a right to know what did or did not happen.
I hope that all relevant organisations, institutions and individuals will respond without delay to the EULEX request for evidence.
I call on competent authorities to take appropriate measures to protect witnesses.
It is now up to the judicial authorities to pursue further investigations, if deemed appropriate.
I fully support EULEX's role in this regard, but only they can comment on the progress of their preliminary investigation.
SETimes:
Kosovo has not yet approved the budget, and the government postponed the wage increase.
There have been lots of rumours saying that if the government is going to do that, the ICO will block the decision.
What is your role and how will you react if the parliament approves the budget with an increase.
Will you cancel the budget?
Feith:
Kosovo institutions are responsible for their own decisions and I provide them with my advice.
I do not think it helps Kosovo if we do not give space to the country's institutions to make decisions and see the results.
The revenue should cover expenditure, and it is important to respect international agreements.
There will now be a process in the assembly to discuss the budget and we'll see how that goes.
SETimes:
The Serbs in the south participated in the elections, and elected their representatives in the parliament and government, but not in the north.
Is Kosovo facing a partition not just between south and north, but also among the Serbs themselves?
Feith:
Participation of the Serbian community in the 2009 municipal elections and the 2010 general elections was a result of hard work by Kosovo authorities to create new municipalities, which enabled the Kosovo Serb community to have a greater say on important issues, and include Kosovo Serbs in the central institutions.
Increasing numbers of people in the Kosovo Serb community have seen they can benefit from participation in Kosovo's political life.
Now the government is working to reach out to northern Kosovo in the same way.
The international community as a whole has been very clear that Kosovo territorial integrity must be respected.
SETimes:
How do you feel about analysts saying that Kosovo is isolated from the EU, without visa liberalisation, without the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, and now with trade barriers to the EU?
Feith:
The EU -- all 27-member states -- remains firmly committed to Kosovo's European perspective, which is demonstrated in financial assistance of reforms and the biggest civilian mission deployment ever, the EULEX mission.
Kosovo is making progress in its EU integration process, to fulfill the criteria for visa liberalisation, arranging for trade agreements and participating in Stabilisation and Association Dialogue;
this is sometimes a painful process of reforms and change but with benefits in the long run.
I think this is a very active engagement and not isolation.
SETimes:
What do you think will happen when Kosovo's independence is no longer supervised by the international community?
Feith:
The vision shared by Kosovo authorities and the international community is of a peaceful, viable, democratic and multiethnic Kosovo contributing to regional stability.
All my work is directed to making this the long term future for Kosovo.
