22/06/2005
(Various sources -- 15/06/05 -- 22/06/05)
Through 25 June, the Albanian Theatre of Opera and Ballet is presenting its latest ballet performance "Bajadera" in co-operation with the National Theatre of Croatia.
The Albanian Public Television orchestra and the Dance Academy in Tirana are also participating in the project.
An exhibition of oil technique works by Albanian painter Leonard Prevezi opened at the National Gallery of Arts in Tirana last week.
Prevezi, who now lives and works in Brussels, has staged exhibitions in Belgium, France, Italy and the United States.
The fourth international conference "Education for the Culture of Peace" started in Sarajevo on 20 June.
The three-day event, organised by several Bosnia and Herzegovina NGOs, is attracting participants from 28 countries and is focusing on the role of education in post-conflict periods.
Public broadcasters from several Western Balkan countries -- Albania, BiH, Macedonia and Montenegro  -- sealed an agreement on co-operation in Sarajevo.
The document was signed on 17 June, under the framework of a regional seminar on European audiovisual policy and broadcasting sector reforms.
Over 2,300 children from European countries gathered at the traditional Orpheus Holidays in Smolyan, Bulgaria, from 18 June to 19 June.
The programme included folklore music, dance performances and a parade.
Bulgarian archaeologists announced on 19 June that they have unearthed the richest accumulation of Late Bronze Age ritual ceramics ever to have been discovered.
Found at the Orpheus Temple near the southern village of Tatul, the artefacts include a unique priest sceptre engraved with sun-related symbols and other objects believed to have belonged to a Thracian king buried at the site.
The 45th edition of the International Children's Festival in Sibenik, Croatia began on 19 June.
The event, which includes over 1,500 participants from 14 countries, will continue until 2 July.
The upper gallery of the National Archaeological Museum in Athens re-opened last week after two and a half years of reconstruction.
The project, totalling nearly 16m euros, was undertaken after a 1999 earthquake caused an extensive damage.
Numerous artefacts, including frescoes from the Akrotiri archaeological dig and exhibitions of bronzes, pottery and minor artwork, are now on display again.
Bulgarian racer Ivailo Gabrovski won the 42nd Romanian Cycling Tour held on 19 June.
In the final classification, Gabrovski was first with 23 hours, 51 minutes and 58 seconds, followed by Ukrainian Oleksandr Surutkovici and another Bulgarian, Radoslav Kostadinov.
The 4th edition of the International Ethno-Festival of Food and Music took place in the Serbian town of Novi Sad from 18 June to 19 June.
The 3,000 visitors sampled over 300 traditional dishes.
