14/03/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 14/03/11
Forty-one Kurdish intellectuals issued a joint declaration at the weekend condemning threats against prominent Kurdish writers and artists by the Kurdistan Freedom Falcons (TAK), a terror organisation with links to the PKK.
Sivan Perwer, Muhsin Kizilkaya and Mehmet Metiner were among those warned by the militant group to be silent. 
The threats came days after the PKK announced the end of its unilateral ceasefire, saying the government had not responded to Kurdish demands. 
I
n their statement, the intellectuals called on Kurdish politicians, including leaders of the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) and Democratic Society Congress (DTK), to take a clear stand against such intimidation.
"We, the signatories below, see these threats as a major attack on freedom of thought and strongly condemn them. 
We invite [PKK leader Abdullah] Ocalan and the administrators of the KCK [the Kurdistan Communities Union, the urban branch of the PKK] and the PKK to modify their approach," the declaration read.
Meanwhile, some analysts believe the PKK's belligerence is related to the upcoming elections in Turkey.
"They are trying to make the headlines," said Tayyar Arı, a professor at Uludag University in Bursa. 
"With street fights and threats the Kurdish militants try to get more votes for their political parties."
Initiatives by some Kurds to promote a peaceful solution have rattled the PKK, he told SETimes. 
"By using force, they are trying to control the Kurdish community," he said.
Ilter Turan, president of the Turkish Political Science Association, also sees the latest developments as a power play by the terrorists.
"The PKK threats targeted those who can influence society's opinion on Kurd issues throughout the country," he said. 
"It proves once more that the PKK's terror activities are directed more against Kurdish society than the Turkish government."
In an interview with SETimes, BDP Parliament Group member Hasip Kaplan said his party "doesn't have any connection to terror or deadly threats".
"We are the democratic opposition of the country with concrete purposes, goals and ideology," he said.
At the same time, however, he insisted that Kurds are united on issues affecting their community. 
When it comes to their freedom and rights, the Kurds have only 'one voice', he said.
"Our common opponent is the government, which acts against us, arrests our members and heads of local governments, in order to get the nationalists' votes during the upcoming election," he said.
