11/01/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 11/01/11
Turkey and Armenia both remain interested in normalising their relationship, an adviser to Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan says.
The process has never been halted, Geybulla Ramazanoglu told SETimes. 
However, he added, Ankara's role as a broker should be understood correctly.
"Turkey wants to develop relations, but it is not enough; Armenia also should solve its problems with Azerbaijan and stop blaming Turkey. 
We are optimistic, and looking forward to see the solutions in 2011," Ramazanoglu said.
Turkey closed its border and broke off diplomatic ties with Armenia in 1993, backing Azerbaijan in its conflict with Armenia. 
Relations soured further as Armenians stepped up pressure for international recognition of what they describe as a genocide against them, committed in the waning days of the Ottoman Empire.
Turkey steadily denies the genocide claims, saying Turks also died amid a general climate of anarchy and interethnic violence.
Hope for mended ties picked up in September 2008, when President Abdullah Gul visited Armenia to attend a soccer game. 
The move contributed to the two countries signing an agreement in April 2009 and two protocols that followed that October.
Veteran Turkish diplomat Omer Engin Lutem, who has been involved in researching Armenian issues since 1980, currently heads the Armenian Research Centre at the Ankara-based Centre for Eurasian Strategic Studies.
Lutem told SETimes that there have been no official contacts between the two countries since the January 18th, 2010 ruling by the Armenian Constitutional Court saying that the two protocols could not affect Armenia's policy on genocide recognition.
But the Turkish government is still making an effort to keep the normalisation process going, he added.
"Turkey is taking some steps; there are a number of initiatives between peoples, for instance, the Armenian churches in Turkey are reopened, and they work."
Sinan Ogan, chairman of the Ankara-based Turkish Centre for International Relations and Strategic Analysis, says that relations between the two nations have becomes increasingly worse.
"It's not about the protocols, it's about the fulfillment of the promises," he says, adding that Turkish civil society is sensitive towards Azerbaijan's issues with Armenia.
Ogan predicts that the issue will be one of the main cards for political parties to play during this year's election.
Armenian politician Girard Libaridian, who was a senior adviser to former President Levon Ter-Petrossian, doesn't see any reason to be hopeful this year.
"I hope I am wrong. 
Unfortunately, both Armenia and Turkey tried to resolve too many problems in a protocol document that should have been a simple statement aimed at the normalisation of relations and the opening of the border. 
Sometimes one can be too clever for one's own good," he told SETimes.
However, the International Crisis Group's Turkey project Director Hugh Pope disagrees. 
He says that the relationship between Turkish and Armenian officials is relatively good, and contacts between the two countries' civil society are flourishing.
"There is indirect trade and direct flights between the two countries. 
It looks like the dynamic of gradual economic and social Turkey-Armenia convergence will continue," Pope said.
While politicians try to find a possible solution to the problem, life goes on in the two countries. 
Sometimes, however, it presents situations that are unusual, and even heartbreaking.
Serdar Guntepe, 26, a resident of Kars -- the ancient city in Turkey's far northeast, in sight of the closed Armenian border -- fell in love with Armenian native Marem Armenian, 25, during his university years in Istanbul three years ago.
The couple meet regularly here and there, but there is no way for them to marry.
"Our families are deeply against that. 
Both of our great-grandfathers were killed during World War I. 
Not only neighbours, but even our family members don't understand us," Guntepe told SETimes.
