14/04/2011
(Zaman, BIA News Center - 14/04/11; Hurriyet, World Bulletin, RFE/RL, Dnevnik.bg, Council of Europe - 13/04/11)
Addressing the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) on Wednesday (April 13th), Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan rejected allegations that his government has curbed freedom of expression.
The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has removed restrictions in this area, as part of the democratic reforms it has implemented since coming to power in 2002, he argued.
"We have attached utmost priority to the struggle against all forms of prohibitions and strengthened the fundamental rights and freedoms in the widest possible sense in the last eight and a half years," Erdogan said in his speech at the Strasbourg-based body.
"Recent allegations of pressures, restrictions or bans on the media and freedom of expression do not reflect the truth. 
I have to say that some press organs that used to run stories on the order of some anti-democratic formations, in particular gangs and mafias, until eight years ago are continuing their publications freely today."
Addressing the recent arrests of 26 Turkish journalists as part of an ongoing investigation into Ergenekon, a covert criminal network accused of plotting to overthrow the government, Erdogan noted that none of them had been detained for their professional activities.
"We are aware that some of the recent detentions are perceived in Europe as an interference in the freedom of the press. 
In this connection, I would also like to remind you that journalists and newspapers who applaud and provoke coups simply do not exist in Europe," the Turkish leader told PACE lawmakers.
He also invited the Council of Europe (CoE) to send its representatives to Turkey to assess the state of media freedom on the ground.
"We hope that Europe and European institutions will continue to follow-up developments on this subject, not based on news disseminated by certain circles, but rather through more objective sources and will evaluate the situation accordingly," said Erdogan.
Following talks with Erdogan, CoE Secretary-General Thorbjorn Jagland later said that he had accepted the invitation and would send an envoy to Turkey "as soon as possible" to assess the situation.
"This is a constructive approach and a move forward in the discussion about media freedom in Turkey,'' the head of the 47-nation rights organisation said.
Among the 26 arrested in March was investigative journalist Ahmet Sik, who was detained over suspected links with Ergenekon. 
Police raided the offices of the publishing house that was planning to publish his book, The Imam's Army. 
Acting on an Istanbul court's orders, they also confiscated all drafts of Sik's manuscript. 
Nevertheless, a copy of the book was later published on the internet.
"I am not the person who ordered the seizure of that book," Erdogan said on Wednesday.
