10/11/2010
By Baris Yılmaz for Southeast European Times -- 10/11/10
The EU criticised Turkey on Tuesday (November 9th) for the growing political pressure on the media and restrictions on freedom of expression.
"Concerns remain in regards to political attacks against the press," the EU Commission said in its 2010 Progress Report on the country, released on Tuesday.
In the report, the European Commission (EC) draws a mixed picture of Turkey's progress towards democratisation and membership.
While praising the ruling Justice and Development Party's (AKP) constitutional reform in September, its efforts to open relations with Kurds, its increasing role in foreign policy, progress in civilian oversight of security forces and remarkable success in the economy, Brussels criticised the slow pace of reforms, strained relations between key state bodies and growing pressure over the media.
The EU blasted not only the government pressure on opposition media, but also the court cases against journalists for their work covering politicians and other high-level authorities.
More than 4,000 investigations have been initiated against journalists for breaches of confidentiality or attempts to influence a fair trial, following their reporting on the Ergenekon case.
Turkey's frequent website bans have become another growing concern for the EU.
Popular video sharing site YouTube has not been accessible in the EU candidate country since 2008.
Hundreds of websites have been banned, often due to regulatory loopholes and a vague legal framework.
In its report, the EU stressed that Turkey's law on the internet limits freedom of expression and restricts citizens' rights to access information.
"Just as the other sections of the society, media is also deeply divided in Turkey.
News agencies are giving only one-sided information.
Some big media conglomerates are using media to become important in public, to pursue their other interests.
This should change," European Parliament Rapporteur on Turkey Ria Oomen-Ruijten told SETimes, adding that there must be legislative reforms to assure independent media in Turkey.
"Pressure on newspapers, court cases against journalists and the disproportionate ban of numerous websites are unacceptable in a free pluralistic society," she stressed.
The report also criticised the growing polarisation in Turkish politics.
The confrontational political climate, lack of dialogue and spirit of compromise between the main political parties and strained relations between key political institutions, undermined major reform efforts in the past 12 months.
Oomen-Ruijten will visit Turkey this week to meet with government, opposition and NGO members to discuss developing a spirit of compromise and intensifying reforms.
One source of polarisation has been the controversial Ergenekon probe.
A total of 270 people, including 116 military officers and six journalists, have been detained and charged with trying to overthrow the government.
The EC expressed support for the investigation into Ergenekon and other alleged coup plans, which Brussels said "remain an opportunity for Turkey to strengthen confidence in the proper functioning of its democratic institutions and the rule of law".
But the EU also criticised the long pre-trial detentions in these cases, which it said "raises concern".
Unlike Oomen-Ruijten, Professor Cagri Erhan, director of Ankara University European Research Centre, has little hope for the revival of the reform process in the foreseeable future.
"Neither the government, nor any other political party sees any political investment in the EU process," he told SETimes.
"Support for the EU membership process among the public has decreased to the lowest levels."
Brussels-based independent EU-Turkey news portal, ABHaber.com, harshly criticised the EC.
"In Brussels, the majority of the actors has lost confidence in the future of Turkey's accession talks.
The commission is doing nothing but sitting on the fence, waiting.
If the process will totally collapse upon its intervention, it will be no one but the commission that will pay the price."
