10/11/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/11/10
Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac is known for advocating the best possible relations with NATO. 
Under Sutanovac's guidance, the military annulled conscription and began creating a professional army -- an ongoing process expected to be completed during Sutanovac's term in office.
SETimes: What are the most important markets for Serbia's military industry, and what are the industry's revenues and plans for the future?
Dragan Sutanovac: Serbia is the biggest exporter of weapons and military equipment in Southeast Europe. 
A few years ago, we faced difficulties marketing our products. 
Today, however, the problem is that the demand exceeds certain factories' capacities. 
At the ministry [of defence] and in the government at large, we are discussing ways to help those factories expand capacity and manufacture to match the demand.
Serbia today sells products to countries ranging from Malaysia to Canada. 
It is currently exporting its entire output, a portion of it to the US, especially hunting weapons and sports ammunition.
SETimes: Serbia is abolishing mandatory military service. 
How many soldiers will serve in the professional armed forces, and how will they be able to meet the country's security requirements?
Sutanovac: The big defence system reform will wrap up early next year, and Serbia will have an army of nearly 36,000 members who will meet the highest professional standards. 
According to the structure, size and level of training -- and partly the equipment -- the Serbian military will be one of the more modern in the region. 
Our army is largely seen as a factor of stability, not only in the Balkans. 
The system of defence is fast becoming modern -- an engine spearheading reforms in Serbia and accelerating its path to the EU.
SETimes: What do you see as Serbia's biggest security challenges?
Sutanovac: The biggest challenges are the so-called asymmetric threats -- organised crime, illegal migrations, drug trafficking, and any sort of extremism. 
There are numerous reasons why they develop, the first being the security environment, poverty and a low level of education.
SETimes: In which international military missions do Serbian soldiers participate, and are others planned? 
What is your opinion on the participation of Serbian soldiers in NATO missions, such as the one in Afghanistan?
Sutanovac: The Serbian Army must be ready to take part in all peacekeeping missions around the world. 
The defence ministry's task is to have the army equipped and trained to fulfill its lawful obligations to protect the interests of Serbia's citizens, regardless of where in the world they may be jeopardised.
SETimes: How would you assess Serbia's co-operation with NATO through the Partnership for Peace programme, and will Serbia open its mission in NATO?
Sutanovac: Serbia is not yet fully using the capacities offered by the Partnership for Peace programme. 
The chief of the mission's military section has recently gone to Brussels with two other officers to work on opening an office. 
Numerous countries that are members of NATO and the Partnership for Peace have offered to help us open the office as soon as possible.
