11/06/2011
By Aaron Stein for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 11/06/11
Increased scrutiny and stringent sanctions have forced Iran to rely on a vast network of middlemen to supply technology for its nuclear, missile and conventional military programmes.
To circumvent US, European and UN Security Council sanctions, Iranian nationals have established front companies in Turkey and numerous other countries to trans-ship controlled technologies critical for these programmes.
Iran is dependent on foreign technology for its nuclear and missile programmes, forcing it to rely heavily on procurement networks for critical dual-use items.
Dual-use technologies have military and civilian uses and are the focus of various international agreements to prevent proliferation.
When trying to buy controlled dual-use items in Europe or the United States, larger companies are often hesitant to sell goods to Iran because of the sanctions, forcing the Iranians to look elsewhere.
"The more reputable companies know not to sell to the Iranians, so the front companies will ask companies in other countries to buy the items," Paul Brannan, a senior analyst at the Institute for Science and International Security, told SETimes.
If successful, the front company will import the controlled item and then re-export it to Iran.
Known as trans-shipment, this practice has proven difficult to "detect and deter", according to Brannan.
Even before the sanctions, "Iran had already developed a proliferation network ...
the real development was when the United States was able to gain support from countries around Iran, like the United Arab Emirates and Turkey, to enforce sanctions," Gaukhar Mukhatzhanova, a research associate and Iran specialist at the Center for Nonproliferation Studies, told SETimes.
Despite the Turkish government's commitment to crackdown on these procurement networks, two high profile cases have proven just how difficult these illicit networks are to stop.
Step-SA, a firm established by Iranian nationals operating in Istanbul, was indicted by a grand jury for allegedly procuring dual-use items for Iran's ballistic missile programme this year.
The indictment followed news that two Turkish companies, Elektronik Kontrol Aletleri and ETI Elektronik, were connected to the Abdul Qadeer Khan's extensive proliferation network.
Khan is known to have supplied critical nuclear technologies to North Korea, Libya and Iran from the mid-1980s until the early 2000s.
Making Turkey even more attractive to these shadowy businesses is its inclusion in the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) and the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) -- two international coalitions designed to prevent the spread of nuclear and missile technologies.
Turkey does not need an export license to import dual use items from the 44 NSG countries, and, while it is required to get a license from the 33 MTCR states, it is far more likely to be approved than Iran.
Further complicating matters is Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad's populist economic policies, which, according to Mukhatzhanova are not impacted or deterred by sanctions.
Ahmedinejad and other hardliners in Iran have a financial incentive to close the country to trade, even though the nuclear and missile programmes remain reliant on Western technology for their operation.
These contradictory goals have created a demand for these shadowy businesses.
In Turkey, these cases "are frustrating because it is an EU candidate country, but also a trans-shipment point", says Brannan.
However, he stresses that these cases don't just happen in Turkey, but "in several countries around the world" and that "illicit procurement networks will target any country".
