11/01/2011
By Muhamet Brajsori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 11/01/11
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) are popular in his home region of Drenica, Kosovo.
So popular, in fact, that they consistently win most of the votes there.
In the December 12th election, turnout exceeded 94%, with the lion's share going to Thaci's party.
The PDK's consistently strong results have aroused public suspicions.
A flurry of media reports and internet postings paint Drenica as beset by electoral irregularities and under the thumb of a well-oiled political machine.
Interior Minister Baram Rexhepi, a PDK member, says the town is being singled out unfairly.
"Why is there all this talk about Drenica," he asks, "when you had the same problems during the elections in Pristina, in Podujevo, in Decan?"
Indeed, some analysts say Drenica is symptomatic of a much wider problem, encountered throughout Kosovo.
"Every political party has been participating in manipulation through their commissioners and observers," says Pristina columnist Fatlum Sadiku.
"The elections management system has failed and if you visit the offices of school directors -- the voting centre's managers -- you could find voting papers, not just in Drenica but everywhere."
Each party has its strongholds, he explains.
Whether it's in PDK-dominated Drenica, the AAK's base in Decan, or LDK-leaning Podujevo and Pristina, the situation is "always the same".
Kosovo's struggling economy fuels political manipulation, analysts say.
In a country with Europe's highest unemployment rate, landing a public sector job is a big deal -- and the way to do that is often to toe the line of whichever party dominates a particular area.
"In previous years we have seen irregularities, which are expected, and they are not a surprise," says Engjellushe Morina, executive director of the Kosovo Initiative for Stability.
"What is surprising is that irregularities happen in the same areas -- you always have complaints by political parties in Drenica, now in Malisevo and Glogovac, and traditionally two or three parties are suspected as being the 'organisers of irregularities'," he said.
