13/04/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 13/04/11
Almost a year after the government passed the lustration law, Romania is still struggling to uncover former communist collaborators in its current government.
About 10,000 former communist officials, Securitate officers and informants are still active in politics and the economy in Romania, Marius Oprea, an expert in former Securitate, told SETimes.
"We have a serious handicap in uncovering the former communist collaborators because for a whole decade Romania was directly ruled by them.
The old apparatus had for a long time control over the communist archive and did its best to hinder access to them or conceal the dossiers," he said.
Senate Deputy Speaker Dan Voiculescu was charged with collaborating with the Securitate -- the communist regime's secret police and the main oppressive body.
In March, the country's highest court upheld the verdict issued by Bucharest's Court of Appeal in February 2010.
This verdict, historians say, can be a precedent in disclosing other high-ranking Romanian dignitaries.
Voiculescu, founder of the rightist Conservative Party, was first uncovered as a former communist collaborator in August 2006 when the National Council for the Study of the Securitate Archives (CNSAS), the state body entrusted with looking into the former regime's files, concluded he had been recruited under the code name Felix as early as the 1970s.
"It's never too late to have such verdicts.
We need to have clean people in politics.
This is why this may be a precedent and we may witness new disclosures as the experts are covering the former communist archives.
Please note they got the former dossiers they are now examining late enough," Oprea told SETimes.
He lays the verdict in a regional context after Bulgaria started cleaning its diplomatic corps of former communist dignitaries.
According to Novinite, 192 of the current 432 Bulgarian diplomats had ties to the former communist security agency.
"
These are standards of a Western type democracy which, if we chose to adhere to, we also have to put them into practice," Oprea said.
The lustration law, passed in May 2010, was seen as both belated and with little practical effect.
Though it forbids former communist officials from public offices for five years, the law says those whose mandates are under way cannot be removed.
A similar law hasn't been passed in Bulgaria yet.
