10/05/2011
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Nusaybin -- 10/05/11
In the Turkish city of Nusaybin, residents are nervously eyeing the heavily mined border with Syria.
For nearly two months the regime of President Bashar al-Assad has faced a nationwide surge of opposition protests, including in al-Qamishli, which lies 1km from Nusaybin and where around 10,000 people marched on Friday (May 6th).
The two cities are both strongholds of Turkey and Syria's restive Kurdish minorities and are linked by close family ties.
Activists in al-Qamishli told SETimes that a mass influx of refugees could occur.
"People are talking about fleeing," said one journalist in the city who spoke by telephone, requesting that his name be concealed for fear of reprisal.
"Turkey is only 500m away.
If the army comes into the city, they might escape.
Many of us have relatives there and this would make it easier."
Kurds on both sides of the border fear a repeat of the events of March 2004, when rioters in al-Qamishli were massacred by the military.
Activists in al-Qamishli contacted by SETimes said military forces are again circling the city, with checkpoints set up on its approaches two weeks ago and tanks and troops seen gathering outside.
In other parts of Syria, including Deraa, Homs, and Baniyas, the Assad regime has already used ruthless military tactics to confront the threat to its 41-year rule.
Syrian human rights groups claim army and security forces have killed at least 580 people and arrested thousands more since pro-democracy demonstrations began.
Nusaybin's business community fears the effect of the instability on the burgeoning trade relations between Ankara and Damascus.
"We're upset at all these movements in Syria because our financial relationships are going well," said Mahsum Ozmen, president of Nusaybin's chamber of commerce.
"Our government has established very good agreements with them."
But Nusaybin Mayor Ayse Gokkan, of the Kurdish nationalist Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), claims government level co-operation with Syria has bought few local benefits.
"The government is only allowing its own men to trade freely," said Gokkan, whose party won 82% of the vote in Nusaybin in the 2009 local elections.
"If any member of the BDP tries to make any trade connections, both governments will do their best to prevent it."
Gokkan said that although travel is now easier since Turkish citizens no longer have to go to Ankara to obtain visas, trade at the border crossing between the two cities remains forbidden.
So far, the bloodshed seen elsewhere in Syria has not come to al-Qamishli.
But some believe the experience of the 2004 uprising has created stronger political awareness within the country's two million Kurds, making them a force that Damascus is wary of tackling while unrest persists elsewhere.
"Since 2004 Kurdish activism has got stronger and stronger," said Abdulhafiz Abdulrahman, the founder of a Syrian Kurdish human rights body, who recently claimed asylum in Turkey.
"More than 80% of people are interested in politics now."
Meanwhile, Gokkan warned that bloodshed across the border could stoke the already simmering tension in Nusaybin itself.
"We're fearful, because anything that happens to them in al-Qamishli, it's as if it's happening to us too," she said.
