13/04/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 13/04/11
During the three days of the Sarajevo Business Forum 2011 last week, all eyes were on the investors. 
This was the second international conference organised by Bosna Bank International and the Islamic Development Bank, aiming to connect investors, businessmen and government representatives from virtually around the world with entrepreneurs from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and surrounding countries.
Countries represented included Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwait, Malaysia, the US and Turkey.
"The nearness of the European market, established structure as potential for development, qualified and competitive workforce, stable currency and 'healthy' banking sector, are all advantages of this region, as well as the historical connection with the other regional countries, not only the cultural connection, but industrial and educational as well," Murat Yulek, chairman of the board of TAIB, a Turkish investment bank, told SETimes.
The business forum is comparable to a marketplace at which one offers "goods" -- investment opportunities -- from among which investors chose.
This year, 153 projects -- worth $14.7 billion -- were registered, most involving tourism, infrastructure, energy, agriculture and financial industries.
"Politicians are responsible for creating an atmosphere in which such exchanges can prosper and last efficiently," BiH's tripartite presidency member Bakir Izetbegovic said, adding that the country's political uncertainties should not discourage investors.
And while last year's interest was directed towards energy, this year it is tourism that intrigued investors. 
In its April edition, the magazine Condé Nast Traveler listed BiH as one of the "15 places which must immediately be visited".
The magazine and investors alike concur that the country is a jewel of largely untouched natural beauty, which once up and running, will no longer be considered an adventure or a cheap holiday.
This year, attention was also more directed towards education. 
During the discussion on the potential for investment in Southeastern Europe, it was noted that for the realisation of educational and other plans, the vision must be combined with money -- something perhaps simplified by Islamic banking.
Unlike conventional banking, Islamic banking is not about profits. 
It prohibits investing in businesses that are contrary to the principles of Islam.
"Investors want to invest in BiH according to these ground rules," Harun Kapetanović told SETimes. 
He is from BiH, but works as an economic adviser for Dubai's government.
Crucial to this is Sheikh Saleh Abdullah Kamel, a billionaire who presides both over the Islamic Business and Industry Chamber and one of the largest invesment groups in Saudi Arabia and the Middle East, the Dallah al Baraka Group.
"I promise to invest $50m in [BiH] until the next forum in April of 2012," he said. 
"I will do all in my power to help this region become an example of a successful development, and will invite investors from other parts of the world to help the economic development of BiH," he told SETimes.
