13/04/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 13/04/11
In the region and the EU, Kosovo has the lowest attendance in higher education. 
While there are 50 students per 1,000 inhabitants in the EU, Kosovo falls short with just 30 students per 1,000 inhabitants, according to the education ministry.
In an effort to increase student numbers, the University of Pristina raised the student admission limit. 
For the professors and students, however, higher student numbers may affect the quality of teaching and education in general, as the university faces a lack of accommodation and staff for the increased numbers.
"University of Pristina has enough space for the current number of students. 
We opened new study spaces in Peja and Gjilan, so the higher student numbers will be on the main Pristina campuses, and other cities," former Kosovo Minister of Education Enver Hoxhaj told SETimes.
"Our approach is to have as many higher educated citizens as possible, and maximally increase the number of youth in higher education," Hoxhaj says.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci promised last year that the government will open new universities in Peja and Gjilan, which according to Hoxhaj "will create more study places and turn the focus away from Pristina University".
University student parliament head Mergim Lushtaku described some of the challenges and problems students face at the university. 
"Lack of space, objective-based literature, and other disappointments directly affect students," he says.
"Every academic year there are more than 200 students per class, a lack of professors and the literature is outdated," Shkelzen Hamiti, a law faculty student told SETimes.
The law faculty and the faculty of economy have the highest number of students at the university.
Dean of the Philosophy Faculty Ramush Mavriqi says his faculty is in better shape than others due to recent investments to expand the capacity of classes, received through international support.
"We are not facing so much the problem of space, since we recently reconstructed the building and got more," Mavriqi says.
Berat Berisha, a student at the philosophy faculty disagrees. 
"The faculty of philosophy has many problems: lack of professors, noise in the lobbies affecting the quality of lectures in the classes, and, worst of all, these problems impact our future."
"The university [staff and leadership] is aware of the existing problems, and we are dealing with them," University of Pristina Rector Muje Rugova says.
