10/05/2011
(RFE/RL, Blic - 10/05/11; UN News Centre, UN Security Council, Office of the High Representative, Beta, B92, Emportal, RFE/RL, VOA, Al Jazeera - 09/05/11)
The rising political tension in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) over the past five years has pushed the country into its worst crisis since the Dayton Peace Agreement, High Representative Valentin Inzko told the UN Security Council on Monday (May 9th).
Presenting his regular six-month report on BiH, the Austrian diplomat warned that the political situation has continued to deteriorate since November.
"Today, regrettably, we face the most serious and most direct challenges" to the Dayton Agreement, said Inzko.
BiH has failed to form a state-level government since the October general elections and the prospects of this happening any time soon are dim, he added.
Aside from the economic problems, many state institutions have been operating under "serious political, institutional and economic pressure", which has affected their efficiency and functionality. 
Furthermore, the process of EU and NATO accession has come to a "complete halt", said Inzko.
Under the Dayton Accord, which ended the conflict, the country was divided into two semi-autonomous entities -- the Federation of BiH (FBiH), dominated by Bosniaks and Croats, and the Serb-controlled Republika Srpska (RS).
While the processes of electing delegates to the FBiH House of Peoples and forming the entity government were marred by obstructions and lengthy political disputes, "the Federation authorities now seem to work effectively," the top international envoy said.
The recently renewed push by several Bosnian Croat parties for the creation of a third, Croat entity in BiH reflects "the overall division of the society", according to Inzko.
While the FBiH Constitution provides for co-operation among cantons, the move by the Croatian Democratic Union of BiH and the Croatian Democratic Union 1990 to organise a Council of Croat Cantons and Municipalities "is clearly not the direction we should be going in", he noted.
Inzko has also submitted a separate special report on recent actions taken by RS authorities, including the entity parliament's decision last month to hold a referendum in June on some of the High Representative's powers and the competencies of certain state-level institutions, including the Court of BiH.
"The conclusions and the decision on the referendum ... 
are not only a clear breach of the Peace Agreement but also put into question all laws enacted by the respective High Representatives claiming they are in violation of the Peace Agreement."
Inzko also warned that if recent actions by RS authorities are allowed to proceed, they "would have a major impact on the functionality and sustainability of Bosnia and Herzegovina".
The Serbian and Croatian permanent representatives to the UN, who were allowed to participate in Monday's session, expressed contrasting views on the RS referendum issue.
Serbian Ambassador Feodor Starcevic said the planned referendum does not violate the Dayton Agreement, and has nothing to do with BiH's territorial integrity.
"My country is opposed to any imposition of a solution because solutions should be taken only by the legitimately elected political representatives of citizens," he said.
RS should "reverse" its referendum decision "as it undermines the constitutional structure of the country and could undo the positive developments achieved since the entry into force of the Dayton Peace Agreement," Croatian Ambassador Ranko Vilovic said. 
"If the referendum moves forward, it may foster new tensions in the country and the region."
The EU and US representatives reiterated their support for Inzko and his stance on the referendum.
The recent conclusions by the RS parliament "present a fundamental challenge to the Dayton Accords, and constitute the most serious of a disturbing pattern of actions by the Republika Srpska in violation of this agreement", US Deputy Permanent Representative to the UN Rosemary DiCarlo was quoted as saying.
