10/01/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 10/01/11
The most important Christmas customs in Serbia are tied to children and the family, to the warm atmosphere of home, and the anticipated holiday feast. 
Roast pork or lamb, stuffed cabbage rolls or sarma, cakes and cookies are found on nearly every dining room table.
Except, that is, for families who cannot afford it.
All that food costs money, and some don't have enough. 
Their children, meanwhile, face the prospect of a holiday with no presents.
This year, the Belgrade city authorities stepped in to help them enjoy Christmas too.
Around 200 children -- many of them Roma -- got the chance to attend a Christmas lunch organised by the municipality and attended by international diplomats.
The children had their lunch served by Brazilian and Canadian ambassadors to Belgrade Dante Coelho de Lima and John Morrison, with US Ambassador Mary Warlick, who was celebrating her first Christmas in Belgrade.
"There is no better way to mark this day and show the Christmas spirit and tradition. 
I'm enjoying this; it's a pleasure to help these children and cheer them up," Warlick told SETimes.
"For me, actions like this one are especially important, because my country is struggling with the problem of hunger, which is why I am particularly sensitive to children living in poverty, without regular healthy meals," de Lima said.
Biljana Momcilovic is 13-years-old and wants to become a hairdresser when she graduates from elementary school. 
"I love Christmas and we always celebrate it in my house," she said. 
"My parents don't have enough money to buy presents for all of us. 
I have two more brothers and a sister. 
I've never tried dishes like these before; I really like them."
Although the children enjoyed the abundant food and were excited about the presents, their parents found it difficult to forget about the poverty that colours everyday life.
"I'm unemployed, we live on welfare, and yet we try to provide education, decent clothing and food for all our children. 
It's really hard," 55-year-old Zorica Kadri, a mother of five and grandmother of 20, told SETimes.
