10/06/2011
By Linda Karadaku and Muharrem Nitaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 10/06/11
Kosovo Police General Director Reshat Maliqi ordered the rotation and subsequent suspension of six Kosovo Serb police station commanders late last month.
Kosovo Police spokesperson Arber Beka told SETimes that Maliqi's decision is legal and in accordance with procedures, adding that the Kosovo police are ready "for actions in all situations, in which police actions will be co-ordinated with the EULEX and KFOR police branch".
Besim Hoti, a Mitrovica Kosovo Police spokesperson, said on Radio Free Europe that the suspension continues because the six officers refused to obey an order issued by Maliqi.
"The Kosovo police director needs to decide whether to continue the salary suspension of the six Kosovo police officers for an undefined time," Hoti said, adding that the six are now subject to investigation for allegedly breaking the Kosovo police law.
The six commanders, four from the northern police station and two from border crossings, were asked to rotate to other stations, but disobeyed the order.
Kosovo daily Zeri quoted Maliqi saying that the rotation of the commanders of the Kosovo police stations, including the north, was done in co-operation with EULEX. 
He explained that the rotation is related to better police functioning and that the rotation in the north has no political connotation.
Ramadan Qehaja, Kosovo security analyst and the Director of the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, told SETimes that "Kosovo police in the north do not work for the interests of Kosovo, but the interests of Serbia's Ministry of Interior."
"The chain of command that should characterise a police force is cut [in the north]. 
Police there are not under Pristina's command. 
There are those among Kosovo police in the north that want to be part of Kosovo police as a whole, but its commanding staff is more under Belgrade's orders," Qehaja said.
Northern Kosovo was not mentioned as a separate entity in the latest report of the Interior Ministry, led by Bajram Rexhepi, who was quoted as saying that the ministry has been working "on the prevention and fighting of all kinds of crimes and organised crime", among other things, without mentioning management problems in that part of the country.
According to the ministry's latest report, published at the end of May and covering the period from February to May, "it is important to underline the importance of reforms undertaken from Kosovo police through the internal re-organisation, with a special emphasis on the centralisation of the regional units for the investigation and fighting of crime in the framework of the Crimes Pillar."
The ministry said progress has been shown in investigating, following and arresting criminal groups related to drug trafficking, weapons, human trafficking and other types of organised crime.
"The new concepts which are in the first phase of Kosovo police application, the concept of policing led by intelligence and police in communities, have started to show visible results in preventing daily crime and finding and fighting all forms of organised crime," the interior ministry said, adding that it resulted in a 23% reduction in serious crimes as compared to the same period last year.
