10/06/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/06/11
After Serbia's farmers blocked the roads in Vojvodina for a week, the government agreed to their demands and reversed a decision to suspend agricultural subsidies for land parcels bigger than 10 hectares. 
On June 5th, Belgrade announced the deal and the blockade cleared.
"We were united and achieved our goal. 
We succeeded in ensuring that an even greater number of farmers obtain subsidies," Association of Farmers Chairman Miroslav Kis told SETimes.
Janosh Shomodji, a farmer from Zrenjanin, explained that the government said it originally decided to stop paying subsidies for land parcels between ten and 100 hectares allegedly to help the smaller producers.
"They tried to compensate for the lack of money in the budget at the expense of agriculture," Shomodji told SETimes.
Farmers gathered in front of the Vojvodina parliament in Novi Sad, blocking the surroundings with 70 tractors. 
The government initially claimed it would not give in and offered loans with favourable interest rates instead of subsidies.
The farmers would not budge.
"We do not have anything now which we had last year. 
We had loans with a 5% interest rate and now they offer us 8%. 
All the measures to encourage investments are eliminated, for example insurance, and just look at the damage on the fields caused by rain," another Zrenjanin farmer, Vladimir Pernek told the daily Blic.
A compromise was reached only after President Boris Tadic joined the negotiations.
"We agreed that this year, the farmers with land parcels up to 30 hectares will receive subsidies, while those owning between 30 and 100 hectares will be paid next January," Assistant Agriculture Minister Milos Milovanovic told SETimes.
The subsidies will remain the same -- 140 euros per hectare. 
Professor Danilo Tomic, who heads Serbia's Association of Agricultural Economists, said the government's policy towards small producers should focus on the development of animal husbandry and increased competiveness.
"The state should help small farmers, possessing up to 10 acres, to raise five cows or ten sheep, to connect and create co-operatives, and to approach the market jointly to be able to withstand the competition," Tomic told SETimes.
Agriculture Minister Dusan Petrovic says Serbia's agricultural policy must change because the circumstances have changed since 2010. 
He said the country now has a major problem in producing beef, breeding cattle and pigs, and consequently must strive to reduce risks.
"In August, as soon as we finish sowing wheat, we will open the debate on agricultural policy for 2012. 
A new dialogue may arise from all this," Petrovic said. 
The most important change, he added, will be inexpensive loans with fixed interest rates.
Agricultural experts say that Serbia, despite currently experiencing problems in the sector, has a great chance to export food. 
Exports in the first half of 2011 were 45% higher than in 2010, amounting to 416m euros.
"If the government's new agricultural policy is sound, agriculture could contribute a lot of money to the state budget. 
Serbia could be a major food factory and not import apples and beans, which any household can produce," economist Daniel Popovic told SETimes.
