10/06/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 10/06/11
In anticipation of a heavy crackdown by security forces on the northwestern Syria town of Jisr al-Shughur, 20km from the Turkish border, thousands of refugees have fled to safety in Turkey where the government and aid organisations have set up refugee camps.
According to the head of the International Disaster Response of the Turkish Red Crescent, Ali Akgul, the number of Syrian refugees in the towns of Altinozu and Yayladagi in southern Hatay province has swelled since the beginning of the week and is growing "hourly". 
As of Friday (June 10th), the count had reached 2,800.
"We've provided them with tents, food and clothes, so there is no problem with that," Akgul told SETimes, adding everyone has been able to be accommodated so far. 
"But what happens in the coming days is not clear yet."
The increasingly brutal crackdown in Syria has tested what had been close Turkish-Syrian relations, with the Turkish government caught between maintaining good relations with Syria in order to have influence in Damascus and showing support for the Syrian opposition.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has called on the Assad regime to show restraint, while Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu has called for reform through "shock therapy", in the face of growing anti-regime protests that have claimed over 1,000 lives since mid-March.
Ruling AKP deputy from Hatay, Mustafa Ozturk, worries that if refugee inflows continue there could be a very serious humanitarian situation.
"But in the name of humanity we have to keep our door open," he told SETimes, hoping the sitation in Syria will improve, allowing its citizens to return home. 
".
Backing on his party's policy, Ozturk underscores his strong support for democracy next door. 
"We are giving this message to Syria but the government there is taking it too slow," he says, adding either Syria will listen to Turkey, or it will enter a "difficult period".
Meanwhile, the violence has provoked fresh international condemnation. 
The UN Security Council is weighing a resolution on Syrian unrest, circulated by France and Britain, condemning the Assad government for using force against civilians, though the measure faces stiff resistance from China and Russia.
According to an official at the Turkish Foreign Ministry who requested to remain anonymous, Ankara is still developing its stance on the UN debate. 
"Our policy on Syria was clear from the very beginning. 
When it [the UN debate] comes to the government's agenda, whatever the [UN] decision is, we'll value it."
Veteran diplomat Murat Bilman, who headed the Strategic Research Department at the ministry for years, believes that if Western allies decide to punish Syria, then Ankara has to clear up its relations both with the West and its neighbour.
However, he warns against leaving Turkey out of the debate, as he claims was the case with Libya: "If [our] Western allies try to make a decision this time without asking us, the situation will be different. 
It is unacceptable for any country to leave Turkey outside [the debate]."
Onur Oymen, a former ambassador who now serves as a main opposition CHP member of parliament, says Ankara will need to see the exact text of the UN decision before taking a position, adding such a text should contain no double standards.
"We need to be on the side of the resolution if this [UN] decision is in accordance with the interests of the Syrian people and others, with human rights and respect for democracy, and [takes a position against] internantional norms against the use of violence [against civilians]."
Joshua Walker, postdoctoral fellow at the Crown Center for Middle Eastern Studies, also believes Turkey's reaction will vary depending on the character of the UN vote.
"Clearly the official position remains focused on Assad, but behind the scenes they are positioning themselves regardless of the ultimate outcome as demonstrated by the hosting of the Syrian opposition groups in Antalya," he told SETimes.
"I would imagine Turkish diplomats are very actively involved at the UN and are being consulted regularly since Turkey is the critical player when it comes to what's happening in Syria,", he added. 
He noted that Ankara leaving the borders open and accepting refugees despite the Assad regime's calls to close the border "is something to particularly watch if things continue to escalate".
