11/03/2011
(EurActiv - 11/03/11; Euobserver, The Washington Post, VOA, Telegraph, Jerusalem Post, USA Today, Hungarian EU Presidency website, US Department of Defence - 10/03/11
The EU approved further sanctions targeting Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi's regime on Thursday (March 10th), as NATO decided to deploy more warships in the central Mediterranean.
Meeting in Brussels on the eve of an EU crisis summit, the foreign ministers of the 27-member states extended the list of Libyan individuals subject to restrictive measures and imposed sanctions on five key Libyan financial groups. 
The new measures will enter into force after the publishing of the decision in the EU official journal Friday.
"The funds and economic resources of the five designated entities will be frozen and an additional name will be added to the list of 26 individuals deemed responsible for the violent crackdown on the civilian population since the 15th of February and subject to an assets freeze," the Hungarian EU presidency said in a statement after the meeting.
Meanwhile, French President Nicolas Sarkozy and British Prime Minister David Cameron urged the EU to be ready "for all contingencies" in Libya and called for broader international pressure to force Gaddafi and his regime to step down.
In a strongly worded joint letter sent to the leaders of the Union's 25 other member states ahead of Friday's summit, they also voiced support for the rebel-led Libyan Interim Transitional National Council in Benghazi and for a "co-operative dialogue" with it.
"We support continued planning to be ready to provide support for all possible contingencies as the situation evolves on the basis of demonstrable need, a clear legal basis and firm regional support," they wrote in the letter. 
"This could include a no-fly zone or other options against air attacks, working with Allies and partners, especially those in the region."
Condemning the use of military force against Libyan civilians, they said Gaddafi should quit so that the bloodshed in the country may end.
The EU leaders will urge him Friday to "relinquish power immediately", according to the draft summit conclusions, obtained by the Brussels-based EurActiv media network.
"The EU stands ready to engage with the new Libyan authorities in order to help Libya build a constitutional state and develop the rule of law. 
It will assist the restart of the Libyan economy," the draft also said.
Meanwhile, France raised eyebrows Thursday, when it became the first country to recognise the anti-Gaddafi National Council as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people. 
The Italian, German and Spanish foreign ministers slammed Paris for failing to co-ordinate its decision with its EU partners and to notify them.
Meanwhile, the situation in Libya remained tense, as government forces continued their air strikes against rebel-held cities.
Concerned about the escalating violence, NATO defence ministers decided at a meeting Thursday in Brussels to increase the presence of Alliance maritime assets in the Central Mediterranean and to provide support for humanitarian efforts.
"All Allies have agreed to three principles, which will act as a guide for any future considerations or actions regarding Libya: demonstrable need, a clear legal mandate and solid support from the region," NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said.
