12/04/2011
(The Sofia Echo - 12/04/11;
IMF, VOA, Hurriyet, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediafax, HotNews.ro - 11/04/11)
The global economic recovery is gaining strength, the IMF said in its twice-yearly World Economic Outlook (WEO) released on Monday (April 11th).
It cautioned however that disruptions to oil supply pose new risks to the process and cited high unemployment and commodity price increases as issues of concern.
"Given the improvement in financial markets, buoyant activity in many emerging and developing economies, and growing confidence in advanced economies, economic prospects for 2011-12 are good," the Washington-based financial institution said.
While noting that there were "fears" about the potential impact of high commodity prices on global recovery, IMF Chief Economist Olivier Blanchard did not believe the increases could derail the process altogether.
"Commodity prices have increased more than expected, reflecting a combination of strong demand growth and a number of supply shocks," he said.
"These increases conjure the spectre of 1970s-style stagflation, but they appear unlikely to derail the recovery."
The Fund's projections are for world GDP to grow by 4.4% this year and by 4.5% in 2012.
The figures show, however, that the process of recovery is moving at two speeds, with real GDP in advanced economies expected to expand by about 2.5% during that period, and in emerging and developing economies by 6.5%.
According to the WEO, the emerging European economies with the highest real GDP growth rates this year are Kosovo (5.5%), followed by Lithuania and Turkey, with 4.6% each.
Six countries are forecast to see their economies expand by more than 4% next year, when Kosovo (5.2%) and Turkey (4.5%) are expected to be joined by Serbia (5%), Romania (4.4%), as well as Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Latvia, both with 4%.
But unemployment is expected to remain a problem for most of the nine emerging economies.
In only three among them -- Romania, Bulgaria and Poland -- the level of unemployment will be lower than the 9.2% average for the eurozone.
In the other six nations, it is expected to range from 11.4% in Turkey to 19.6% in Serbia.
In line with earlier predictions, the Greek economy is expected to contract by 3% in 2011 and to post a positive growth of 1.1% next year.
According to Blanchard, more time is needed to determine if the austerity measures Greece and Ireland are implementing to deal with their sovereign debt problems "are working or not".
The Fund's projections for Europe's 14 emerging economies, including all Balkan countries, plus Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland, are for an average GDP growth of 3.7% this year, well above the 2% average growth for the whole of Europe and the 1.7% one for the 17-nation eurozone.
That trend is expected to continue in 2012, when the group, in which all but Turkey are former communist states, is expected to post an average growth of 4%, compared with 2.2% for the entire continent.
Italy and all other advanced countries lying to the west of Germany and Switzerland are expected to post an economic growth of between 0% and 2%.
The forecast for Portugal, which last week became the third eurozone member to seek a bailout from the EU after Greece and Ireland, is that its economy will shrink by 1.5% this year and by 0.5% in 2012.
