12/04/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 12/04/11
Sanliurfa, Turkey's mainly Kurdish southeastern Anatolia city in Urfa province, started Monday (April 11th) with disappointing news -- the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), didn't include their native Ibrahim Tatlises' name on its 530-member list of candidates for the June 12th general elections.
However the day got better. 
Right after the AKP announcement Monday, Tatlises decided to run as an independent candidate from Sanliurfa.
"The decision was confirmed at the last minute," Ahmet Turkmen, Tatlises' lawyer, told SETimes. 
"After recovering, Tatlises will start his pre-election campaign."
"To represent his hometown is a big honour for him," the lawyer added.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan visited the singer in the hospital last week and discussed the possibility of his candidacy on the party list -- filling Sanliurfa residents' hearts with hope.
But the AKP said its decision was based on concerns about Tatlises' health after he was shot in the head on March 14th.
On April 6th, Tatlises was taken to the Murnau Trauma Clinic in Germany, for specialized treatment. 
His doctors in Turkey said his recovery was remarkable, but were worried injuries could leave him permanently paralysed.
Police are probing possible links to the PKK in the singer's shooting. 
Sixteen suspects were detained last month as part of the investigation.
Abdurrahman Mufit Yetkin, an AKP MP from Sanliurfa who also was left off the candidate list, says the decision about Tatlises wasn't an easy one for the party.
"Tatlises is the man who popularised Urfa," he told SETimes. 
"His activities as an MP would be very important."
Engin Selcuk, an Istanbul-based political scientist and head of the Turkish-Asian Centre for Strategic Studies, thinks that although the AKP didn't include the singer in the formal list, it still supports him informally.
Tatlises, who has millions of fans in Turkey and the Middle East, has strongly supported the government's "Kurdish opening", an initiative aimed at solving the decades-old Kurdish problem.
"The fact that Tatlises is involved in the politics, is already accepted … no matter if he runs [with the] AKP or not," he told SETimes.
If Tatlises becomes an MP, he adds, he could participate in the government's Kurdish opening negotations, representing the Kurdish community.
Selcuk has no doubt that Tatlises will be elected from any Kurdish region.
In 2002, when the 58-year-old singer entered the election ring from the nationalist right Young Party (Genc Parti), he went to Istanbul, instead of his hometown. 
The party got only 7% of the votes.
Mustafa Kalbinur, 65, a Tatlises fan from Sanliurfa, was disappointed when the AKP didn't include the singer as a candidate, but he is happy that Tatlises will run as an independent.
"PKK stands right behind our doors and beats our intellectuals," Kalbinur told SETimes. 
Tatlises could help prevent this, he added.
