09/06/2011
(Hungarian EU Presidency, Expatica.com, EurActiv, Sega, HotNews.ro, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg - 09/06/11;
Euobserver, DPA, Agerpres, Mediafax, Nine O'clock, The Sofia Echo, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg, European Parliament - 08/06/11)
The European Parliament green-lighted Bulgaria and Romania joining the border-free Schengen zone on Wednesday (June 8th), a day ahead of an EU ministers' meeting likely to postpone such a decision until September.
Although Bulgaria and Romania are fully prepared to join, the door to the European visa-free zone will remain closed for at least another few months.
The 736-seat EU legislature gave its approval Wednesday after considering EP Rapporteur Carlos Coelho's progress reports on the implementation of the Schengen acquis by Sofia and Bucharest, as well as the findings of expert follow-up teams.
The non-binding decision was passed by a vote of 487-77, with 29 abstentions, and was then forwarded to the EU Justice and Home Affairs Council.
"We are in a position to welcome Bulgaria and Romania into the Schengen area and I hope that the Council will adopt the same position as soon as they receive our positive opinion," Coelho, a Portuguese MEP, said.
"Their citizens should be regarded as fully European citizens, and should not be hostages of populist discourse."
The parliament also said that following its entry into the Schengen area, Bulgaria should take additional measures and work out a common mechanism with Greece and Turkey to cope with a possible surge in migration pressure on the EU.
"Illegal migration makes Bulgaria, Turkey and Greece one of the EU's most sensitive external border areas," it noted.
The two Balkan nations were hoping to join the Schengen area, encompassing 22 EU member states, as well as non-members Iceland, Norway and Switzerland, in March.
However, France and Germany launched a campaign in December 2010 to postpone Bulgaria and Romania' accession over their lingering problems in the fight against corruption and organised crime.
Since then, the group of opponents to the two countries' admission, which needs to be approved by all EU member states, has grown to include also Belgium, Finland, the Netherlands and Sweden.
Accession to the Schengen area however depends on the implementation of specific technical requirements in the areas of border control, cross-border police co-operation and visa issuing procedures, not linked to any political considerations.
"Schengen is one of the biggest achievements of the EU.
We must not destroy it with rash decisions," said EP President Jerzy Buzek.
Noting that Bulgaria and Romania meet the Schengen standards, he also urged the Council "to follow the recommendations of the vote expressed today by the large majority of the EP".
The two countries, which have criticised EU opponents to their Schengen bids for trying to introduce new conditions in the final phase of the accession process, hailed the assembly's decision Wednesday.
"Today's favourable vote reconfirms that the European Parliament remains deeply attached to the European emblematic projects," the Romanian foreign ministry said in a statement.
The Bulgarian foreign ministry said Sofia expects "EU home affairs ministers … to take into consideration the will of the EP and prepare a decision on the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to Schengen within the timeframe recommended by the Parliament".
Ahead of the meeting in Luxembourg, however, several media reports referred to EU diplomatic sources as suggesting that accession will be postponed for another several months.
Hungarian Home Minister Sandor Pinter, who chairs the talks, said on Thursday that he expects the Council to pledge that it will "return to this issue as soon as possible, hopefully not later than the end of September, for the purpose of making the decision".
