10/03/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 10/03/11
In 1976, the Mijatovic family built a house in Belgrade's Kaludjerica district, one of Europe's largest illegal settlements.. 
"We had to build a house; there was no way of getting an apartment in Belgrade, where we got jobs. 
Our house was one of the few existing in Kaludjerica, so we had to pay from our own pocket for the installation of electricity and water," Stanka Mijatovic told SETimes.
However, the family wasn't lonely for long. 
In the early 1990s, Kaludjerica began to expand: Serbs forced to leave Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo because of wars built houses in that part of Belgrade. 
Tens of thousands of illegally built facilities created zoning chaos in Kaludjerica, as well as in some other parts of the capital.
At the time, authorities tolerated illegal construction to keep the peace. 
But the situation has snowballed to the point that there are currently 780,000 requests to legalise existing structures throughout Serbia. 
So pervasive is it that experts estimate the number of legal and illegal buildings in Serbia is essentially equal.
Attempts at mass legalisation in 2003, 2006 and 2009 all ended in failure.
"We've been living in our house for 30 years and paying our taxes to the state, but if we wish to sell it we can't, because it's not legalised," Mijatovic said.
However, on February 10th, the government adopted amendments to the Zoning and Construction Law that envision steep discounts for those looking to legalise their facilities, and reduced documentation. 
Drastic penalties await those who fail to abide by the law.
"Now no one will be able to say they do not have enough money to legalise the house they live in. 
Monthly installments will total just a few euros," Environment and Spatial Planning Minister Oliver Dulic said.
The biggest discounts will go to the poorest, those with a facility of 25 square meters per household member and no other holdings. 
Their discount could total 99%. 
That way, for example, a family of four with a house measuring 100 square meters will pay around 250 euros, rather than 1,100 euros, with the option of an installment plan.
However, the discount will not apply to everyone.
Predrag Vucic, a member of the Belgrade administration in charge of zoning, tells SETimes that those who had illegally built facilities in valuable central city zones are exempt. 
"It does matter whether one has built a facility in downtown Belgrade, in the suburbs or in some poor region of Serbia," he said.
He predicts the legalisation process could take years, as there are around 243,000 requests in Belgrade alone.
Not everyone is happy with the proposed solutions. 
Those who have already paid for legalisation -- at higher prices -- will not get their money back.
"We turned out to be fools for gathering and paying for all the paperwork on our own. 
The legalisation cost us several thousand euros, whereas now we would've paid several hundred," Milorad Cvejic, who lives in the southern Serbian town of Kursumlija, told SETimes.
Then there is the potential for corruption. 
Stevan Lilic, head of the Lawyers for Democracy association, told Belgrade media that the prospect is there, given the provision that municipal governments can collect documentation for individuals and then close legalisation deals with them afterwards.
