09/03/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 09/03/11
Early last week the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) announced the end of its unilateral ceasefire, three months earlier than initially promised, saying the government had not responded to its demands.
So far, the PKK has observed seven ceasefires.
The latest was in response to promised reforms by the government.
The Erdogan administration declared a "Democratic Opening" in 2009, which was designed to break the deadlock with the Kurds and to explore a political solution to the conflict.
Since 1984, the PKK has waged an armed struggle for Kurdish self-determination.
The conflict has so far cost almost 40,000 lives.
The organisation, considered a terrorist group by Turkey, the US and the EU, accused Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government of prosecuting elected Kurdish MPs and other officials, ignoring calls to investigate allegations of mass Kurdish graves in the country's southeast, and failing to improve prison conditions for its leader, Abdullah Ocalan.
"These demands are not fair and [are] kind of an excuse by the PKK in order to use force," a government representative told SETimes.
"The Kurdish problems in our country are not done, but as a ruling party [the Justice and Development Party (AKP)], we have been taking serious steps to solve them forever," AKP MP from Diyarbakir Kutbettin Arzu said.
"Turkey [has] walked a road, from when the Kurds' existence was denied to its society and language acceptance nowadays."
There are dozens of Kurd native MPs in parliament, Arzu said, adding that because the PKK doesn't recognise Kurds other than organisation members, its statements are false.
As for the government's next steps, Arzu said, expect more of the same.
"They [the PKK] lose themselves;
we have no intention of making any deal with the unlawful group anymore."
But not all agree.
Parliament member Yusuf Ziya Irbec recently left the AKP and moved to the far-right opposition Nationalist Action Party (MHP) due to the government's policy towards Kurds.
"This policy wasn't led the right way from the very beginning," he told SETimes, saying that "the PKK's ceasefire promises couldn't be trusted until they totally deny terror."
"There is no way for discussions with terrorists," he said, commenting on the future process.
"The PKK has long made it a habit to create an environment of fear in the region during election time," says Suleyman Ozeren, director of the Ankara-based International Terrorism and Transnational Crime Research Centre.
"Neither the government, nor any of Turkey's intelligence units, were surprised when the PKK declared its last decision," he told SETimes, adding, after that afterwards, its imprisoned leader Ocalan extended the ceasefire until March 21st.
"They [PKK] understood that with political demands they couldn't go far away, so I expect, they will prolong the ceasefire again," he says.
However, Nihat Ali Ozcan, author of the book "Kurdistan Workers Party:
History, Ideology and Methods", believes by ending the ceasefire, the PKK aims to heighten the political polarisation, to mobilise its grassroots and to boost social control over its ethnic constituency.
"The peak in terms of violence will probably come after the [June] elections, as Turkey will enter into a new constitution-making process," he told SETimes.
"The PKK sees escalation of the level of violence as a negotiation chip in the constitution-making process in the post-election Turkey."
