08/06/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 08/06/11
Exiled Syrian opposition activists delivered a strong message at a conference in Antalya last week.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, they said, must step down and hand power to his vice-president until a council is formed to transition the government to democracy.
Analysts say Turkey demonstrated support for reform by allowing the event -- dubbed "Conference for Change in Syria" -- to be held on its territory.
Nevertheless, Ankara's position remains nuanced.
Metin Yilmaz, an AKP deputy and spokesman for parliament's Foreign Affairs Commission, says the ruling party will "not be silent" as the bloody crackdown against demonstrators next door continues.
"We want Syria to be a country with a good future, democratic values and respect for human rights," Yilmaz told SETimes.
Turkish politicians, he added, are busy with the June 12th elections, but after them, Ankara "will be more firm on its Syrian policy".
Ali Ozturkmen, a representative of the Syrian opposition Turkmen Movement and conference participant, told SETimes they rely on Turkey.
"We want Turkey to help us make our country become not a terrorism hub, but a united and friendly neighbour," he said.
Participants in the Syrian protests are awaiting Turkey's help and even raise its flag during the demonstrations, he added.
Veysel Ayhan, a Syria analyst at the Ankara-based Center for Middle Eastern Strategic Studies, was at the conference.
He says that by hosting the anti-Assad regime conference on its territory, Ankara is sending a message of support to the opposition, even on a diplomatic level.
"This is the second stage of Turkey's policy on Syria," Ayhan told SETimes.
The first step, he said, was when Turkey called on the Assad regime to initiate reforms -- a demand which went unheeded.
As a further step, he suggested, Turkey might support international sanctions against Syria, if the oppression continues.
"This would be a big blow to the regime."
Speaking about the Antalya conference, Ayhan said the participants agreed everything must be done to change Syria from a totalitarian country to a secular democracy.
Mehmet Sandir, chairman of the Turkey-Syria Friendship Group in parliament, takes a contrasting perspective.
He worries the anti-regime conference in Turkey might spoil the country's relationship with Assad.
"I hope this conference took place with the Syrian administration's knowledge, otherwise it wouldn't be right," he commented, arguing Turkey should not contribute to the destabilisation of Syria.
"What I've been explaining to the Ankara administration for months now is that, as an ally of the West, we should explain to them [the West] the Syrian realities," said Sandir, a representative of the Nationalist Action Party (MHP).
"The instability of Syria will embroil the Middle East;
it will be a worse situation than Afghanistan," Sandir warns.
Muharrem Hilmi Ozev, Syria analyst at the Ankara-based Center for Turkey-Asia Strategic Research, believes that even though Turkey sympathises with the Syrian opposition, it didn't exclude the Assad regime's point of view.
"But the fact is that after the Antalya conference the opposition has entered Syrian politics," he said, arguing Turkey is trying to play a moderator role between the two.
Meanwhile, Ankara cannot go further than supporting the opposition, Ozev says, as "the country will lose its moderator role."
