17/06/2005
(Various sources -- 10/06/05 –17/06/05)
The European Investment Bank has extended a 35m-euro loan to Albania for road infrastructure upgrades, the finance ministry announced on 15 June.
That loan, combined with one from the EBRD, will be used to build a new 35-km stretch of road, and to repair the Fier-Tepelena road in southern Albania.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's  (BiH) foreign trade deficit reached 1.25m euros between January and May.
That is a 1.7 per cent year-on-year increase, according to data from the Central Bank.
Exports increased by 30 per cent on an annual basis, while imports grew by 10.7 per cent.
Gross Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) in Bulgaria stood at 335m euros between January and April, down by 16.9 per cent year-on-year, according to the Central Bank.
Analysts say it was due to the relatively higher reinvested profits by foreign companies and the lack of privatisation deals with non-residents.
Croatia's leading food producer Podravka has acknowledged that sales in its branches in Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia fell during the first quarter of this year.
Podravka suggested that the EU entry of these states and the introduction of new market requirements were the main reasons.
The Slovene company Turbo Institute will built new 20 mini-hydropower plants in Macedonia, under a 100m-euro agreement sealed with Skopje on 15 June.
Turbo Institute will have concession rights over the future facilities for the next 30 years, after which it would transfer them to Macedonia.
The Romanian government launched the privatisation tender on 16 June for Banca Comerciala Romana (BCR) -- the country's biggest bank in terms of assets, inviting foreign investors to submit letters of interest by 7 July.
Interested candidates can bid either for a 50 per cent plus one share stake or for a 62 per cent stake in BCR.
Bucharest expects at least $444m for the 50 per cent stake.
The World Bank board endorsed two grants totalling $12.5m for Kosovo on 14 June.
Out of these funds, $5.5m will be extended to support the management of public resources, and $7m will go towards strengthening the business climate.
Turkey and the IMF have reached an agreement on the first review of the $10 billion stand-by arrangement, according to Economy Minister Ali Babacan.
The IMF board is expected to approve the review in July, enabling the disbursement of an $833m tranche.
