08/06/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 08/06/11
The murder of 19-year-old Muhamet Cakaj at Pristina's Sami Frasheri High School by fellow students is only the latest of several high-profile incidents highlighting a growing problem of public violence in Kosovo's schools.
The issue has galvanized public opinion.
"This case and others are evidence of the lack of security for students in the schools and facilities around them.
Above all, it is an indication of the failure of educational and security institutions to address this serious problem that is beginning to reach worrisome proportions," commented Avni Bytyci of the NGO INPO, one of the few organisations that has addressed the problem.
The numbers support INPO's concerns:
In the first semester of 2011, more than 210 incidents involving students, many resulting in severe injuries, have been reported.
The situation is worse than in 2010 when, according to police, there were 37 incidents involving serious bodily injury, 36 cases of property damage, 15 robberies and an undetermined number of minor injuries.
Experts struggle to explain the rise in violence, but Aferdita Spahiu of the Kosovo UNICEF office says, "Studies conducted in Kosovo show that violence manifests [itself] because of poverty or other factors, posing a high risk to child development."
In addition to student-on-student violence, youngsters also report teacher-initiated violence against students.
Shpend, 18, a student from Pristina, says that teachers take their frustration out on students for no reason at all, and often physically attack them.
"Last month, one teacher said he did not like a girl's shirt and told her if she wore it next time, she could forget about passing the subject.
Also, a pupil was watching something on his mobile phone, and the teacher came and slapped him," Shpend said.
Retired teacher Rexhep Gashi from Pristina acknowledges that teachers at times overstep boundaries to assert power over the pupils.
"Many teachers before 1999 used [their position] as a means of showing their power to beat the children, expel them from class or used grading, which is not correct and should have been avoided," Gashi said.
But Gashi also said that pupils can be hard to work with, as many still face war trauma and poverty -- and neither parents nor the government address either issue.
"They read news that even with a good education it is difficult to find a job, which confuses them and brings them up in a wrong way," Gashi said.
Pristina teacher Agron Ismajli agrees it is hard to teach today because pupils are continually disruptive and very rude, but beatings have subsided in recent years.
"I remember those years, when beating a child because he did something was a school practice, but today it is 90% different.
And it is not at all beating;
those who practice it mostly spank them on the bottom or pull their ear," Ismajli said.
In an attempt to address the issue, Kosovo's Education Ministry said it is working with schools and the community to formulate an awareness policy about the dangers and consequences of physical abuse.
But the contribution of family, schools and society are irreplaceable, it said.
"I appeal primarily to parents and other responsible institutions of the country, but also the whole society, to exert their influence on their children every day in order to prevent violence at school and around it," Minister of Education Rame Buja told SETimes.
