08/06/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 08/06/11
It was a banner year for tourism:
Albania had about 3.5 million tourists last year, a whopping 32% increase over previous years.
Authorities are anticipating more of the same this year.
"Our expectations are based on the improvements in infrastructure we've done and the tourism environment in general," Endri Jorgoni, chief of cabinet in the ministry of culture and tourism said.
"However," he acknowledges, "the political situation might have a negative impact on that."
For eight years now, Dritan Xhengo, 35, has been operating a tourism agency in Tirana that offers everything from tickets and packages to travel insurance.
Xhengo, who studied in the UK and Slovenia, agrees that the political situation might impact the number of tourists visiting Albania, however, he notes, "so far, so good".
He says European tourists come to Albania, either as a couple, groups or individually, and there is an "extraordinarily positive change" compared to a few years ago.
Most of the Western tourists prefer study tours, cultural tourism, and archaeology.
Many come from Britain, Italy, Finland and Denmark.
"Albania is cheap for them," Xhengo says.
He notes, however, that Albania still "exports" more tourists than it "imports".
He says this is due to the comparatively low level of services in Albania and an eagerness to see other cultures in Europe.
"Comparing money you spend with the quality you get, it's cheaper abroad than at home," Xhengo says.
Albanians had preferred going to countries where no visas were needed, like Turkey, but in the wake of visa liberalisation, this preference is shifting towards Croatia, Spain and Greece.
Jorgoni says he is unaware of a discrepancy between "export" and "import" of tourism, but admits that the main problems encountered within Albania are a persistent lack of infrastructure, including roads leading to the most popular attractions.
"It has been spontaneous tourism until now," Jorgoni says, adding that the government is working now to institutionalise it.
One focus is boosting investments in tourism.
A new draft law "favours investments in tourism and transforms the ministry of Tourism and Culture into a one stop shop and a manager of tourism", Jorgoni says.
The draft legislation notes that the tourism sector "has great potential in contributing to the social and economic development of the country, bringing more revenue, strengthening the currency and opening jobs".
Tirana resident Enkelejda Beqo says she has chosen to spend vacations in different countries because she likes meeting new people, seeing different cultures and visiting places rich in history.
"It is also about spending vacations in places where you know nobody … and where service is in line with quality and cost," Beqo said.
