08/12/2010
(Bulgaria media sources -- 09/10/10 - 12/11/10;
Euobserver - 19/10/10;
AFP - 13/10/10)
Hundreds of illegal buildings on the Black Sea coast will be demolished within months as part of Bulgaria's efforts to put an end to years of violating the country's construction laws.
"It is about time that Bulgarians feel the power of the state," Regional Development Minister Rosen Plevneliev said in November, announcing the launch of an operation aimed at establishing the legality of buildings in the basins of more than 50 dams.
Water reservoirs, beaches and national thoroughfares, forests and parks of national importance, as well as natural and archaeological reserves are listed in the constitution as exclusive state property.
The law does not allow the construction of private villas or houses within dams' sanitary zones.
However, flying in a helicopter over the Ivaylograd Dam in the Rhodope Mountains in October, Bulgarian tax officials and prosecutors were surprised to see a vacation village sprawling on the banks of the water reservoir.
The 45 illegal houses in the so-called "customs agents' village" were reportedly built between 1998 and 2008.
The owners of the luxury properties with private quays, fishing ponds and mansions hidden behind tall fences are mostly senior civil servants -- including customs and traffic police officers, as well as businessmen.
One of the villas was found to belong to Stefan Marashev, the head of the customs office in the southeastern border town of Svilengrad, who was eventually demoted.
Ivan Simidchiev, head of the National Construction Control Directorate (NCCD), lost his job over the case.
His successor, Milka Gecheva, said recently that the owners of the illegal buildings are making efforts to legalise their properties, but voiced doubt that they will succeed.
She thinks another 40 houses near the Ivaylovgrad Dam will prove to have been erected in violation of the laws, as well.
Plevneliev told reporters in early November that 30 illegal structures built in the area of the Iskar Dam near Sofia will be razed by the end of the year.
On November 1st, authorities began removing about 50 shacks at a national nature reserve in the Ropotamo River's Black Sea delta.
Nine days later, bulldozers and other heavy machinery were sent by the NCCD to another fishermen's village to begin demolishing 147 illegal houses there.
Another 80 buildings at the Chengene Skele village near Bourgas may be added to the list, if the court decides they were also erected in violation of the laws.
"The bulk of this territory is part of the state forest fund and will not be used as long as its designation remains unchanged," Gecheva told Sofia-based private national television channel bTV during the operation.
Some local residents claim they were given construction permits, which were later annulled illegally.
Others insisted that they were repeatedly promised during local elections over the past 40 years that their village would be legalised, but that elected mayors never kept their promise.
Their attempt to block the bulldozers' access to Chengene Skele failed as police were called in to disperse the crowd.
During a protest in Burgas two days later, village residents threatened to stage civil disobedience and disorder, Darik Radio reported.
The helicopter flights over other areas on the Black Sea coast and inside the country, including Sofia, revealed hundreds of luxurious villas and mansions, some resembling small palaces in size and style.
Occupied by Bulgaria's nouveaux riches, many such estates are complete with swimming pools and exquisitely trimmed gardens.
A residence less than 15km away from Sofia, looking much like the Washington's White House, was found to belong to a private construction company, an investigative report by private national Nova Television channel revealed in a report in early October.
One member of its managing board was lawyer Anna Pengezova, the 26-year-old daughter of a senior Bulgarian magistrate.
Her name emerged in a scandal earlier this year when it was revealed that relatives of several top judges had obtained construction permits for beachfront lots in the Black Sea resort of Primorsko after registering as residents of the town and being in desperate need of a home.
Another luxury mansion in Sofia shown in the aerial footage in October is occupied by the family of Dolores Arsenova, an environment minister from 2001 to 2005.
Located in the upscale Boyana suburb, it exceeds 2,000 square metres in size.
Arsenova has said the property belongs to a company in which her husband is a shareholder.
Claiming that a company owns the property is a frequent tactic used to avoid paying taxes, according to Krasimir Stefanov, head of the National Revenue Agency (NRA).
It also allows the occupants to charge electricity and water bills, salaries for cleaners and gardeners, and other home maintenance costs to their companies.
Another scheme is to continue listing the house as still under construction, long after its owners have moved in.
"In recent years, tax evasion has turned into a national sport," an October 19th report by Brussels-based Eurobserver quoted Stefanov as saying.
"It is unusual to play by the rules in Bulgaria and my job is to instill a certain discipline."
