07/06/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 07/06/11
One after another, they resigned. 
By June, a total of ten candidates of Turkey's third-largest political party, the nationalist National Action Party (MHP), had withdrawn from the elections after facing the release of incriminating sex tapes.
Though low-quality, the tapes were clear enough to do political damage, and the immediate resignations of high-ranking party members reinforced their authenticity.
This type of smear campaign, though remarkable for its timing just prior to a national election and the number of people it affected, is hardly unique in Turkish politics. 
Nor are such tactics aimed at nationalists alone; almost exactly a year before the MHP "cassette earthquake", the head of the Republican People's Party (CHP), Deniz Baykal, was targeted in a similar fashion and forced to step down.
It remains unclear who was behind publication of the recent MHP cassettes. 
Some claim they are the work of rival nationalists aiming to purify the party. 
Others hold that the incumbent Justice and Development Party (AKP) organized their distribution to ensure a more sweeping victory on June 12th. 
In either case, the legality of their release is in question.
"This is a clear violation of an individual's right to privacy," Klaus Jurgens, a contributor to the Turkish daily Today's Zaman, told SETimes. 
"An investigation must commence in earnest as to who is behind the production as well as circulation of the tapes."
Such an investigation, however, would do little to change the tide of the coming election. 
It would also do little to clarify the larger issue of a political culture that often revolves around mudslinging and vitriol, which tend to provide the day's political headlines.
Bogazici University professor of political science Hakan Yilmaz argues that such tactics are a way to distract the electorate. 
"It's a little bit like the ancient Greeks watching the gods fight it out up on Mount Olympus," says Yilmaz, ruing the powerlessness of Turkish voters, who are forced choose between parties while having no say in what candidates those parties put forward.
"Ultimately, there are no really irreconcilable differences among the major parties," Yilmaz told SETimes, making an exception for the Kurdish-backed Peace and Democracy Party (BDP). 
The lack of substantial policy difference, he says, is why politicians are inclined to attack one another on a more visceral level.
Even as each party engages in dirty politicking, each also comes forward to decry the practice.
Referring to the cassette scandals, President Abdullah Gul commented that prosecutors should tackle the issue, calling such blackmail "ugly and dangerous". 
"Today it happens to them, tomorrow to others, [everybody] should act with moral principles," he said.
Cemal Dindar, psychologist and author of a recent book examining the psychology of Turkey's new right wing, The Language of Rage, emphasizes the types of code and insinuations that are seen in this type of political rhetoric, whereby the prime minister might condemn "a certain media group," rather than actually giving its name.
Dindar adds that even discussions about the practice can get ugly. 
"With the concepts of political morality, like 'clean' or 'dirty', the debate [over morality] itself can also paradoxically become a part of the 'dirty politics'," he told SETimes.
The level to which political discourse has sunk in this election season was arguably best captured by someone who knows more about smut than anyone else in Turkey, the porn star known as Sahin K. 
Announcing his own intention to run for office, he emphasized his integrity in contrast to that of other politicians, saying, "If it's tapes we're talking, my tapes -- everything of mine -- is out in the open. 
As a matter of fact, I'd even film in parliament."
