16/02/2005
(Various sources – 02/09/05 – 02/16/05)
Croatia's Janica Kostelic interrupted her recovery from the flu to win the slalom event at the world championships in Italy on 11 February.
She became the first woman in 23 years to win three ski titles in a single alpine skiing world championship.
UEFA, the European football governing body, is sending two investigators to Greece to look into reports that a local club, Panionios, fixed its UEFA Cup game with Georgia's Dinamo Tbilisi.
The probe is part of a major scandal that has shaken European soccer in the last month.
Greek businessman Minos Kyriakou was elected the new president of the Hellenic Olympic Committee on 14 February.
He was the sole candidate for the position.
Kyriakou succeeds Lambis Nikolaou, who completed two seven-year mandates.
The coach of the Macedonian national football team, Dragan Kanatlarovski, resigned on 13 February after his team managed only a 0-0 draw against Andorra in a World Cup qualifier.
The Macedonian Football Association Board is expected to discuss the resignation on 20 February.
The sixth international Guitar Art Festival closed in Belgrade on 14 February.
This year's edition marked the 60th birthday of the founder of the classical guitar school in Serbia, Jovan Jovicic.
The first-ever Skopje Ethno festival was held at Universal Hall in Skopje, from 11 February to 12 February.
Nine orchestras participated, performing Macedonian, Albanian and Roma ethno music.
Croatian writer Veljko Barbieri's book of recipes, "Kuharski Kanconijer -- Gurmanska Sjecanja Mediterana", won the prestigious Gourmand World Cookbook Award, contest officials announced in Sweden on 11 February.
Barbieri's book was also chosen as one of the two best books about Mediterranean cuisine published last year.
Two Greek-Turkish co-productions -- "Angel's Fall" by director Semih Kaplanoglu and "Hostage" by director Constantine Giannaris -- are competing in the 55th Berlin International Film Festival, which lasts until 20 February.
A third entrant, Yesim Ustaoglu's "Waiting for the Clouds", is a co-production of France, Germany, Greece and Turkey.
The three films are sponsored by Eurimages, the Council of Europe's film fund.
