07/12/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/12/10
Despite its official view that conditions do not exist for Kosovo Serbs to vote in Sunday's (December 12th) general election, the Serbian government has said it will not try to penalise those who go to the polls.
That stance has apparently contributed to the formation of eight -- out of the total 29 -- Serb tickets vying for seats in the Kosovo parliament.
According to the Kosovo Electoral Law, Serbs are guaranteed ten of the 120 seats in parliament, regardless of turnout.
In the case of a higher turnout, Serbs could win more than 20 seats.
There are more than 200 candidates on the Serb tickets, including 82 women.
However, there few are from Kosovo's north -- where Serbs make up the majority of the population.
Parties and citizens' associations that gather Serbs from the enclaves in central and southern Kosovo, where Serbs live in an Albanian environment, make up the majority of the participants.
Analysts believe the Independent Liberal Party and the United Serb Ticket will be fighting for dominance.
The Independent Liberal Party has been involved in the Kosovo cabinet for years.
Party leader Slobodan Petrovic predicts his party will win more than ten mandates on Sunday, and will have at least three ministers in the future government.
"The citizens have recognised the values of the Independent Liberal Party," Petrovic said, adding that his main priorities are the return of Serbs to Kosovo and the improvement of their economic position.
The appearance of the United Serb Ticket is particularly intriguing, with its leaders claiming it includes representatives of all parliamentary parties from Serbia.
They are calling it the "state ticket", alluding to the notion that the group enjoys the support of at least a portion of the Belgrade government.
That is true to an extent, since one of the candidates is Randjel Nojkic, a senior official of the Serbian Renewal Movement, which is a member of Serbia's ruling coalition.
"Before we started creating the United Serb Ticket, we spoke with people from the Serbian government.
You can see for yourselves that the Serbian Renewal Movement has backed our participation in the election.
Many other parties are also supporting us in a way," one of the heads of the United Serb Ticket, Rada Trajkovic, told the Belgrade news agency Beta.
Serbian Minister for Kosovo Metohija Goran Bogdanovic said that he does not support Serbs taking part in the election, but added that he somewhat understands their decision due to the difficult conditions in which they live.
Bogdanovic also said he is aware that many expect an unprecedented number of Serbs to participate on Sunday.
He stressed that the Serbian government would not divide them into "patriots and traitors".
All Serbs "working in the interest of the Serb community" will have Belgrade's support he said.
However, not everyone in Belgrade sees things the same way.
Petar Petkovic, the spokesman for Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia, told SETimes that Kosovo Serbs could gain nothing from involvement in the Kosovo government.
"We will expel from our party all those members who take part [on Sunday]," Petkovic said.
