07/12/2010
By Linda Karadaku for SETimes in Pristina – 07/12/10
Citing improved security on the ground, NATO is further scaling back its troop strength in Kosovo. 
A decade ago, there were 50,000 personnel there. 
The number now is closing in on 5,000. 
In part one of an exclusive interview with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku, KFOR Commander General Erhard Buhler assesses the current situation.
SETimes: What is the overall security situation in Kosovo, specifically after the October resignation of then-President Fatmir Sejdiu? 
Has the "political crisis" had any effect on the security situation?
General Erhard Buhler: My personal assessment of the security situation today in Kosovo is that a lot has been achieved in recent years and my respect and gratitude for that goes to the citizens on the one hand and to the police officers on the other. 
I am optimistic that this trend will go on.
As of September 1st, when I assumed responsibility as commander of the Kosovo Force, I had meetings all over Kosovo, including with many representatives of local institutions and of international stakeholders operating here and in the region. 
My impression is that, in spite of differing political views, all are interested in peace and stability.
I can confidently state that the general security situation improved significantly and we can assess it as calm and stable. 
In this regard, the political crisis that you're talking about is a democratic process which can happen in any democracy. 
"Crisis" implies threats and risks; I am sure you agree that elections are a means of people organising themselves democratically, I cannot see any crisis in this.
I don't think that elections will have any effect on the security situation and I am confident the Kosovo Police (KP) are perfectly able to manage the process. 
Having said that, should a threat appear, KFOR will, as always, be prepared to take any measure required.
SETimes: Will special measures be taken for the elections to guarantee security?
Buhler: I don't think that it is necessary for KFOR to take any special measures. 
The Kosovo Police are perfectly capable of taking on the task of securing elections. 
However, we will be involved in the planning process for the security concept and will be standing by in the execution phase with all our capacities to support the KP.
SETimes: How would you assess the situation in the north of Kosovo, given routine acts of violence there?
Buhler: The situation in the north has been complex for years and everybody knows this. 
From my many visits, I know that the vast majority of people there are as decent and peaceful as people are all over Kosovo. 
They want to live a quiet daily life and we must not create a wrong reputation. 
However, there are some radicals and criminals. 
As a response to some violent acts, KFOR, in close co-ordination with EULEX and the Kosovo Police, decided to reinforce the layout of the security measures in order to improve the situation. 
Thus, we have increased the number of patrols and checkpoints. 
These joint operations are aimed at tackling the -- at times -- challenging security situation in the north.
However, I am strongly convinced that the situation cannot be solved only by military means but requires a political solution. 
One thing is sure: a peaceful solution in the interest of future generations requires the participation of all communities in Kosovo.
SETimes: What is the security situation like in the Serb majority enclaves in the rest of Kosovo?
Buhler: My sense is that the situation is very good. 
When I recall the atmosphere and situation that we had there not so long ago, now things look so much better. 
I have the feeling that Kosovo Serbs there have taken their lives into their own hands and look into the future with more confidence than in the past.
