06/12/2010
By Erl Murati for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 06/12/10
Starting on December 15th, Albanian citizens will be able to travel to the EU without a visa.
The European Council made that decision on November 8th, saying any Albanian who holds a biometric passport will be able to visit the EU member states for up to 90 days over six months, though there is no right to residence or work.
Brussels has no desire to see a mass influx of would-be immigrants.
"We have been very clear in saying that if there will be systematic abuses, I repeat systematic, the process will be revised. 
Please, don't disappoint us," EU Justice and Internal Affairs Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom said in Tirana after the move was announced.
The results of visa liberalisation for Macedonia and Serbia has triggered concern. 
After the rules were eased for them, numerous ethnic Albanians from those two countries have requested political asylum in the EU.
Albania's interior minister, Lulzim Basha, has been campaigning hard to raise public awareness about the seriousness of the issue. 
Through community meetings, leaflets, billboards and TV spots, the government has been driving home the message that breaching EU regulations can have consequences.
"We asked the citizens not to abuse the possibilty of free movement and avoid the chance of a penalty, " Basha told SETimes. 
"In any case, no one should abuse free movement and I am sure that these conditions will be respected."
According to a survey by the EUNACAL Institute and the Open Society Foundation, the number of Albanians travelling to EU countries will likely double after the eased visa regime goes into effect.
The Albanian Institute of International Studies, meanwhile, found that 21.9% of Albanians surveyed think visa liberalisation is very desirable because it opens up the possibility of working in member countries. 
The same study found that 20% would like to travel outside Albania for study purposes, and 28% for purposes of taking up residence.
This is exactly the message Brussels does not want to hear. 
Complicating the issue is the fact that many victims of persecution by Albania's former communist regime say the wrongs they suffered have never been redressed at home, giving them a rationale for claiming political asylum abroad.
"In Albania, we are a neglected class. 
That is why we will ask collectively for political asylum in Brussels," Xhaferr Agaraj, a representative of the National Association for the Rehabilitation of Political Convicts in Albania, told SETimes.
A total of 1,800 people convicted by the old regime on political grounds are seeking compensation for the years spent in prison. 
Disappointed with their treatment at home, many believe that Europe could somehow heal their pain.
