06/01/2011
By Justin Vela for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 06/01/11
Lufti Arslan, one of the founders of Genc, an Islamic organisation based in the Uskudar district of Istanbul, closed the book he was reading, The Networked Society by Manuel Castells, when guests unexpectedly appeared.
The choice of reading material provided some insight into Arslan.
"The world is awaiting us," he said, speaking of Turkey's growing power.
"Not just the Middle East."
Genc, which means "youth" in Turkish, has published a magazine oriented towards young people and launched a foundation that raised money for humanitarian projects around Turkey.
It also started an alternative university that teaches media, humanities, and Arabic, discussing the different subjects through an Islamic viewpoint not offered in Turkey's officially secular state universities.
"There is a lack of civil society in Turkey.
Our ability to express our worldview, to express our identity is limited.
Limitations by the state are not useful for people to understand themselves," said organisation co-ordinator Suleyman Ragip.
Founded in 2006, Genc is preparing to send some of its volunteers abroad to work on international projects.
"Turkey is getting rich," Arslan said.
"People in Turkey are looking outside more.
In order to be better inside you have to have groups outside."
Claiming that the West persisted in seeing Turkey through an "orientalist" viewpoint, Arslan said that the desire to be active abroad originated in the country's recent economic prosperity and the Islamic requirement to give to the poor.
"This is not mine," he said, gesturing at the desk in front of him.
"This is my duty.
Because I have a direct connection with Allah I have to provide something [for others].
This is a very foreign idea in the West."
While there is nothing wrong with being a missionary, Ragip said, Genc is not seeking to gain converts.
"There is no aim to make anyone Muslim," he said.
"Atheist, Christian, Jew.
If I can help you I will.
I have no problem with people who are not Muslims.
He will pay anyway in the way of God."
"Every part of society in Turkey is finding ways to connect with the outside world," he said.
Members of Genc acknowledge that Islamic organisations are viewed suspiciously by non-Muslims, if not outright feared.
International Islamophobia is on the rise, inspired by terrorism and the growth of the global Muslim population.
Within Turkey, many secular Turks are wary of Islamic organisations, perceiving them as possibly hiding a secret plan to dominate society and impose their views.
After the IHH Humanitarian Relief Foundation gained infamy with the Gaza flotilla crisis between Turkey and Israel in May 2010, international Turkish organisations began to be perceived as having ulterior agendas.
Some speculated about connections with the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), which critics have repeatedly accused of harboring a secret plan to promote Islam and to establish an Islamic state within Turkey.
The party denies such claims.
Last year, as Turkey voted against sanctions for Iran at the UN, lashed out at Israel, and demanded the level of deference Ankara believed it deserved, allegations flew that the country was "turning away" from its traditional Western allies.
Some also see Turkey as harboring "neo-Ottoman" ambitions or desiring to exert influence over regions once controlled by the Ottoman Empire.
Professor Darko Tanaskovic, an expert in oriental studies at the University of Belgrade, describes neo-Ottomanism as "an ideological amalgam of Islamism, Turkism, and Ottoman imperialism".
"The tempo of integration … [of the Western Balkans within the EU] has been slowed down considerably," Tanaskovic said in a recent interview.
"As for Turkey, it appears that there is no chance of full EU integration in the foreseeable future, if at all.
Therefore, the project of bilateral and multilateral co-operation of these countries may develop over time into an alternative to European integration.
Such options have been discussed informally quite often."
Organisations such as Genc, along with mass media, business deals, and offering to mediate in various conflicts, are among the ways that the Turkish government exercises its soft-power approach to neo-Ottomanism, analysts say.
"Ottomanism is dead," Arslan said.
"[Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet] Davutoglu said, 'We have to have Ottoman national unity.' The West read that as resurrecting Ottomanism.
This is not an Ottoman dream or Turkish Muslim jihadist calls.
This is resembling revolutionary messages.
We are looking for a newer vision."
A phenomenon that cuts to the heart of modern Turkey, Islamic organisations express the grassroots thinking of many in a country that is contributing to the founding of a new era in no small way.
Jenny White, the author of Islamist Mobilization in Turkey, wrote that Islamic organizations were locally conceived and, unlike many similar institutions in the West, do not make attachment to a political entity their overriding goal.
“Like any loosely drawn movement, it aims to unify people around a shared ideology and social and political goals.
Islam is the central idiom to which all participants appeal,” wrote White.
While studying the Islamic movement in Turkey, White found that it existed largely separate from government entities yet served as a conduit to mobilizing voters behind a political force.
The organizations it produced existed as powerful instruments that contributed to the rise of political parties with Islamic politicians, such as the AKP who are today at odds with the country’s secular establishment.
"The biggest clash in Turkish society came from the intelligencia wanting to get rid of Islam," Ragip said.
"In the hearts and minds of people, Islam was there.
The essence of these lands is molded by Islam.
It can't be rejected."
