07/04/2011
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 07/04/11
Just over a month before the May 8th local elections, the Albanian government is proposing an amnesty for those who have fallen behind in paying required taxes and fees. 
The draft legislation would waive penalties for individuals as well as companies, and also provides for re-evaluating property values and re-capitalizing assets.
Pushing it through, however, could be a formidable political task. 
Because some clauses require a 3/5th majority vote in parliament, the government must reach agreement with the opposition Socialists.
The legislative process in Albania has been blocked for about two years due to an ongoing dispute over the last round of general elections. 
Important laws have had to be put on hold because of the impasse.
"I invite the opposition to vote on the law as proof of their will for the country's best interest," Prime Minister Sali Berisha said, appealing for co-operation. 
But Socialist leader Edi Rama has already voiced doubts.
"The Socialist Party has nothing against fiscal amnesty in principle, but only if it would be a serious process, not an amnesty to legalise funds for corruption, drugs and trafficking," Rama told journalists.
Under the draft legislation, individuals, including emigrants, would legalise their assets by paying a 3% tax. 
Real estate would be re-evaluated through 1% tax, a significant reduction compared to the 10%, applied to real estate after sale.
Small businesses would be pardoned for unpaid social insurance tax. 
Large companies would also be forgiven their unpaid tax, penalties and interest. 
Companies would have the opportunity to recapitalize their assets.
The most controversial clauses involve forgiving unpaid electricity bills – an amount estimated at 270m euros -- along with 50% of unpaid customs duties on imported cars.
World Bank Director for Albania Ksenyia Lvovski has advised the government to be careful.
"Fiscal amnesty should not relay the message that people and businesses can make mistakes, infringe on the law and not be punished," Lvovski said in a meeting with the media, "In order to avoid this, the government must take measures to avoid repeating such behaviour, and if it happens, there will be consequences."
Economists and experts agree that it should not be implemented just for the sake of scoring points with voters.
"The most controversial aspect is the political timing," former Economy Minister Anastas Angjeli said in an interview. 
"Not only does it risk being transformed into an election campaign tool, but it could also be implemented in a political context."
Arben Ahmetaj, a Socialist MP, called the initiative "just an election campaign balloon".
"This measure would not release assets for the country. 
From a technical viewpoint, there are serious questions [about] a successful implementation," he said.
Business associations support the initiative, however.
"The assets released from the fiscal amnesty will reflect our companies' full potential before their international partners, which now are not fully displayed," Nikolin Jaka, head of the Tirana Chamber of Commerce said.
It is not the first time fiscal amnesty has been considered in Albania. 
A few years ago, Finance Minister Ridvan Bode declared fiscal amnesty would release around 3 to 4 billion euros, while the Chamber of Commerce study estimates a release of 4.5 billion euros.
Independent experts, quoted by Monitor magazine, forecast a record capital release of 10 billion euros if fiscal amnesty is implemented.
