07/04/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 07/04/11
Ask Ariana Remaj about the quality of health care in Kosovo, and she'll tell of the shock she received last January when she sought treatment for a flu and high fever.
"He told me I should go buy myself an injection and gloves.
The closest drugstore is 5km from my village," she says.
Many patients say they are frustrated by poor services, an indifferent attitude on the part of medical personnel, and a lack of medications.
A former Kosovo ombudsperson, Hilmi Jashari, says scarce government funds are a major source of the problem.
"Financial difficulties, however, cannot justify inhumane treatment of patients in the clinics," Jashari said.
Patients report being routinely advised by their doctors to take their problems elsewhere – namely, to one of the many private clinics that have burgeoned in Kosovo since the end of the 1998-99 conflict.
Many physicians have jobs both in the state facilities and in their private competitors, a fact which presents a possible conflict of interest.
When Ardiana Hasani-Leka, a Pristina resident, broke her leg, she first went to the city's state-run hospital.
"The doctor told me that I should go to a private clinic because they do not have the necessary medical instruments.
He referred me to [the private clinic] where he works," Hasani-Leka said.
Doctors, meanwhile, say they are being criticised unfairly for circusmtances that are beyond their control.
They say a lack of support from the state budget is hampering services and quality, despite their dedicated efforts.
"It's difficult to work under such conditions, but we think of our patients and do our best," says Drita Rukiqi, a doctor in the Central Family Health Care Centre in Pristina.
She does not think that doctors working in private and public clinics at the same time creates a conflict.
"We must survive;
we have families and with our salaries we need to have two or sometimes three jobs just to support the family," Rukiqi says.
Arsim Gashi's child was at the pediatric clinic of the Pristina University Hospital for three days.
He says he witnessed first-hand the problems medical personnel have to face.
"They are doing their best, but it's clear with those salaries and conditions they are not always happy, but one cannot blame them for that," Gashi told SETimes.
Kosovo's new Health mminister Ferid Agani promises changes.
"We will work to restore the lost patient confidence, and work so the Kosovo health system transitions from an emergency phase to a development stage," Agani told SETimes.
