06/01/2011
(Bloomberg, FT, Zaman - 06/01/11;
AP, Hurriyet, Xinhua - 05/01/11;
New York Times, AP - 04/01/11;
New Europe - 21/11/10)
Turkey is preparing a bill to accelerate the judicial process, Justice Minister Sadullah Ergin said on Wednesday (January 5th), amid public anger over the release of alleged members of a militant group charged with torture and murdering scores of people.
Amendments to the criminal code, restricting to ten years the amount of time suspects charged with terrorism and crimes against the state can spend in detention while awaiting their final verdicts, entered into force on January 1st.
The new law also set the maximum detention period for most other crimes at five years.
This forced the government to set free dozens of suspects this week, including 18 members of an Islamic militant group, known as Turkish Hezbollah.
Ten of them have been convicted on charges of torturing and killing 188 people and attempting to establish an Islamic state order in Turkey's Kurdish-dominated southeast.
They were arrested in 2000 and were sentenced to life in prison in December 2009, but their appeals trial is still under way.
Under Turkish law, an inmate is considered under arrest until a final verdict has been issued by the Supreme Court of Appeals, according to Istanbul-based daily Hurriyet.
Turkey approved the new law in a bid to bring its legislation in line with EU standards.
"The implementation of pre-trial detention is not limited to circumstances where it is strictly necessary in the public interest," the European Commission said in its latest report on Turkey's accession progress.
"This adds to the overcrowding in prisons … Judges do not make effective use of the probation system."
Ergin noted on Wednesday that there was no limit set for periods of arrest under Turkish law prior to the new changes to the criminal code.
"We enacted this recent amendment since this situation was not befitting Turkey," he said.
"The Supreme Court of Appeals is currently hearing cases that date back more than five years."
His ministry is preparing a new bill that should speed up the appeals process and shorten trial periods, the Turkish daily Zaman quoted him as saying.
The new legislation would provide for increasing the number of both chambers and judges at the Supreme Court of Appeals, to help ease the workload of the high court.
Currently, it takes 1,622 days, or almost four-and-a-half years, on average for a trial to be completed, with the appeals process alone lasting about 1,042 days, Ergin noted, adding that there are many cases that have been pending for decades.
Following the enactment of the new detention rules, more than 1,000 suspects currently in custody could be eligible for immediate release, the minister said.
The majority of them are awaiting the Supreme Court of Appeals' final verdict.
"What is wrong is lengthy trials and the bottleneck at the Supreme Court of Appeals," Bekir Bozdag, deputy chairman of the ruling Justice and Development Party's parliamentary group, told Zaman.
"Most of the cases in which suspects' maximum arrest time has been exceeded are currently at the Supreme Court of Appeals, not at local courts," he added.
