06/01/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 06/01/11
Ranko Kostic and his wife Dragana have prepared everything for Christmas at their home in the village of Vidanje in Klina.
The tree is decorated, the aromas of traditional food will soon fill the kitchen, and hope for the future abounds.
"Christmas means a lot for us, the Christian Orthodox.
It is a happy day we enjoy so much.
We visit each other, hang out with each other, reconcile with those we were holding grudges or people we didn't like," Kostic tells SETimes.
Fish and pork are the main dishes.
Kostic says it is fish on Christmas night (January 7th) and baked pork on Christmas Day.
Badnjak, the log that is ceremonially burned on the domestic hearth, is brought into the home.
The first guest to enter the house Christmas morning -- the polozajnik -- starts the fire in the fireplace and makes a wish for wealth and health.
The polozajnik brings good luck to the home for the next year.
Kostic has two daughters, Tanja and Sanja.
"Children enjoy it enormously;
they eat sweets and cakes," he says.
The family goes to church for the midnight liturgy where they say the prayer to the Badnjak and sing to it.
"
We will go to Budisalci Monastery this year, which is 7km from Videnja.
The first day, we usually stay home and the second day, we have family visits," Kostic explains.
In the past years, Serbs from central Kosovo would organise themselves to go and cut the wood to prepare the Badnjak, accompanied by the Kosovo Police Service.
The deputy commander of the Kosovo Police Station in Gracanica, Rame Kryeziu, told KIM Radio that he had not received any requests this year for that, but still there would be increased police presence.
"As in previous years, we will be deployed in the early morning hours and during the day at specific points of the lake to the Gracanica monastery, in order to regulate traffic and maintain law and order," Kryeziu said.
The main Christmas liturgy on Friday night will be held in Prizren, at St George's Church.
Theodosius, Bishop of Raska and Prizren, will officiate, together with the clergy of the diocese.
Christmas celebrations begin on Thursday with a liturgy at the church of Saint Demetrius in Mitrovica.
