05/01/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/01/11
Kosovars in three municipaities head back to the polls Sunday (January 9th) for a revote after irregularities marred the December 12th general elections in those areas.
Accusations of electoral fraud sparked calls for a revote in Skenderaj/Srbica, Drenas/Glogovac and Decan/Decane.
The municipalities registered almost 100% voter turnout in the December elections, compared to 47% across the rest of the country.
Because of their political power, "vote guardians" had stolen votes which in turn damaged the entire voting process, said acting Kosovo President Jakup Krasniqi.
"Political party representatives violated the will of the Kosovo citizens on December 12th," Krasniqi told Kosovo Radio Dukagjini, saying that "a mistake is a mistake, but stealing is stealing."
"I am convinced that PDK had no reason to be concerned over the votes it would win, especially in the two Drenica municipalities, Lipjan and Malishevo," Krasniqi said.
Outgoing Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, the leader of the PDK, says "The December 12th elections gave another impetus to Kosovo democracy, with a new opposition which, we hope, will be constructive and co-operative in the development of Kosovo."
Fatmir Limaj, PDK deputy chairman, disagrees.
He said that during the elections, there were cases that damaged the credibility of the process and democracy in Kosovo.
Limaj also told Kosovo Radio and Television that some commissioners of parties "trafficked" votes of the candidates from one to another, within one party list.
"It is well known in this [PDK] party who can win the votes and who cannot," Limaj said.
Kosovo NGO KIPRED member Krenar Gashi thinks the election process was essentially flawed.
He told SETimes that the revote will have a big impact on manipulation or stealing of votes within the parties.
"Commissioners of the political parties, believing that the votes will not be re-counted in the final notebooks, have also manipulated the votes of the candidates, favouring one and damaging the other," Gashi said.
He said that manipulations of votes within the lists "caused an increase of tensions among the candidates for deputies and different factions which exist in all political parties".
"When it comes to election irregularities, Krasniqui's comments were in accord with the constitution, despite the fact that the constitution does not clearly define the function of the acting president," Gashi said.
