07/04/2011
(EurActiv, Euroalert.net, The Irish Times, Sofia News Agency, Balkans.com - 06/04/11; European Commission, Hungarian EU Presidency, European Voice, Euobserver, Deutsche Welle, The New York Times - 05/04/11)
All EU member states must develop national strategies for Roma inclusion by the end of 2011, the European Commission (EC) said on Tuesday (April 5th).
The aim of the initiative is to end the widespread discrimination against Europe's biggest ethnic minority, numbering between 10 million and 12 million people. 
More than half of them live across the EU, with Romania, followed by Bulgaria, Spain, Hungary and Slovakia being the countries with the largest Roma communities. 
Malta is the only member of the 27-nation bloc without any representative of that ethnic group, according to 2009 statistics.
"Despite some good intentions from national politicians, too little has changed in the lives of most Roma over the last few years," EU Vice-President and Justice Commissioner Viviane Reding said at the European Parliament (EP) on Tuesday, as she presented the EC's European Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies.
The national plans should outline the measures governments will take for the achievement of specific targets in four critical areas to improve the integration of the Roma community, the EC said, citing education as the most important among them.
"Surveys show that in some member states, only about 42% of Roma children complete primary school. 
The European average is 97%. 
Our goal is to ensure that every Roma child completes primary school at the very least," Reding said.
The other three priority areas the commission wants the EU nations to focus on are employment, health care and housing.
While each member of the Union is expected to outline its own goals, depending on the specific circumstances in the country, the measures should aim to reduce the gap between Roma people's access to jobs as compared to that of other citizens. 
That could imply significant economic benefits, as well, according to the EC.
With an average age of 25, which is well below the EU average of 40, the community accounts for a growing share of the working age population, it explained. 
In Bulgaria and Romania, for example, young Roma represent 20% of the new entrants to the national labour markets.
Noting that life expectancy for the community is ten years less than the EU average of 76 for men and 82 for women, the EC called for ensuring better access to health services for members of that group.
The measures EU nations will outline in their Roma integration strategies should also aim to close the gap in access to housing and essential services, such as running water or electricity.
"The persistent exclusion of Roma people is unacceptable in 21st century Europe built on principles of equality, democracy and the rule of law," EU Commissioner for Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion, Laszlo Andor, said on Tuesday. 
"The living conditions of the majority of Roma and their relations with mainstream society have just worsened in recent years."
