07/03/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 07/03/11
It was a dramatic, painful way to drive the point home.
Halko Drustinac and Zoran Bulatovic, two workers in Novi Pazar, were fed up with not receiving their paycheck.
The company that employs them allegedly owes them two years' worth of wages.
In a bid to draw attention to their plight -- and the difficulties faced by Serbian workers in general -- each of them took a nail and hammered it into his hand.
The act caused a public furor and further highlighed the anxiety many Serbs feel about the state of the economy.
These days, having a job is no guarantee of being able to make ends meet -- not when cash-strapped companies find themselves issuing IOUs instead of pay.
According to data from the Association of Free and Independent Unions of Serbia, only 17% of private employers regularly pay their employees' salaries.
While workers like Drustinac and Bulatovic battle to get their pay, many other Serbs don't have a job at all.
Boban, 37, a former security guard at a Belgrade company, is among them.
"I lost my job late last year," he told SETimes.
"Now I don't know how I'll get a new one and there are bills to pay every month.
There aren't many ads I can answer and even when a vacancy pops up hundreds of candidates apply."
The unemployment rate is now at around 20%.
Meanwhile, price hikes in January have further upped the cost of living for Serbs who already were struggling.
Many basic goods -- bread, milk, sugar and oil -- were affected.
Is an economic turnaround in sight?
Some analysts hope so.
Jurji Bajec, a Belgrade economist and adviser to the prime minister, predicts 2011 will bring improvements, including a moderate raise for public sector employees.
He added that foreign investment will likely increase.
"One can expect employment in Serbia to start growing at the end of the year, since the 3% economic growth rate expected this year ensures an end to rising unemployment," he told Belgrade media.
But not all economists are as optimistic.
"It is difficult to expect those who pushed us into this crisis to pull us out of it.
The Serbian crisis is not just a consequence of the global economic crisis, it rather bears many local characteristics and I see no serious political resolve to undertake the necessary changes," analyst Mahmud Busatlija told SETimes.
Further deterioration could seriously destabilise Serbia, he added.
"I do not think dramatic political change can occur, because all major parties share the same priority -- membership in the EU.
But there can be serious social quakes here that would increase pressure on the government to improve the citizens' living standards," Busatlija said.
Meanwhile, pensioners like 76-year-old Vera are staring at an empty pantry.
"It's the hardest for us pensioners, because we can't get anything other than our pension," she said.
"What can we buy from our pension?
If only the prices of bread, milk, sugar and oil didn't increase so much," she told SETimes.
