05/01/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/01/11
Every New Year, a cheerful old man with a long white beard, red coat and reindeer-propelled sleigh heads out from faraway Lapland to the sound of bells.
Whether you believe in the legend of Santa Claus or not, one thing is for sure -- every New Year means presents.
To help keep the magic alive, agencies organise New Year's Eve celebrations for children, with Santa Claus the inevitable hero of each event.
The Santa Clauses Agency has operated in Belgrade for 15 years and employs five "professional" Santa Clauses.
Celebrations are held in private homes or are thrown by companies for their employees' children.
Of course, not all client requests are easily met, says agency head Sasa Radovic.
"One such request was to really enter the house through a chimney, like in the legend, while another was to come into the apartment through a second or third floor balcony.
This year ...
a dad came up with the idea of Santa Claus arriving in a sleigh with reindeer."
That required a little tweaking.
Santa ended up arriving in a horse carriage, Radovic told SETimes.
Mothers are no pushovers either, he adds.
"Certain moms have threatened that, if we're not good Santa Clauses, we will have to do house chores, such as dish washing or throwing out the trash.
They threatened us, but they were just joking.
Everyone has so far been satisfied with our service.
Unlike others who are not registered for such services, we have registered our agency," Radovic explains.
Despite the occasional challenges, he enjoys his job and the magic and joy he brings children.
"Being a Santa Claus is a beautiful thing, it's fantastic to enter children's unspoiled world.
"Unfortunately, during the year there are no house visits or shows with Santa Clauses.
During that time, I put on weight and make my elves make presents.
There are several billion children in the world and I have to deliver gifts to all of them," he notes.
For a quick break from the workshop, Belgrade's Santa Clauses have organised their own race for the past three years.
About 1,000 Santa Clauses of all ages ran through the main streets of Belgrade during last month's event.
Everyone had a good time despite sub-zero temperatures and snow, warming up by running, dancing and singing.
The event also raised funds for the Association of Parents of Child Cancer Patients.
Slavko, 33, and Nevena, 20, are professional dancers and regular race participants, which is their way of spreading the festive spirit.
They do believe in Santa.
"This is a unique opportunity to have a good time, run, dance and play, to usher in the New Year and Christmas holidays in a nice way and instill a bit of that joy in the people around us," Slavko explains.
"We hang out and dance and this is one of the ways to share all that with other people," Nevena adds.
