06/05/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 06/05/11
President Ivo Josipovic wrapped up a visit to the United States on Wednesday (May 4th) after a series of high-level meetings in Chicago and Washington. 
Officials say they reaffirmed the excellent ties between the two countries and US support for Croatia's long anticipated EU entry.
In talks with Vice-President Joe Biden, the main topics were Southeast Europe and the progress Croatia has made in its EU bid, which Biden's office later described as "crucial for the entire region".
Biden "recognises the efforts made in Croatia in order to fully respect the rule of law and continue with the fight against corruption", the office said in a statement.
The trip coincided with the killing of al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden by US forces. 
News of bin Laden's death prompted Josipovic to reaffirm that Croatia -- which has just over 300 troops deployed in Afghanistan as part of the ISAF operation -- is ready and willing to continue to contribute to the global fight against terrorism.
"Croatian-US relations have shown steady progress since the very beginning and evolved into the full status of allies, with Croatia being a NATO member," Ivan Grdesic, a former Croatian ambassador to Washington and a professor at the Faculty of Political Science in Zagreb, told SETimes.
But not all areas of co-operation have been explored fully, Grdesic added. 
"What is needed in our bilateral relations is improved economic and trade relations," he said.
US Ambassador to Zagreb James Foley, who accompanied Josipovic during his tour, told HINA that the president had "long and fruitful meetings" with both Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
The Obama administration, he added, considers Josipovic a "statesman who wants progress and reconciliation in the region".
One aspect of reconciliation may be the proposed establishment of RECOM, a regional truth commission for war crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia.
For its part, the US administration underscored "the leading role" that Josipovic plays in "healing wounds and building bridges in the region".
In Zagreb, teacher Josip Sabic, 49, said he hoped Washington would help Croatia wrap up the lengthy EU accession process. 
"We have been waiting for too long and I hope that now the world's only superpower will tell these guys in Brussels that they should let Croatia in," he told SETimes.
