06/05/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 06/05/11
The 2nd Istanbul International Water Forum was held from Tuesday (May 3rd) to Thursday, drawing participants from around the world to discuss pressing water problems.
The emphasis was on regional co-operation, with a particular focus on the Middle East.
"The things that unite us are far more numerous than the things that divide us," World Water Forum Secretary-General Oktay Tabasaran said, highlighting common regional interests.
"Our country is not one that is rich in water resources," Turkish Minister of Forests and the Environment Veysel Eroğlu said during the forum.
"But nor is it poor." With proper regulation, he claimed, there is enough of the resource to satisfy domestic needs.
For Turkey, the crucial issue is management of the headwaters of the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers, along which a rapidly increasing number of dams and hydroelectric power plants are emerging.
Dams and irrigation projects have largely been constructed within the context of the Southeast Anatolia Project (GAP), which aims to harness the energy of Turkey's water resources and bolster the economy of southeast, one of the poorest regions in the country.
Advocates argue that GAP will provide more than a fix to energy and economic problems;
successful development of the southeast will, they say, also alleviate tensions with Turkey's Kurds through socio-economic development and integration.
Critics of GAP say the more Turkey utilises these rivers, the less water there is to flow to the downstream riparian states of Syria and Iraq.
The issue of downstream water flows has created an ebb and flow of political difficulties among the three states.
Chief of the League of Arab States' Centre for Water Studies and Arab Water Security Chakra Ksia, however, expressed optimism on the water flows between Turkey and Syria.
"That's why I'm here," Ksia said.
"We currently have very, very good relations.
Many protocols have been signed, and memorandums of understanding concerning co-operation regarding the Tigris have been produced."
Regarding a proposal to export dammed water from Turkey to Iraqi farmers in exchange for oil, UN Representative and NGO worker Imane Abd El Al was not optimistic.
"We're talking about Mesopotamia here." Importing water to the "cradle of civilisation", she argued, is absurd, as is the idea of treating water as a commodity rather than a right.
Gazikent University's Mehmet Karpuzcu countered that any benefits Turkey's dams provide for other countries should be paid for by those countries, and that while water may not be a commodity, infrastructure is.
Though politics dominated many of the discussions, water management was not presented as something limited to the political sphere alone.
President of the World Water Council Loic Fauchon underscored environmental and moral concerns, too.
"Even as we must share water equitably between man and states, we mustn't forget another obligation:
sharing water between man and nature."
