06/04/2011
Text and photos by Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 06/04/11
When roughly 300 Wahhabi Muslims gathered outside the parliament building in Sarajevo last month, demanding that detainees of Afro-Asian origin be released from the Lukavica Immigration Centre, the government was quick to respond.
"I absolutely support all forms of democratic protest. 
However, this protest was not based on objective facts, and it was aimed at deluding the public and constituted pure speculation," Director of the BiH Service for Foreigners' Affairs, Dragan Mektic, told SETimes.
Rally organisers say conditions at the immigration centre are "inhuman" and they question the transparency of procedures in the detention of at least five people at the centre. 
The five were detained because they are considered a threat to national security.
The rally, complete with banners, flags, and chants of "Tekbir, Allahu Ekber" [Allah is the greatest] attracted a fair amount of media coverage, including TV crews, as well as a solid police presence. 
Protesters demanded that the detainment of their fellow fighters be re-examined.
The main organiser was Nadja Dizdarevic, who became a public figure in 2001 when her husband at the time, Omar Boudel Hajj -- a member of the so-called "Algerian Six" -- was arrested in Sarajevo and transferred to Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.
Dizdarevic says those detained are being held without a shred of evidence. 
She says they have been declared a threat to national security, again without any evidence. 
"If those people are guilty, let us see what [this is] based on, and then we shall be the first to denounce them."
Mektic told SETimes that BiH's Service for Foreigners' Affairs "established its strategy and legal framework according to EU standards ... 
These are persons who are to be removed from BiH because they are illegally in BiH, or whose status we have not been able to determine."
"The decisions in terms of removal of such persons from BiH passed by the Aliens Service are reviewed by the Court of BiH and can also [on appeal] be reviewed by the Constitutional Court of BiH. 
None of the Service's decisions so far have been quashed by these second-instance institutions," Mektic added.
BiH Service for Foreigners' Affairs Deputy Director Izet Nehum flatly denied allegations of inhuman treatment at the immigration centre. 
He says the living conditions are at the same level as in European immigration centres.
"So far, we have hosted visits by 37 NGOs at our immigration centre, and nobody has stated anything negative. 
We have even been visited by the representatives of the Strasbourg Human Rights Court. 
It is hard to say who has not visited us, and nobody has given any negative opinions," Nehum told reporters.
Mektic notes the centre was funded by the EC and "designed in co-operation with Dutch immigration experts, drawing on the experiences of the Netherlands in terms of dealing with aliens. 
Thus, any claims during the Wahhabi protests in terms of violation of human rights at this institution are pure arbitrary speculation."
