05/01/2011
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 05/01/11
The new year has brought a big new challenge for BiH.
On January 1st, the country assumed the one-month, rotating presidency of the UN Security Council.
Most agree that taking up the post constitutes the country's greatest foreign policy achievement since independence and reflects its increased international standing.
But ongoing political unrest and the failure to form a government could derail the country's diplomatic agenda.
"We have been on the council for a year now and this is the culmination of our efforts," BiH UN Mission head Ivan Barbalic told Deutche Welle.
"We have been preparing for this task for several months now, and we believe that we will perform according to expectations.
I generally believe that we will do a god job and that January will pass without any major stress."
The country will be represented in an unusual way at Council sessions, however, reflecting its lack of state-level cohesion.
Normally states are represented by their top officials, but in BiH's case, the job will go to its permanent ambassador to the UN.
"This a negative political precedent made by BiH," outgoing foreign minister Sven Alkalaj said in a letter to members of the state presidency.
It will "certainly not remain unnoticed by the other UN Security Council members and the numerous other UN member states who have given us their trust and votes".
Various media have speculated that this break from normal practice is the reason why some top international officials, including EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton, have cancelled their attendance at this month's thematic session of the Security Council.
The attendance of some others, such as General-Secretary Ban Ki Moon, is pending.
During the month, the Council is expected to address major crises such as the potential partition of Sudan and escalating tension between the two Koreas, among other topics.
Institution and peace building will be the major topics raised at the thematic session, according to the BiH tripartite presidency.
