06/06/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 06/06/11
Kosovo Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj made his first official visit abroad to Croatia, saying the country is a long-standing ally and that Kosovo is looking to develop closer ties, mostly following the Croatian EU integration experience.
"In the past 20 years, Croatia advanced Kosovo's cause of freedom, before and after independence, at all stages. 
It's time to work on developing the best possible relationship with the government and the people of Croatia," Hoxhaj told SETimes.
Economic relations need a boost and the two governments recently signed a number of agreements aiming to encourage better ties between their business communities.
"Croatia and Kosovo have a political commitment to promote economic co-operation, but we noted the interest of Croatian businessmen to invest in Kosovo," Croatian Ambassador to Pristina Zoran Vodopija told SETimes.
As for the EU integration process, with a main focus on visa liberalisation, the Croatian government promised assistance to Kosovo. 
The two countries plan to draft a common agenda as a road map for Croatia's assistance.
"Croatia will serve as a model for Kosovo ... 
We will take their experiences to foster our integration proces. 
We'll develop a common agenda for co-operation opportunities between our governments on these issues," Hoxhaj said.
Croatian counterpart Gordan Jandrokovic confirmed "In the last few years we gained great experience in these two processes, for which we want to help Kosovo and make its EU path shorter and faster than ours."
He also said Croatian-Serbian relations can serve as a model for resolving practical problems in Kosovo's relations with Serbia.
As for Kosovo-Croatian ties, the roots are deep.
A small Croatian community has been living in Kosovo for centuries, centred mainly in the village of Janjevo. 
Before the 1990s the Croatians were the majority in the village, but the armed conflict sent many from Janjevo to Croatia.
Historically, Janjevo is called "the village with an entrance but no exit" because of its closed-valley location.
Janjevo's village priest and the head of the Janjevo Croatian community, Don Mate Palic, is pessimistic about the future of the Croats in Kosovo, especially the youth.
He says many left for Croatia or Germany and will never return, as the current economic situtation offers limited prospects.
"The economic conditions are bad; young people want to go abroad for a better future, and those who left in the past because of the war now will never come back,"says Palic, adding that "ethnic relations are not a problem for us, just creating jobs for the young is our challenge."
The government in Pristina announced that the Croatian community will be recognised as a minority in the Kosovo Constitution, a move that should also help foster closer relations between Zagreb and Pristina.
"Montenegrins and Croats will be added as minorities in the revised constitution [of Kosovo]," Deputy Prime Minister Slobodan Petrovic confirmed.
