05/01/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 05/01/11
Setting up a bureau for the Taliban in Istanbul remains "just an idea", Turkish officials say, although there is support for the possibility if it might help secure peace in Afghanistan.
"This is not on the official agenda yet;
there is no official proposal [from the Taliban] at all," an adviser to Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan told SETimes.
"We have never worked with the Taliban.
However, Turkey might be a good moderator in the region.
If we could do it, everyone could benefit from it," the adviser, Geybulla Ramazanoglu, said.
Taliban insurgents indicated last month that opening the office could foster a negotiated settlement.
Analysts say it would give the Taliban the political legitimacy it has demanded for years.
"If Turkey is kind enough to provide such a venue we, the government of Afghanistan, will be happy and pleased to see this facilitation take place," Afghan President Hamid Karzai said after a December 23rd meeting with Turkish counterpart Abdullah Gul, on the sidelines of the 11th Economic Co-operation Organisation Summit.
Later, though, during a joint news conference with Karzai, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davotoglu stressed that no concrete decision has been made.
Even if it remains only talk at this stage, the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) has already lambasted the prospect.
"We are against this.
Turkey should never co-operate with a terrorist organisation," said CHP Deputy Chairman Yilmaz Ates.
"We'll do everything to block the Taliban office's proposal."
Prominent Turkish political analyst Esedullah Oguz says there has been little public discussion.
"The media didn't address this topic at all.
People are unaware and not interested in that," Oguz told SETimes, adding that dozens of regional summits have taken place in Turkey with the aim of building trust between Afghanistan and Pakistan, with little success so far.
Turkey's "zero-problems" approach to regional crises is failing to hold public interest because it has not yet shown itself to be productive, Oguz said.
In theory, he said, a Taliban bureau is not the worst of ideas.
But the government seems unaware of the actual situation in Afghanistan, he added.
"Of course, there are close ties between politicians.
This week, a Turkish parliamentary delegation will visit Afghanistan.
But, in fact they are way too far from reality," the analyst said.
Richard Weitz, a senior fellow and director of the Centre for Political-Military Analysis at the Washington-based Hudson Institute, said that Turkey is eager to mediate disputes between neighbouring countries.
Earlier it focused on resolving differences between Israel and Syria;
more recently it has encouraged dialogue between Iran and the international community.
"Turkey is well-placed to host any talks between the Karzai government and the Taliban.
That said, like the other dialogues, these negotiations will prove difficult, though even if they fail Turkey will gain approval for trying to end the war," he told SETimes.
