16/03/2005
(Various sources – 09/03/05 – 16/03/05)
A bilingual Romanian-Portuguese collection of poems by Mihai Eminescu, one of Romania's greatest poets, was published in Lisbon, Portugal on 13 March by the Evoramons printing house.
It includes 25 selected poems.
An exhibition presenting Poland's tradition in graphic arts opened at the Museum of Modern Art in Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), on 14 March.
The exhibition features pictures and posters by 28 Polish artists and designers and is being staged with the support of the Polish Embassy in BiH.
Croatia's Janica Kostelic finished second after Sweden's Anja Paerson in the women's overall World Cup contest during the final giant slalom in Lenzerheide, Switzerland on 13 March.
Kostelic, 23, lost the title by only three points, following a year of rehabilitation from injuries and illness.
One of Greece's most prominent composers, Stavros Kouyioumtzis, passed away on 12 March at the age of 73.
He died of a heart attack in his hometown of Thessaloniki.
Kouyioumtzis became popular in the 1960s and had written songs for Greece's best-known performers ever since.
An exhibition by the prominent Romanian artist Ioan Nemtoi, titled "Madrid 11.03" and dedicated to the victims of the terror attacks in Madrid, opened at the Nemtoi Gallery in Bucharest.
The glass works exhibition also commemorates the 16 Romanians who lost their lives in the Madrid Atocha station.
Bulgarian Culture and Tourism Minister Nina Chilova and her Greek and Turkish counterparts, Dimitris Avramopoulos and Atilla Koc respectively, met last week to discuss the idea of creating a Sofia-Istanbul-Athens "golden triangle" for culture and tourism.
According to Chilova, a pilot project called "Rhodopi Mountains -- Home of Orpheus" is already being discussed by Bulgarian and Greek tour operators.
A folk song festival took place in the Albanian town of Elbasan last weekend.
The event, co-organised by the Albanian Culture Ministry and the Elbasan Municipality, showcased 11 folklore groups from around the country.
Greece has picked a site for a Formula 1 track.
Tourism Minister Dimitris Avramopoulos announced last week that the facility would be located at Viotia, 100km north of Athens.
Turkey, meanwhile, is completing its own F-1 project and is due to host a Grand Prix in August.
Macedonian author Olivera Nikolova's book "Kuklite na Rosica" ("Rositsa's Dolls") won the Novel of the Year award issued by the newspaper <I>Utrinski Vesnik</I>.
Her work, set in the turbulent years of the 19th century, was selected from among 37 other novels.
\***
Turkish contestants won 12 medals -- four gold, four silver and four bronze -- at the 15th European Junior Taekwondo Championships, which ended in Baku, Azerbaijan, on 14 March.
Turkey also finished second in the women's standings.
