06/06/2011
By Ozgur Ogret for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 06/06/11
Internationally renowned Turkish singer Ibrahim Tatlises returned to Istanbul on June 1st after undergoing weeks of treatment in Germany for a gunshot wound to the head in an assassination attempt in March.
Now, however, he faces legal problems for alleged ties to the criminal underworld in Turkey
Commenting on Tatlises' condition, Professor Tunc Alp Kalyon, head of the institute in Istanbul where the singer is continuing treatment, said Tatlises' morale and response to treatment are positive.
"The overall condition of our patient is extremely well.
We can say it is better than we had expected."
Rumours spread shortly after Tatlises was shot in Istanbul on March 14th that he may never walk or sing again.
He suffered paralysis on the left side of the body and spent 58 days at a clinic in Germany.
Although the singer's health condition is improving, his legal situation remains in question.
Turkey's Supreme Court of Appeals revoked a court decision that deferred a prison sentence of 13 months and 15 days Tatlises received for "aiding a [criminal] organisation knowingly and willingly."
Under the original decision of the Istanbul Court, the singer was found guilty, but received a deferred sentence under the condition he did not repeat the crime in the next five years.
However, when the case went to appeal, the Supeme Court of Appeals decided the sentence should not be deferred.
Now, the related Istanbul Court will inspect the case dossier once more and come to yet another decision.
Addressing journalists on June 3rd, Tatlises' lawyer Ahmet Kucuk expressed no worries regarding the singer's legal situation, saying claims that he would face prison time are unfounded.
"The revoking decision of the Supreme Court of Appeals is in favour of my client."
According to Kucuk, if the court postpones the sentence again the case would be closed and the offence would not remain on Tatlises' record.
Evaluating the situation for SETimes, lawyer Ilkhan Mehmet Elcin agreed with Kucuk's assessment, but also mentioned another possibility.
"The Supreme Court of Appeals may think the conditions for postponing the sentence may not have actualised for Tatlıses," he said, explaining the offender must show remorse in order to have a deferred sentence.
This, he said, is something the Supreme Court may not have been convinced of, in which case Tatlises would not get off free.
Meanwhile, the investigation into the assassination attempt against Tatlises continues.
The singer will testify as soon as his doctors find him fit.
Tatlises' fans and critics have mixed feelings about the whirlwind series of events and the popstar's alledged ties to organised crime.
Speaking to SETimes, writer and Turkish popular music expert Naim Dilmener commented that this is not the first time Tatlises' name has been mentioned with organised crime, but that does not create a negative reaction from his fans.
"In countries like ours, such connections -- even though they have nothing to do with being a man -- are seen as primary factors of being strong and powerful."
Likewise, university student and Tatlises fan Fatos Yildiz, 24, believes Tatlises has actual underworld connections, but she does not find it important.
"He has so many businesses and he lives in a country like Turkey.
He must have connections to those kinds of gangs but these do not concern me;
I am interested in his songs," she said.
