06/04/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 06/04/11
A recent decision by the Serbian parliament will allow soldiers and police officers to participate in peacekeeping missions organised by the EU. 
Until now they have taken part only in UN-led operations.
The ability to join operations headed by the UN, EU and international security forces is "an important element of Serbia's policy, which contributes to Serbia being treated, in relations with the EU and Partnership for Peace member states, as an equal partner in preserving world peace and stability," Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac said.
Sutanovac also said Serbia would soon sign a deal with the EU on being part of peacekeeping missions.
Not everyone, however, welcomes the move. 
Opposition parties say that it represents a break from the country's stated policy of military neutrality.
Serbia should only become involved in UN operations, the Democratic Party of Serbia and the Serbian Radical Party insist.
According to them, by taking part in EU missions Serbia would in fact "secretly" participate in NATO activities and could even find itself part of EULEX.
But Sutanovac dismissed those claims, noting that Serbia would be able to choose which operations it will be involved in.
Security in today's world cannot be achieved only through the protection of borders of one's own state, State Secretary of the Defence Ministry Tanja Miscevic said.
"When it comes to new global security challenges, such as organised crime, terrorists, climate change or environmental disasters, it is too late to deal with them when they come to your region or territory. 
That is where the importance of involvement in EU missions lies," Miscevic added.
Belgrade analysts think that Serbia's participation in peacekeeping missions is useful for its reputation.
"The priority of Serbia's foreign policy is EU membership. 
We cannot join the EU by following our own rules, which is why we have to contribute to collective security," military analyst Aleksandar Radic told SETimes.
The foreign policy benefits are worth the money Serbia will have to spend on participation in peacekeeping missions, he said.
Vojkan Kostic, a journalist specialising in reports on the Serbian Armed Forces, agreed there are numerous advantages.
"By participating in such missions, Serbia will prove that, after years of clashes in the Balkans, it is no longer a country that needs help in preserving peace, but rather a country capable of contributing to establishing global peace," Kostic told SETimes.
Participation, he said, carries the risk that Serbian soldiers may be killed. 
"That, however, is a risk that is closely linked with the profession of soldier and which can be reduced to a minimum if Serbia maintains its determination not to be part of peace-imposing missions, rather only of peacekeeping ones," he said.
Serbian soldiers and police officers will take part in the EU operations in Uganda and Somalia this year, and participate in UN missions in Congo, Liberia, Haiti, Ivory Coast, Lebanon, Cyprus, and the Middle East.
Peacekeeping missions worldwide will involve up to 265 soldiers and 11 police officers. 
Participation is strictly voluntary and only professional soldiers can apply.
