04/01/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 04/01/11
Croatia's leadership has indicated that 2011 is a decisive year for the country to meet its EU accession goal.
With only seven negotiation chapters still open, authorities hope to finish most of remaining work by July.
"We will continue to do our job well.
There are two major goals we need to fulfill -- finish the EU negotiation process and recover our economy," Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor said during her New Years' address.
Kosor said that to achieve the two goals -- and to fight pervasive corruption -- Croatia needs a basic political consensus.
Likening EU membership to a return to "our ancient home where we belong", she called on all parliamentary parties to join in the effort.
After Croatia closes the remaining chapters, the EU ratification process will then last up to 18 months.
Authorities hope the country will become the Union's 28th member in 2013.
But how smooth will the home stretch be?
Some worry that Croatia may face complexities in the final phases of the negotiations process if it is unable to show it is mounting a strong fight against corruption.
A recent editorial in the Financial Times argued that Croatia should not be admitted into the EU until it has tackled the issue.
According to the paper, such concerns must be addressed during the negotiations phase because the EU has more power over its members before they join.
At present, over 40 high-level Croatian officials have been investigated and charged, while former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader has been detained in Austria during a probe into alleged shady dealings.
His property and assets have been blocked, and his expensive art collection has been confiscated by state prosecutors.
"I'm sure that at the end of the day it will be a success story for Croatia, for the EU and also for Southeast Europe.
Sanader's case has shown that the rule of law in Croatia is unquestioned, that the institutions are functioning and the principles of the EU are embedded in our state and society," Foreign Affairs Minister Gordan Jandrokovic said.
But there is frustration too.
"I think the EU should not ask us to do the impossible.
Don't they know that we already have Remetinec prison full of people who are charged with corruption, including ministers, too?
I don't think that all the other EU members had to show the same efforts as we did ...
Just look at Italy," Zagreb pensioner Mirko Tadic told SETimes.
He added that the level of compliance with all the EU requirements actually makes euro-scepticism rise.
And he is not alone.
"We belong to Europe.
These changes we need to do are for our benefit, but some of them are painful.
But it is deeply wrong to think that Croatia is a corrupt country and that the people here are rotten," Zagreb resident Ante Zeljic said.
