06/06/2011
(Various sources -- 03/06/11 - 06/06/11)
Tens of thousands of protesters gathered in front of parliament Sunday (June 5th) night to vent their anger at the Socialist government over its plans for additional austerity measures in order to secure more cash and prevent the country from defaulting on its debt.
This largest in a series of 12 days of peaceful demonstrations reportedly attracted about 80,000 people who filled Syntagma Square in Athens, urging the ruling PASOK party to abandon the new programme, due to be submitted to parliament this week. 
Some of the signs protesters carried, according to the daily Kathimerini, read "Take back your measures" and "Greece is not for sale".
A medium-term programme Prime Minister George Papandreou was due to discuss with his cabinet on Monday (June 6th), reportedly envisions higher property taxes, fewer tax exemptions and a significant reduction of government jobs.
Citing unnamed sources from the country's finance ministry, Greek news agency ANA-MPA reported on Saturday that the measures also envisioned doubling the current 6.5% VAT rate for items such as pharmaceuticals, books, newspapers and other periodicals to 13%. 
The annual vehicle registration taxes, as well as those levied on boats and luxury cars, would likely also be raised.
Papandreou, who is planning to submit the programme to parliament on Wednesday, will have to ensure his party's full support for it first. 
Sixteen PASOK lawmakers urged the prime minister in a letter last week to put that step on hold to allow for a thorough debate on the proposed measures before they are put to a vote.
With the country on the brink of default, Papandreou's government signed a deal on a three-year 110 billion-euro aid package with the EU and the IMF in May last year. 
In return, it agreed to carry out sweeping austerity measures to cut public spending and boost the ailing economy's competitiveness.
Over the past 12 months, the IMF, the European Commission (EC) and the European Central Bank (ECB) have been carefully monitoring Greece's progress in implementing the envisioned reforms. 
After completing their latest review, officials of the three institutions said last week that the country would get the next tranche of aid from the rescue package, "most likely, in early July".
In a joint statement issued on Friday, the troika also noted that an agreement had been reached with Greek authorities on new economic and financial measures needed to meet the objectives of the bailout deal.
"Overall, significant progress, in particular in the area of fiscal consolidation, has been achieved during the first year of the adjustment programme," the joint press release read. 
"However, reinvigoration of fiscal and broader structural reforms is necessary to further reduce the deficit and achieve the critical mass of reforms needed to improve the business climate and pave the way for sustainable economic recovery."
Greece's sovereign debt, which stood at over 215 billion euros in May last year, reached nearly 330 billion euros at the end of 2010.
