04/01/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 04/01/11
It was a campaign promise heard around the world, or at least as far as IMF headquarters in Washington.
In the run-up to the December 12th snap elections, candidate Hashim Thaci, the outgoing prime minister, vowed to give 50% raises to teachers in primary and secondary schools. 
Civil servants in the public sector could expect 30% raises. 
Retirees could look forward to increased pensions in the year ahead, he also promised.
It was music to the ears of voters, who gave Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) the win, though not by a wide enough margin to govern without a coalition.
That same string of promises rang alarm bells at the IMF, where officials are opposed to wage hikes.
They pointed to an agreement between the Fund and the Kosovo government on the financial framework covering next year, signed by Economy and Finance Minister Ahmet Shala and former Central Bank Governor Hashim Rexhepi, specifying that expenses for salaries during 2011 must not exceed 7.4% of Kosovo's GDP. 
This agreement allowed Kosovo to persuade the IMF to provide a soft loan of 110m euros. 
That, in turn, ensured another 300m in assistance from the EU and World Bank.
Thaci insists the increases were planned by the current government, well before the need for snap elections arose. 
On December 23rd, he ordered the ministry of economy and finance to review the 2011 budget and include the salary hikes.
He has said the teachers can expect their raises in January, something other politicians dismiss as a campaign promise he cannot keep.
But in the beginning of December, he signed a memorandum of understanding with the Civil Servants Union of Kosovo, including that 30%, meals and transportation -- which went into effect on Saturday (January 1st). 
Murzel Zymberaj, head of Civil Servants Union of Kosovo, said the offer "makes us believe that the prime minister will have continuity in care of the civil servants".
The head of the United Syndicate of Education, Sciences and Culture, Ali Shabani, is looking for more. 
"We need to continue talks in order that also other categories to be included in this proposal," and not just teachers, he said.
During the year, Kosovo spends around 300m euros for salaries. 
Thaci's promises raise that figure to around 400m euros, well over that 7.4% allowed by the IMF for salaries in the public sector.
"We are extremely alarmed by recent news that the IMF is reviewing the financial agreement with Kosovo" as a result of Thaci's campaign promises, Shpend Ahmeti, the leader of New Spirit Party-FER, told SETimes.
"Such promises threaten the credibility of Kosovo and its financial stability," he said.
Alban Zogaj, an expert in economics and a candidate of the Kosovo New Alliance-(AKR), notes that in Kosovo, the inflation rate is lower than the rate of wage growth in the public sector.
However, Zogaj stressed, that when considering the high inflation, real wage growth had no effect in Kosovo. 
According to him, real growth will be seen when living standards improve.
Haxhi Arif, chairman of the Independent Trade Unions of Kosovo, says prices are up, but not living standards.
"We have seen an increase of prices and this will be a problem for the families here, the majority of whom live with low wages," he said.
