06/06/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 06/06/11
Energy ministers of six European countries and the EU's Energy Commissioner are expected to gather in Turkey on Wednesday (June 8th) to sign a support agreement for the Nabucco pipeline project, intended to bring gas from Asia to Europe and reduce energy dependence on Russia.
Energy Minister Taner Yildiz, who is also a key candidate for the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) in the upcoming elections, will host the ceremony in his central Anatolian hometown, Kayseri.
Ankara wants to hammer out the support agreement ahead of the June 12th election.
Many AKP leaders believe delays in Nabucco could spur Russia to speed up contracts and partners for its rival South Stream pipeline.
"Turkey wants to become a key country of its region and we are ready for any effort to realise this project," said Mahmut Mucahit Findikli, AKP MP and vice-chairman of parliament's Committee on Energy, adding that Nabucco is of great importance to Ankara and its European partners.
"If the Kayseri meeting is successful, everyone will benefit from it," he told SETimes.
"Being the best option for transiting Iraqi and Caucasian oil and gas, Turkey can bring all the countries to the conclusion that it will be profitable for everyone," Findikli added.
But some energy analysts and politicians are not that optimistic.
Tacidar Seyhan, a member of the same parliamentary committee from the Republican People's Party (CHP), says Nabucco is a "dead project" for Turkey and that "Ankara has no use for it."
"Our role in this partial project is limited to transferring gas;
we don't even get access to it," he told SETimes.
The AKP is simply using Nabucco "for the election campaign", he added.
Mete Goknel, former director of Turkey's state-owned pipeline company, BOTAS, raises other concerns.
"The EU's plans to start construction on the pipeline have been delayed for another year, until 2013, because the consortium has no gas supply contracts lined up." he told SETimes.
Under such conditions, he said, it is not clear why the EU ministers have been invited to Kayseri.
"I have never heard of a support agreement in any international pipeline project," he said.
Goknel said he wonders why the meeting is being held in Kayseri instead of the capital, Ankara, "or at least Istanbul".
"It is also still not clear yet under what circumstances the potential gas suppliers -- Azerbaijan or Iraq -- will participate in the project," he added.
According to Findikli, however, the meeting will send an important message.
Its goal, he said, is to show the whole world that Nabucco has political support and that the project will be realised sooner or later.
Once complete, Nabucco will carry an estimated 31 billion cubic metres of natural gas a year from the Middle East and the Caspian Basin to Europe through Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary, to a hub just outside Vienna.
