06/06/2011
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 06/06/11
General elections in Macedonia on Sunday (June 5th) resulted in a decisive victory for the ruling party, VMRO-DPMNE, though it lost its absolute majority in parliament. 
Meanwhile, the leftist coalition led by the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) more than doubled its number of seats.
"Macedonia chose reforms and recognised the change which began in 2006," Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said in his victory speech. 
"In the next period we will work on attracting investments and creating jobs, on EU and NATO membership with our dignity intact, the fight against corruption, maintaining good multi-ethnic relations and supporting education, which is key to the future."
While conceding defeat for the fifth time in a row, the SDSM appeared energised by its stronger showing at the polls. 
"You saw what we have done with 18 lawmakers, and you can imagine what we could do now with more than 40," said party leader Branko Crvenkovski.
Going into the election, the VMRO-DPMNE had 63 seats in the 120-seat parliament. 
It will now have 56. 
The left-wing coalition, meanwhile, will increase its representation from 18 to 42 seats.
Losing out this time around were the smaller right-wing parties VMRO-NP, United for Macedonia, Democratic Right as well as the opposition Liberal Democratic Party. 
Despite considerable fanfare going into the election, they did not win enough votes to enter parliament.
"They experienced a debacle because they did not satisfy voters' expectations and are swept away from the political scene," analyst Slobodan Casule told SETimes. 
"VMRO-DPMNE remains the only authentic conservative party, which transformed in time and accumulated the voters on the right."
With the Macedonian diaspora allowed to vote for the first time, VMRO-DPMNE won all three seats representing Macedonians in the Americas; Europe and Africa; and Asia and Australia.
As predicted, Sunday's vote brought no major shakeup among the Albanian bloc of parties. 
The Democratic Party for Integration (DUI), a member of the ruling coalition, garnered 14 seats, while the opposition Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) and the National Democratic Revival -- led by Gostivar Mayor Rufi Osmani -- won eight and three respectively. 
The main surprise was that Imer Selmani's New Democracy party did not win a single seat.
State Election Commission officials said these were the best organised elections since Macedonia declared independence from Yugoslavia two decades ago. 
Many commentators agreed.
"The election took place in a democratic atmosphere and were free and fair," Macedonia's leading political analyst Dimitar Mircev told SETimes. 
"That represents an important step in Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic integration. 
Voter turnout was also high -- around 63%."
Many see the name issue with Greece as the most pressing issue on the government's agenda over the next few months. 
In a major turnaround during the campaign, the SDSM joined the ruling parties in supporting a referendum on the issue.
"In my view, the political elites have reached a consensus about the name issue now that the opposition accepted that citizens have a final say through a referendum. 
I expect that the Albanian parties will accept the referendum as well," analyst Mircev told SETimes. 
"In August, there may be an intensification of talks with Greece and we expect a repeat positive European Commission recommendation for beginning EU negotiations. 
In autumn, we expect The Hague court's ruling on Macedonia's suit against Greece, so by year's end there will be conditions to affect the significant priorities of Macedonia's foreign policy."
Skopje resident Vladimir Petrov, 38, told SETimes that the elections brought a "sense of democratic maturity".
"The new government must now make efforts to achieve Macedonia's main goal, NATO and EU accession, though not at any price, given that preservation of our Macedonian identity is paramount," he said.
