18/05/2005
(Various sources – 11/05/05 – 18/05/05)
The 4th Convention of Christian and Muslim Theologists was held in Sarajevo from 16 May to18 May.
Titled "Muslims and Christians for the Common Wealth", the event was held under the auspices of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Catholic, Orthodox and Islamic religious communities.
The first wine ever made in the Mediterranean region was probably produced in Cyprus -- up to 6,000 years ago, Italian archaeologist Maria-Rosaria Belgiorno said in Nicosia on 13 May.
She was announcing the results of excavation work near the southern coastal town of Limassol.
Dinamo Bucharest won this year's Romanian Soccer Cup, after defeating Farul Constanta 1-0 on 12 May.
At a news conference, the coach of the team Ioan Andone said the victory was due to luck and months of hard work.
A collective exhibition of Albanian impressionist and expressionist art is on display at Tirana's DIDART Gallery.
The exhibition features five prominent Albanian painters -- Adrian Cene, Ksenofon Dilo, Shkelqim Kokonozi, Siro Muhedini and Vilson Kilica.
The third edition of the International Dubrovnik Film Festival will be held from 25 May to 29 May.
Over 50 movies from Croatia and abroad will compete this year.
Romania's Alina Eremia won the 12th Banja Luka 2005 Children's Song Festival, which closed on 13 May.
The event, organised by Radio-Television Republika Srpska, drew 18 participants from Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Malta, Romania and Serbia-Montenegro.
Kosovo artist Ismet Jonuzi's exhibition "Peace" opened at the Chifte Amam museum in Skopje on 17 May.
On display are over 100 pieces of art -- sculptures, paintings, graphic art and pictures – which Jonuzi has created over the past 10 years.
An exhibition titled "Archaeological Park Medijana -- Possibilities for Reconstruction and Promotion" opened at the Serbian Academy of Art and Science in Belgrade.
It presents projects for conservation, rebuilding and promotion of the prehistoric site.
