04/01/2011
By Justin Vela for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 04/01/11
Speaking to SETimes at a cemevi or Alevi community centre that he runs in Istanbul's Kagithane district, Alevi dede (priest) Zeynal Sahan said, "The way the Sunnis interpret the Koran is structural. 
The way we interpret it is deeper."
Claiming to follow the form of Islam practiced by members of the Prophet Mohammed's household before others "abducted" the religion, Sahan said Alevis faced violent discrimination under the Ottoman Empire that continued after the founding the of the Turkish Republic.
The Alevi form of Islam teaches equality between the sexes, allows for alcohol consumption, and claims that God is within everyone.
In December, relatives of Alevis and leftists who perished during a horrific 1978 incident in the city of Maras gathered to mark the anniversary of their deaths. 
According to official data, at least 111 people were killed in a massacre perpetrated by Sunni Muslims and far right extremists. 
Alevis say the actual number was much higher.
The commemoration was met by 500 Turkish nationalist protesters who chanted, "There is no exit from Maras," and began marching towards the Alevis before being dispersed by police with pepper spray, according to local media.
"Alevis in Turkey have been discriminated against because of the racist and sectarian founding ideology of the Turkish Republic," said Fermani Altun, president of the Alevi Dunya Ehli-Beyt foundation. 
"All of the institutions have been based upon Sunni sectarianism, including education [and] politics."
Alevis are estimated to number between 15 and 20 million in Turkey, out of a total population of about 75 million. 
Today, Alevis are more concerned about gaining a fair level of recognition from the Turkish government than violence from the rest of the population.
However, the plethora of different Alevi groups do not agree on the correct way to go about this.
Some groups demand that the government recognise Alevis as an official minority group. 
Others say that the government simply must recognise Alevism as a religion and give it adequate focus in state mandated religion classes.
"There are passing references to other religions [in religious textbooks], but not to ours," said Sahan. 
"If you look at the number of people that are Alevis in Turkey, then the books should perhaps be one-third about Alevis."
Altun believes that more is necessary. 
"The Alevis' situation in Turkey now is even worse than the minorities," he said. 
"Minorities are second class citizens, but Alevis are third class."
He said that recognised minorities in Turkey have the guarantees of international support, their own schools, and the ability to establish their own places of worship. 
While Alevi organisations maintain unofficial prayer rooms in cemevis and even private homes, they are not allowed to have their own formal places of worship.
"[Alevis] being classified as minorities would be a chance for all of us," Altun said.
Both Altun and Sahan were dismissive of efforts made by Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) to deal with Alevi concerns. 
Sahan said that AKP's so-called "Alevi opening", which was launched in 2007 along with a series of other initiatives meant to further the country's democratisation process, had not solved the problems of Alevis.
Rather, they say, it was an unsubstantial attempt to further Turkey's EU accession.
"The problems could but solved in parliament in an hour, but they aren't," he said.
Sibel, 19, a non-practicing Alevi student, said she was not comfortable telling people she is Alevi, even though she had never experienced any discrimination.
"I am conscious of the discrimination done in the past," she said. 
"Even though I don't know the details. 
Our grandfathers were discriminated against. 
It is a subconscious thing [for me]."
Of more concern to her was the future of the Alevi culture in Turkey.
"I know the story of Sunni Islam. 
I don't know much about my culture. 
That needs to be changed."
