04/01/2011
Euobserver, EurActiv, ACT Media, Sofia Oggi - 04/01/11;
AFP, Sofia News Agency, Focus News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool - 03/01/11)
Insisting that it has met the technical requirements for joining Europe's Schengen area, Romania made clear on Monday (January 3rd) that it will keep fighting attempts to delay its accession.
Romania and Bulgaria were originally due to enter the 25-nation border-free zone in March 2011.
But, about ten days ago, the interior ministers of France and Germany, Brice Hortefeux and Thomas de Maiziere, sent a letter to the European Commission (EC) saying such a move would be "premature" in light of the lack of progress in judicial reform and the fight against corruption and organised crime.
Upon their EU entry in January 2007, the EC imposed the so-called Co-operation and Verification Mechanism (CVM) on Romania and Bulgaria to measure their progress in meeting commitments in those areas.
Hortefeux and de Maiziere insisted that the findings in the next progress report under the CVM, which is expected in July, should be taken into consideration when deciding on Romania and Bulgaria's Schengen bids.
The EC has said, however, that the CVM is not linked to the process of expansion of the EU passport-free travel area.
Romanian Foreign Minister Teodor Baconschi called for a fair assessment of his country's bid in an interview published on Monday, in which he also urged Paris and Berlin to reconsider.
"It would be unfair to accept that two states, no matter which, could set a precedent by changing the rules of the game," he told the Romanian daily Adevarul.
Baconschi said that the CVM, which has never been imposed on any other EU nation before, "is becoming a handicap ...
or a pretext for pressuring the two countries in other fields," the AFP quoted him as telling Adevarul.
"We'll have to decide whether it is worthwhile going ahead with this mechanism or whether we should denounce it unilaterally."
Baconschi also issued a thinly-masked threat that Romania could insist on the introduction of the CVM for Croatia, which is expected to complete its EU membership talks by the end of June, as a result of the current row over its Schengen bid.
"Let's look at Croatia.
We support the EU's enlargement to the Western Balkans.
But we cannot accept this accession taking place without the CVM in a situation where the CVM applies to us," he said.
