05/05/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 05/05/11
According to President Bamir Topi, Sunday's elections has should mark the consolidation of a new phase of democratic stability.
However, the month-long campaign has been marred by violence and mudslinging between the country's two largest parties -- Prime Minister Sali Berisha's Democratic Party (DP) and the opposition Socialist Party (SP) led by Edi Rama.
The two have held the country in political deadlock since the June 2009 elections, which were contested by the SP.
"May 8th is very important for the country and Albanians should understand the importance of these elections," OSCE Ambassador Eugen Wollfarth said on April 27th.
Berisha called on institutions involved in the electoral process to observe and rigorously apply the electoral law.
He has been promising supporters economic development and implementation of reforms that would lead the country towards integration with Europe.
The DP has based its campaign on promises to implement "all projects" at the local level, with the support of the central government.
Rama has been telling supporters that his coalition is not based on ideology and it unifies Albanians beyond left and right, beyond party lines.
"For 50 years Albanians experienced the consequences of the promise of earthly paradise in their backs, and nowadays they experience, on a daily basis, that the economic paradise that Sali promises, by promising happiness, is followed by economical hell," Rama told supporters.
The SP has constantly complained about the voter lists and decisions by the Central Election Commission, taken by majority vote without opposition votes.
The SP has also sued the managers of the Civil Registry Office and three local municipal leaders for abuse of duty, falsifying documents and election results, and violating the right to vote, all related to the voters list.
"Not only are the incidents an issue of concern, but also of concern to the people is pressure upon the state administration for the voters list, contrary to the legal decisions of the Central Election Commission and confirmed as such by the Electoral College as well," SP deputy Armando Subashi told SETimes.
The Socialist MP adds that these are signals that the elections will not take place in accordance with standards.
The biggest battle is in Tirana, where Rama is competing for a fourth mandate against Lulzim Basha, the DP candidate and former interior minister.
DP member Aldo Bumci told SETimes that Basha has led a civil campaign.
"Basha did not deal with accusations, but [rather] with the problems of the citizens, which is different from Rama who declared the elections as political.
Basha pulled Rama into a civic campaign."
Bumci also underscored the will of the majority for free and fair elections.
