04/05/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 04/05/11
The first group of refugees fleeing the violence of the Syrian uprising appeared at the Turkish border late last week, sparking concern of mass refugee flows.
Ankara has already set up a camp in southern Hatay province for approximately 300 Syrians.
But some, including Hikmet Cetin, former foreign affairs minister and parliament speaker, fear there is a very real chance of a mass exodus in the near future, which could destabilise both Turkey and Syria, countries that have only recently cobbled together ties.
"It seems like our government prefers its own friendship with Bashar al-Assad's regime, instead of taking the people's side," he told SETimes, adding that neither Syria, nor the Middle East as a whole, "will ever be the same again".
"We should openly explain to the Assad regime that one cannot solve problems with people by using force," he said, urging Ankara to consider its national interests first.
On the diplomatic front, Turkey sent envoys to Damascus last week while the National Security Council met for a "refugee summit" on Friday (April 29th) and urged "friendly Syria" to halt the violence.
Gokhan Durgun, the main opposition Republican People's Party MP from Hatay, assumes dialogue with Syria is not working, as Assad is ignoring everyone.
He worries the uprising has already damaged the border regions.
"We've started feeling its influence on the economy," Durgun told SETimes, noting that many of his friends from Hatay, who invested in Syria after the visa regime was eased, have now lost their money.
"Instead of seeing Syrian tourists here this season, we have received refugees," he says.
Durgun suggests the governing Justice and Development Party (AKP) take the initiative and mediate dialogue between the Assad regime and the people, instead of offering just "friendly advising".
Abdulhadi Kahya, AKP MP from Hatay, predicts relatively little impact in the region from the Syrian uprising.
"Turkey's, and especially Hatay's heart beats with Syria," he says, adding they want "logical reforms there, not violence"… and "our politicians in Ankara are aiming for that goal."
As for refugees, "Of course, we will treat them with a humanitarian perspective," Geybulla Ramazanoglu, an adviser to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, tells SETimes.
Osman Bahadır Dincer, a Syria analyst at the Ankara-based International Strategic Research Organisation (USAK), says the fact that refugees have fled to Turkey has only accelerated Ankara's diplomatic activity.
"The government understands its role in Syria, but this is a test for Turkey," he told SETimes, adding that if Ankara fails in its dialogue with Assad, it will lose the whole Arab world.
"Unlike Egypt and others, in Syria there is no power that will rule the country in the interim period.
Therefore, it is Ankara's duty to persuade Assad that there is a way out for him."
If this doesn't work, Dincer warns, the flood of Syrian refugees -- including Kurds -- could trigger larger ethnic problems in Turkey.
