05/04/2011
(Telegraph, CNN, Zaman - 05/04/11;
RFE/RL, VOA, Washington Post, Hurriyet, Telegraph, The Globe and Mail, Times of Malta, BBC, Al Jazeera, Xinhua, Trend News Agency - 04/04/11;
ANA-MPA, CBS, New York Times - 03/04/11)
Libya has been pushing this week for a solution to its ongoing crisis, but on its terms.
A government spokesman said on Monday (April 4th) that the Tripoli regime is willing to discuss political reforms that could include "elections, referenda, anything".
But the process of change should be led by Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, Moussa Ibrahim noted, describing the Libyan leader as a "unifying figure" and ruling out any negotiations on the ruler's future.
"The leader provides Libyan tribes, Libyan population, a unifying figure.
We think he is very important to lead any transition towards more democracy, [a more] transparent system, better anti-corruption laws, more freedom for press," the spokesman said.
"Many Libyans want him to lead the process forward because they are scared if he is not there for any reason we will have what happened in Iraq, we will have what happened in Somalia, we will have what happened in Afghanistan."
Ibrahim's statement came less than 24 hours after Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Abdulati Obeidi embarked on a diplomatic mission to Europe to discuss ways to end the fighting in the country.
Following talks with Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou late Sunday in Greece, the Libyan diplomat visited Turkey and Malta the following day.
"According to what the Libyan envoy said, the regime seems to be looking for a solution," Greek Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas said in a statement following Obeidi's meeting with Papandreou.
There were no official statements on Obeidi's talks with Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu in Ankara and then with Maltese Prime Minister Lawrence Gonzi in Valetta on Monday.
Istanbul-based daily Zaman quoted Turkish officials only rejecting speculation that Obeidi had brought a message from Gaddafi on his possible exile.
Meanwhile, there have been reports suggesting a possible rift within the ruler's family over a proposal for a solution, under which Gaddafi would withdraw and pass his power to his second-oldest son, Saif al-Islam, 38.
That plan is reportedly supported also by one of Saif's brothers, Saadi Gaddafi, but is opposed by two others -- Mutassim Gaddafi, who serves as national security adviser, and Khamis Gaddafi, the commander of an elite militia force.
A CNN report on Tuesday quoted Ali Aujali, a former Libyan ambassador to the United States who now represents the Libyan opposition in Washington, as describing that offer as "ridiculous".
The Libyan people don't want Gaddafi or any other member of his family to rule the country, he said.
On Monday, meanwhile, NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen met with senior Turkish officials in Ankara.
He held a closed-door meeting with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and Defence Minister Vecdi Gonul.
Afterwards, the NATO official had a separate discussion with Davutoglu.
"We attach great importance to the continuation of NATO's effective efforts … to guarantee the security of the Libyan people, normalisation of the situation in Libya and an end to attacks against civilians," Davutoglu said after the meeting, which focused on efforts to deal with the ongoing situation and Turkey's humanitarian aid initiatives there.
