04/11/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 04/11/10
The significance of upcoming first round local and regional elections in Greece on Sunday (November 7th) skyrocketed late last month following Prime Minister George Papandreou's indication that a poor showing of candidates supported by his ruling PASOK party could trigger snap elections.
Speaking a little more than a year since his Socialist party swept to power in place of the centre-right government of Costas Karamanlis, Papandreou announced on October 25th that he wasn't interested in holding an early poll.
"If the result of local elections is added to certain other parameters, and the sum leads to an impasse, and since there are no impasses in democracy, then the sovereign people must speak," the prime minister said.
Subsequent statements by cabinet ministers and government spokesmen removed any misunderstanding about the spectre of snap elections. 
In a cascade of press coverage and party rallies that followed, Papandreou explained that a poor showing would be interpreted as an "anti-memorandum" vote of protest, a reference to the 110-billion-euro bailout signed by the Greek government with the EU-ECB-IMF "troika" in May.
As such, he said Greece's "course to recovery" would be endangered, while weakening his government's resolve to push through sweeping reforms in public administration, the social security sector and the wider economy.
"It would not be prudent to believe this is a bluff, because it is not," was the response this week by Deputy Culture Minister Telemachos Hytiris, a veteran PASOK cadre and Papandreou insider.
Parties on both right and left quickly vilified the prospect of early elections as "blackmail", "blackmailing dilemmas" and "fear-mongering".
"Mr. 
Papandreou is threatening the people that if they vote against his candidates, he'll call [snap] elections," main opposition New Democracy (ND) leader Antonis Samaras retorted on Wednesday. 
"For what reason? 
So they [voters] can vote against him again? 
Is he abandoning [power]? 
And why should we be afraid?"
Before the political stakes were raised, Sunday's municipal and regional elections were noteworthy for the reform of the country's administrative map. 
Fifty-four prefectures were merged into 13 regions, including the Attica (greater Athens) region, which encompasses nearly half of the 11 million residents in the country.
Mergers of municipalities throughout Greece, part of the "Kallikratis" plan passed by the Papandreou government, are billed as a way to cut costs, offer more efficient and centralised services and to combat petty "small town" corruption.
Asked whether Papandreou's statements will impact the race, incumbent Athens Mayor and former New Democracy (ND) minister Nikitas Kaklamanis was adamant.
"I believe that they will have an impact. 
However, not in the way the prime minister had anticipated. 
The Greek people are now well aware that politics cannot be practiced on the basis of debt restructuring, extortion or false dilemmas. 
Politics is practiced, and development achieved through incentives, not threats. 
The supposed dilemma which the PM presented reflects his desperation," Kaklamanis, an outspoken former health minister, told SETimes on Tuesday.
Conversely, when asked if the election has been turned into a referendum on the memorandum or will serve as a vote of confidence in the government, Kaklamanis' primary opponent, PASOK-backed Giorgos Kaminis, said: "The answer is quite simple: Our coalition is not just backed by PASOK, for citizens to consider it as such … The prime minister, on his part, as the head of the government, has to deal with major national issues, both on the domestic and international front; in the wake of the economic crisis, therefore, he formulates his policies on several levels, and with many dilemmas."
The soft-spoken Kaminis, a political newcomer fresh off his high-profile tenure as Greece's Ombudsman, told SETimes that his four-party coalition surpasses petty party dilemmas or party lines.
"Namely, it has one purpose: to save Athens," he said.
In the all-important and hotly contested Attica regional race, another political newcomer believes Papandreou's "election dilemma" will be ignored by the voters, while echoing ND leader Samaras' position that snap elections would be a "negative development" amid the ongoing economic crisis.
"The prime minister's statements mostly affect the general political climate in Greece, and less so the municipal and regional elections of November 7th. 
Mr. 
Papandreou … believes he's found a political exit [from the crisis], shifting the burden of responsibility to the citizens," political analyst Manos Eleftheriadis told SETimes on Wednesday.
Eleftheriadis, who is on the ballot of the ND-backed candidate for Attica regional head, said the decision to turn the election into a 'referendum' on government policies merely allows "citizens the opportunity to express themselves, pointing to the desired way for extricating the country from the crisis and the memorandum's clutches."
