04/04/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 04/04/11
She is one of Serbia's most popular stars, having released 13 best-selling albums and performed in sold-out concerts around the Balkans and abroad. 
Her name is practically synonymous with the genre of "turbofolk", which repackages traditional sounds in a new-fangled dance-pop format.
With her busty good looks and uninhibited style, Svetla "Ceca" Raznatovic was a role model for thousands of girls who grew up during the 1990s, when the genre peaked. 
Her 1995 wedding to the notorious paramilitary leader Arkan -- who was gunned down five years later in the lobby of the Belgrade Intercontinental -- was broadcast live on TV.
Now Ceca stands accused of embezzlement and illegal possession of weapons -- charges that could land her in prison for up to 15 years.
"No one is untouchable in Serbia," Justice Minister Snezana Malovic said as she announced the indictment last week. 
Explaining why it took eight years of investigation before charges were filed, prosecution spokesman Tomo Zoric said the case was wide-ranging.
"It was necessary to collect documents and data on transfers and bank accounts from several countries, such as Russia, Greece, Turkey, Slovenia and France," Zoric said, explaining that the prosecutors wanted irrefutable evidence before proceeding.
The embezzlement charges centre around the transfer of star players from the Obilic football club, which she inherited from Arkan after his death. 
Ceca allegedly diverted large amounts from the sale -- 4.1m in German marks and another $3.1m -- for personal use.
She is also being charged in connection with 11 guns discovered in her house in 2003, following the assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic. 
She had been seeen in the company of leaders of the "Zemun Clan", the criminal gang that organised the murder. 
Subsequently Ceca spent four months in custody but was released without charges.
Last week's indictment has proved controversial, with Ceca's defenders proclaiming her innocence and many others wondering why the probe took so long. 
Milos Djorelijevski, a journalist reporting on organised crime, says the length of time was unusual and that many more complicated criminal cases have been processed more quickly.
"The whole case speaks of the links between politicians and people from the entertainment and sports worlds," Djorelijevski told SETimes. 
"Svetlana Raznatovic has had people close to her in each government after 2000."
Ivica Dacic, Serbia's interior minister, acknowledges that he has long-standing personal ties with the singer. 
"Ceca and I have been friends since we were little and I cannot say that someone is no longer my friend now because they are indicted," he told Belgrade media.
"However, the fact that I am friends with someone does not mean they are absolved of anything. 
Let a court make the final decision," Dacic added.
But not everyone believes that will happen. 
Belgrade media reports are already predicting that Ceca will secure a plea bargain under which she will hand over a portion of the disputed funds and serve a brief stint in jail.
"Of course it is good for public figures, if they break the law, to answer for it," Djorelijevski says. 
"But on the other hand, there is already talk of a settlement with Raznatovic, which is why I think there will be no trial in this case. 
Thus the public will not be given answers to many interesting questions."
The singer's attorney, Goran Petronijevic, has declined to comment until he receives an official copy of the indictment.
Serbs in Belgrade who spoke to SETimes had varying reactions. 
"I think it's good to demonstrate that everyone should be held accountable for breaking the law, rather than just ordinary people without protection," says Sladjana, 36, a saleswoman.
Nikola, 30, who works on a construction site, believes political motives are behind the whole matter. 
"The investigation took eight years and the indictment is being raised now, when the general election is approaching. 
Isn't that odd?" he told SETimes.
