03/03/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Kumrovec -- 03/03/11
As anti-government protests continued in Zagreb on Wednesday (March 2nd), the European Commission (EC) released its interim report on Croatia's EU accession progress.
The report recommends additional reforms in Croatia's judiciary before accession talks on the negotiation chapter can be finalised, said EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele.
The EC acknowledged that authorities in Zagreb have advanced with reforms in the judiciary but that further effort is needed to set up track-records in the fight against corruption.
The rallies, initially organised by a Facebook group, began last week to protest the country's economic situation and corruption.
The group -- which numbers between 2,000 and 5,000 according to sources -- is calling for Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor's government to step down.
On Wednesday, they marched through the centre of Zagreb, taking down and destroying flags of the two biggest Croatian political parties, the ruling HDZ and then opposition SDP.
They also gathered in front of Kosor's appartment, shouting their request for her resignation.
Smaller protests were organised in other towns, too.
"We want prospects," a protester named Marko told SETimes.
"I want to have work;
I want to live a decent life with the salary I will get ...
I don't want to go abroad to find a future.
I want to stay home and I want the officials of this country to focus on the needs of the people," he said.
"So if these guys don't know how to make the situation better, the least they can do is to go away and find another job," said his friend Marina, a student from Zagreb.
The group carried posters with their messages:
politicians are being blamed for corruption and not taking care of the people, impoverishing the country and destroying the economy.
Earlier this week, Kosor said if the protests continue, they migh endanger Croatia's EU accession.
The EC report said that in addition, the government has yet to settle fully the issue of the return of refugees and advance co-operation with The Hague war crimes tribunal.
Once the country fulfils all these conditions, the chapter on judiciary and fundamental rights can be closed, Fuele said.
Overall, the interim report suggests that local authorities have to intensify efforts to finalise the accession talks by the end of June.
