04/04/2011
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia - 04/04/11
Few would blame Kristiana Vulcheva if she turned a blind eye to current events in Libya.
But despite her eight-year ordeal there, the Bulgarian nurse says it grieves her to see what Colonel Muammar Gaddafi is doing to his own people.
"I am sorry to see what the Libyans are going through, for the simple reason that I have never had any problems with ordinary people" there, she told SETimes in a telephone interview on Friday (April 1st).
"And I'm sorry they are being killed for no reason at all now."
According to her, "violence, aggression" are Gaddafi's way of dealing with things.
"He knows no other way," she added.
Vulcheva was among a number of foreign health workers who were arrested in Libya in early 1999 in connection with a large-scale HIV infection in a children's hospital in the eastern city of Benghazi several months earlier.
The majority of the medics were released.
But for the seven who were not and were sent to jail in Tripoli instead, the detention was the start of a protracted nightmare.
Aside from Vulcheva, the group included her husband, Dr Zdravko Georgiev, and nurses Nasya Nenova, Snezhana Dimitrova, Valentina Siropulo and Valya Chervenyashka.
The seventh was Palestinian doctor Ashraf Juma Hajuj, who was granted Bulgarian citizenship several years later.
After three years of investigation, in February 2002, a special court in Tripoli charged them all with deliberately infecting 393 Libyan children with the virus that causes AIDS, allegedly as part of a conspiracy to damage the country's security.
In May 2004, the five Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor were convicted and condemned to death by a firing squad.
Georgiev was acquitted, but was not allowed to leave Libya.
The court dismissed charges against nine Libyans who worked at the same hospital and set them free.
Ignoring evidence by two leading AIDS experts that the 1998 HIV outbreak was caused by poor hygiene at the Benghazi hospital and that it predated the medics' arrival there, the judges based their verdict largely on signed confessions the nurses made during the investigation.
Maintaining their innocence, the medics insisted that those confessions were extorted by torture, including beatings with barbed wire, rape, electrical shocks and dog attacks.
In the face of mounting international pressure, Libya's Supreme Court ordered a retrial, but despite further scientific evidence that exonerated them, the medics' death sentences were upheld.
Finally, however, a deal was reached with the help of the EU.
Libya's top legal body commuted the sentences to life in prison and the families of the 438 infected children received $1m in compensation each.
The health workers' plight ended a week later, when they landed in Sofia on board a French presidential jet, accompanied by France's then-First Lady Cecilia Sarkozy and Benita Ferrero-Waldner, the EU's external relations commissioner at the time.
In an interview with Qatar-based Al-Jazeera television in August 2007, Gaddafi's son, Saif al-Islam, admitted that the Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor "were tortured by electricity and they were threatened that their family members would be targeted".
"What [Gaddafi] did to us was an act of terrorism on his part," Vulcheva said on Friday, adding that she is trying to be sensible about the things that happened to her and does not allow memories of those events to torment her.
"We all have a cross to bear.
Every man on earth has his or her Libya," she noted.
"I don't look back, because if one keeps looking back, one cannot move on."
Last year, she graduated with a degree in rehabilitation and now works at a physiotherapeutic unit at the Military Medical Academy in Sofia.
While she feels generally happy today, she only hopes to see everyone in Libya realise one day that she and her colleagues had nothing to do with the HIV infection in Benghazi.
"I would like to see even the most ordinary, illiterate and simple people in Libya understand one day that we are innocent, and that this is made public officially," Vulcheva said.
"I would also like to see Gaddafi tried before an international court and brought to justice for all the crimes he has committed, and not only those against us."
Bulgarian political analyst Evgeniy Daynov says the scapegoating of the Bulgarian medics and the repression against the Libyan people today are elements of the same "erratic behaviour" Gaddafi has been demonstrating over the past two decades.
"I think it was evident for a very long time that Gaddafi is an ordinary barbaric dictator -- slightly unhinged," Daynov told SETimes in a telephone interview Friday.
"It was inevitable;
it always has been inevitable over the past 20 years that he would come to a moment when everybody would see that he's a brutal dictator, who is intent on killing people."
He also criticised the international community for allowing the Libyan leader to re-enter the world political stage several years ago, despite those signs, and imagining he had changed.
"He never had any part in the world community," said Daynov.
Asked to comment on recent media reports that Gaddafi might be allowed to go into exile to stop the killings in Libya, the Bulgarian analyst agreed that this was the best option for solving the ongoing crisis in the North African country.
"The reason for that is people in his position should be allowed a way out," Daynov noted.
"In this way they are less destructive.
They become extremely dangerous without a way out."
