03/03/2011
(Various sources -- 26/01/11 - 03/03/11)
The governments of all Southeast European countries, except Turkey, have directly or indirectly expressed support for steps taken by international community in response to the indiscriminate use of force against civilian protests in Libya since February 15th.
On Tuesday (March 1st), the 192-member UN General Assembly suspended Libya from the organisation's Human Rights Council (HRC) over Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's violent repression of peaceful demonstrators who are demanding his ouster.
The decision was adopted following a recommendation to that effect by the 47-nation Geneva-based rights' body on Friday.
Speaking at the ongoing session of the HRC, Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki commended that move, as well as the Council's decision that an independent inquiry commission be urgently sent to Libya.
He also praised the UN Security Council for its "swift and unanimous decision" Saturday to impose a series of restrictive measures against Libya.
The sanctions, including an arms embargo, a travel ban on Gaddafi and 15 others close to him, as well as an asset freeze targeting the Libyan leader and five members of his family, were supported by Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), one of the current non-permanent members of the 15-nation Council.
Speaking at Saturday's meeting, Ivan Barbalic, BiH's permanent representative at the UN, said his delegation was appalled at the "unacceptable level of violence" against civilians in Libya and called for urgent action to end the bloodshed in the country.
Addressing the HRC in Geneva on Tuesday, Albanian Deputy Foreign Minister Edith Harxhi noted that people in her country, which emerged from nearly half a century of dictatorship only 20 years ago, were fully aware of the "total denial of human rights in Libya".
"The international community should take an active role and should not allow that human rights violations become a case where humanity would regret late reactions," she stressed.
Montenegro also expressed its full support for the Security Council and the HRC decisions on Libya.
The human rights violations and the "suppression and use of force against civilians" by the Gaddafi regime require "an immediate and adequate response by the international community," Nebojsa Kaludjerovic, state secretary of the Montenegrin foreign ministry, said in Geneva on Tuesday.
On Monday, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece, Romania and the other 23 EU members unanimously adopted a decision, imposing even tougher sanctions on the Gaddafi regime than those announced by the Security Council at the weekend.
Serbia said on Wednesday it has suspended all military and economic co-operation with Libya in compliance with the UN resolution.
Voicing concern about the situation, Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac also denied allegations that members of the Serbian Army or retired military personnel were involved in the Gaddafi regime's crackdown on protestors.
"We are not participating in it in any way;
there is not a single pilot or any other army member taking part in the activities in Libya, especially not in the military activities there," he stressed.
Labour Minister Rasim Ljajic told reporters that his country condemns all forms of human rights violations, adding that Serbian officials have struck the right balance on the issue.
Turkey is the only Southeast European country to have voiced opposition to the UN sanctions against Libya, with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan arguing that the restrictive measures would harm the Libyan people more than their leader.
Meanwhile, a defiant Gaddafi made clear on Wednesday he is not planning to quit.
The Libyan leader, who has been promising to fight till the last man, again blamed al-Qaida as being behind the unrest in the country, saying Osama bin Laden's militants are giving teenagers milk and coffee spiked with "hallucinogenic pills".
UN High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres warned Tuesday about the risk of "a huge humanitarian disaster" unless measures to evacuate those trying to escape the violence in Libya.
He said an estimated up to 90,000 people, mostly Egyptian and Tunisian migrant workers, had crossed into Tunisia since February 20th.
The number of Libyans who have fled their country since exceeded 3,500 people, he said.
