04/04/2011
(Emg.rs - 03/04/11;
Beta, B92, Radio Srbija, FOCUS News Agency, MIA - 02/04/11;
B92, Emg.rs, Radio Srbija, AKI, Delo, Balkans.com, Serbian Government website - 01/04/11)
Croatia, Serbia and Slovenia agreed on Friday (April 1st) to enhance the economic co-operation among their countries, and to participate together in other markets.
A joint statement issued after the meeting among prime ministers Jadranka Kosor of Croatia, Borut Pahor of Slovenia and Serbian President Boris Tadic in Smederevo, near Belgrade, listed the construction, defence, food and car industries as some possible areas of stronger co-operation.
Other fields included wood processing, transportation and communications.
The three former Yugoslav republics are also planning to explore opportunities for joint participation in third markets -- with media citing Russia, the Middle East and North Africa as regions of particular interest.
Quoting Friday's statement, Serbian media reports said a special working group would be established in the future.
Other steps in this area would include exchange of business and economic information, creation of joint representative offices in third-market countries and the promotion of joint projects by the three Balkan nations' diplomatic missions abroad.
"Our relations are growing again," Chinese Xinhua news agency quoted Tadic as saying after the leaders' second joint meeting since March 2010.
"We are solving problems inherited from the years after the breakup of Yugoslavia.
Step-by-step we are becoming an example for other regions."
The three Balkan countries still have a number of open bilateral issues to solve, such as those of missing persons from the 1991-1995 conflict between Serbia and Croatia, the return of cultural artefacts seized during the war and the housing problems of refugees.
Speaking after the talks in Smederevo, Tadic and Kosor said a donor conference on that issue would be held in September.
Regarding the two countries' genocide countersuits at the International Court of Justice, Tadic said Serbia was ready to discuss possible ways to deal with that matter, but noted that a solution to the issue was within the purview of the national governments.
"Withdrawal of suits would be an expedient solution, but the jurisdiction over this matter lies with the two countries' governments," he told reporters.
EU integration was another question on the table.
Pahor reiterated his support for the Western Balkan nations' membership aspirations, noting that their "moving closer to the EU is not only important for these countries but also for the Union itself."
He also promised Slovenia's backing for Croatia's bid to wrap up its accession talks with Brussels in June, and for Serbia's hopes to gain recognition as an official EU candidate by the end of this year.
Kosor said Croatia, which hopes to become the Union's 28th member by the end of 2012, had always supported Serbia's EU integration bid and would continue to do so in future.
