04/05/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 04/05/11
Parliament is poised to decide whether to launch an investigation into activities of the Kosovo Intelligence Service (SHIK), the pre-war and post-war secret service organisation.
One political party, the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), claims the intelligence service has been functioning as a tool of Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK).
The investigation of the SHIK's activities, legality, and mission is one of the most significant since the 1999 conflict, according to the AAK's Burim Ramadani.
"Kosovo's citizens need to know if SHIK was a criminal organisation or one which has served the interests of the people … we need to know how they were financed, functioned and what they have done," he said.
But Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi, a PDK member, has criticised the proposal, describing it as "a confused request that needs to be clarified before the assembly can decide on it".
The PDK, meanwhile, has submitted its own request for an investigation into political murders after 1999, claiming that the AAK ordered the assassination of political rivals -- an allegation the party denies.
Uncovering the truth about political murders since 1999 presents parliament with a big challenge, says security analyst Granit Salihu.
"It's clear that the killings were addressed for certain groups, and for the public they were all politically motivated, but never resolved," he told SETimes, adding that the police and judicial system have generally failed to investigate such cases.
But launching a probe now would create a new set of problems, according to Salihu.
"In the end, some would say the results are politically motivated and nothing will be resolved, just another issue would surface," he said.
As for the fate of the proposals put before parliament, either both will be approved or both will be rejected, Salihu said, explaining that the outcome hinges "on the political bargain that will follow".
PDK parliamentary caucus head Adem Grabovci told SETimes his party is ready to support the SHIK investigations, but that parliament also needs to support the resolution on political killings.
"We need to realise that the political killings are still terrorising the citizens of Kosovo, and for that reason we need to find the truth, what really happened in that period," Grabovci said.
Six current PDK MPs have admitted being members of SHIK.
Pristina Mayor and leader of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) Isa Mustafa said that SHIK has reorganised and reintegrated within public institutions.
"People who were part of SHIK are now part of the police force, but are using the same methods as the former Yugoslav State Security Administration (UDBA)," he said.
