03/03/2011
By Christos Ringas, Elizabeth Maragoula and Harry Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 03/03/11
While the government attempts to impose austerity measures agreed on with the EU and the IMF, public anger is still erupting over perceived inequity. 
Many Greeks say the cost of economic recovery continues to be unfairly distributed.
Their anger erupted on February 23rd in the largest mass strike since December 2009. 
Most public services were interrupted, all flights in and out of the country came to a halt, and shops and hotels in downtown Athens shut down due to the threat of violence.
Workers at major facilities such as refineries, shipyards, harbours, steel plants and the Coca Cola factory also joined in.
"It has been proven beyond a doubt that this 'medicine' is worse than the disease," said Yiannis Panagopoulos, leader of the General Confederation of Employees of Greece. 
"It makes the rich richer and the poor poorer. 
This situation can not continue," he told SETimes.
A Bank of Greece analyst, who wished to remain anonymous, said calls for "sacrifices" can only succeed if everyone contributes according to their ability.
"It is not the protests that threaten the country's stability but the uneven burden-sharing that triggers social unrest," he said.
"Strikes evidently reduce production and, thus, income. 
Why do people go on strike and purposefully lose a day's pay? 
My view is that they think that losing a day's pay can be justified if they gain a reduction of the recovery cost allotted to them, as they feel they have already contributed enough," the analyst added.
According to political observer Ioannis Michaletos, the strikes serve mainly as an outlet for discontent.
"The Greek labour unions are for decades now, being subject to party politics and mainly adhere to the tactics as laid down by the main Greek political parties," he told SETimes. 
"They defuse people's anger towards the current economic situation so as to pre-empt any radicalisation by fringe groups or emerging political forces."
After enduring salary and pension cuts, benefit reductions, public sector cuts and no collective bargaining, some protesters said they have nothing to lose.
"I have worked for 35 years and contributed to my sector by paying my taxes and the pension fund," said George Skylogiannis, 55, the manager of a private company.
"Now they are telling us that pension funds cannot respond to their obligations as their pockets are empty, but you know this is not my fault. 
And what will be the future for the kids, not only mine but for all the kids being raised now in Greek families? 
I see no future, no hope and I am not the only one feeling that way."
