03/01/2011
(Euobserver, Zaman - 03/01/11;
AFP, Hurriyet, B92 - 02/01/11;
ANA-MPA, DPA, Deutsche Welle - 31/12/10;
Frontex - 30/11/10)
Greece is planning to build a "wall" along its land border with Turkey in a bid to cut the influx of illegal immigrants, a Greek government minister said on Friday (December 31st).
"Greek society has reached its limits in taking in illegal immigrants," Citizen Protection Minister Christos Papoutsis said in an interview with Greece's semi-official ANA-MPA news agency.
"Greece can't take it anymore ...
We plan to build a barrier on the land border to block unauthorised immigration," he said, without elaborating.
The 206km-long border between Greece and Turkey forms just a tiny section of the EU's nearly 8,000km-long external land frontier, but has become a main point of entry for illegal migrants seeking a better life in Europe.
Illegal border crossings detected by the Greek authorities between January and October 2010 rose to 44,000, up from 34,000 for the same period the previous year, the EU border agency Frontex said in a report in late November.
About 39,000 were reported at the land border with Turkey and the vast majority of the interceptions were made along a 12.5km-long stretch near the Greek city of Orestiada.
Alarmed by this surge in illegal border crossings from Turkey, Greece asked the European Commission (EC) in October to help it deal with the growing problem, thus becoming the first EU member state to seek such assistance since Frontex's creation in 2007.
On November 2nd, 175 border control experts from the other 26 EU nations and the Schengen-associated countries deployed to the Greek-Turkish land frontier in the region of Orestiada and neighbouring areas as part of operation RABIT 2010.
By the end of that month, the number of illegal border crossings dropped by 44%, compared to the figures for October.
The mission -- initially planned to stay about two months in Greece -- was recently extended until March 2nd.
Greece, which accounts for 90% of all detected illegal border crossings into the EU, serves as a main transit point for about four-fifths of migrants heading for other European countries, particularly Britain, France, Germany and Italy.
Papoutsis stressed on Friday that the government's new plan is also aimed at cracking down on human traffickers and would not harm legitimate asylum seekers.
"Only those migrants who have an internationally recognised right to protection or a right to asylum will remain in the country, no one else," the minister said, adding that all others would have to leave the country voluntarily, or would face deportation.
A Turkish foreign ministry official told Istanbul-based daily Hurriyet on Sunday (January 2nd) that his country was unaware of the Greek government's plan and that Ankara needed to see its details to be able to comment on it.
"It's a sovereign right of every country to take measures to protect its borders.
They do not have to inform us.
It's a measure to protect their border," the official told the Turkish daily, speaking on condition of anonymity.
