03/06/2011
By Mirjana Boskovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 03/06/11
Montenegro has made progress in reforming implementation of the rule of law, but more improvement is needed in a number of areas, said Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) rapporteur for Montenegro Jean Charles Gardetto.
Gardetto praised the government's progress, noting that a large number of Council of Europe (CoE) conventions have been adopted. 
As an example, he pointed to the adoption of the Law on Antidiscrimination, but called for similar steps to be taken concerning the Law on Ombudsman, which has been "dragging on for two years".
"There's been progress made, but it is not enough. 
The Law on Elections has to be adopted just like the Law on Ombudsman, but that law should first be examined by the Venice Commission, the CoE advisory body," Gardetto said in an interview for SETimes.
This week, the Montenegrin Parliament extended the deadline for passing a new election law for the sixth time. 
That obligation, which is the first of seven key conditions the European Commission has set in order for Montenegro to obtain a date for opening negotiations, is to be finished by July 31st.
There is work to be done, Gardetto added, in the field of protection of minorities, against discrimination, fighting corruption and organised crime and also the appointment of the supreme state prosecutor and president of the Supreme Court. 
He added that election of these two officials in parliament is not carried out according to European standards, because there can be political influence. 
Gardetto urged authorities not to pass the laws before they are revised by the Venice Commission, and advised them to take into account the commission's recommendations.
Asked if he thought the government has shown enough political will to fight organised crime and corruption, Gardetto said that there has been progress in that field.
"But, there is still a lot of work to do and the government has shown goodwill to co-operate with international organisations and work on these issues," said Gardetto, who is in Podgorica with PACE co-rapporteur for Montenegro Serhiy Holovaty.
However, Gardetto said that authorities should allocate enough resources for implementation: "Action plans are nice, but they have to be implemented."
During a press conference at parliament, Holovaty said that PACE expects much more progress in the areas of judicial reform, protection of human rights and minorities, and combating organised crime and corruption.
"Especially in the last sphere because there is a serious concern that everything, what has been done so far, was done at a very low level and it does not concern high level officials, which is a concern not only in CoE but also in the EU," said Holovaty.
Gardetto and Holovaty came to Podgorica on Wednesday, meeting with state and judicial officials, party leaders, NGO activists and journalists. 
The goal of their visit was to collect information for their new report on Montenegro's progress. 
If the report is positive, PACE will terminate its monitoring process, signaling Montenegro has made substantial progress and achieved certain democratic standards.
