03/01/2011
By Nefeli Politis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 03/01/11
Greek consumers say they reined in holiday spending this year due to wage and pension cuts, while shop owners in Athens also partly blame continuing labour action and protests for reduced sales revenue.
Public transport workers in greater Athens, who are among the tens of thousands of public sector employees protesting government austerity measures, have held a series of work stoppages and 24-hour strikes in the weeks leading up to the Christmas and New Year holidays.
The industrial action, combined with salary, bonus and pension cuts in the public sector, appears to have dampened shopper enthusiasm and slowed customer traffic to the city centre.
Store operators had been pinning their hopes on the holiday season to boost low sales and consumption figures recorded since the Greek government introduced a tough austerity programme in March to reduce an overblown budget deficit.
Prime Minister George Papandreou's Socialist government has implemented a series of measures, including a cut in civil servant salaries, holiday bonuses and pensions, a state hiring freeze and increased income and consumption taxes, in exchange for a 110 billion-euro bailout loan from the EU and IMF to avoid bankruptcy.
On a recent weekday when public transport employees in Athens held a 24-hour strike, a group of university students sang Christmas carols with an anti-IMF message as holiday shoppers trickled through one of the city centre's busiest shopping streets.
The students, who were collecting donations to fund a theatre and dance troupe, sang a version of the carol "Santa Claus is Coming to Town", replacing the words "Santa Claus" with "IMF".
"We have been performing Christmas carols here for the past five years.
This year we said that something must change because we are not talking about a usual Christmas," said student Archondoula, 23.
She said that none of her fellow students expect to find employment in their field of study upon graduating and initially opt for "anything at the start, a job in a café".
Holiday season shoppers were seen carrying few purchases in comparison with previous years, saying that this year they were spending a minimum on gifts -- which Greeks traditionally exchange on New Year's Day -- due to strict household budgets and fears of more cutbacks.
"People are holding back.
Even if they want to spend a little, they refrain from doing so because they don't know what tomorrow will bring.
In previous years, people were more joyous.
Now they are hesitant and fearful," said Anthoula, a housewife.
Other shoppers appeared intent on celebrating the holiday season even if it meant a less lavish spread on the table and fewer gifts.
"Look, we are pensioners and we didn't receive the [Christmas] bonus this year so we weren't able to enjoy ourselves as much but it's ok, what can we do?
I am not one for misery … We do what we can," said Vicky, 62.
Meanwhile, business operators, who expressed frustration with strike action and street rallies, said they were offering special promotions this year in order to entice shoppers.
"Customer traffic has been very slow during the holiday season due to the strikes and labour action … There is a major difference compared to last year.
We should not forget that the (Christmas) bonus state employees received has been cut.
Those who still receive a bonus only get a small one and it is used to cover other needs, not shopping," said shop manager George.
Workers and pensioners have held continuous strikes and street demonstrations since the start of the year to protest the austerity measures.
Private sector employees have also been affected and face increased job uncertainty due to changes in labour laws.
The austerity programme also includes measures to reduce tax evasion, clean up wasteful state spending, end corruption and create more efficient state services.
