03/06/2011
By Cigdem Bugdayci for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 03/06/11
Each year on May 29th, a highly embellished re-enactment of the Ottoman conquest is staged in Istanbul.
The commemorations are a source of national and religious pride for some, while others say the city's Islamic past is being overemphasised.
As the Janissaries, in their traditional outfits and false moustaches, march to Ottoman military music, enthusiastic spectators wave Turkish flags.
Ottoman soldiers then launch a symbolic attack on simulated Byzantine walls.
As TV channels report that history is being rewritten, officials give speeches lauding the conquest as a major milestone in world history.
The celebration is important because it points to the cultural heritage of the Turkish people, Istanbul Governor Huseyin Avni Mutlu tells SETimes.
"It is different to reside in a place for a year than to live there for 500 years," he said.
"Therefore, what you have here is a 500 year-heritage.
You live this heritage, feel the responsibility of it and are proud of it.
Thus, celebrations refresh the consciousness;
they are a reason for pride."
The conquest has religious as well as national significance.
It is often said that the Prophet Muhammad prophesised the conquest of 'Konstantiniyye' in the hadiths.
Feramus Erucu, 71, migrated to Istanbul in 1957 and since then has been selling religious pictures at a local marketplace.
"Islam is the power of faith of the Turks and those who attack it must know that we have conquered this place by calling out the name of God," he told SETimes.
In some respects, though, the annual event reflects the spirit of 21st century Turkey more than it does the Ottoman era.
The anniversary of the conquest was never regarded as a day of commemoration during the rule of the sultans.
Later, in the early years of the Turkish Republic, the country's Ottoman and Islamic heritage was often rejected in the name of secularism.
The date first gained status as an occasion for official celebrations in 1953, and the first re-enactment of the conquest was staged in 1996, during the mayoralty of current Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Despite his role in boosting the commemorations, critics have accused him of showing little interest in the city's archeology and history.
He was criticised recently for downplaying the importance of a sunken harbour discovered during work on the Marmaray subway project.
Though many take pride in the Islamisation of the ancient Byzantine capital, experts say the actual story is more complex.
The relationship between the Ottomans and Byzantines was not always clear-cut.
"Ottoman history is not well-known by those in power," says Necmi Aydin, an award winning documentary director.
He created the film "Istanbul, the Saint" as part of the Istanbul 2010 European Capital of Culture Project.
"Mehmet II himself had been sent to the Byzantine palace to be educated as a teenager," Aydin says, pointing to the continuity of traditions.
During the Ottoman period, Istanbul had a heterogeneous population of Muslims, Jews, and Christians living side by side, though today it is almost entirely Muslim.
Aydin, who documented Orthodox as well as and Muslim saints associated with the city, said the conquering emperor demonstrated his respect for Byzantine culture following his victory, but a similar spirit has not prevailed during the Republican era.
"I am not sure if Mehmet II would consent to these celebrations if he were alive now," he told SETimes.
