03/06/2011
(CNN, BBC, The Sofia Echo, Sky News, Telegraph, RTE, The Independent, The Irish Times, The Scotsman - 03/06/11;
Beta, B92, BBC, RFE/RL - 02/06/11;
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia)
Top war crimes suspect Ratko Mladic said on Friday (June 3rd) that he was "a gravely ill man," as he faced judges at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for the first time since his extradition to The Hague.
The 69-year-old former Bosnian Serb military commander was arrested in Serbia on May 26th, after nearly 16 years on the run.
The retired general, who allegedly masterminded the massacre of nearly 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica in the final months of the 1992-1995 war in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), was transferred to The Hague-based UN tribunal on Tuesday.
In their second amended indictment issued on Wednesday, UN prosecutors charged Mladic with two counts of genocide plus nine others of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws and customs of war for his role in the conflict in BiH.
During his initial appearance at The Hague court on Friday, the wartime leader of the Bosnian Serb forces claimed he had not read any of the documents brought to him following his arrival in The Hague, including the new indictment, citing his "poor state".
He said he would need "at least two months" to study all the papers.
Ahead of Friday's session, the purpose of which was to inform Mladic of the charges pressed against him, the UN tribunal assigned Serbian attorney Aleksandar Aleksic to represent him in court until a permanent defence lawyer is appointed.
Presiding Judge Alphons Ories asked him if he wanted to have the entire, 37-page charge-sheet read out to him in court.
"I do not want to have a single letter or sentence of that indictment read out to me," Mladic responded.
In line with ICTY rules, Orie presented a summary of the accusations, count-by-count.
Refusing to enter a plea to any of the charges, Mladic said he would like to receive a copy of the "obnoxious charges" Orie read out in court, adding that he would need more than a month to study properly "these monstrous words" that he had never heard before.
The presiding judge said there was "no good cause" for the court to deviate from the 30-day rule for entering a plea on each count and scheduled the next hearing for July 4th.
In the event the former Bosnian Serb general again refuses to plead during that hearing, the judges will enter pleas of not guilty on his behalf.
At Mladic's request, the hearing was then closed to the public.
On Thursday, his lawyer Milos Saljic claimed that his client underwent surgery and chemotherapy for lymphoma at a Belgrade hospital in 2009.
He said he had documents proving this, but refused to publicly name the clinic where Mladic was treated.
Media reports quoted a spokesman for Serbian prosecutors as commenting later that those documents were a forgery.
Denying that Mladic had had received treatment at the military clinic in Belgrade, Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac promised a thorough investigation into Saljic's allegations.
"I don't know why Mladic's lawyer chose to manipulate the public in this manner," Belgrade-based B92 quoted the minister as saying.
"He's denouncing the whole health-care system, including the military branch… I really don't believe this story, but we will investigate everything."
