03/05/2011
By Dusan Kosanovic and Mirjana Boskovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Podgorica -- 03/05/11
The "One Million Signatures for RECOM" campaign seeks to establish an independent regional commission, a non-judicial panel that would investigate and establish facts concerning war crimes and their victims between 1991 and 2001.
The initiative, launched at a regional meeting in Sarajevo on April 26th, is the region's single biggest NGO campaign.
"RECOM will be the commission for truth that will be set up by states, which will, in doing so, take responsibility for establishing facts about past human rights violations," Goran Miletic, the Civil Rights Defenders' programme director for the Western Balkans, told SETimes.
"Also, we should not forget that this will be the first ever regional commission of its kind to be formed -- all 30 commissions so far have been set up within a single state."
"The national commission model cannot help establish facts in any one country in this region.
A regional approach is necessary," Miletic added, saying RECOM will deal with facts, not debates that lead nowhere.
The focus "will be on victims and the truth, which is essentially the main desire of victims' families and the citizens of all countries in the region," he said.
Perhaps the most important result, he added, is that RECOM will have a decisive role, alongside domestic and international courts, in helping end the general climate of impunity across almost all societies in the region.
The presidents of Croatia and Serbia, Ivo Josipovic and Boris Tadic, were among the first regional presidents to sign onto the initiative.
Their example was followed by the entire Montenegrin parliament, European Commission and European Parliament.
Natasa Kandic, founder and executive director of the Humanitarian Law Centre and an initiator of the coalition for RECOM in Serbia, says the signatures will be collected over six weeks.
"The campaign will send the message that young people are not responsible for the grim heritage, but that they want to be responsible for the attitude towards the grim heritage, thereby giving their support to the regional initiative for setting up RECOM," she told B92.
National Council for European Integration in Montenegro President Nebojsa Medojevic says that, for Montenegro, it is important that RECOM takes a stance towards the "shameful behaviour" of the Montenegrin judiciary, which failed to confront government leaders responsible for events in the early 1990s.
"Nobody has been held accountable for the destruction of Dubrovnik, the Konavle robbery, deportation of Bosniaks, crimes in Bukovica, Pljevlja, Kalduderski laz, the political persecution of SDA leaders, or helping to hide ICTY fugitives Karadzic and Mladic," said Medojevic.
Signatures of support will be collected until June 6th.
At that time, they will be handed over to presidents, governments and parliaments of all countries in the region, together with RECOM's statute proposal.
"This is a chance to arrive at one commission which would bring one truth into the politics and life," said the Vice-President of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH), Mirsad Kebo, the former BiH minister for human rights and refugees.
"There is no peacemaking without truth.
This initiative is the realisation of my dream as a human rights minister and people will find true hope in it."
SETimes correspondent Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo contributed to this article.
