02/03/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/03/11
Statistics suggest that Serbia recycles nearly ten times less waste than EU member states, but officials say recycling is on the rise.
For two decades Serbia has been immersed in serious state problems, from wars, sanctions and poverty to the assassination of a prime minister. 
In such tumultuous times, environmental protection took a back seat.
"Everyone is preoccupied with much bigger existential problems -- how to survive and pay the bills -- so they don't worry about preserving nature. 
All that will backfire on us," student Miroslav Krstic, 22, tells SETimes.
He describes efforts to recycle as a "mission impossible".
"Where can I recycle and sort different types of packaging when there is not a single container for that purpose in my neighbourhood?"
Now that the situation is more stable and Serbia is fighting for EU membership candidate status, more attention is being paid to the environment. 
The state has adopted a national waste management strategy, which is to fully introduce European standards in waste recycling by 2019.
"Serbia currently recycles 7% to 8% of communal waste -- glass, wood, paper, plastic, and metal. 
In the EU, depending on the type of material, between 60% and 80% of waste is recycled," Aleksandar Vesic, assistant minister for the environment and spatial planning, told SETimes.
He offers a couple more examples.
"According to European standards, four kilos of electronic waste per capita should be recycled, whereas in reality 0.5 kilos is recycled. 
We have made progress in recycling car batteries. 
About 80% of them are recycled, but on the other hand, batteries used by households are practically not recycled at all," Vesic acknowledges.
Then there are the old cars.
"According to EU standards, 95% of unusable vehicles should be recycled. 
There is no precise data on how many of such vehicles are recycled in Serbia, but we are most certainly far from the European norm," Vesic said.
That Serbia has much more to do in terms of waste management is also evidenced by the fact that there are 3,251 uncontrolled landfills, predominantly in rural areas.
Vesic says the public needs to be told more about recycling for the situation to improve, while local governments must provide people with more recycling containers, to sort various kinds of waste.
"Recycling is something that has been dealt with actively in Serbia for just the last few years; hence, results cannot be expected overnight. 
It is impossible to immediately achieve the results developed countries worked on for decades, while we are only just starting," Vesic tells SETimes.
Officials are stressing that recycling can be a lucrative business. 
The Serbian Chamber of Commerce recently held a conference linking recycling to development, at which participants said the problem is the relatively small number of people working in waste collection. 
Their numbers are insufficient to meet the recycling industry's demand.
Chamber adviser Sinisa Mitrovic tells SETimes that only 5% to 6% of the Serbian recycling industry is currently utilised, so a great deal of secondary material ends up in landfills.
The old adage "one man's trash is another's treasure" applies in this case. 
It's estimated "the secondary material market ... 
is worth 350m euros annually, with about 100,000 people working on collecting various kinds of waste at the moment," Mitrovic said.
