02/06/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 2/06/11
Using populist language infused with the message of brotherly Islamic solidarity, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) pledged to solve the Kurdish issue and provide investments for the country's restive Kurds during a speech Wednesday (June 1st) in Diyarbakir, the largest Kurdish city.
Announcing projects that he described as wild" in front of thousands gathered in Istasyon Square, Erdogan promised the restoration of Diyarbakir's XI Century city walls, construction projects to replace shanty towns, a new airport, hospitals and a football stadium for 30,000 people, saying "all of these will boost tourism and employment in the province." He also vowed to solve the Kurdish issue and draft a new constitution after the elections.
Signaling the importance of economic issues in the election, Ali Ihsan Merdanoglu, AKP MP from Diyarbakir, said "People here have been waiting for huge government investments for many years and now Diyarbakir is ready to hug AKP again."
"Our party aims to employ hundreds of thousands of people with these projects, which will also revive trade, industry and exports," he told SETimes.
"We are serious about dealing with the Kurds' problems and have always championed Kurdish rights."
Erdogan's visit came a day after the main opposition Republican People's Party's (CHP) leader outlined his party's projects for Diyarbakir.
During his speech, Kemal Kilicdaroglu once again reiterated his pledge for autonomy, saying CHP is determined to resolve the Kurdish issue, regardless of the cost.
"I will solve this issue and bring peace to this country."
"Ordinary people in Diyarbakir are willing to listen to politicians every day, no matter who they are," Mehmet Arslan, a freelance journalist from Diyarbakir, told SETimes, adding that Kilicdaroglu focused primarily on political issues.
For his part, Erdogan blamed the Kurdish problem on the CHP and pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP).
"The patent of the Kurdish problem belongs to the CHP, the [patent of] exploitation [of the Kurdish problem] belongs to the BDP."
Meanwhile, Kurdish politicians consider AKP’s economic projects "old and not perspective enough".
Mr. Erdogan repeats all of these for nine years now," Akin Birdal, BDP MP from Diyarbakir and member of the Parliamentary Commission for Human Rights, told SETimes, adding that "Kurdish people have lost their trust in Erdogan.
"
He believes the BDP could have brought huge changes to the region during the past two years, if it had not faced obstacles created by the government.
"We also have huge projects to offer our people at this time," he added, saying democracy, freedom and self-governance rights are more important for Diyarbakir than the economy and tourism.
Erol Tuncer, deputy-chairman of Democratic Left Party (DSP) and an election analyst, says neither the AKP nor its rivals speak honestly about their real plans on Kurdish issues right now because "they might lose votes in other regions."
"We'll see their real politics right after the elections," he told SETimes.
In his speech, Erdogan called on the audience not to vote for the BDP, because "By taking strength from the PKK they want to divide us ...
They are bandits and terrorists."
Birdal, however, insists his party has always stood against violence.
"Who wants to see their children's corpses?
Our policy is clear.
If they talk about PKK, that has nothing to do with us."
In the 2007 general elections, the AKP won six seats, the BDP four, and CHP zero deputies from Diyarbakir.
