02/12/2010
(B92 - 02/12/10; European Parliament, Beta - 01/12/10; EurActiv - 25/11/10)
The European Parliament's (EP) Foreign Affairs Committee approved the EU's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia in a draft resolution Wednesday (December 1st), urging the Union to quickly complete the process of ratification of the accord.
The SAA, which is considered a major first step towards a Western Balkan country's eventual membership in the 27-nation bloc, was signed in April 2008. 
It must be endorsed by both the EU legislature, as well as by each member of the Union to enter into force.
The accord is likely to get the EP's final approval next month, when the 736-seat assembly will be asked to vote on the document adopted Wednesday. 
The process of SAA ratification by the EU member states began in June this year and only 11 countries have completed it so far.
The members of the EP (MEP) urged the remaining 16 countries "to swiftly proceed with the ratification procedure," an EU legislature said in a statement Wednesday. 
It also quoted Jelko Kacin, the assembly's standing rapporteur on Serbia, as stressing the importance of the SAA in the process of EU integration of the Western Balkan countries.
"It provides the EU and aspirant countries with a political and legal framework for mutual relations, which has contributed much to the stability of the region," the Slovenian MEP said. 
"It has made EU prospects tangible and brought accession negotiations within reach."
The 76-member Foreign Affairs Committee adopted on Wednesday a second draft resolution on Serbia, welcoming EU leaders' recent decision to forward the Balkan nation's membership application to the European Commission (EC) for an opinion.
"This is a very positive development for the whole region, which creates a momentum that Serbia should take advantage of," Kacin said before MEPs endorsed the document in a 51-3 vote, with two abstentions.
The draft resolution, however, stressed the need for Serbia to show full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to be able to make headway on the EU integration road.
That "is a fundamental condition for Serbia to progress on the path to EU membership," the EP quoted the draft resolution as reading. 
According to Belgrade-based B92, it also underlined that only the arrest and handover of the last two war crimes fugitives sought by the ICTY -- former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic and wartime Croatian Serb political leader Goran Hadzic -- will be considered as full co-operation with the UN tribunal.
Calling for talks between Serbian and Kosovo officials to be launched "without delay," MEPs also urged both sides to show commitment and readiness to compromise, which is essential to long-term stability and a better life for people in the two countries.
They also stressed the need for Serbia to secure an environment, in which strong and independent media are able to operate freely without any political pressures or other influences.
The Balkan country should also "adopt adequate measures and make full efforts in order to limit possibilities" for its citizens to abuse the EU visa free regime, the MEPs said.
They also called for further steps to deal with the problems of refugees and internally displaced people in Serbia and to improve the rights of the country's Roma community.
Commending Serbia for its reform progress, the draft adopted Wednesday further noted the need for addressing structural economic shortcomings the country still faces. 
A key condition for nations hoping to join the EU is to be recognised as functioning market economies prior to their entry.
That document will also be put to a plenary vote at the EP next month.
