02/05/2011
By Aaron Stein for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 02/05/11
Buffered by 40,000 baton wielding police officers and riot police, thousands of Turkish workers and political activists gathered on Sunday (May 1st) to celebrate May Day in Taksim Square -- Istanbul's symbolic cultural and political centre.
Against the backdrop of the impending June 12th election, the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) decided to lift a ban and allow protesters to gather in Taksim.
Up until last year, May Day gatherings were prohibited in Istanbul's busiest square after unidentified gunmen shot and killed 34 people during a demonstration on that date in 1977.
Despite the ban, activists have marched every year, often clashing violently with police.
Early in the day, mourners gathered to pay tribute to those killed in the 1977 massacre and repeated their calls for the government do more to find out who committed the atrocities.
To this day, the identities of the gunmen are unknown, though many suspect them of being ultranationalists bent on inciting violence to precipitate a coup.
As the gathering gained steam, the thousands of protestors shouted the central issues from this year's political campaign.
The workers and activists formed "a somewhat organised civil society front against the incumbent party on a number of issues," Emre Hatipoğlu, a political science professor at Sabanci University, told SETimes.
The protests "marked a display of solidarity among labour unions (with the exception of Kamu-sen, a conservative union), other NGOs, various organs of political parties, and even groups of sports club supporters;
rather than being a protest march against the government," Hatipoğlu wrote in an email interview for SETimes.
"The demonstrations may mark an important touchstone in the formation of an organised civil movement," Hatipoğlu added.
Before this march, these disparate groups did not have similar messages.
However, this year all of the groups together called for "freedom of expression, respect for ethno-cultural differences and other areas where the current government arguably did not adequately address," he said.
Turks hope that the demonstration will motivate political leaders to tackle these sensitive issues.
However, Hatipoğlu told SETimes that "with elections on the horizon, what the parties will state will be seen as promises to the electorate at large and carry little policy-relevance."
Participants at this year's gathering included members from smaller opposition parties, including representatives from the pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) and the Republican People's Party (CHP), Turkey's main opposition party.
The presence of opposition parties isn't likely to have a major impact on the upcoming elections.
According to Hatipoğlu, "Turkish politics is trending towards a system of two gravitational centres:
a centre right, and a centre left bloc." He believes, "the demonstrations will have little leverage in either changing established voting patterns of the populace at large, or giving an extra swing to the smaller parties in the upcoming elections."
