02/03/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 02/03/11
Tens of thousands of people gathered outside the Fatih Mosque in Istanbul on Tuesday (March 1st) to honour former Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan. 
While head-scarfed women waited on the sidewalk, men lined up in the street to pray for the late politician who many said made a permanent footprint on Turkish politics.
Erbakan, 84, died on Sunday of heart failure.
"He was our hoca [teacher]. 
I think he gave moral values both to Turkey and the world. 
He was not just a religious person, but a man of logic and science," Tuba Nur, 23, told SETimes. 
"We will not have a person like Erbakan again."
"There are a lot of logical rules in the Quran, and they are used in many countries, including Egypt, even in London. 
Erbakan knew the value of these things," said Ersan Agbas, a 30-year-old student. 
"He was a genius; he had a good political position and everyone respected him."
In 1969, Erbakan introduced the idea of combining Islam and politics to modern Turkey under the manifesto called "the National View", which was a mix of nationalistic, Islamic and anti-Western ideology. 
In his 84 years, he spent 42 years actively involved in Turkish politics and experienced three military coups.
His political ideas influenced many of the top politicians in Turkey today. 
The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) came to power following Erbakan's introduction of political Islam to Turkish society -- which had previously been unacceptable due to Kemal Ataturk's secular legacy.
"He was the first leader of the Islamic movement in Turkey and the world. 
It feels like our own fathers have died. 
He tried to change something in Turkey," Tuncay Eyupoglu, 35, told SETimes. 
"Maybe sometimes he succeeded and sometimes he didn't, but we respect his ideas."
Erbakan was the leader of numerous parties during his lifetime, including the National Order Party in 1970-1971 and the Welfare Party in 1983-1997. 
However, these parties were deemed contrary to Turkey's secular values by the judiciary and closed.
In December 1997, Erbakan set up the Virtue Party, which divided into two separate parties in 2001, when the younger generation -- including current Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and President Abdullah Gul -- founded their own party, which was officially secular with a pro-West orientation.
"Erbakan was a scientist who devoted his life to learning. 
We will remember him with gratitude," Erdogan said on Tuesday.
Erbakan served as prime minister for 11 months. 
He was pressured to resign by the military, which staged the country's first "post-modern coup" in February 1997, forcing him to give up his post.
His political ideas were described in the media as being anti-Western until the very end of his life.
"He has become a marginal force in Turkey. 
His party only got 2% of the votes -- [but] his influence in some sense is much bigger. 
The current government [is comprised of] people who used to be his followers," Hurryiet Daily News reporter Mustafa Akyol told SETimes.
