02/06/2011
(Washington Post, Xinhua, Daily Mirror, NATO - 02/06/11;
RFE/RL, The Sofia Echo, CBC, Slate Magazine, DPA, NATO - 01/06/11)
The ambassadors of the 28 NATO member states decided on Wednesday (June 1st) to extend the pact's UN-mandated military operation in Libya by another 90 days, until late September.
Announcing the move, NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen stressed for the second time this week that the Alliance will not ease its pressure on Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi as long as his forces continue to attack and threaten civilians.
"This decision sends a clear message to the Gaddafi regime:
We are determined to continue our operation to protect the people of Libya," he said.
"We will sustain our efforts to fulfil the United Nations mandate.
We will keep up the pressure to see it through."
A month after the start of the popular uprising in Benghazi on February 17th, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1973, approving the establishment of a no-fly zone over Libya and the use of "all necessary measures" to protect civilians from attacks by government forces.
It followed Resolution 1970, passed by the 15-nation body at the end of February, which banned the supply of arms, ammunition and related material to the North African country and imposed a series of other sanctions targeting Gaddafi and his regime.
On March 19th, NATO members France, Britain and the United States took steps towards enforcing the UN decisions on Libya.
On March 31st, the Alliance took control of all military operations, in line with the mandate given to it under Resolutions 1970 and 1973.
Operation Unified Protector, which was initially granted a 90-day trial period, ending on June 30th, consists of three elements:
an arms embargo, a no-fly-zone and actions to protect civilians from attack or the threat of attack.
Since the beginning of the operation, NATO has conducted a total of 9,332 operational air flights, including 3,521 strike sorties, 32 of them on Wednesday, the Alliance said on Thursday.
From the beginning, Gaddafi has been defiantly resisting pressure from inside and outside his country to step down after 41 years in power, and his forces and mercenaries have continued their assaults on rebel-held areas.
In his statement Wednesday, Rasmussen assured the Libyans that NATO remains committed to ensuring their protection and that the end of the current regime is in sight.
"Our decision also sends a clear message to the people of Libya:
NATO, our partners, the whole international community, stand with you," the former Danish prime minister said.
"We stand united to make sure that you can shape your own future.
And that day is getting closer."
A number of Libyan diplomats and senior officials have abandoned the Gaddafi regime since the popular revolt began, with some eventually joining the opposition forces.
The latest to leave the government was the country's top oil official, Shokri Ghanemm, who cited the "unbearable" conditions, stemming from the continuing conflict in the country as the main motive for his decision.
"Best youth and our best men getting killed [every] day," Chinese news agency Xinhua quoted him as saying Wednesday.
"With this situation, which is unbearable, one cannot continue working and therefore I left the country and I decided also to leave my job and to join the choice of the Libyan youth, to create a modern constitutional state, respecting human rights and building a better future for all Libyans."
