02/06/2011
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 02/06/11
Ahead of elections on Sunday (June 5th), polls suggest Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski is in no danger of losing his job.
The ruling VMRO-DPMNE is 10 to 14 percentage points ahead of the opposition Social Democratic Union (SDSM), according to the country's four major polling organisations.
Among the ethnic Albanian parties, the incumbent Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) is all but assured of victory over its rivals.
The ruling parties currently command 63 out of 120 seats. 
They could, however, lose their absolute majority in parliament.
If that happens, analysts say, Gruevski will need to exercise his coalition-building skills.
"We can expect a new political configuration in the parliament, bringing together many coalition partners," analyst Vele Mitanovski told SETimes. 
"The two main Macedonian political parties are aware of this, which is why they both first advertised their coalition-building capacities."
Depending on how close the margin turns out to be, the stage could be set for future snap elections, he added.
According to fellow analyst Vladimir Bozinovski, the next administration will stay the course on domestic issues, including the economy, but a shift in foreign policy may be in store.
"The government will activate Macedonia's diplomacy, trying to solve the differences with Greece over the name issue. 
That will pave the way to NATO membership and the beginning of negotiations for EU membership," Bozinovski said.
The election campaign has been hard-fought and often negative in tone. 
It also saw increased use of Facebook and other social media networks, with candidates and parties using them to post information about campaign events, rally supporters and launch fierce attacks on opponents.
All parties sought to woo voters by promising to spur development. 
The Social Democrats focused on increasing agricultural subsidies and building roads, while insisting on the need for a progressive taxation system that allows the poor to pay less in taxes compared to the wealthy.
VMRO-DPMNE, by contrast, vowed to slash taxes, particularly in the tourism sector, where it envisioned trimming them from 18% to 5%. 
It also pledged to increase wages and pensions by 20% over the next four years, boost agricultural and family apartment subsidies, and complete 1,200 projects.
The second half of the election campaign saw a number of defections to Gruevski's coalition, with two smaller right-wing parties -- the VMRO-NP of former Prime Minister Ljupco Georgievski and ex-interior minister Ljube Boskovski's United for Macedonia -- saying they would seek a deal with the opposition.
Among the Albanian parties, debate focused mainly on whether the Ohrid Framework Agreement obligations are being fulfilled and on making Albanian the country's second official language. 
Some candidates proposed eliminating the unitary character of the Macedonian state in favour of a federation between Macedonians and Albanians.
For a country that has pinned its hopes on integration, the conduct of the elections may be as important as the outcome.
"In these elections, Macedonia must show it has reached democratic maturity. 
Whether it will depends on the government but also very much on how the opposition behaves. 
Obviously, we voters will contribute to the election's success," Skopje resident Nikola Velevski, 53, told SETimes.
