01/12/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 01/12/10
At a gala ceremony in Monte Carlo late last month, Croatian high jump phenom Blanka Vlasic was named female athlete of the year by the track and field organisation International Association of Athletics Federation.
Kenyan 800m runner David Rudisha was named best male athlete.
Headlines trumpeting "Blanka at the top of the world" splashed across the front pages of Croatian media, praising the talent and accomplishments of the Split-born athlete.
Best in her sport, the only thing eluding her is the world record.
Vlasic, 27, has to jump 210cm to achieve that.
The closest she's come is 208cm, in front of an ecstatic Zagreb crowd in August 2009.
She chose to sidestep the issue almost entirely in Monte Carlo, except to say "The world record for me is like a pair of perfect shoes in the store when you are a little child, and you want them so much."
Her results this year have been stunning, winning 18 out of 20 competitions.
Her home is full of medals, including the silver medal from the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
She breathes the rarified air of Croatia's other superstar female athlete, skier Janica Kostelic, who is now retired from competition.
"We love her;
she is such a great girl.
Did you see how she engages the crowd before she jumps with the dancing and cheering?" says Zeljka Matic, a saleswoman also from Split.
And what she says rings true.
The athlete holds nothing back, clearly showing her emotions, both when she wins and loses.
When she is not at the track, she shows a very elegant and fun-loving side, a young woman who enjoys life.
And she has a champion boyfriend, too -- Nikola Karabatic -- one of the best handball players in the world, whose origins are Serbian.
This latest honour means the world to Vasic.
"This is one of my dreams, to be the best athlete of the season, not only in the high jump.
This victory means a lot to me," she wrote on her website.
Vlasic is the eldest child in a sports-oriented family.
Her mother, Venera, was a cross-country athlete, a basketball player and a gymnast, and father Josko was a decathlon athlete.
She was named after the Moroccan city Casablanca, where her father won the gold medal at the 1983 Mediterranean games.
He was the one who recognised her talent and worked with her since she was little.
So it was no surprise that she called him after winning the award.
"My father will be the first to know," Vlasic said.
