02/06/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 02/06/11
Teams of reporters worked around the clock, taking 12 hour shifts outside the Special Court building in Belgrade, where Ratko Mladic had been detained until his extradition to The Hague on Tuesday (May 31st). 
The media saturated viewers and readers with coverage of the historic arrest –15 years in the making -- offering programming spanning several hours on the topic.
Every other news story took a backseat to this one, with journalists scrambling to obtain exclusive information about everything related to Mladic, his health or his requests while in custody. 
Thus reports and live broadcasts outside the court building served up some interesting tidbits, such as that Mladic had asked to read Dostoevsky and Tolstoy while in custody and wanted to eat strawberries.
Media teams constantly monitored statements and video feeds as members of Mladic's legal team took turns in front of the cameras. 
"I think Mladic's condition is so bad that he will not see the end of the trial in The Hague," his attorney, Milos Saljic, was quoted as saying.
Visits by Mladic's family were cause for chaos outside the courthouse. 
His wife, son, daughter-in-law and grandchildren would arrive and were instantly surrounded by a bunch of cameras, microphones and dictaphones. 
"They won't give any statements, it's not going to happen!" someone from the crowd would announce.
Reporters and crews battled fatigue as well as the competition. 
"I've been waiting for hours for someone to come and take over my shift. 
I've been outside the court for ten hours; I'm exhausted, but no one cares," one complained.
Certain reporters had their physical safety threatened while covering the arrest. 
Prva Srpska Televizija TV journalist Zaklina Tatalovic was attacked by villagers in Lazarevo who disagreed with Mladic's extradition to The Hague, while she was reporting from outside the scene of his arrest. 
"I barely managed to get into the car and hide," she says.
