01/12/2010
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 01/12/10
Macedonia's public prosecutor is investigating whether former President Branko Crvenkovski misused public funds when he hired Slovenian experts to help craft a PR strategy dubbed "Hope".
Crvenkovski, who currently heads the opposition SDSM, allegedly spent 340,000 euros worth of taxpayer money on the plan, which provided strategic advice on grooming the then-president's image.
Critics say that he failed to follow the proper legal procedures in hiring the Slovenian experts, and that "Hope" went far beyond normal PR purposes.
The plan is said to have included tactics for attacking the government of Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, with whom Crvenkovski was at frequent odds.
"We took the case because of the specific nature of the act which falls under the purview of organised crime," said Prosecutor's Office Organised Crime Department head Jovan Ilievski.
"We haven't discarded the possibility of extending the investigation to members of his [then] cabinet as well."
The investigation is expected to last about a month.
Prosecutors will seek to determine whether Crvenkovski violated Article 353 of the Criminal Code, which requires public bids to procure services, and determine whether to press charges.
If indicted and convicted, Crvenkovski could face up to four years in prison.
The case has taken on a regional dimension, with Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor denying allegations that he played a role.
The president of the SDSM's central committee, Ana Daneva, earlier claimed that Pahor personally suggested the experts to Crvenkovski.
Not so, Pahor fired back.
"We never sent advisers to the former Macedonian President Crvenkovski, and expect an explanation from Macedonian Social Democratic Union," he said.
Crvenkovski immediately issued a public apology, saying he was sorry that the Slovenian prime minister's name had been "mentioned without any basis".
He called the matter a "provoked affair".
The SDSM has denied any wrongdoing on the part of the ex-head of state.
"It is a complete lie that President Branko Crvenkovski spent taxpayers' money for personal and party gain.
The funds were spent on consulting regarding public communications, public opinion research and strategies for promoting Macedonia in the EU and NATO," the party said in a statement.
It also announced it would sue the local network Sitel TV, which broadcast various allegations about Crvenkovski -- including the claim that he had been paying the Slovenian experts since as far back as 1996.
Professor and analyst Dimitar Mircev told SETimes he is worried less about the legal aspects of Hope and more about the kind of advice Crvenkovski received.
"Crvenkovski tried to score points against the current government in a way that is inappropriate and immoral.
It would be enough if the 'Hope' suggestions were used to advance the state and her international prestige, but unfortunately they concerned only his personal image," Mircev said.
