01/02/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 01/02/11
Just over a week after three protestors were shot dead at an anti-government rally in Tirana, the opposition said on Monday (January 31st) that it will stage another demonstration in the capital this coming Friday.
Although the international community has urged dialogue, the situation in Albania has become more polarised than ever. 
The prime minister, Sali Berisha, is refusing to meet with those he deems "coup plotters", while Socialist leader Edi Rama has defied calls to discontinue street protests.
"Our attempt is not a fight to eliminate the other side. 
It is to give a new chance to Albania, by creating the conditions for all sides to be equal in [the eyes of] the constitution and the law," Rama said. 
"We will be in the parliament to push ahead what we have started."
He urged members of the international community to reconsider their ties with "the regime in power", and to be intolerant of things they would not accept in their own countries.
Berisha, however, says Rama and the Socialists are derailing Albania's interests as they seek to topple the government.
"The [attempted] coup d'etat has dealt a strong blow to the main project of the Albanian nation -- its integration into Europe," Berisha told a cabinet meeting Monday.
He has continued to reject Socialist demands for early elections. 
Rama and his party charge that the previous general election, in June 2009, was tainted by corruption and vote-rigging.
Meanwhile, state prosecutor Ina Rama is heading the investigation into the January 21st melee in which three protesters were killed. 
As part of the investigation, mobile companies have been asked to provide lists of phone conversations involving senior state officials.
US Ambassador to Albania Alexander Arvizu says Washington backs the probe.
"I just want to state before everyone here that the United States supports the Office of the Prosecutor very fully and very completely," he said. 
US experts have reportedly arrived in Tirana to assist with the investigation.
In a rare TV address, President Bamir Topi spoke to the nation Monday and called on the two sides to hold talks.
"I strongly underline the need for the Albanian political class to find and put in use all legal and democratic mechanisms to get out of this problematic situation in the interest of Albania and its citizens," Topi said.
