27/08/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/08/11
Kosovo's recently established Institute for War Crimes will collect data on crimes against humanity and acts of genocide committed in Kosovo from 1998 through June 1999. 
In part two of this interview with SETimes correspondent Muhamet Brajshori, recently appointed Institute Director Zejnullah Gruda discusses his frustrations with the UN war crimes tribunal.
SETimes: Many in Kosovo feel that the ICTY did not deliver justice regarding crimes in Kosovo. 
What is your stance on that?
Gruda: I'm very thankful for this question which is important. 
To punish those who have committed war crimes is a primary condition. 
It is a satisfaction for victims, it is a requirement of justice and a requirement for a better life for future generations. 
It is also a warning for others to not repeat the crimes.
Unfortunately, what has happened in the ICTY and in Serbia, courts have dealt with a symbolic number. 
This is not important. 
They dealt with those who ordered and some who did some crimes on the ground, and not with others.
In theory and in practice this is wrong, because one of the main authorities of international law, Hugo Grotius -- in his book about war and peace law -- says not only those who did, but also those who planned, helped, supported crimes, have hidden crimes or didn't try to prevent crimes, are responsible.
According to this … I think here the International Community has failed. 
They should have begun with the de-nazification of Serbia, removing all those who have been linked to helping, planning and ordering crimes. 
In that case, justice would be done. 
This is the same with the Nuremberg practice.
The indictment and punishment decision [at Nuremberg] didn't stop with just those accused and brought to trial, but accused and called a criminal the NSDP, the SS, and the Gestapo. 
It was said everyone linked to them should be brought to trial.
If the Nuremberg practice were followed, all the formations during the war should have been declared criminal formations. 
Political party leaders, especially the radicals and extremists -- the Red Berets, Beli Orlovi, Tigers of Arkan -- were criminal formations financed by the state and trained by the police and army. 
In Kosovo, you have more Albanians indicted for war crimes than Serbs.
SETimes: What can the people of Kosovo expect from your tenure at the Institute?
Gruda: This is relatively long-term job. 
Since WWII, Jews have worked on the Holocaust and it will take decades, because many times war crimes are difficult and challenging tasks.
In BiH there was an Institute founded during the war that has done incredible work and has published many books. 
We also have books on war crimes, but books written by institutes have reliability and people working there will have better qualifications.
The work of the Institute will be to collect evidence and data, to establish a data bank, offering everyone the opportunity to see it and use it; to systematise the data, to process the data, and to publish it if the financial resources are available. 
And maybe one day it will be helpful to present evidence against Serbia at the ICJ.
We now have thousands of pictures provided by KMDLNJ [the first human rights NGO established in the 1990s] of the most terrible crimes. 
This is a long-term job, which we will finish in the best possible way.
It's lucky that we have institutional support from the minister of justice and the government, which makes the job easier and guarantees quality. 
The Institute will provide quality documentation … for all those who want to know the history and truth.
