10/11/2004
(Various sources -- 03/11/04 – 10/11/04)
A Bulgarian archaeological team led by Georgi Ganetsovski discovered a 9,000-year-old female skeleton and the remains of a farm at a site in northeast Bulgaria.
The skeleton is the oldest ever to have been found in the Balkans.
Excavation work will continue in early 2005.
The second annual Medieval Art Festival was held in Bucharest from 6 November to 7 November.
The event featured a number of exhibitions presenting folklore items, jewelry and icons.
The 28th edition of the Gusla (Balkan fiddle) Festival of Serbia-Montenegro and Republika Srpska opened in Belgrade on 6 November.
Forty musicians from the region gathered for the traditional Serbian music contest, which is being relaunched after a six-year break.
Croatia's Council of National Minorities organised its seventh annual concert.
Fifteen cultural societies took part in the event, including representatives of ethnic Czechs, Hungarians, Macedonians, Poles, Montenegrins, Roma, Bosniaks, Slovenes, Albanians, Jews, Slovaks and Serbs.
The first Balkan Boom Film Festival began in Bucharest on 8 November.
The weeklong festival -- a joint initiative of Romanian authorities, the Goethe Institute and the French Institute -- is aimed at presenting the new wave of directors in the region since 1990.
Shooting of a new Macedonian-German co-production, "Contact", started in Skopje on 8 November.
The film, directed by Sergej Stanojkovski, stars Serbian actor Nikola Kojo and Macedonian actress Labina Mitevska.
"Photographic Portraits from Kastoria", an archive exhibition featuring the works of Greek photographer Leonidas Papazoglou (1872-1918) opened on 8 November at the Museum of Photography in Thessaloniki, Greece.
The exhibition was organised by Giorgos Kolombias, a major collector of Papazoglou's works.
The 21st Bosnia and Herzegovina Theatre Meetings began on 4 November in Brcko.
The weeklong event commemorates the first anniversary of the death of Zaim Muzaferija, one of the country's most prominent actors.
