29/07/2011
(Various sources -- 21/07/11 - 28/07/11)
Just days after the leaders of the 17-nation Eurozone agreed on a second 109-billion-euro rescue package for Greece at an emergency meeting in Brussels on Thursday (July 21st), two major ratings companies again reduced the Balkan nation's credit ratings.
On Monday (July 25th), Moody's Investors Service became the first to do so. 
It cut Greece's credit ratings by three notches to Ca from Caa1, just one notch above default.
According to the agency, the country's default -- which the new three-year bailout programme is aimed at preventing -- was almost certain.
The plan approved last week again includes loans from the EU countries using the euro as their national currency and the IMF, which will be made available to Athens under relieved terms. 
The deal was reached after private financial institutions agreed to shoulder some of the burden by voluntarily contributing 37 billion euros to the package.
Moody's, however, warned that the programme announced by the EU "implies substantial losses" for private creditors and that it sets a negative precedent for creditors of other debt-laden Eurozone members.
It also "implies that the probability of a distressed exchange, and hence a default, on Greek government bonds is virtually 100%," the agency said in a statement on Monday.
In a similar move two days later, Standard & Poor's (S&P) cut the debt-laden Balkan country's credit rating another two steps to CC, with a negative outlook, putting Greek government bonds deeper into "junk" territory.
"Standard & Poor's has concluded that the proposed restructuring of Greek government debt would amount to a selective default under our rating methodology," The New York Times quoted the agency as saying in a statement on Wednesday (July 27th). 
"We view the proposed restructuring as a "distressed exchange" because, based on public statements by European policy makers, it is likely to result in losses for commercial creditors."
Credit ratings agency Fitch, which has also rated Greek bonds as junk, said a day after the new bailout plan was agreed on that it would put Greece in "restricted default". 
The agency also warned that this would also affect the ratings of other Eurozone member states.
EU officials appeared confident last week however that the fresh rescue package and other measures "to stop the risk of contagion," as EU Council President Herman Van Rompuy put it, were steps in the right direction.
"It is clear there is still much work to be done in all corners of Europe before we are firmly out of the stormy waters. 
But the direction is now clear," EU Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs Olli Rehn said in a statement on Friday.
Less than a week later and just two days after downgrading Greece's sovereign debt ratings, Moody's also cut Cyprus's government bond ratings two levels to Baa1 from A2, with a negative outlook.
"Ongoing concerns about Cyprus's fiscal position, which are amplified by the fiscal and economic consequences of the destruction of the Vasilikos power plant on 11 July 2011," the company said in a statement on Wednesday, announcing its decision.
The island's largest power plant, which supplied more than half the country's electricity, was destroyed in a massive explosion at a nearby naval base that was triggered by a cache of Iranian munitions that the authorities seized back in 2009.
The agency also cited the "increasingly fractious domestic political climate," as well as the significant exposure to Greek debt of at least several Cypriot banks.
On Thursday, a day after Moody's decision, the ministers on Cyprus's government submitted their resignations ahead of a cabinet reshuffle.
