27/07/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Mitrovica – 27/07/11
As efforts continue to resolve a crisis at Kosovo's northern border, the country's prime minister has defended a decision to deploy police units at crossing points with Serbia.
The move was "legal and legitimate", Hashim Thaci said in an address to the nation. 
"We cannot forever be indifferent and tolerate our sovereignty being violated and that part of the country being used for smuggling."
Armored units from the ROSU special police force took over Gate 31 at the northern border on Monday (July 25th) but local Serbs erected roadblocks preventing them from approaching a second crossing point, Gate 1. 
In an ensuing sniper attack, one Kosovo policeman was shot and later died from his wounds.
Subsequently during the day, two hand grenades were thrown by unknown assailants and exploded in Northern Mitrovica but caused no casualties.
"My friends, neighbours and family were scared and unclear as to what was going on," Mitrovica resident Adrian Berisha told SETimes. 
"They all fear that March 2004 can happen again."
Pristina, Belgrade and the local Serb community are now in a dialogue aimed at defusing the situation. 
KFOR has announced that an agreement was reached on Tuesday night, paving the way for the police forces to return to Pristina.
The EU has expressed concern about the decision to deploy the police.
"The operation carried out last night by the Kosovo authorities was not helpful. 
It was not done in consultation with the international community and the EU does not approve it," EU High Representative Deputy Spokesperson Maja Kocijancic told SETimes.
Kocijancic said it is essential to calm the situation and return the forces to where they were. 
EULEX, she said, stands ready to assist the Kosovo authorities.
Analysts disagree over how to assess the situation. 
According to Security Studies professor Abdullah Hajdari, the action strengthens Pristina's hand in the negotiations with Belgrade.
"There was a view in Brussels and Belgrade that Pristina does not have the capacity to control northern Kosovo, but this action showed things to be different, and now Pristina will have a better position in the dialogue," Hajdari told SETimes.
But Leposavic journalist Goran Rasic disagrees, saying it was a dangerous move threatening to escalate the overall situation.
"The Serbs there do not want to be governed by Albanians and the only factor that can change that is Belgrade. 
But Belgrade does not have the will because northern Kosovo will be used as a card during the EU membership process," Rasic told SETimes.
Officials in Pristina said the government's intent was ultimately to deploy customs officers to implement the trade embargo against Serbia because EULEX has refused to do so.
