14/11/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 14/11/05
In the past few years, Montenegro has striven for changes:
societal, economic, political and also educational.
As part of the republic's sweeping overhaul of its education system, all 22 gymnasiums -- out of a total 48 high schools -- will start implementing new curricula from September 2006 onward.
As opposed to the mostly fixed subject offerings under the old system, the reformed curricula will have two components:
a general educational core and electives.
Students will now have the opportunity to exercise some choice in what they study, determining in part the shape of their education.
The term "gymnasium", used in Montenegro, is equivalent to the British sixth form college, the college and lycée in France, and the liceo and gimnasio in Italy.
In the United States, the term "high school" is used instead of "gymnasium", and "secondary school" in place of what Montenegrins refer to as "high schools".
In brief, a gymnasium is a general educational school whose aim is to prepare young people for university and higher education.
Institutions of this type date back to 1326 in Montenegro.
Under the planned overhaul, students gain progressively more control over their studies as they move towards graduation.
In the first grade of the gymnasium, the general educational core will account for 90 per cent of a student's course load, with the rest taken up by electives.
By Grade IV, however, a third of the classes taken by students should be electives.
In the final year, special attention is paid to getting ready to the Matura (final) exams.
The Matura itself is being upgraded to meet international standards and given enhanced significance;
in the future, it will enable students to enroll at universities without taking an additional entrance exam, and also facilitate study abroad.
An Examination Centre dealing with the Matura, functioning as an independent institution within the Montenegrin educational system, is in the works.
The choice of electives depends on students’ interests and affinities, their future educational plans, the resources of their local school and the interests of their community, and on the obligation to take the Matura, explains Radovan Ognjanovic, director of the Department for Programmes and Standards at the Bureau for Education Services.
The list of elective subjects is never final;
in fact, it will be revised annually.
Overhauling the gymnasium is just one part of an ambitious, across-the-board strategy for educational reform being pursued by the government.
It is based in large part on a guiding document, the Book of Changes of the Education System of the Republic of Montenegro, which was published in 2001 by the ministry of education and science in collaboration with the Open Society Institute.
Under the strategy, reform is to consist of two basic phases:
formulation of the new education system, and implementation.
The model of change put forward in the Book of Changes incorporates the general principles of other European education systems -- that is, the principles of democracy, autonomy, equal opportunities, decentralisation, deregulation, and depoliticisation and transparency.
As laid out in the Book, the underlying principles of the education reform in Montenegro are decentralisation of the system, equal opportunities, application of a quality system, development of human resources, lifelong education, flexibility, possibilities of transfer (vertical and horizontal interconnectedness of the system), compatibility of curricula with the level of education, interculturalisation and the gradual introduction of changes.
The Book of Changes also suggests setting up bilingual general gymnasiums in regions with a majority Albanian population.
Also, if approved, it would be possible to organise teaching in a foreign language, with the prior consent of the Ministry of Education and Science.
The reforms will affect students, teachers, principals and administrators alike, and as with all major changes, there are challenges as well as benefits.
Proponents say that students will gain a significantly enriched education.
Learning, they say, is more effective when students are studying material they are truly interested in.
Many teachers and principals agree, though some are intimidated by the need to radically overhaul curricula and methods that have been in place throughout their careers.
At the same time, they can look forward to students who are more engaged by learning.
Officials recognise that to make the reforms successful, activities will need to be put in place to help smooth the adjustment process.
