27/07/2011
(24 Chasa - 27/07/11; Reuters, Sofia News Agency, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg, Capital.bg, Mediapool - 26/07/11; DPA, Arab News, Capital.bg, Sofia News Agency - 25/07/11)
Libyan Consul-General Ibrahim al-Furis will be expelled from Bulgaria, the foreign ministry in Sofia said on Tuesday (July 26th), a day after giving the diplomat 24 hours to leave the country.
Once he was announced "persona non grata" in Bulgaria, al-Furis led a group of Libyans in storming and taking control of the North African country's diplomatic mission in Sofia. 
Video footage from the incident showed them smashing a statue and portraits of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi to pieces and, reportedly, taking over the embassy seal and safe.
The group also replaced the national green flag with the one adopted by the rebel Transitional National Council (TNC) in Benghazi, declaring they were joining the rebels.
Libya's charge d'affaires Mohamed Milad and at least one other mission staff were detained, but were later released.
The 24-hour deadline within which al-Furis had to leave the country expired at 10am on Tuesday. 
The diplomat, however, refused to leave and remained inside the embassy building, which the Bulgarian authorities cannot enter as it is considered Libyan territory under international law.
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Nickolay Mladenov was quoted as citing Article 9 of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations as the grounds for the ministry's decision to expel al-Furis from the country.
The article stipulates that a receiving state may "at any time and without having to explain its decision, notify the sending state that the head of the mission or any member of the diplomatic staff of the mission is persona non grata or that any other member of the staff of the mission is not acceptable".
According to Bulgarian media reports on Tuesday, al-Furis had sent a letter to the foreign ministry, saying he expected to be appointed Libya's ambassador shortly, representing the TNC.
Bulgaria, which along with Croatia recognised the Benghazi-based political body as the only legitimate representative of the Libyan people in late June, sought confirmation of this from the Council.
TNC Deputy Foreign Minister Salaheddin Bishari responded on Tuesday, telling Sofia to go ahead and expel al-Furis.
"The TNC would like to inform (you) ... 
that the person mentioned in your email does not belong to the TNC," Reuters quoted the diplomat as saying in a letter to the Bulgarian foreign ministry. 
"Furthermore we recommend that he should be deported according to the decision taken by the Bulgarian government."
A report on the online edition of Sofia-based Capital weekly on Tuesday quoted al-Furis as saying he was unaware of the message from Benghazi and that he was trying to get in contact with rebel officials there. 
If the TNC does not recognise him as its official representative in Sofia, he would seek political asylum in Bulgaria, he added.
