24/08/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/08/11
Serbia will once again attempt to sell national air carrier JAT Airways, a company whose debts are now estimated at about 300m euros. 
The first tender for the sale of a 51% stake in the firm in 2008 fell through -- no company was interested in paying the set price of 51m euros.
Now the state has decided to change its strategy and offer potential partners a newly founded company that would be free from debt. 
The condition for participation in the tender is that the bidding company must have transported at least 1.5 million passengers in 2010, and posted a balance of 200m euros. 
The new company has been given the symbolic name NewCo.
Applications for participation in the tender will be accepted through September 30th. 
Government representatives believe this time the offer will be much more attractive to potential investors.
"The partner is getting a wholly new company in which it will invest together with the state of Serbia, while also getting what is currently the healthiest in JAT -- the existing fleet, pilots, slots at the most attractive locations and with the most attractive dates, at the best airports in the world and Europe," State Secretary in Charge of Air Traffic Miodrag Miljkovic said.
But Belgrade economist Mahmut Busatlija worries about the success of JAT's sale.
"The tender was called at a time when the global economic crisis looks set to gain momentum again. 
If that happens, people will first give up on travelling. 
It is completely unclear who will enter a deal with the Serbian air carrier under such conditions," Busatlija told SETimes.
He finds another decision by the government controversial: writing off JAT's debt, by placing it on the backs of Serbia's tax payers.
"Instead of calling the tender, the state should have tried to restructure JAT, cut down its debts, and make the company more functional. 
However, in such situations in Serbia, there is always too much politics and too little professionalism," Busatlija said.
Economist Milan Kovacevic says JAT's top asset is its exclusive flying rights to some destinations. 
But even that does not guarantee the tender's success.
"The right to fly to attractive destinations is JAT's real value. 
That is the trump card for finding a buyer, but with the prerequisite of the company previously shrugging off the weight of debts and excess employees," Kovacevic said.
In Belgrade, the political opposition also objected to the tender. 
The Serbian Radical Party said JAT's property was worth 220m euros, and that the government wants to sell it below price.
"The Serbian government's decision to sell JAT through the strategic partnership model is a plan to give the company's property to foreigners for practically nothing, and to transfer JAT's debt to the state and Serbian citizens," the Radical Party insists.
The once powerful airline has seen a decline in operations over the past two decades. 
According to official data, the JAT fleet currently only has 14 outdated airplanes -- ten Boeing 737-300s and four ATR72-200s.
