27/09/2011
By Linda Karadaku and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 27/09/11
At least ten people were injured Tuesday (September 27th) in clashes between local Serbs and KFOR soldiers at the Jarinje checkpoint in northern Kosovo.
As the soldiers tried to remove barriers the Serbs had constructed in July near the border crossings, Molotov cocktails and stones were thrown by the crowd. 
KFOR replied with rubber bullets and pepper spray.
A spokesperson for the NATO peacekeepers, Kai Gudenoge, said four soldiers were wounded after a homemade bomb was thrown at them. 
According to him, one was severely wounded and was evacuated by helicopter.
Serb representatives and KFOR have presented different versions of how the clash started. 
The Serbs claim their protests were peaceful, but KFOR says that stones were thrown at the soldiers and they were forced to react.
"We have been acting in self-defense, if they shoot, we shoot back. 
We will react in self-defence depending on the acting of the crowd. 
We are reacting depending on the crowd," Gudenoge told SETimes.
Meanwhile, the director of the Kosovska Mitrovica hospital, Milan Jakovljevic, told SETimes that six wounded Serbs had been admitted to the hospital with "wounds inflicted by battle ammunition".
Tensions have been high at the Jarinje crossing since Monday afternoon, when KFOR removed one of the barricades held by the Serbs. 
The demonstrators responded by setting up new blocks and closed off KFOR's access with their own bodies.
Although the night went by peacefully, on Tuesday morning KFOR threw tear gas at the gathered Serbs and arrested several of them, after which it used machines to remove some of the barricades. 
But the Serbs returned to the crossing, set up new blocks and at the time of the incident there were about 1,000 Serbs at the barricades.
Brussels is to host a new round of talks between Belgrade and Pristina Tuesday. 
Asked by SETimes whether the talks would be canceled due to the events at Jarinje, the head of Belgrade's negotiating team, Borislav Stefanovic, said that the situation on the field "makes dialogue difficult".
"Some are trying to do everything to make Belgrade pull out of the dialog, after which it would be accused of not wanting a peaceful solution to the Kosovo crisis."
EULEX said that the barricades should be removed and that Tuesday's action was a joint one between KFOR and EULEX. 
EULEX spokesperson Irina Gudelevic said that the barricades should be removed because they are an obstacle for the free movement of people and goods.
EULEX was present in the gates together with Kosovo police and customs officers.
