22/08/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/08/11
Vojvodina officials say they harbour great expectations regarding the opening of an office in Brussels in mid-October, primarily to access European funds.
They say this is a normal European practice and over 300 regions from various European states have offices in Brussels.
"It is very important that we are [present] at the place where decisions are made.
By opening an office in Brussels, we hope to have easier access to European projects and better possibilities for foreign investment in Vojvodina," future Brussels office head Predrag Novikov told SETimes.
All of Serbia can only benefit from that, he added.
The move has caused some alarm in Serbia and has led to claims that the move is part of various Vojvodina parties and provincial leaders' separatist tendencies.
Right-wing parties protested the Vojvodina statute earlier, claiming it left relations between Vojvodina and the central government in Belgrade too loose.
The announcement about the Brussels office sparked particularly accusatory reposnses.
The opposition Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) in Vojvodina claimed there are parties and people within the Vojvodina administration who "propagate separatism".
It is they who had insisted the most on the opening of the Brussels office, DSS representative Borko Ilic told SETimes.
Asked why DSS had no problem with the fact that the Serbian cities of Nis and Kragujevac have offices in Brussels, but object to Vojvodina's, Ilic replied that Vojvodina authorities had asked for special status for their representatives, as well as for diplomatic passports.
"Also, nowhere in the contract on the opening of the Vojvodina office is it mentioned that the provincial representatives have an obligation to represent a policy in line with the central [national] government," Ilic said.
Opponents of the Vojvodina office in Brussels point to a statement by former German Ambassador to Belgrade Andreas Zobel on Kosovo, which provided a reason for being cautious.
In 2007, Zobel said that "insistence on Kosovo being a part of Serbia would destabilise Serbia, after which the issue of Vojvodina could also be raised."
Novikov waved off all accusations of separatist tendencies.
"Vojvodina will not endanger the state of Serbia with a single act.
Our office will be located at the Serbian Embassy in Brussels, and our representatives will have Serbian diplomatic passports," he said.
Novikov also reiterated that the reasons for opening the office are mostly economic.
"At the beginning of our work, we will have only two officials in Brussels.
We will increase the number of representatives only if the office brings money to Vojvodina and Serbia.
We recently won a European ambrosia plant destruction project worth 400,000 euros and with that project alone we have paid for the entire first year of the office's work," Novikov said.
Aleksandar Popov, representative of the Centre for Regionalism NGO, said that opposition to the Vojvodina office is a result of phobias caused by the state's disintegration during the previous decades.
"Today every major company has an office in Brussels, so why not Vojvodina?" he told SETimes.
Popov explained that the term "region" in Europe allows certain areas of different states to express their specific characteristics and be more financially independent from the central government.
"It would be important to implement that in Serbia as well.
This way, large parts of Serbia practically remain empty, while people run off to bigger cities, primarily Belgrade and Novi Sad," Popov said.
