22/08/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 22/08/11
Onur Oymen hopes Turkey's main opposition party will not back away from its secular nature and Kemalist ideology, while implementing internal reforms.
The 70-year-old politician, who until last year served as a deputy chairman of the Republican People Party (CHP), is now wary of its new secular leadership.
"The specialness of the CHP is [that] our party was founded by [Mustafa Kemal] Ataturk.
But what we are witnessing today is those who protect Kemalist ideas are being taken from the scene, replaced by less-knowledgeable figures," he tells SETimes, commenting on the recent shakeup of the party's Central Executive Committee (MYK), a move that was expected in the post-election period.
Nine figures entered the new 16 seat MYK at its general meeting on August 17th, while four top advisers -- Osman Koruturk, Suheyl Batum, Hurşit Gunes and Umut Oran -- are no longer part of the team.
One surprising change was to the party's number two position:
Nihat Matkap was given the post, replacing Gursel Tekin who will now be responsible for press relations.
"Change is very important for any party, but not so often," says Oymen, pointing out the previous MYK was created just eight months ago.
"In the near future, especially ahead of the constitutional changes, the party's political line will be very important for millions of our loyal members," he underlined.
Akin Unver, the Ertegun Lecturer of Turkish Studies at Princeton University, says many secularists in Turkey seem to be settling with the idea that the CHP will not assume government on its own in the near future, so the party is trying to re-formulate itself as credible opposition party.
"Therefore, the best one can expect from the new CHP is a productive and constructive opposition party, able to restrain some of the authoritarian tendencies of the ruling AKP elite," he explained.
"That said, CHP elites have indicated earlier that they would like the constitution to represent all segments of the society and therefore conveyed their intentions of close co-operation with the AKP in this matter."
Still, there are serious divisions within the CHP itself, Unver says.
"As the new leadership could only provide 1% increase in party votes in the general elections -- the old guard is becoming more influential again."
"Although CHP's new leadership aims to produce a constitution with co-operation with the AKP, CHP's old guard will probably find ways to make things more difficult for the new leadership.
The best way they can do that is to rely on intra-party vetoes and block CHP's decision-making processes," he noted.
Faik Oztrak, the current CHP deputy chairman, however, sees no reason for confrontation between the new CHP leadership and the more ideological old guard.
"Our political course is well-known and based on a series of programmes that we've declared during the [June 12th] election campaign, with participation of both former and current MYK members," he said, adding that the party will start working towards local elections.
"The new MYK will deal with accomplishing our platform.
Most of our new [MYK] members come from the party's assembly, who are quite knowledgeable about the Ataturk ideology," he explained.
For Engin Selcuk, an Istanbul-based political scientist, the shakeup of the CHP is based "not on Turkey's political needs, but on the internal party divisions".
"There is no huge public interest in the CHP internal meetings as it used to be before," he said.
"The more the internal divisions increase in the party, the less support they get among the society."
In the meantime Selcuk believes the CHP has a nature, formed over many years, which no new leader or MYK team can change.
