31/01/2012
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 31/01/12
Sports fans in Serbia are in high spirits, celebrating a string of athletic successes that they say is bringing a much-needed respite from the global economic crisis and promotes Serbia as an athletic power, rather than a nation still recovering from war.
At least 15,000 sports fans celebrated the recent successes of Serbian athletes in downtown Belgrade on Monday (January 30th), despite the frigid temperatures.
Vuvuzelas, whistles, Serbian flags and posters greeted the country's European champion water polo team and handball players, who won the silver medal in the European Championship.
Fans also cheered tennis player Novak Djokovic, who defended his title at the Australian Open on Sunday.
"We made our dreams come true. 
I hope we made you happy too," handball goalkeeper Darko Stanic told the throngs of cheering fans.
Belgraders spilled out onto the streets Sunday evening when Djokovic won the Open, the water polo players became European champions and the handball players won the silver medal.
The "triple crown" at the weekend raised spirits all over the country.
"People identify with successful athletes and self-respect increases throughout the nation. 
In this case, athletes are a symbol, representatives of the whole nation and everyone feels as through they are participating in that success. 
That helps people have a more positive perception of themselves, their chances and life circumstances," University of Belgrade professor and psychologist Zarko Trebjesanin told SETimes.
He also believes the athletes' successes are important, because they are role models for the country's youth.
"In sports, 95% of success is achieved through hard work and sacrifice. 
That is a good model for young people, especially if it is pointed out to them that success was a result of hard work, that it is not just a gift from heaven," Trebjesanin said.
Srdjan Djuric, owner of Belgrade-based advertising agency Pleon Olaf & McAteer, said that the international achievements of Serbian athletes also affect the country's international image.
"Due to the Yugoslav wars, Serbia has had an extremely unfavourable image in the world. 
Thanks to the successes of athletes … the impression of the country is slowly starting to change. 
Serbia is becoming the land of European water polo and volleyball champions and the homeland of the world's number one tennis player," Djuric told SETimes.
Success is also important for domestic perceptions, he said.
"We are victims of the stereotype that Serbs are lazy and inefficient. 
Success in sports shows that the nation can be successful where there is a system and where people are adequately rewarded for their work," Djuric said.
Serbian Water Polo Association spokesman Marko Bogdanovic told SETimes that establishing a good system is the most important thing.
"The best people are staying in Serbian water polo and passing their knowledge on to the younger generations. 
The system we have established, even though we receive less funding than some other sports, has enabled us to dominate global water polo for decades," he said.
Fans agree that the successes of athletes mean a great deal to them.
"I was so proud on Sunday. 
Finally, something good happened to us in the midst of this [economic] crisis," says Nikola Kostic, 20, who joined thousands of other fans to celebrate the medals of the water polo and handball players.
"Of course, I'm proud of the athletes' successes. 
We're first in water polo, tennis, previously in volleyball ... 
that's not a small achievement for a country with a population of eight million," fan Rastko Dobric, 32, told SETimes.
