24/02/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/02/12
M.K., 33, is a physician at the Clinical Centre of Serbia who wants to improve his skills and acquire more knowledge.
He says he can’t do that in Serbia, which is why he is planning to continue his career abroad.
He doesn’t want his full name used.
“The situation here is so desperate that we sterilise and re-sterilise single-use instruments… we use them until they fall apart.
They are used until something completely breaks down.
We have 30-year-old devices.
When people from abroad come here, they want to take those devices to antique shops or medical museums to see how medicine has developed over the centuries.
What has been standard procedure in the world for years will not be done here for a long while yet,” M.K.
told SETimes.
Poor equipment, corruption, and complicated administrative procedures are the biggest problems for the healthcare system in Serbia.
Although authorities say they have taken a number of steps, it seems neither the doctors nor the patients are satisfied.
Serbian newspapers constantly print articles on corruption in healthcare and a growing number of arrests.
The most famous scandal involves the former head of the Health Insurance Bureau, Svetlana Vukajlovic, who was arrested in connection with the procurement of vaccines against the new flu strain.
More recently, four doctors were arrested earlier this month, for allegedly taking bribes from a company manufacturing orthopedic devices, in exchange for instructing patients to buy devices from that specific company.
Justice Minister Snezana Malovic said that in healthcare-related public procurements, including the procurement of flu vaccines, the state budget has lost 11m euros since 2009.
Ministry officials say they are doing everything they can but the fight against corruption is a systemic problem, which all segments of society must combat.
In a statement to SETimes, Assistant Healthcare Minister Dubravka Saranovic said that all complaints by patients are investigated and depending on the case, handled by either the health inspectorate or the interior ministry.
“In 2011, there were 80 reports of some types of corruption and all were forwarded to the interior ministry.
The majority of my colleagues have not succumbed to corruption and I advise them to stay true to their profession and the patients to report each corruption case,” Saranovic said, adding that every report would remain anonymous and would be forwarded to the relavent service.
Aside from corruption, patients also face daunting administrative red tape that prevents them from exercising their right to healthcare.
“When I went to my primary health care unit to schedule an appointment, they couldn’t fit me in because there is only one ophthalmologist and I had to go back for a new referral,” said pensioner Dragica Zigic, 73.
Chronically ill patients who need ongoing medical services are often frustrated.
“I am diabetic and use many different medicines and I have to go and get new prescriptions for the same therapy every month,” said 53-year-old housewife Branislava Milic.
Healthcare Ministry representatives say they are battling such issues and have sent a proposal to the Health Insurance Bureau that would ease administrative procedures for patients.
“We are proposing that the validity of prescriptions be extended to three months, so that patients do not have to see their doctor for medication every month,” Saranovic explained.
M.K.
told SETimes he has heard that Germany is “publicly thanking Serbia for the ‘brains’ Serbia is giving it”.
The chief issue, according to him, is equipment shortages.
“We have people who can work and know how to perform surgery, but have nothing to do it with.”
Ministry representatives respond that significant amounts have been invested in providing both eduation and equipment, primarily to oncology clinics.
“We have made a plan for distributing equipment [for] these institutions:
mammography machines, scanners, MRI and radiation devices,” Saranovic said, adding that wait lists for radiation therapy are being addressed.
