22/07/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 22/07/11
When the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) announced the "Kurdish opening" two years ago, it raised hopes the country might manage to end its conflict through political negotiations and a broadening of Kurdish cultural rights.
But last week's PKK attack in Silvan, Diyarbakir which left 13 soldiers dead and seven others wounded has again thrown a major hurdle in the way of the "Kurdish opening".
With the pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) boycotting parliament in protest over a court decision to exclude one of its elected members, Hatip Dicle, from entering parliament and last week's declaration of "democratic autonomy", any near-term rapprochement between the AKP and the BDP -- and hence a political solution to the Kurdish issue -- does not bode well.
Since the ambush, parliamentary negotiations between AKP and BDP have ceased, as the AKP is under pressure to take a tough line against the terrorism – and by extension the BDP -- which is viewed by many as the legal political wing of the PKK.
Meanwhile, far-right opposition leaders have called on the government to declare an end to "Kurdish opening" and send troops to Diyarbakir and even Kandil, the PKK base in northern Iraq.
"This [Kurdish opening] initiative has collapsed in Diyarbakir. 
The AKP should admit that and close this 'opening' right now," Oktay Vural, Nationalist Action Party (MHP) deputy chairman and parliamentary group chairman, told SETimes.
"The military authorities should provide satisfying responses to the public's questions about the Silvan attack. 
We should start a real war against terrorism, instead of using this topic politically," he says, arguing involving Kurdish politicians in negotiations with the government is not working and encourages new attacks by the PKK.
In his most recent statement issued at the beginning of the week, PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan, who is currently serving a life sentence, threatened "more violence" if parliament fails to convince the PKK that they have plans to implement democratic measures to address the Kurdish question, according to Firat News Agency.
For Kurdish politicians, PKK attacks should not be a reason to discourage the AKP government from drafting a new democratic constitution and resolving the Kurdish question.
"We may see similar attacks in the future, as PKK leaders urged it before the Diyarbakir ambush as well, but attacks should not force the government to retreat from its decision to take steps toward peace," Mehmet Nezir Karabas, a Kurdish politician and former BDP MP, told SETimes.
On the contrary, he says, part of the reason for the Diyarbakir attacks "might be the fact that the government backed down from its pro-election promises to the Kurdish people".
"There is a major mistrust between the AKP leaders and the Kurdish people right now," he says, arguing that instead of following its Kurdish opening, the AKP leaders have recently dubbed the conflict as a "terror problem".
Meanwhile, Mustafa Akis, AKP MP and deputy-chairman of the Parliamentary National Security Commission, rules out any change in government policy.
"We never stepped back from either our Kurdish opening or the security strategy of struggling with PKK. 
Unlike others, we try to keep these two [Kurdish opening and PKK] separate", he told SETimes.
As for the Diyarbakir ambush, Akis says Turkey is ready to "overcome the difficulties of dealing with terrorists and prevent such attacks in the future".
