24/09/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 24/09/11
Fatmir Limaj, a member of parliament and deputy head of Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party (PDK) of was placed under house arrest Thursday (September 22nd) and charged with various counts of war crimes, allegedly committed in 1999 at an improvised detention centre located in the village of Kleçkë.
At the request of EULEX prosecutor Maurizio Salustro, the pre-trial judge at the District Court of Pristina has ordered one-month house detention for Limaj, as well as the temporary confiscation of his travel documents.
The decision on Thursday to take legal action against Limaj came within 24 hours of the Constitutional Court of Kosovo's ruling that MPs, the president, prime minister and cabinet members "do not enjoy immunity from prosecution for actions and decisions taken outside the scope of their responsibilities" and may be arrested even while the Kosovo Assembly is in session.
Experts consider that the Court has opened the door to prosecute public officials, but that it has also raised questions regarding the independence of the Assembly.
Seb Bytyci, Executive Director of the Balkan Policy Institute-IPOL said that the court interpretation is a historic decision.
"The court decision is aimed at clarifying the issue of immunity of deputies, in order that the immunity will not be misused to escape justice for crimes they have committed," he said. 
"This is a historic decision because it prevents the establishment of a tradition of 'strong' immunity as in Albania for example, where MPs cannot be pursued by justice for any illegal action they do."
Agron Demi, Executive Director of GAP Institute for Advanced Studies told SETimes that he is worried that the decision has become personalized with the case of Limaj.
"The recent decision of the Constitutional Court is one of the most weakly argued decisions that this court has granted so far. 
It is a disturbing phenomenon in Kosovo that laws are designed to adapt to specified individuals, in this case Fatmir Limaj," he said.
"From today [the ruling] will affect the work of the Kosovo Assembly. 
Limaj has been given a month under house arrest. 
During this time he cannot play the role of representative of the people because his movement is limited and at present the Assembly shall have 119 MPs instead of 120. 
And this affects the work of the institution," Demi said.
Bytyci does not agree that decision is specific to one individual, but is rather part of a more general effort to improve justice in the country.
"Limaj is the first case that has raised the issue of immunity of MPs, but the immunity issue should have been clarified sooner or later. 
Therefore, this decision serves the justice system in general."
He acknowledged, however, that concerns about the independence of the Assembly may be valid. 
"The reaction is fair in the sense that the decision means that MPs may be arrested during sessions. 
So it opens the way to abuse executive power at the expense of the legislature. 
So just this aspect of the decision is troubling," he said.
According to Demi, police and courts in Kosovo tend to come under the influence of the ruling party, increasing the likelihood that opposition MPs will be targeted.
"In all countries where the international community has helped the state building process, opposition politicians have been protected from arbitrary actions of people in power. 
But in Kosovo, this rule does not apply, and we have a fragile parliamentary democracy," Demi said.
According to Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi, "institutions and citizens who want to benefit this country want the courts in Kosovo to be independent, fair and take action based on evidence and facts, not on political grounds.
But in reality, he added "politics intervenes in the justice system. 
Unfortunately, this has always happened, and it endangers the normal functioning of the justice system.
