24/09/2011
By Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 24/09/11
Following a report earlier this week that the Serbian government will bring the north of Kosovo back into Serbia's system of taxation, State Secretary in the Serb Ministry for Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic told SETimes on Thursday (September 22nd) that the government has changed the law on VAT for three articles, but not for all of them.
"It has changed [the law] only for gasoline and oil, brought back taxes for cars, vehicles as well, and pre-paid mobile phones because there was a lot of manipulation and smuggling," he told SETimes.
Kosovo media reported on Thursday that trucks from Kosovo were not allowed to enter Serbia without the Serbian VAT certificate.
Kosovo Minister of Trade and Industry Mimoza Kusari-Lila is expecting an answer from EU negotiator Robert Cooper to decide on what steps Pristina should take.
"We did not know that until our trucks were turned back. 
This is a violation of the principle of the agreement reached on September 2nd," Kusari-Lila said.
The Kosovo authorities say the VAT for Serbian or other imports are collected by Kosovo customs.
"The operational plan for the establishment of the customs authority in the two border crossings in northern Kosovo clarifies that the revenue will be collected at the customs terminal in Mitrovica. 
According to the legislation, the internal VAT is collected by the Kosovo Tax Administration," Kosovo Customs Director General Naim Huruglica told SETimes.
By taking this decision, Serbia has made its previous decision -- based on which Serb exporters had tax free status the moment Serbian customs and tax authorities proved their goods are sent from Serbia to Kosovo -- invalid, Huruglica said.
Huruglica added that absent a Kosovo customs authority in northern Kosovo, the scheme had been used to declare false exports, while goods were sold in Serbia without paying VAT and excise taxes.
"Serbia pretends to protect itself from smuggling and manipulations, while trying in political terms to sell it as a decision to collect VAT," he said.
"Despite the fact that it is impossible to pretend to collect VAT twice, in reality, it goes fully against the economic interests of Serbia, because Serb products would be much more expensive and they would not be competitive in the market," Huruglica concluded.
EULEX confirmed that collecting taxes is a matter for the local authorities.
"The main point is that Kosovo is a single customs area. 
… The rule of law must prevail for the benefit of everyone," EULEX Press Office deputy head Francoise Lambert told SETimes.
Economics expert Ibrahim Rexhepi equates the placing of northern Kosovo in Serbia's tax system with Kosovo's "final division from an economic point of view".
"It becomes a serious political problem, which, if not solved with the intervention of the international mechanisms, the EU and the UN, can bring a very dangerous situation and threatens to have very serious consequences," Rexhepi told SETimes.
