25/11/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 25/11/11
Former EU Commissioner Leonard Orban was recently appointed to head Romania's newly created European Affairs Ministry, which is to deal with efficient use of available EU funds. 
Romania has found itself at the very bottom among members of the bloc when it comes to his issue.
SETimes correspondent Paul Ciocoiu spoke to Orban about the challenges involved.
SETimes: Is the decision to found a ministry specially dedicated to drawing EU funds a belated one?
Leonard Orban: My simple answer is better later than never.
SETimes: Did you assess the problems leading to poor utilisation of EU funds? 
What went wrong?
Orban: Of course we did an assessment, including what is going on at the structures and authorities that manage EU funds. 
Based on this evaluation we decided to take a series of measures meant to finally increase the absorption rate.
There are a multitude of problems and difficulties -- insufficient administrative capacity and a certain lack of experience in this field. 
We have noticed differences among the state institutions and that those state structures that have done better are those that managed funds before Romania joined the EU, namely pre-accession funds.
The others encounter bigger difficulties in managing these funds. 
At the same time, we have found difficulties that the recipients run into when preparing and then implementing their projects. 
These difficulties relate to procedures that are more complicated than usual. 
Also, difficulties related to the hesitant involvement of the private sector, such as the banking sector in this field.
But let me say it clearly: we are also facing, to put it diplomatically, certain irregularities in the system.
SETimes: Do you have any statistics concerning fraudulent projects?
Orban: Not us, but those who deal with such cases. 
The anti-fraud department has a clear view of the projects under investigation, or those against which a legal case is being bought. 
But if they exist, either number is not significant.
SETimes: But are we looking at a decreasing number?
We do not really have terms of comparison here because the more we propose to attract larger funds the bigger the risk of running into such cases. 
There have been problems concerning public acquisitions that the European Commission has found to be systematic. 
Thus, we have radically changed this system.
SETimes: What does the public acquisition system consist of and what are the main measures taken to correct it?
Orban: The measures are under way, both legislative changes that are already in place and changes in the system. 
The latter include the two state structures that deal in the public acquisitions in the EU funds managing mechanism. 
That means the two institutions from now on will be held responsible. 
Thus far, regardless of the decision they took no one was held accountable.
Now they joined the system and their activity is audited and has to be corrected if flaws are found so as to make these institutions responsible. 
To achieve these changes, we risked being suspended from EU fund payments for six months, a move that would have blocked the activity for the next year's first semester. 
This is why reforming the public acquisition system is by far our first priority.
SETimes: What are your main objectives during your term?
As concerns absorption of EU funds, I have established, as a goal, reaching an absorption rate of a minimum 20% by 2013. 
That means effectively spending 3.1 billion euros from this very moment until the end of 2012. 
Compare that figure to the 716m euros spent so far.
SETimes: Some in the EU argue those countries that do not manage to attract a significant amount of the funds allotted from the 2007-2013 EU budget should receive less from 2014-2020 budget.
Orban: Yes, this is an argument used by those member states, net contributors, who want to reduce their share of the EU budget. 
Why give Romania, Bulgaria and other countries so much money when the absorption rate is so low?
We, in turn, will have to present two counter arguments. 
First, we will have to improve the internal situation by raising the absorption rate; and second, it is the EU's poorer states that need this money the most, granted through the cohesion policy. 
It is in the EU's best interest to blur the differences between developed and less developed states. 
With no cohesion, the EU cannot move forward.
SETimes: Do you think Romania would have weathered the economic crisis better if it had been able to draw more EU funds?
Orban: Absolutely! 
I am looking at Poland, which has managed to maintain a high level of EU funds absorption. 
They admitted the economic growth it generated was larger than they expected. 
And they did not invest only in infrastructure, but in projects that generated economic growth. 
Of course, for a country such as Romania, infrastructure is essential. 
It is a pre-condition. 
In parallel, we need to invest in fields that generate development, that have a multiplier role for the economy.
SETimes: Romanians see the EU funds field as very entangled and bureaucratic. 
Have you considered relaxing the procedures and the project selection criteria?
Orban: It was not simple to draw these funds. 
We deal with complicated procedures and many other difficulties that are hard to remove. 
But I personally have noticed an improvement and a perspective of a more rapid advance in this field, at least in terms of road infrastructure.
The procedures required by European regulations are also complicated. 
But sometimes we have made these procedures more complicated than necessary. 
One of the priorities is to simplify them and we are analysing this.
It is a thin line we are treading on because we have to be more flexible but rigorous at the same time. 
The first condition is to ensure a rigorous financial management. 
Thus, we will not simplify more than the case [allows] so as to endanger or to cast doubt on this rigorous financial management.
SETimes: There is a debate on a new administrative division of Romania. 
One of the arguments in favour of this measure is that it will lead to a better absorption of the EU funds.
Orban: We have sometimes observed a lack of a systemic approach, one in which projects are submitted by different county councils that run counter to each other.
We have also noticed a lack of correlation among financed projects even within a county.
Creating larger entities, regions, can lead to a systemic approach and help identify those priorities that can be financed through EU funds. 
The lack of correlation led to cases where a road construction project was followed by a main water pipe connection project so the newly built road had to be torn up.
Such examples are numerous, where there are many visions and options -- sometimes dictated by various interests -- and an agreement cannot be reached. 
As a result, we find ourselves compelled sometimes to withdraw the financing of projects that cannot be implemented in time.
