21/07/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/07/11
By arresting Goran Hadzic, the last remaining fugitive sought by The Hague tribunal, Serbia has shrugged off a heavy political and moral burden, but some fear new political conditions will be set for Serbia en route to the EU.
"Hadzic's arrest is also the end of conditioning Belgrade with co-operation with The Hague tribunal.
The tribunal will now be taken off the front pages of Serbian newspapers, but it is certain there will be new conditions, primarily those related to Kosovo.
They will be even bigger if Belgrade fails to find a way to regulate relations with Pristina," Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences professor Predrag Simic told SETimes.
That claim is backed by a part of Serbian President Boris Tadic's speech at the news conference announcing the arrest of Hadzic, who is charged with war crimes in Croatia.
Tadic said that Serbia had not arrested the indictee due to external pressure and EU candidacy, but rather due to its moral obligations.
"It is also a complete illusion that pressure will yield results in the matter of Kosovo.
We do not operate under pressure," Tadic said, adding that the stopping of EU enlargement would be "a disastrous mistake that would first affect the Balkan peoples", but trigger consequences also felt by the EU itself.
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic gave a similar speech, saying that by arresting Hadzic, the 46th indictee demanded of Serbia by The Hague, "the state has come out of the dungeon it had been in for 20 years.
The EU should stop blackmailing Serbia;
there is no more reason for conditioning Serbia on its road to European integration."
Simic also predicted Kosovo would not be a formal condition for Serbia's membership as long as there were Union members who refused to recognise Pristina's independence, though he stressed there would be plenty of informal pressure.
"Perhaps even under the influence of Kosovo, relations between Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are improving.
The Balkan countries have realised they have many reasons to jointly lobby for EU membership and good mutual relations can open the doors to the Union for them," Simic said.
Hadzic's capture raises another question -- will those responsible for hiding fugitives from The Hague tribunal be arrested?
Military analyst Aleksandar Radic thinks such an investigation would be useful for Serbia, but also said that not a single Balkan country had so far unveiled networks of aides to Hague tribunal indictees.
"That did not happen in Croatia, after the arrest of General Ante Gotovina.
And in such investigations it would be interesting to see who directly assisted the indictees in hiding, particularly who provided them with political support in the venture," Radic told SETimes.
He does not think Serbian authorities knew the whereabouts of the indictees and were only awaiting a suitable moment for their arrest.
"That is a conspiracy theory presented in the media, without any valid proof.
The political decision on arresting the fugitives was made after the government led by Boris Tadic was formed more than three years ago.
I believe the indictees were arrested when the security forces located them," Radic said.
Completing co-operation with The Hague tribunal is behind schedule, he notes.
"Had it been achieved earlier, this success would certainly hold more weight for Serbia, because there was a strong consensus on EU enlargement.
Now, however, certain members are no longer sure if Greece should remain a member, let alone if Serbia should join the Union," Radic said.
Hadzic was arrested on Mount Fruska Gora, not far from Novi Sad, on Wednesday (July 20th), after seven years in hiding.
His lawyer, Toma Fila, told reporters in Belgrade that his client had been hiding abroad "for a long time".
Fila added that Hadzic would not appeal the decision on his extradition to The Hague.
According to Serbian laws, the indictee is to be delivered to the tribunal within seven to ten days.
