27/01/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/01/12
Kosovo's parliament sent the draft law on pensions back to the government for review on Thursday (January 26th), after concluding that the legislation would violate the dignity of the pensioners.
"The categorisation of the pensioners has not been done properly. 
The worst is that the law would enter into force in 2016," Ismet Beqiri, the LDK’s parliamentary whip, told reporters after the decision.
A delegation of the Coalition of Kosovo Pensioners met earlier this week with Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi, and handed over a petition against the draft law on the state-financed pensions plan. 
More than 15,000 pensioners signed the petition, which demands the average pensions be raised to 60% of the average monthly salary -- which was 272 euros in 2011.
"We have formulated our amendments [to the government draft law] -- if they are included, the problems of the pensioners will be solved and their dignity will be returned," Pensioners and Invalids Union head Shaban Kajtazi told SETimes.
Retiree Sefedin Bakalli, from Gjakova in western Kosovo, receives 80 euros a month under the current plan.
"No one can live with that money. 
You cannot even buy medicine with it," Bakalli tells SETimes.
The draft, prepared by the ministry of labour and social welfare, planned increases in the basic pensions from 45 to 50 euros, and payments for those who have made contributions from 80 to 101 euros.
The bottom level, currently 45 euros a month, is paid to those who never worked. 
The second tier, currently 80 euros, is paid to those who were employed and paid contributions in the former Yugoslavia, but not to the current Kosovo pensions fund established in 2002.
For those who made contributions during their employment since 2002, the Trust of Pensions Savings compensates them, depending on the amount the worker set aside.
Another issue plaguing the pension sector is the missing contributions from workers up to 1999.
Under the Yugoslav pension system, less than a half of the population qualified for retirement received pension benefits, and many Kosovars were prevented from participating in the system after 1989, when Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's regime began the process of abolishing Kosovo's autonomy and placing it under Serbian rule.
From July 1st 2002, Kosovo's government has provided basic pensions for all citizens over 65, financed by the budget, by mandatory and voluntary contributions of employers and employees and by voluntary pension schemes.
Bakalli is one of the many Kosovo Albanians who contributed to the state programme, and lost the money after the Yugoslav republic dissolved.
He worked for 33 years as a judge and a prosecutor in Kosovo, when it was part of the former Yugoslavia. 
As Milosevic's regime crumbled, Bakalli was forced into retirement in 1992.
From 1992 to 1999, he received about 500 euros a month. 
From 1999 on, however, he received only about one-tenth of that. 
"My children help me, after all those years of work. 
It's such a pity ... 
I don't know if that money will ever be brought back to Kosovo," he said.
Ministry official Lirie Mavraj told SETimes that the issue is more of a political issue than a judicial one. 
She said that the pension system was interrupted in 1999 when Kosovo was put under international administration -- in 2002, UNMIK issued Regulation 2001/35, which established the Fund of Pensions Insurance and the Trust of Pensions Savings.
Jeton Demi, media official for the Trust of Pensions Savings, says that the Trust deals with current pensions, and lacks the judicial authority to deal with the pre-2002 payments.
He acknowledges "the problem of pensions coverage for citizens over 65 years old is complex and cannot be solved with the establishment of one institution."
