20/07/2011
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 20/07/11
The polarisation between "White Turks" -- a social category which is considered as rich, educated, Westernised, and urbanite, but sensitive about the protection of the status quo -- and the other parts of the society, looks set to increase.
The latest protest against Aynur Dogan, a Kurdish singer and one of the most impressive young voices in Turkey, has sparked debate among the media and the public alike over social polarisation.
The audience was waiting for Javier Limón and his new project called "Mujeres de Agua" (Women of Water), bringing together singers from the Mediterranean (Portugal, Spain, Greece, Turkey and Israel) as a part of the Istanbul Jazz Festival in Nisantasi, one of the most "Westernised" and "cultivated" parts of Istanbul.
The concert started as planned with beautiful performances of flamenco, guitar, percussion and piano.
However, everything changed when Aynur took to the stage representing Turkey and started to sing in her native language, Kurdish.
After a certain tolerance for her first song, the second one prompted some in the crowd to shout "the martyrs' blood is not yet dried" and "sing Turkish".
During the third song, the level of protest increased, with some people throwing objects on stage, forcing her to leave.
Following attacks on Turkish soldiers last week by the PKK, killing 13 and wounding seven, tensions on the street have risen along with nationalist sentiment.
The attack came on the heels of the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Congress' declaration of "democratic autonomy".
Ekrem Eddy Guzeldere, political analyst for the European Stability Initiative (ESI), explained to SETimes the backdrop of the protests.
"The protests show that a significant part of the secular, upper-middle class, well-educated people living a Western lifestyle, don't accept Kurdish as a cultural component of Turkey, but equal it with terrorism."
Emre Gokalp, sociology professor at Anadolu University, says the attack against Aynur exceeded the limits of protest.
According to Gokalp, the protest shows again that such fanatic nationalism, which links Kurdish people with PKK, appears also in some parts of the society who consider themselves as "leftist" or "liberal" and "educated".
Well-known sociologist Nilüfer Narli believes the fear of Turkey being divided, the so-called Sevres Syndrome, has increased in the past few years.
She links the most recent declaration of "democratic autonomy" and PKK attacks to a deepening fear in society.
Now, she says, "The intellectuals' message for common sense is very important."
In response to the audience protest, the Istanbul Foundation for Culture and Arts (IKSV), the concert organiser, quickly issued a statement criticising the audience's actions and emphasising the "connecting role" of art and culture.
For IKSV, the language of the art is universal.
In her press statement, Aynur expressed her shock that "the empathy shown towards Spanish and Hebrew songs could not be established towards the love longs of the brotherly Kurdish language;
[that it] turned into hate is really saddening."
However, in a sign of how far Turkey has come, such performances would not have been possible a decade ago.
Therefore, despite all the protests, this "unfinished" performance might be seen as a success for further opening debate on the Kurdish issue.
