23/09/2011
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 23/09/11
Left with an industry that she says now caters to politicians and businesses instead of to the public, the non-profit Media Institute in Macedonia (MIM) Executive Director Biljana Petkovska explains how her organisation is trying to improve the sector.
Petkovska spoke with SETimes correspondent Goran Trajkov in an exclusive two-part interview about journalism in Macedonia.
SETimes:
How well do you feel Macedonian media performs when compared to other regional and global media markets?
Where does it fall short and where does it excel?
Petkovska:
One of the rare positive aspects is that Macedonia's media market offers a variety of media outlets operating in the languages of the ethnic communities, including the Roma community.
Unfortunately, the overall bad economic situation in the country has negative effects on their work, as it affects the economic performances of other media outlets, especially those that operate on the local level.
We face the same global problems -- like the uncertainty of traditional print vs internet media -- and we lack new business models for the new media type.
But what makes us different, and it is very concerning, is that we are lacking the eagerness and enthusiasm to talk about these issues, frankly and openly, and to take actions and responsibility.
Maybe this is because the media in Macedonia has never been treated as a pure business, but rather as a tool for achieving other goals, mainly political.
Many journalists have entered the profession with other motives that have nothing to do with the essence of journalism.
SETimes:
Where do you see the MIM contributing to the improvement of the media sector?
Petkovska:
Our school of journalism and PR will promote its first graduates soon.
These students are educated according to the best educational standards -- thanks to our close co-ordination and partnerships with prominent European universities.
This year, the school was granted the UNESCO Chair in Media, Dialogue and Mutual Understanding status, and this opens great possibilities for exchange of experience and know how for our students with the international journalism programmes.
We are convinced that good education is a key factor for a successful career in the profession, and the school will keep investing in it.
But the important thing now is to improve the market situation, in order to make the journalism profession more prosperous for the current and the future students of the school, which is where the MIM is focused.
Our institute will continue to provide courses for media professionals in various aspects of professional standards, with an emphasis on the work with internet media.
SETimes:
What are your immediate objectives for the next six months?
If you could change one thing in Macedonian media, what would it be?
Petkovska:
We are co-ordinating efforts with other media associations to contribute jointly to raise awareness of the importance of professional standards, media ethics, and journalist's rights.
We are equally devoted to lobbying and advocating for better positioning of the media and journalists in the public discourse and raising the awareness and understanding of the role of the media in a democratic society, the freedom of expression standards, lobbying for legislation changes in accordance with European standards, and enhancing the media literacy.
Establishing a self-regulatory media mechanism, where journalists, the owners and the public will be represented, is one of the priorities we have worked on for many years, and now together with the journalists' association we hope to be able to set this body by next year.
Setting the rules of the "game" and putting pressure to obey the existing ones is something we all need to work on.
To read the first part of this interview, click here.
