23/11/2011
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 23/11/11
The Kosovo Independent Media Commission (IMC) has become nearly inoperative since December 2010 due to lack of a number of Council members.
With four members reaching the end of their two-year mandates, and the Kosovo Assembly failing to replace them, the seven-member body lacks enough personnel to function.
"Because of the Council's vacancies we are unable to manage a significant part of the sector we regulate," Naile Selimaj Krasniqi, the IMC executive director, told SETimes.
A long list of tasks awaits completion.
These include requests for new licenses and demands by cable operators for technical and operational reforms.
The commission should also play a role in amending current regulations and shaping a national strategy on digitalisation.
Tomor Halilaj runs the "Intersat" cable provider in Drenas/Gllogovac, central Kosovo.
Although he has submitted the necessary documents, his request for a license remains on hold.
Meanwhile he is at risk of being penalised for operating illegally.
"I'm desperately waiting for the license approval in order to sleep in peace," he told SETimes.
"I face executive office warnings to submit documents.
And then they tell me they are unable to approve the license in absence of a complete Council."
In its 2011 Progress Report, the European Commission highlighted the problem, noting that the Kosovo Assembly has yet to complete the appointment of five IMC Council members.
In early 2011, the IMC submitted to the Assembly a list of eight candidates, out of an original 17 public nominations, for four of the open spots.
An ad hoc committee representing all the parliamentary parties shortened the list to four and submitted those names for voting.
In July, however, the assembly rejected the proposed candidates, without indicating how to move forward.
Berat Buxhala, an MP from the ruling Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK), chaired the committee.
He says his group completed its part of the task.
"What's happening with the IMC is catastrophic," he told SETimes.
"Clearly it's the assembly that is to blame for the delay.
I did my job as head of the ad hoc committee and it's up to the presidency to proceed.
But it's absolutely inexcusable."
Another committee member, Alma Lama of the Vetvendosje opposition party, says that while the Assembly bears partial responsibility, the root problem is at the government level.
"There is a temptation from the government to put control on independent institutions.
Having this situation best fits them, and this is the reason why new IMC Council members are not elected," Lama told SETimes.
The Kosovo Assembly's disregard is not something new, says Filloreta Bytyqi, former head of the Council.
Since 2008, she said, the assembly has yet to elect a seventh member of the Council -- a direct duty of the legislative body.
"Delays from the assembly started in 2007, following the end of the mandate for two Council members," Bytyqi said.
The indecision, IMC officials say, comes even as the media landscape becomes increasingly complex, leaving the Council powerless in the face of mounting obligations.
In addition, decentralisation is under way, with considerable uncertainty about the final outcome.
"We are have a strategy on digitalisation, in which other stakeholders are involved, but in the absence of the Council's final approval, there is a potential risk of having it contested at the last minute," Krasniqi said, adding that her organisation's credibility in the eyes of the public is taking a hit as well.
