19/07/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 19/07/11
On Monday (July 18th) UNMIK officials told Albanian property owner Sebahate Selaci, who is building her house in the Bosnian neighbourhood in the northern part of the ethnically divided city of Mitrovica, that she must cease the construction of her home until she gains permission from the mission's northern office.
Several of Selaci's neighbours gathered in front of her house, just steps from the eastern bridge over the Ibar River.
Hasan Miftari says he and the other Albanian neighbours will not allow the house to be demolished.
"We have our own institutions where we apply for constructions permits, but they (UNMIK) want that we go to the parallel structures to apply for construction permits, and we will never do that, nor allow the demolition of the house of [Selaci]," Miftari told SETimes.
Neighbours told SETimes that parallel structures -- considered by Pristina and countries that recognise Kosovo as illegal -- have issued a permit for a huge building that is being financed by the Serbian government.
"If the government will not protect us and our houses and remove this building which is illegal and not ours, we will demolish it and protect ourselves and property because we live here," Miftari told SETimes.
Selaci told Kosovapress that she applied for a building permit in Mitrovica (south) and she will not go to the parallel structures for permission.
"I'm building my house on my own property and will not allow UNMIK to demolish it, which is working for the parallel structures."
She said that she was notified by a decision written in Serbian -- though any UNMIK regulations decision is required to be given in Albanian, Serbian and English.
This alone, she says, points to the fact that the parallel structures are behind this.
Analysts, such as local journalist Adnan Ibrahimi, question UNMIK's neutrality when it comes to Mitrovica.
"Their policy is not clear anymore and the regional office does not work in line with its HQ in Pristina.
The regional office is politicised so much that it cannot do neutral work there, which makes them use double standards many times towards the Albanians," he tells SETimes.
Dragan Krstic, a Serbian journalist in northern Mitrovica, tells SETimes that it needs to be clear to municipalities that Pristina does not have the right to issue documents and permits that involve northern Kosovo.
The reaction of the Albanian community, he says, is exaggerated to provoke conflict.
"For Serbs, any decision taken by Albanian authorities is not valid, and it is the same for the construction permit.
UNMIK is implementing Resolution 1244 and Albanians living in the north should understand that just documents issued by the municipality in the north are valid here," Krstic told SETimes.
