22/09/2011
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 22/09/11
The Macedonian Institute for Media (MIM) is a non-profit organisation that promotes excellence in media and public communication.
Its main purpose is to provide training for journalists.
Since its establishment in 2001, MIM has organised over 100 training sessions, workshops, seminars and conferences -- hosting more than 1,000 domestic and foreign media professionals, and has sent many Macedonian journalists to similar training sessions and conferences outside the country.
MIM Executive Director Biljana Petkovska spoke with SETimes correspondent Goran Trajkov in an exclusive two-part interview about journalism in Macedonia.
SETimes:
How do you rate the journalism in Macedonia?
What metrics criteria do you use to determine measures of effectiveness and measures of performance when evaluating the media?
Biljana Petkovska:
Journalism in Macedonia is facing serious problems.
Most influential media fail to obey professional standards and ethical principles.
Those who try to stick to professionalism are a minority -- [they face] pressures from various sources, like politicians, media owners, state officials, business elites.
After November 25th 2010, when the police entered the premises of the most influential national commercial station, A1 TV, confrontations between the national media outlets and particular journalists are key issues in the media.
This phenomenon provides endless comfort for the politicians, the institutions and public officials who are supposed to be the key media target.
Self censorship is widespread.
Journalism does not serve the public interest any more, but it mainly addresses the interest of politics, and consequently business, as they are inter-related.
MIM is closely following the quality of media coverage and all media related issues, and regularly provides analysis and research reports on concrete issues and topics, such as the quality of election coverage, situation with the new media, the status of the public service vis a vis the European standards, etc.
These reports are made in accordance with methodologies recommended by prominent international universities and regulatory institutions, the OSCE, the Council of Europe.
We use them as a tool for advocacy and lobbying for improvements.
SETimes:
What affect did the bankruptcy of A1 TV have on broadcast media and media in general in Macedonia?
Petkovska:
Sad to say that after all happenings with A1, we still don't see a willingness by the government, the media or the responsible institutions to enter serious dialogue about the real problems in the media.
Lack of pluralism in content is a big challenge for the market now, despite the relatively high number of media outlets.
With the bankruptcy of A1 and the three dailies close to the station, more than 200 media professionals are left without jobs.
Given the overall poor economic situation in the country, this will further decrease the "price" of the journalists on the market, and will make them even more vulnerable to pressures and abuses.
The way in which the airing frequency of A1 was cut off is concerning, because it sets devastating standards for closure of media outlets without respecting legislation.
SETimes:
How do you think your organisation can represent the interests of journalists in Macedonia, and what assets will you need to be effective?
Petkovska:
MIM is trying to keep pace with the needs of the media community and the market conditions.
We provide training for media professionals in various aspects of professional journalism, and we contribute to the academic education for journalists through the School of Journalism and PR.
Currently, our focus is more on our research and advocacy initiatives, through media content analysis, research reports, advocacy for improvement of media legislation, and implementation of the ethical principles.
In parallel with our efforts to advocate for journalists' rights, we are trying to be critical of the quality of journalists' products regarding the professional standards, and to generate a culture of self-criticism and self-evaluation among media professionals, especially among the journalists and the editors.
In part two of this interview, Petkovska discusses global problems facing the media and the search to improve the sector.
