25/01/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 25/01/12
Edita Tahiri, Kosovo deputy prime minister in charge of the dialogue with Serbia, told SETimes that since Kosovo and Serbia have no diplomatic relations, it comes as no surprise that the two countries lack judicial co-operation.
"Kosovo and Serbia are two independent and sovereign states, neighbours, but without political relations.
Therefore, we have no area of co-operation, and no technical dialogue to establish co-operation in certain areas, like free trade, free movement of persons, energy, telecom, transport, and other areas," she says.
Tahiri's statements followed Monday's (January 23rd) action by EULEX prosecutors in the Mitrovica district court, who charged Kosovo Serb Jevro Pantelic with organised crime, money laundering, fuel smuggling, tax evasion, possession of illegal arms, import duty and excise tax evasion.
Pantelic was initially arrested in May 2011 in the northern town of Zubin Potok.
At the time, his arrest triggered protests and reactions from local Serb leaders in northern Kosovo who do not recognise Pristina prison authority.
Pantelic now awaits court proceedings.
Tahiri said that the government is committed to the rule of law in Kosovo, including the north.
"I cannot speak for co-operation, judicial, security or police matters, but we are committed as a government to implement the rule of law throughout Kosovo -- to establish the rule of law in the north, where there was an aberration, not to say anarchy for years," said Tahiri.
The December arrests of brothers Zvonko and Zarko Veselinovic by Serbian police also sparked questions about co-operation between Kosovo and Serbia in judicial and police matters.
KFOR and Kosovo authorities consider the Veselinovic's responsible for the attacks on KFOR soldiers last year and organised crime.
KFOR Commander General Erhard Drews singled out Zvonko Veselinovic as the chief organiser of an attack on KFOR troops in November, in which about 30 German and Austrian soldiers were wounded.
EULEX spokesperson Anne Blanksma told SETimes that Kosovo courts have already issued an arrest warrant for the brothers.
"An arrest warrant was granted by a local Mitrovica district court judge upon an application of a local prosecutor.
EULEX prosecutors are also working in a joint team with local prosecutors," said Blanksma.
EULEX and Serb authorities will decide on the outcome of the Veselinovic case.
Blanksma was not able to say if a request will be sent to Serbia for the extradition of the brothers.
"Different options are considered and no final decision was made.
Meanwhile, EULEX is with interest following the proceedings in Serbia," she said.
Tahiri says the Kosovo government will be committed to fight organised crime in the north and any other part of Kosovo, and that the Veselinovics must be brought to justice.
Pristina-based Balkan Policy Institute Executive Director Seb Bytyci told SETimes that Belgrade will not hand over Zvonko Veselinovic to Pristina, as it does not recognise Kosovo authorities, including the police and judicial institutions.
"It would be best if he is tried in Kosovo for crimes he is accused of, which took place in Kosovo.
That is not likely to happen as Serbian authorities will not hand him over to Kosovo authorities," Bytyci said, adding that EULEX can play an important role in the matter.
"Given that EULEX has a co-operation agreement with Serbia, they can act as mediator between Serbian and Kosovo police.
EULEX should also demand that he is tried in Kosovo and can be tried by EULEX judges, as it is a case of organised crime under EULEX competencies," Bytyci said.
