23/12/2011
By Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 23/12/11
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) ended the year with a mark of B, acceptable on a school report card, but bad in the world of credit ratings.
Along with Cambodia, Ghana and Honduras, the ratings agencies Moody's Investors Service and Standard & Poor's gave BiH a score five points below investment grade.
The reason is the failure to establish the state government nearly 15 months after elections were held.
The current economic picture is a far cry from that promised by candidates touting programmes ahead of the October 2010 elections.
The unemployment statistics provide a stark bottom line.
"Around 690,000 workers in effect support the 530,000 unemployed and 550,000 retirees," economist Predrag Simic told SETimes, warning that the situation could be even worse in 2012.
Ifeta Bajric is a textbook example of BiH's working poor.
She receives her salary of less than 300 euros only irregularly, leaving her unable to secure even basic necessities for her family of three.
"There were times when luxury meant expensive clothes, but today more and more things have become a luxury for our household," Bajric told SETimes.
According to the World Bank, Bajric and those like her make up almost 50% of the population now living below the poverty line.
The number of unemployed is growing, as are lines at soup kitchens that offer one warm meal a day.
Many resort to begging and picking through garbage in search of food.
Although a social strategy to combat poverty was adopted last year by the larger entity, the Federation of BiH (FBiH), and Brcko District, the government of Republika Srpska (RS) did not, nor did the BiH Council of Ministers
RS's media, meanwhile, spreads the notion that those in RS enjoy much better living conditions than those in FBiH.
"It should not amaze us," says communications expert Mirza Mehmedovic, "since that picture is created by the leading political structure of RS and is used to strengthen their current political position."
"Distorted pictures about the smaller BiH entity ...
stem primarily from the media's economic dependence on political centres.
This is, without a doubt, shown by the current government in RS, with the leadership of Milorad Dodik, who makes budget allocation decisions based on the obedience of the media.
Due to the fact that the political leadership in Republika Srpska control all economic activities, it is clear that they control all the money flowing into the media," Mehmedovic told SETimes.
Critics say RS was able to demonstrate a semblance of welfare by selling state property or piling up increasing amounts of debt.
But any fooling of the public ended once layoffs began in earnest.
"RS is literally facing bankruptcy:
there is no more state property to sell, the budget is empty.
Most of the municipalities are insolvent.
Salaries and pensions are lower than in FBiH.
Worker's unions are voicing their dissatisfaction more and more, and a hungry worker doesn't want to listen to stories about recession and the creation of some new country, while at home a hungry family awaits," FBiH politican Nedim Berberovic told SETimes.
A monitoring report by the European Council stated that the crisis in BiH is the worst since 1995 and that RS and Dodik are mainly to blame.
Although public support for Dodik is falling, it is difficult to imagine that he would leave politics on his own.
"Dodik's politics don't differ from earlier political structures which were leading Republika Srpska.
Dodik is a symbol of a continuing nationalistic politics that pervades public life in RS, and [even] his overthrow ...
wouldn't bring much news," says Mehmedovic.
"Whether we call that politician 'Dodik' or some other name, the rhetoic of co-existence and co-operation among the citizens and entities is what is important, and this is still not heard from Banja Luka," he adds.
