22/12/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/12/11
The arrests of Zvonko and Zarko Veselinovic on Tuesday (December 20th) on Mt.
Kopaonik in central Serbia attracted a great deal of attention among the Serbian public.
The two were identified by KFOR as organisers of the riots at the Jarinje crossing and in the village of Jagnjenica in northern Kosovo in which dozens of Serbs and KFOR soldiers were injured and wounded.
Specifically, KFOR commander Major General Erhard Drews of Germany said Zvonko Veselinovic, 31, organised the clashes at the Jarinje crossing on September 27th, while his brother Zharko, 36, led assailants against KFOR in the village of Jagnjenica the following day.
Public speculation quickly grew whether and how the arrests would affect the Kosovo Serb barricades and whether the Serbian police acted under pressure from Western countries.
The Serbian press linked Zvonko to oil smuggling in northern Kosovo while some media linked him to influential Albanian drug groups.
The media also claimed Veselinovic paid a number of Serbs to stand guard at the barricades which ultimately serve his alleged criminal endeavours.
Neither EULEX nor the Serbian police however, publicly accused the Veselinovic brothers.
The two were living openly in the centre of northern Mitrovica prior to being arrested.
The police did issue a brief statement saying Zvonko was charged with possession of, and trade in arms.
Zharko was charged with inciting abuse of official duty but no specific case was cited.
The police said nothing about the accusations concerning events in Kosovo.
The state news agency Tanjug cited Ministry for Kosovo and Metohija sources that said Veselinovic was likely not arrested about the events in Kosovo because Serbian police are not authorised to investigate them.
KFOR and EULEX declined to comment, hence the reason for the arrests are not clear at this point.
The Serbian authoritiesˈ and KFORˈs posture fueled speculation by the public and caused further divisions on the Serbian political scene.
Serbian National Council of Northern Kosovo head Milan Ivanovic characterised the arrests as a political act forced by Western pressure.
"Nobody has anything against fighting crime, but the Veselinovic brothers were arrested just a few days after KFOR accused them of violence.
Apart from the timing of the arrest, suspicion is also provoked by the extremely brief news release on what they are being charged with," Ivanovic told SETimes.
Opposition leader Tomislav Nikolic called for clarification of the case.
"If pure crime is in question, certainly nobody should defend him [Zvonko], but if the reason is that he built two alternative roads by which the Serbs fed themselves for four months, than that is a delicate matter and seems like the beginning of the dismantling of the Serbian institutions i.e., the delivering of Kosovo and Metohija," Nikolic said.
"It really takes a lot of evidence to justify the arrest of the man who has been helping Serbs get through these most difficult months," he added.
Government officials said they did not wish to comment, saying the case is now a matter for the police and courts.
However, Aleksandar Jugovic, a ruling coalition Serbian Renewal Movement MP, said the arrest shows no one is above the law.
"Now it should also be investigated who is responsible for the violence in Kosovo, which has caused great damage to Serbian interests.
It should also be investigated why KFOR is accusing certain individuals," Jugovic told SETimes.
Serbs from the north of Kosovo say the event will not have a crucial impact on the fate of the barricades they erected back in July in an attempt to prevent the deployment of Kosovo customs officers at the crossings to Serbia.
"Veselinovic greatly contributed to maintaining the barricades over the past months and his arrest may make the position of the Serbs in the north somewhat more difficult.
However, Veselinovic did not play a key role at the barricades and hence they will survive without him.
The real problem is whether this arrest shows that Serbia is letting Kosovo go down the drain," Kosovo resident Milan Ivanovic said.
Milos Z., one of the Serbs at the barricades, says the roadblocks will remain for as long as there is reason for them.
"We did not set up the barricades because of Veselinovic, so we will not remove them because of him either.
Our stance is clear:
we will not live in the state of Kosovo, rather in the state of Serbia," Milos told SETimes.
