20/09/2011
(AFP, Reuters, Wall Street Journal - 20/09/11; AFP, Reuters, FT, Bloomberg, BBC, CNN, Washington Post, VOA, eKathimerini - 19/09/11)
The EU and IMF told Greece on Monday (September 19th) to slash its public sector and speed up reforms to be able to get the critically needed next aid tranche under the 110-billion-euro bailout accord it signed with them last year.
The new warning came during a three-hour conference call between Greek Finance Minister Evangelos Venizelos and senior representatives of the so-called troika -- the European Commission (EC), the European Central Bank (ECB) and IMF.
The talks, which the Greek finance ministry described as "productive and substantive", focused on the measures the government must take for its international creditors to approve the sixth, 8-billion-euro installment of aid, according to Greek daily Kathimerini.
Greece badly needs that new injection as soon as possible to avoid defaulting on its sovereign debt. 
Officials have recently warned that the country will run out of money by the middle of October.
Citing unidentified sources, Kathimerini said the troika officials stressed the need of speeding up public sector reforms, as they also pushed for a range of other measures, including raising the tax on heating fuel to equal that on gasoline. 
That, according to the paper, would imply that the cost of heating fuel would increase by 40 cents per litre.
Venizelos has reportedly pledged that the government will take the required actions to meet its commitments to the EU and IMF, as well as every needed measure to prevent the country's default.
"We have both the will and the steady commitment to implement whatever we have to implement, not just towards the eurozone but towards ourselves and our children," the minister was quoted as saying Monday.
Greece was expecting to receive the new tranche from the rescue package earlier this month. 
A mission of inspectors from the troika arrived in Athens in early September to review its progress in meeting the terms of the bailout before a decision is taken on the next portion of aid. 
But they left abruptly after a row over the size of the country's budget shortfall and its cause.
About ten days later, the government announced a new set of austerity measures, aimed at meeting the fiscal targets agreed with the EU and the IMF last year, as well as securing the vital funding. 
One of them was a new property tax that the Greek authorities hope will help them raise the 2 billion euros needed to close the budget gap for this year.
The IMF was not impressed with that idea for dealing with the deficit problem, however, saying the focus should be instead on improving tax collection.
"In our view, you should not be drawn to higher and higher taxes on the limited tax base," the IMF representative for Greece, Bob Traa, said in Athens on Monday. 
"This will neither be economically or politically sustainable."
What was needed instead was a "much stronger resolve to tackle the problem of tax evasion", he said.
Furthermore, inefficient state-owned enterprise should be closed and there should be "reductions in the excessively large public sector workforce and generous public sector wages".
Traa also criticised the Greek authorities for dragging their feet on the implementation of the government's privatisation programme.
"The privatisation is behind schedule because politicians can't agree how to do it. 
If you wait ... 
the country will go to a default," he warned.
