23/01/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 23/01/12
It wasn't that long ago -- during the 1990s -- that police in Serbia were a source of anxiety, not security.
They were a tool Slobodan Milosevic wielded to preserve his power.
Few would have imagined that after power changed hands -- democratically in 2000 -- a person once closely tied to Milosevic would again be at the helm of the police.
But that is what happened in 2008, when Ivica Dacic, formerly one of Milosevic's closest aides and head of the Socialist Party of Serbia that Milosevic founded, became Serbia's interior minister.
When Dacic arrived, he faced a largely sceptical public.
But today, near the end of the current cabinet's term in office, faith in the police is being restored.
In an exclusive interview, Police Director Milorad Veljovic tells SETimes, "I believe we are a good example in the Balkans of a proper and good police.
We have very good co-operation in the region and beyond.
The police forces of the region are brought together by a common problem -- organised crime -- and if we solve that problem together, we can solve it better.
There is no police [force] in the world that can solve that problem alone."
While satisfied with the domestic security situation, he says risks are right next door.
"From the security aspect, Kosovo is a problem for Serbia that in a way jeopardises security in Serbia itself.
The moment the issue of security in Kosovo is resolved, Serbia's security will be resolved as well," Veljovic says.
He cites organised crime, drug trafficking and terrorism as key dangers.
"All those problems are threatening Serbia from Kosovo.
Terrorism is a problem we do not give enough importance to.
I'm not saying Serbia is endangered;
we are controlling that well for the time being.
Terrorism is an evil that is not local or regional, but rather much broader.
Prevention in that area is not enough, not only in Serbia but in the entire region as well," Veljovic says.
Veljovic, who was named Serbia's first police director in 2006, adds that the Serbian police are ready and able to protect and guarantee the safety of all citizens, regardless of their nationality or religion.
As for the economic crisis, he notes, it is "inciting greater criminal activity," while at the same time it means police are making do with less, including equipment and personnel shortages.
Over the past year, this has resulted in several police strikes.
"Today Serbia has 35,000 professional police officers.
In order to be able to fully adhere to European standards, we need another 15,000 policemen," Veljovic tells SETimes.
The average policeman's salary is about 350 euros a month, which, according to the police director, is not enough, given the dangers police face.
"If a policeman cannot support his family, it is questionable whether he will do his job professionally."
Equipment has not been updated in years, he says.
Better and more protective equipment should be procured, he says, along with newer technology.
"All that requires huge funds," he acknowledges.
Though they "strive for professionalism" and have earned the public's trust, Veljovic thinks the police have not yet gained the status they deserve.
"The police are protecting the borders of this country;
the police are the ones holding the administrative boundary with Kosovo, maintaining public peace and order and preventing crime.
If one is responsible for all that, then they must have some satisfaction," Veljovic said.
He also says the police must be above the influence of political parties.
"We've made big steps toward reducing the influence.
The political structure must realise that the police are ...
not a service of one party or one government," Veljovic said.
A main task, he adds, is to fight corruption.
"Corruption is endangering the system.
It is a great evil.
Corruption cannot be dealt with only by the police;
the entire system has to do it.
All state institutions, all sectors, all bodies and structures must be involved in that battle.
If I chase a traffic policeman today over whether he will take 10 euros on the highway, I haven't resolved corruption.
It is resolved systematically," he emphasised.
