05/01/2005
(Various sources – 29/12/04 – 05/01/05)
A Greek telethon has raised more than 7m euros for the victims of Asia's tsunami disaster, organisers reported.
Around 550,000 people sent text messages to a special number, donating one euro per SMS.
Individuals and companies paid 4m euros into bank accounts and pledged another 2.2m euros through phone calls and emails.
Athens has so far spent about 1m euros on aid to South Asia.
There are no confirmed Greek fatalities, though seven Greeks are missing.
The United States, meanwhile, is conducting a massive military relief operation, sending an array of warships, planes and helicopters as well as more than 13,000 military personnel.
Washington has provided $350m in aid to disaster victims.
The prominent Croatian painter and academician Edo Murtic passed away on 2 January at the age of 84.
Murtic's career included over 150 solo exhibitions and 300 collective exhibitions around the world.
Sarajevo will name one of its streets "Susan Sontag" in honour of the celebrated American writer, who passed away on 28 December.
Municipal authorities say the move is an expression of the public's gratitude towards Sontag, who helped bring awareness and aid to the city during the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Republika Srpska Museum of Contemporary Art in Banja Luka will open its 2005 season on 11 January with an exhibition dedicated to Finnish architect Alvar Aalto (1898-1976).
The exhibition was previously shown in Belgrade, Zagreb and Sarajevo.
A concert by Balkan composer and musician Goran Bregovic and his Orchestra for Weddings and Funerals was the main event during New Year's Eve celebrations in Skopje.
Thousands of people from Macedonia and abroad attended the performance.
Romanian philosophy professor Andrei Marga was awarded the annual Herder Prize of the Alfred Toepfer Foundation and the University of Vienna for his contribution to "maintaining and promoting the European cultural legacy".
The awards ceremony will take place in Vienna on 29 April.
The art exhibition "Bete Noire" by the Greek artist Costas Avgoulis opened at The Apartment gallery in Athens last week.
This is the third solo exhibition featuring Avgoulis, acknowledged for his images of tension and experimentation with new techniques.
The exhibit closes on 8 January.
