21/12/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 22/12/11
The economic crisis rocking Croatia and the eurozone has hit consumers' appetite for holiday spending, affecting Croats' choice of foods and gifts and the amount of money they receive from kin residing in foreign countries.
Adding to difficulties is the fact that remittances from Croats working abroad have been on the decline since 2009, following a decade of continuous growth, according to the Croatian Central Bank data.
People are hard to separate with the little money they have and, judging by the constantly increasing food prices, many will choose a modest Christmas table and gifts so as not to burden their budget.
"They buy only shirts, jeans and less expensive items like hats and gloves. 
Rarely does anyone buy a coat or shoes. 
People just do not have money," Bojana Kupresak of the the Spens clothing boutique in Zagreb told SETimes.
Croatia's leading independent market research agency, Hendal, carried out research into the spending habits of Croatians and the numbers are telling. 
Two thirds of Croatian families will spend less this year during the holidays than last year. 
A third of those surveyed said they would spend the same amount as last year, while only 4% plan to increase spending.
Nearly half of respondents plan to spend between 30 and 60 euros during the holidays. 
Every fifth person said that spending an additional 50 or 100 euro would strain their budget, while only one in ten plans to spend more than 100 euro for Christmas.
Under the Christmas tree this year Croats will most often find sweets and clothes over cosmetics, toys, books or other gifts.
When it comes to the person for whom the Croats would buy a gift, as expected children will get the most gifts.
According to Visa Corporation research, 62% Croats will primarily buy presents for children, 53% their partners and and 35% for relatives. 
Only 12% of Croatians will buy gifts for friends, and 1% for colleagues.
The research also shows nearly half of households consider their financial situation to be worse than a year ago, and over a third expect the financial situation to worsen next year.
Finally, research shows 66% of Croats prefer debit and credit cards as means to pay for Christmas gifts and 44% may defer payments.
Legally guaranteed Christmas bonuses under question
Croatian law provides that all workers receive a Christmas bonus from their employers, which the locals call Bozicnica. 
On average, the Christmas bonus is around 170 euros.
This may not appear much to some, but in difficult economic times every bit helps.
Last year, public administration workers waived the bonus at the urging of the dominant establishments, on the grounds that the deep economic crisis demanded such a sacrifice. 
However, employees this year say they are resolved to take the Christmas bonus at any cost.
The Union of Croatian Police has even announced they will go on strike at the country's border crossings if authorities do not pay up by December 22nd.
"It is known that this is the time most people enter into Croatia. 
We will nicely explain to everyone in five different languages what kind of country they are entering," warned the police union head Dubravko Jagic.
However, the HDZ government that is on its way out has not paid much attention to this problem. 
It has a more urgent problems to deal with -- the lost elections, corruption scandals, court trials and a plummeting political reputation.
The new government, however, which will begin to work after the holidays, has announced strict austerity measures. 
It remains to be seen who will eventually get the Christmas bonus.
Still, it's Christmas
Wherever they may be, Croats traditionally return home for the holidays, and are doing so this year despite economic woes.
Travel tickets for buses and trains are already largely reserved, with the largest arrival expected on the day before Christmas.
"Return tickets to Austria and Switzerland are already nearly sold out and intense demand is expected for maps for Germany and the Benelux countries. 
We can say that ... 
this year every seat in the buses will be full during the Christmas holidays," Zagreb bus station ticket saleswoman Ivana Lecic told SETimes.
One Croatian returning home for the holidays is Zeljko Ramo, a worker in Linz, Austria, who has worked for 15 years assisting the elderly.
"I could hardly wait to get home to my wife and children. 
Simply there is no place like home, and a man should live for those few days when he is with his family. 
A person should not regret spending money for that, no matter how big the crisis! 
Who knows what will happen tomorrow and where will I be," Zeljko said.
