23/01/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 23/01/12
The opposition Vetevendosje (Self-determination) Movement wrapped up its protests at the crossings with Serbia, in Merdar/Merdare and Dheu I Bardhe/Bela Zemlja, after midnight, saying police restrictions and the very low temperatures had made it impossible to remain.
Vetevendosje ended its main protest in Merdar/Merdare at about 1:35 am, after Kosovo Police had arrested activist Veton Dragusha, who had been handling logistics.
"In a sign of responsibility for the wellbeing of the protesters, the leaders of Vetevendosje Movement asked them to disperse in a quiet way," the movement said.
"The peaceful protest to protect the Republic, for the domestic products and against Serbia, will continue in the future, in other forms as well," Shpend Ahmeti, deputy chairman of the Movement told protesters and reporters at Merdar/Merdare.
"I believe Vetevendosje is on a good way to put continuous pressure on [the government] to have the reciprocity measures implemented, considering at the same time the health and the lives of the protesters," Belul Beqaj, Kosovo analyst and university professor told SETimes, adding "This is part of the maturity of the leadership of Vetevendosje."
The government reacted on Sunday evening saying that the right to protest peacefully is guaranteed by Kosovo's Constitution, but it "cannot be misused by anybody, for any reason".
"This protest is totally unnecessary and against the decisions of parliament.
It has caused difficulties in the free movement of the citizens and goods, but Kosovo Police have been taking care that the freedom of movement be guaranteed and that roads are not blocked," the government said in a press release.
Sunday's protest began after parliament approved a "counter-motion" on the reciprocity agreement with Serbia, this time presented by Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo.
This new motion, which made previous motions invalid, was approved by a vote of 59 to 41, with one abstention.
"Parliament welcomes the agreements reached between the Republic of Kosovo and that of Serbia from the dialogue.
The government obliges -- based on the laws and the constitution -- to implement the reciprocity measures.
This decision comes in power the day of its approval and makes invalid all other decisions on this issue," the new motion reads.
Vetevendosje had gotten its motion on reciprocity approved by parliament in December 7th.
It required full political, economic and trade reciprocity with Serbia.
Vetevendosje deputy Visar Ymeri said in parliament that lawmakers should have discussed police violence that occurred at its border protests last weekend.
Arbana Vidishiqi, head of Radio Free Europe in Kosovo, suggests to SETimes that Vetevendosje may have lost this round but gained itself some political traction.
"Self-determination was a lone wolf in its action of blocking the border, but it was very well accompanied by other opposition political parties in decisively rejecting the motion."
"Protest or not, one will need giant steps to overcome the "multi-motion" situation, which now may be also seen as a precedent for using parliament on behalf of vengeful political actions," Vidishiqi added.
Vetevendosje leader Albin Kurti says peaceful protests makes the Kosovo more democratised.
"Not understanding and not getting used to peaceful protests contributes to possibilities for dictatorships," he told reporters at Vetevendosje's headquarters on Saturday.
President Atifete Jahjaga met that day with political leaders, including Thaci and Kurti, urging that all parties should seek solutions within Kosovo institutions, through dialogue, and by respecting the constitution and other laws.
"Jahjaga assessed that debate and the decision-making process should be developed in the institutions of Kosovo and should [be used to] contribute to compile, harmonise and implement policies," her office said.
