19/11/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 19/11/11
Women in the Balkans are increasingly playing an important role in developing and managing businesses -- as well as in making economic decisions within families and in the society at large, despite traditional regional notions of their role as housewives.
According to research by Belgrade magazine Business Woman, 17% of Serbian companies are currently owned and managed by women, while additional 17% to 20% of businesswomen manage other enterprises.
Women owners and managers have shown great persistence in maintaining their businesses, particularly during the economic crisis.
"Of the 57 companies created four years ago, 38 actively work and did not lay off anyone.
Our women are big business fighters and therefore the state should adopt a strategy of developing female entrepreneurship as it recently did in Croatia," Association of Business Women of Serbia Director Sanja Popovic-Pantic told SETimes.
Ten years ago, there were 11% female managers in neighboring Croatia, and in 2007, noted as the year of biggest achievement for women percentagewise, between 25-30%.
Women managed more than 24,000 companies then, employing 127,000 people.
This year, there are 10% to 12% less enterprises, but no major company led by a woman went bankrupt.
"It is a time of crisis, but we are working on educating beginner businesswomen in accordance with the Strategy for Women's Entrepreneurship 2010-2013 as well as creating a database of female entrepreneurship," Croatian Association of Business Women Circle President Jadranka Radovanic told SETimes.
In Serbia, 62% of women say they certainly want to build a career and achieve success, 44% want to have their own business.
"Very encouraging data because it shows that many women want to get educated, improve and leave a mark in the business world via their results," Business Woman magazine's Jelena Gajic told SETimes.
Voted best among working women in Serbia in 2010, 36-year-old entrepreneur Sanja Knezevic told SETimes that the beginnings were not easy.
She began her tourism project -- the ethno-village Latkovac -- five years ago, by acquiring loans from Serbiaˈs Development Fund of Serbia as well as bank loans.
"There were times when I cried all night because it seemed I would not be able to repay the loans," she said.
Since, Latakovac hosts several thousand tourists annually.
"I experienced many problems, primarily financial, but never because I am a woman.
On the contrary, men in my work accepted me with respect, and, being gentlemen, helped me many times, saying they admire my courage and endurance," Marjanovic told SETimes.
Women in Serbia usually begin in trade and services but increasingly establish businesses on healthcare, food, textile and consulting.
The Business Registers Agency reports a fourth of all business associations belong to women -- very close to the European average of 30%.
In BiH however, the environment is more challenging as there still are no policies and programs to encourage women start ups nor are there relevant indicators about the number of women-run enterprises.
Women Network in Business (WNB) is one of the rare projects that together with the microcredit organization MI-BOSPO has financially supports member business ideas and start ups.
"During the economic crisis men are losing their jobs and women bear an ever greater burden of the economic survival of families," WNB Project Manager Sanela Ajkunic said.
According to WNB data, women in BiH are mostly engaged in agriculture, then manufacturing and trade and services.
Nearly two thirds live in rural areas.
