19/09/2011
(ACTmedia - 19/09/11; Nine O'clock, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, FOCUS News Agency, Standart - 18/09/11; Sofia News Agency, Expatica.com, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, AFP - 17/09/11; DutchNews.nl, Romania Business Insider, EurActiv, Euronews, Sofia News Agency, FOCUS News Agency - 16/09/11)
Bulgaria warned at the weekend that it might withdraw its support for changes to the Schengen agreement if its bid to join Europe's visa-free zone is blocked at a meeting of EU justice and home affairs ministers on Thursday (September 22nd).
If "a reasonable solution … that meets the interests of all of Europe and especially the best interests of Bulgarian citizens" is achieved, Sofia will back the ongoing reform efforts, Bulgarian Foreign Minister Nickolay Mladenov said on Saturday.
"If, however, no such decision is taken, we shall need to carefully consider our entire policy from now on regarding the support we give to the reform of European legislation on Schengen. 
Because ultimately the rules are written to be complied with," he stressed.
Bulgaria and Romania were initially scheduled to join the European free-travel area in March 2011.
But, France and Germany urged the European Commission (EC) in December last year to put any decision on their admission on hold, arguing that the EU's two newest members were not prepared.
While accession to the Schengen zone hinges on the fulfillment of a set of technical criteria, Paris and Berlin's main argument was that the Balkan pair had failed to show tangible progress in the fight against corruption and organised crime.
While both the EC and the European Parliament have since confirmed that Bulgaria and Romania have met the requirements for entry, other EU nations have voiced opposition to their admission, which needs to be approved by all 27 members of the Union.
Mladenov's warning followed the Dutch government's decision on Friday to block the two Balkan countries' Schengen accession at the upcoming EU home affairs ministers' meeting in Brussels this week because of their insufficient efforts in fighting corruption.
"It was decided by the cabinet that we are still against the joining of Romania and Bulgaria," Elaine de Boer, spokesperson at the Dutch immigration ministry told the AFP. 
The Netherlands, whose Immigration Minister Gerd Leers said in June that his country was opposed to any decision being taken before 2012, would not approve even their partial entry, she said.
According to Dutch media reports, Finland also supports their country's stance. 
Other Western European nations that have expressed opposition to Sofia and Bucharest's Schengen bids include also Denmark and Sweden.
Romanian Foreign Minister Teodor Baconschi also criticised the Dutch government's decision, attributing it to pressure from the country's anti-immigration Party for Freedom, whose support is critical for the cabinet's survival.
"Unfortunately, this is new proof that EU rules are ignored based strictly on internal political calculations," Romania's English-language Nine O'clock daily quoted Baconschi as saying.
Bucharest, he said would continue to work with all EU partners towards achieving "a favourable vote for Schengen enlargement".
"This is not a question of whether Romania will become a Schengen member, but of when we will be able to lift internal border checks," Baconschi noted.
EU Home Affairs Commissioner Cecilia Malmstrom also voiced hope on Friday that a solution would be found. 
Poland, which currently holds the rotating, six month presidency of the EU, is making "great efforts" to make sure that a compromise can be reached at Thursday's meeting, she said.
"We, of course, have supported these efforts and said that both Romania and Bulgaria are ready for accession from a technical point of view," Malmstrom stressed.
