20/12/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 20/12/11
The new law, passed in November and coming into force next spring, should reduce red tape and shorten the length of the adoption process, viewed as the two main hurdles for adopting orphans.
The new adoption law limits to one year the evaluation process, after which a child can be declared adoptable if the biological parents do not claim the child.
It will also extend the period during which an orphan is declared adoptable from one to two years, therefore increasing the chances of the child finding a new home.
Previously, the adoptee's relatives, up to the fourth degree, were encouraged by the courts to adopt the child.
Under the new law, relatives will be merely informed the child has been declared adoptable without pressure to adopt.
Authorities and analysts are optimistic about the new law.
"We have elaborated and promoted the changes in the law on adoptions, with the very purpose to increase the number of annual adoptions.
We anticipate that in time statistics will show a significant increase in this respect," Bogdan Panait, head of the National Adoptions Office (ORA), told SETimes.
There are currently 851 children undergoing adoption procedures in the courts, Panait said.
In 2010, 1,011 were adopted.
Panait said the new amendments are the outcome of a 2010-2011 nationwide study carried out in partnership with UNICEF that highlighted the long and complex adoption procedure as obstacles.
Specialists say the new law fits current Romanian social realities.
"Changing the law on adoptions is a step forward taken by the Romanian authorities and meets the demands of the families in line to adopt a child," Mihaela Naftanaila, editor of the newspaper Romania Libera, told SETimes.
"It brings a new philosophy, basically changing the focus from reintegrating children with their families at the risk of not being effectively accepted, to giving them up for adoption to families that meet strict economic and moral criteria and who desperately want a child," she explained.
With 67,000 children in orphanages, Naftanaila says the new law will go some ways towards integrating children and providing them with proper care and education to succeed once they are adults.
"Once integrated in adoptive families, they will not end up on the streets, cleaning car windshields at intersections, because after turning 18 they were expelled from orphanages," she concluded.
In line with the new provisions, ORA started training social workers in local government to handle the new caseload.
However, despite the progress, some hurdles still stand in the way:
lack of specialized personnel in some of the regions, societal prejudice and the absence of courts specialised in adoptions.
Statistics show that Romanians prefer to adopt children between zero and three years of age that have not been in an orphanage and are of the same ethnic origin.
In the end, adoption can provide fulfillment and opportunity for both the child and family, as attested to by one story.
"I adopted a little girl from a poor family in the countryside in 1987.
Despite all the obstacles of the then reclusive system, I came out victorious in the end," A. Sandulescu told SETimes.
"But it was not the system itself that bothered me the most, but the people around me.
My family had to move because of my neighbors' insistence to tell my young daughter she had been adopted.
But looking back, I am sure I would do it again with no second thoughts," she said.
Her daughter, now 26 years old, just graduated from the medical faculty and works as an intern.
"I know that I changed her life completely by offering her this chance.
And that's what probably keeps all these families in line to adopt a child."
