19/08/2011
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 19/08/11
In light of last year's referendum to amend parts of the 1982 constitution and the AKP's election promise to write a new constitution in its third term, the Turkish government is pushing ahead with plans for a new civilian constitution.
"This constitution should be free of the democratic shames of the past: not exclusive but inclusive, not alienating but embracing, not discriminating but integrating, and not oppressive but liberating," Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in a televised address to the nation on July 30th.
Ahead of the upcoming debate, the AKP has formed a nine-member commission to lead work on the new constitution. 
The objective is to prepare a brief document providing a roadmap for meetings in September between Erdogan and all political parties. 
Then, after parliament's opening session in the fall, a new parliamentary Constitutional Compromise Commission will be formed with the participation of representatives of all parties.
It is planned to draft the constitution with the largest consensus possible in order to meet the demands of different segments of society. 
By September, the commission will call on NGO representatives, civil society, and academia to provide input on the new constitution.
To this end, Erdogan plans to send letters to opposition leaders informing them of his key principles for a new constitution, thereby calling on them to work together on it.
This week, Parliament Speaker Cemil Cicek visited leaders of the main opposition parties -- CHP and MHP -- and received their commitment to participate in the new Constitutional Compromise Commission. 
However, he did not call on the pro-Kurdish BDP because of their boycott of parliament, suggesting Erdogan will do the same.
Speaking to SETimes, the head of the current Parliamentary Constitutional Commission Burhan Kuzu emphasised that even "no" voters in the latest referendum will be integrated into the constitution to prevent tensions. 
"The new constitution will not be designed only by AKP, because the possible balance between 'no' votes and 'yes' votes in a constitutional referendum will force the opposition parties to join the preparation of the new constitution," he says.
Under the current parliamentary arithmetic, the AKP has 327 seats, leaving it three short of proposing changes to the constitution and passing it by referendum, and 40 seats short of the two-thirds majority needed to change the constitution unilaterally. 
It will therefore need some support from the opposition or independent deputies to pass constitutional reforms.
"If the AKP reaches an agreement with only one party, the social support of a new constitution will be lacking," Ibrahim Kiras, a journalist for the daily Star, tells SETimes. 
“
A consensus between the AKP and opposition CHP on the new constitution is widely considered difficult. 
"Moreover, it will be more than optimistic to think that [CHP leader Kemal] Kilicdaroglu's leadership can convince his party to work with the AKP on the constitution," Kiras says, referring to internal divisions within the CHP. 
“
The Nationalist Action Party (MHP) and the AKP may be able to agree over the content and objectives of a new constitution, but even then "We can't expect a constitution prepared by these two parties to be embraced by other sections of society," notes Kiras. 
“
Whatever the details of the final constitution, Burhan Kuzu says it will be designed on the principle of expanding freedom: restrictions will be the exception, not the rule.
Kuzu points out that the 1982 constitution has already been changed 17 times, mostly in areas expanding freedoms. 
"However, as a result of these 17 piecemeal changes, the constitution has become a patchwork and led to disconnections and inconsistencies between the articles at the implementation level," he adds, highlighting the need for a new constitution.
