05/11/2004
(Various sources – 29/10/04 - 05/11/04)
Austria's OMV will acquire a 33.34 per cent stake in the  Romanian national oil company Petrom, after the state antitrust body officially approved the deal on 2 November.
OMV will pay a price of 669m euros and invest an additional 860m towards acquisition of a controlling stake in the future.
The Austrian firm has agreed to sell its 25.1 per cent share in the Romanian private oil group Rompetrol to avoid monopoly.
The rating agency Standard & Poor's announced on 1 November that it has assigned a long-term credit rating of 'B+' long-term and a short-term sovereign credit rating of 'B' to Serbia, with a stable outlook.
The agency attributed the rating to expectations of continued prudent economic policies and further progress in structural reforms, amid significant political risks and a vulnerable external position.
The European Commission (EC) said it plans to boost trade and enhance business links between the two parts of divided Cyprus.
EC representative Adrian van der Meer signalled that the EU will expand the scope of products that can be traded across the Green Line separating the Greek and Turkish communities on the island.
Serbia's government adopted on 2 November the draft budget for 2005, setting a budget deficit target at around 273m euros or 1.4 per cent of GDP.
The budget deficit is in line with IMF requirements and would be covered by privatisation receipts, foreign loans and grants, and borrowing on local financial markets.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and the World Bank sealed an agreement on a $20m loan for support of urban infrastructure development.
The loan has a 20-year maturity and a 10-year grace period.
The Bank, meanwhile, is considering the extension of an additional $150m for related projects in BiH in the next three years.
The US-based Trafalgar Resources bought the Macedonian mining company Zletovo.
The price of the deal was set at 150,000 euros.
The new owner is also required to invest an additional 10.5m euros in the restart and modernisation of the company's highly indebted mines over the next ten years.
The Serbian government has forwarded to parliament a new competition protection bill, aimed at bringing domestic legislation closer to that of the EU.
Among other measures, the legislation provides for the establishment of an antitrust body.
The Bosnian engineering firm Energoinvest has signed a 23m-euro contract in Libya, company head Dzemail Vlahovljak announced on 2 November.
Under the deal, Energoinvest will supply equipment and engineering works for Libya's Great Man-Made River project, starting on 1 December.
