19/12/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 19/12/11
The most famous railroad in the former Yugoslavia, the Brcko-Banovici railway, turns 65 this year and still stands as a symbol of international volunteerism as people from around the world came together to build it.
Built by around 65,000 young people from the former Yugoslav republics and more than 20 countries, the railroad served to transport coal to all former Yugoslav republics from the small mining community in north-eastern BiH.
"This was truly an undertaking that would be worthy of fame even today. 
There are accounts that one of the youth groups came from Colombia, and that they did not really know where exactly BiH was on the map. 
If we take into account that they didn't arrive by plane, but by other transportation means, the weight of the will of the youth is clear," event organiser Zoran Blagojevic told SETimes.
Bozo Novakovic, a member of the Brcko- Banovici railway building initiative, who was not 18 at the time, remembers: "We worked day and night and nobody minded anything, not the least that we did it all for free. 
It was a great friendship of youth from around the world, real brotherhood and unity."
Today, volunteerism is a rare occurrence in BiH. 
The country's exceptionally high unemployment rate is sufficiently demoralising to make volunteerism a thing of the past.
However, volunteering can provide youth and adults with valuable work experience and a sense of community, something BiH could use to overcome inter-communal divisions.
"Youth are less willing than ever to work without financial gain, and that is understandable since the social situation is hard. 
However, once they see a smile on someone they helped their attitude towards volunteerism changes. 
I often tell politicians that the volunteers working in the association do more than those paid for the job," says Emir Basic from the NGO IPAK in Tuzla.
One of the biggest challenges facing volunteers in BiH is the absence of a legal framework.
"Volunteers know they can contribute to the workings of the civil society sector, but the country simply doesn't want to legally regulate that," UN Volunteers programme officer in BiH, Elizabeth Siebenmann, told SETimes.
"I haven't volunteered until now, but I intend to, in case it is connected to working in education and to the university studies that I finished. 
The motivation for volunteering is to help the community and to acquire some experience, but not the financial gain,'' says Maja Salikovic, currently an unemployed professor.
Brcko-Banovici railway is considered the biggest post-war investment in the former Yugoslavia. 
In only 190 days, the youth built around 92km of rail -- still a record today.
