04/11/2004
(OSCE, AP, Reuters, The Scotsman, Ireland Online, Radio B92, Tanjug - 03/11/04)
Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova's Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) has been confirmed as winner in the province's second parliamentary elections since 1999.
As in the 2001 vote, on 23 October the party again failed to win an outright majority and must now find partners for a coalition government.
That cabinet will likely be in office during talks on Kosovo's final status, expected to begin in mid-2005.
The final results, released by the province's Central Election Commission (CEC) on Wednesday (3 November), showed that the LDK won 45.42 per cent of the vote and will retain its 47-seat representation in the province's 120-member assembly, in which 20 seats are reserved for representatives of Kosovo's minorities.
As for other main Kosovo Albanian parties, Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo came in second with 28.9 per cent of the vote, entitling it to 30 parliamentary seats -- four more than it won in the 2001 election.
Ramush Haradinaj's Alliance for the Future of Kosovo finished third with 8.4 per cent of the vote, winning 9 seats.
ORA, a new party founded by publisher and journalist Veton Surroi, came in fourth with 6.23 per cent of the vote and 7 parliamentary seats.
A total of six other Kosovo Albanian parties won the remaining seven of the 100 multiethnic seats in the assembly.
Twelve entities were eligible to contest the 20 seats set aside for Kosovo's minorities, the OSCE statement said Wednesday.
Of the ten seats for Kosovo Serb representatives, eight are to be taken by the Serbian List for Kosovo and Metohija and two by the Citizens' Initiative of Serbia.
The remaining 10 seats go to representatives of Bosniak, Turkish Roma, Ashkali, Egyptian and Gorani communities.
The turnout, according to the final results, was 53.57 per cent.
Nearly 660,000 of all 1.3 million registered voters took part in vote.
However, turnout among the Kosovo Serb community was less than 1 per cent.
The majority of the group's eligible voters refused to cast a ballot, following calls for a boycott from Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, other Belgrade officials and leaders of the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The international community has said it plans to launch talks on determining Kosovo's final status, provided a review in mid-2005 shows the province has made substantial progress in meeting UN-set benchmarks in areas such as the rule of law, minority rights and dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
Jens Modvig, deputy head of the OSCE Mission in Kosovo and acting chairman of the CEC, urged the elected representatives on Wednesday "to rapidly form a new government and, with increased vigour, continue to make progress in implementing the standards" set by the international community.
Some have voiced concern about a possible stalemate in consultations on forming a government coalition and a repetition of the situation in 2001, when it took leading parties 12 weeks to reach an agreement.
Expectations are that Rugova will seek partners from the major pro-independence Kosovo Albanian parties and that the talks will produce few major changes in the current government configuration.
Acknowledging that a certain delay was again possible, a Western diplomat told Reuters however that this time around that it would be shorter.
"It'll be weeks, rather than months.
But not too many weeks," he said.
Local papers predicted that UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen could intervene in the event no agreement is reached within 10 days
