18/08/2011
(Blic - 18/08/11; Reuters, AP, DPA, AFP, CNN, AKI, Deutsche Welle, Dutchnews.nl, RFE/RL, VOA, Beta, B92, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 17/08/11)
Prosecutors at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) said on Wednesday (August 17th) that they have asked for permission to divide Ratko Mladic's indictment into two parts in order to expedite the litigation process.
If UN judges give their approval to the motion filed on Tuesday, the former Bosnian Serb military commander would be tried first on charges of genocide for his alleged role in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, in which up to 8,000 Bosniak men and boys were killed.
The trial would then likely open in January, Aleksandar Kontic, a member of chief ICTY prosecutor Serge Brammertz's immediate office, told reporters at the tribunal's regular weekly press briefing on Wednesday.
After that case is closed, the second one would begin focusing on the remaining accusations in Mladic's latest amended indictment of June 1st this year. 
Aside from the two charges of genocide, the 69-year-old retired general, who led the Bosnian Serb forces throughout the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), faces also five counts of crimes against humanity and four of violation of the laws or customs of war.
That part of the indictment deals with a host of atrocities committed during the 43-month siege of Sarajevo and in other municipalities across BiH, including persecutions, murder, extermination, deportations, inhumane acts, terror, unlawful attacks and taking of hostages.
Asked about the rationale behind the prosecutors' decision to ask for splitting the charge sheet, Kontic cited "the fact that Mladic was arrested recently in such a late stage of the ICTY mandate" as one of the reasons, according to a statement on the tribunal's website.
The wartime Bosnian Serb military chief was arrested north of Belgrade on May 26th, after 16 years on the run, and was transferred to The Hague several days later.
Media reports quoted the motion filed by Brammertz on Tuesday as arguing that the sought split-up of the case "will maximise the prospect of justice for the victims".
The application, reportedly, also noted "the desirability of commencing a trial as soon as possible, and the need to plan for the contingency that Mladic's health could deteriorate."
Two shorter trials would allow for the best case management in the specifics of the case against the former Bosnian Serb military commander, the ICTY quoted Kontic as saying at Wednesday's press briefing.
Mladic was originally charged with war crimes stemming from the conflict in BiH in July 1995, under a joint indictment with wartime Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic, but it was later split into two separate cases.
Karadzic, who has also been charged with genocide in connection with the Srebrenica massacre, was captured in July 2008 in Belgrade and the trial against him began about 15 months later.
Kontic said that the prosecution was not planning a formal merge between the Srebrenica parts in each of the two war criminals' indictments, but that it was considering whether or not it would be able to have the witnesses to come to The Hague to testify for both trials at the same time. 
But it was too early to speculate about such an option, he added.
If the UN judges give their consent to two separate trials against Mladic, he would also be handed two separate verdicts.
