17/11/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 17/11/11
The EU Task Force -- led by US prosecutor Clint Williamson -- launched its investigation last week into allegations made by CoE rapporteur Dick Marty's report that the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) extracted and traded human organs of Serbian and Albanian civilians
"The task force will probe war crimes and organised crime allegations contained in the Council of Europe report of December 2010. 
In addition ... 
[it] will examine possible abductions, detentions, mistreatment and killings during the period in question as well as any other crimes related to the allegations in the report," Williamson's spokesperson Juri Laas told SETimes.
Laas stressed that upholding international standards in investigating the allegations is paramount. 
"It should be seen as a fair and independent criminal investigation conducted in accordance with international standards of justice."
Williamson was appointed to head the team in August, barely two months after EULEX formed the special team of investigators and prosecutors.
He acknowledged the investigation will be complex and will take time to complete, and said the task force has already undertaken steps to secure information from a number of institutional sources, to analyse the information, and to initiate its own investigative activities.
"Given the events occurred 12 years ago and material evidence is hardly retrievable ... 
I expect that the investigation will be mainly focusing on identifying eye witnesses who will be able to reconstruct some of the evidence. 
Therefore, this process will be very extensive and it may take a few years before the outcome of the task force is made public," former Albanian UNMIK expert Roland Gjoni told SETimes.
Williamson visited Tirana on November 9th, where he met Prime Minister Sali Berisha and welcomed Albania's commitment to fully co-operate. 
"
Albania's full and unconditional co-operation with the EU's task force conducting the investigation on Albanian territory is a positive development," concurred Gjoni.
Williamson visited Kosovo and Serbia in late October.
Serbian Justice Minister Snezana Malovic said last Friday it was never in question whether the country's judicial bodies will fully assist the EULEX task force.
"Of course we will co-operate with the EULEX representative to shed light on organ trafficking, which got an official seal when the case was presented before the Council of Europe," Malovic told Tanjug.
However, she reiterated Serbia's position for an independent panel to conduct the investigation.
"It would be best to form an independent body with a UN mandate to look into the issue, because evidence and suspects are spread out across several countries," she said.
While many Serbs view EU and international institutions in Kosovo with mistrust and do not believe the EULEX task force's effort will amount to much, some are hopeful in the belief that international humanitarian law must be respected and the facts about the missing be established.
"The fate of 520 of our loved ones is still uncertain. 
We waited very long for the truth about them be established. 
Nobody informed us of anything with regards to the investigation; we only [learned] from the media that Mr. 
Williamson began his work," Union of Kidnapped and Missing Persons in Kosovo and Metohija President Verica Tomanovic told SETimes.
"We are convinced that Mr. 
Williamson will investigate all allegations and suspicions, and will be objective," she added.
