17/11/2011
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 17/11/11
Analysts are nearly unanimous that High Representative Valentin Inzko's report to the UN Security Council on Wednesday (November 15th) represents the true situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The report says that BiH stagnates because the leaders of the six biggest political parties have not formed a state-level government for more than a year after the last elections.
The report also warns that Republika Srpska (RS) officials -- as well as some in the other entity, FBiH -- continue to use inflammatory nationalist rhetoric, while the two Croat HDZ parties continue to push for the formation of a third entity as evidenced by the meeting of the Croatian People's Council.
According to the report, the main culprits for the situation in BiH are the RS authorities, who obstruct the work of state institutions by joint legal and political activities. 
The reports states that by threatening to hold a referendum on independence, RS authorities put into question the competency of the state, its laws, the authority of the OHR and relevant UN Security Council resolutions.
Inzko also warned that the RS is obstructing a final decision for the Brcko district.
As expected, RS officials and representatives of both HDZ parties were incensed.
RS President Milorad Dodik deemed the accusations against RS "superficial and without merit".
He sent a letter to the UN Security Council, accusing Inzko of exaggerating the situation in order to maintain in international circles the perception that the OHR must remain in BiH.
Representatives of the two HDZ parties called the report biased, pinning the blame for the current situation in the country on Inzko himself, because he imposed the FBiH government, which they say is illegitimate.
"As expected, Inzko's report is disputed most in RS because the governing structure in this entity does not see its share of responsibility for the condition BiH is in. 
However, the question arises about the responsibility of the international community and the OHR itself, which by their not doing anything in the past year, contributed to this condition," analyst Tanja Topic told SETimes.
Topic said she expects the governing elite in RS to continue using the referendum as a tool to issue threats and blackmail, regardless of whether it intends to hold one or not.
"The negative marks in the report are not surprising, given that BiH has been stagnating for years," Mostar University Professor Milana Vego told SETimes.
The Croat parties' dissatisfaction is justified to an extent, Vego said, because after the last elections Inzko helped form the FBiH government from which the two HDZ parties were kicked out. 
The two parties claim they have gained legitimacy as genuine representatives of the BiH Croats via the ballot box.
However, University of Sarajevo political science professor Nerzuk Curak considers the claims that Inzko is sympathetic to certain parties in BiH unfounded.
"It is about time that all BiH elites face those issues which the high representative cited in his report, rather than deny them like spoiled children," Curak told SETimes.
He however, cautions that the international community in large part contributes to the country's agony because of its passive attitude towards BiH.
"BiH is structured in such a way that it cannot function successfully without outside pressure," he said. 
Speaking to SETimes, former RS President Dragan Cavic said the key to solving BiH's problems is not in the hands of the international community, but in its own citizens, who can change things through elections.
"At present we have a high representative who cannot assume any responsibility because he is not doing anything, while at the same time OHR has become an alibi for the domestic political elite to justify their non-action," Cavic said.
