16/09/2011
By Linda Karadaku and Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Mitrovica -- 16/09/11
International forces and Kosovo authorities launched an operation during the early hours of Friday (September 16th) in a bid to establish control over checkpoints at the northern border with Serbia.
Police and customs officers were flown in by helicopter, bypassing road barricades set up by local Serbs.
A spokesperson for the Kosovo Police, Baki Kelani, told SETimes that police and customs officers have now been deployed at Gates 1 and 31, together with EULEX.
"No incidents have been reported so far," he said.
Serbs, however, continue to respond with demonstrations and roadblocks, impeding access to all roads leading to the border points.
In the ethnically divided city of Mitrovica, the Ibar Bridge is now impassable due to a barricade made of sand and stones, while security cameras in the area have reportedly been destroyed.
Meanwhile, residents of the predominantly Serb municipality of Leposavic have been gathering in large numbers near the border gate at Jarinje, prompting KFOR troops to issue a warning that anyone approaching closer than 100 meters risks being shot.
Stefan Trajkovic, 43, from northern Mitrovica, told SETimes that although his people want peace, they do not want rule by Pristina imposed on them.
"They [the Albanians] have got their independence, now let us live our life," he said.
Bashmir Kastrati an, Albanian living in northern Mitrovica, said many Albanians in the north have evacuated their families, while others have been guarding their neighbourhoods in case of an incident.
He said his Serbian neighbours have been advising Albanians to leave for a few days because of the risk.
"It is not the first time we are getting used to it.
I guarded last night with some others, tonight we will do it again.
We have removed the families and sent them to the south because we don't know what is going to happen," he said.
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci called an extraordinary meeting of his government at noon Friday.
"Establishment of rule of law in the North is our common objective," Thaci said, while thanking KFOR, EULEX and international partners for their role in the operation, which he termed a success.
He pledged that free and democratic elections will be held in the north.
The way ahead, he added, depends on partnership and "not on the barricades, which are just an obstacle to the European future".
Abdullah Hajdari, professor of security studies at the University of Pristina, said that Kosovo should show Serbs living in the north that they are citizens of Kosovo and will be respected.
"They have been manipulated for years, and it is not easy to accept a change for them while they get salaries and other benefits from Belgrade," he said.
In Belgrade, Policy Centre Director Dragan Popovic said he does not expect serious clashes.
"There is a certain risk due to the fact that most of the leaders of North Kosovo Serbs are not under the control of the Belgrade government and that is what I see as a biggest challenge in this moment," he told SETimes.
"Still, with a clear message from the Serbian government that war is not the solution in any case, it should be expected that Serbs' protests in the North will be peaceful and non-violent," he added.
But Ramadan Ilazi, a Kosovo-based analyst, took a different view, saying the situation is tense and has the potential to escalate.
"There will not be establishment of rule of law in the North, but only establishment of control in the two border crossings," he told SETimes.
Arbana Vidishiqi, head of the RFE/RL Kosovo section, said the situation poses a test for all sides.
"Establishing the rule of law in the most lawless part of the country will definitely be a challenge, most likely not to be met in one day only.
If nothing else, September 16th will mark the beginning of a long process of searching for a solution to a 12 year old problem," she said.
