01/12/2004
(Various sources -- 24/11/04 – 01/12/04)
Albania celebrated its Independence and Liberation Days on 28 November and 29 November, respectively.
To mark the 60th anniversary of liberation from German occupation during World War II, the Palace of Brigades -- built near the end of King Zog's reign -- was opened to visitors.
Bulgarian skating duo Albena Denkova and Maxim Staviski, World and European silver medalists in 2003, won a gold medal in the international ice dance contest in Gelsenkirchen, Germany last week.
The Bulgarians racked up a total of 167.28 points, placing first in both the original dance and the free dance programme.
The 45th International Thessaloniki Film Festival was held in Greece from 19 November to 28 November.
Iranian director Mohsen Amiryousefi's "Bitter Dream" received the Best Film and Public Choice awards, while Russian director Marina Razbezhkina's "The Harvest Time" won the special jury award.
Fourteen films from Europe, Asia, the US and Latin America participated in the competition.
Two films from Southeast Europe won awards at this year's international film festival in Mannheim-Heidelberg, Germany.
"Mila From Mars", directed by Bulgaria's Zornitsa Sophia, won two awards -- the Rainer Werner Fassbinder Award and the Ecumenical Jury Prize.
Serbian director Srdjan Koljevic's "Red Coloured Grey Truck" won the Audience Award, the German Cinema Owners' Award and a prize for comedy.
Days of Bosnia and Herzegovina Culture started in Turkey on 29 November.
The week-long programme includes art exhibitions, theatre and opera performances, a film panorama and presentations about 180 contemporary authors.
This year's edition of the International Tuzla Theatre Days closed on 26 November in Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The ten-day festival drew theatre troupes from BiH, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro.
An exhibition featuring participants in the 9th Zlakusa 2004 International Ceramics Workshop began in the Serbian town of Uzica last week.
Over 145 artists from 14 countries took part.
A photo exhibition on the traditional Macedonian feast of the sacrifice -- Kurban -- opened at the Museum of Macedonia in Skopje on 30 November.
According to organisers, the event offers insight into one of the country's most significant traditional customs.
Sixty-two photographs are on display, illustrating how the feast is celebrated in different parts of the country.
