15/11/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/11/11
According to opinion polls, Serbia's Armed Forces enjoy greater confidence from citizens than all other state institutions.
As of this year, the army has become professional, and trained soldiers are now more ready for the challenges they face.
SETimes correspondent Bojana Milovanovic talked with Serbian Defence Ministry State Secretary Tanja Miscevic about the biggest security risks for the country and where the army stands on NATO accession and Kosovo.
SETimes:
Currently, what are the biggest security risks for Serbia?
Tanja Miscevic:
Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence is a serious threat both for Serbia and the entire region.
We saw that each time we faced unilateral activities, it led to escalation of tensions within Serbia and the neighbouring countries.
Organised crime is also a security issue, closely linked to systemic corruption, which poses a serious problem for the state and society.
Threats also include any kind of trafficking and smuggling, terrorism and extremism -- religious or national.
Extremism is a serious threat to security, not only to Serbia, but the entire region and even Europe.
When we talk about security, we talk about the need for Serbia's co-operation with Europe and the region.
SETimes:
How much has the professionalisation of the Serbian Armed Forces changed the security system?
Miscevic:
The army's professionalisation resulted in a great change and transformation.
The Serbian army is determined to take part in peacekeeping missions, which was not possible with mandatory military service, only professionals.
There is also a possibility of voluntary service and there is great interest in that.
SETimes:
Interest in military training in Serbia is growing, as is the citizens' faith in the army.
How do you explain that?
Miscevic:
The army is gaining and already has a very good position in the eyes of the citizens, especially after the 1990s.
This year, the University of Defence was formed, comprising the Military Academy and the Military Medical Academy.
Each position at the Military Academy attracts eight times more applicants [than before].
Those who graduate from the Military Academy do not necessarily become officers, they can choose civilian service.
The Military Medical Academy attracts as many as 12 times more candidates, not because of the economic crisis and the fact that their education ensures a certain job, but rather the quality it offers.
SETimes:
You mentioned Kosovo and the situation there as a security risk.
How will the Serbian Army react in order to avoid conflict?
Miscevic:
The defence ministry and the Serbian Armed Forces are part of this country's executive authorities and we follow the policy of those authorities.
The army is co-operating well with KFOR, partnering in maintaining and securing peace primarily for citizens in northern Kosovo, but also in the entire territory.
SETimes:
The issue of Serbia's NATO membership provokes opposing views.
What is the army's stance?
Miscevic:
Based on a parliamentary resolution, military neutrality is Serbia's position.
The defence ministry can have its own position, but the decision on whether the state will join NATO is a state matter, and the state will make the decision based on costs and benefits of membership.
SETimes:
How important is regional co-operation for Serbia's overcoming security risks?
Miscevic:
It is inevitable, not because we come from a joint environment and joint state in the past, or because we had an unfortunate history in the 1990s, but [because] in the future it will be dangerous if we respond to security challenges individually instead of jointly.
Individual responses will be much more expensive in this time of economic crisis, when budgets are trimmed down and states are turning to one another.
There are good grounds for regional co-operation.
Serbia has agreements on co-operation in the defence sector with more than 50 states.
Joint manoeuvres and joint participation in multinational operations increases trust between armies in the region.
