16/12/2011
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/12/11
According to a study by the International Data Corporation, the software piracy rate in Serbia has kept steady at 74% for the past four years.
In Europe, only Albania and Montenegro have a higher software piracy rates than Serbia.
The total value of legal software in Serbia is estimated around 71m euros annually, while the illegal software value is estimated at 73m euros.
According to Microsoft Serbia, a 10% reduction in the software piracy rate in Serbia would add 20m euros to the state budget annually and create 10,000 jobs.
"Software piracy reduction is a key issue for developing the domestic IT sector, which counts as the fastest growing and most profitable," Milos Blagojevic, Microsoft business development manager, told SETimes.
The tax administration office in the Serbian Ministry of Finance established a department to handle software piracy issues in Serbia.
The first inspection was conducted from May 16th to October 31st on 161 taxpaying companies.
The results showed that 42% of companies use legal software, 57% illegal, and 1% violated the licence rights.
"The inspection has shown that pirated software is mostly used in architectural and engineering activities, and in technical consulting and printing," Blagojevic said.
The Tax Administration Office is currently developing a registry of software producers and distributors that should enable the wider use of legal software by companies and individuals.
However, a major problem is discovering and prosecuting both producers and consumers of pirated software.
Last year the Serbian Ministry of Interior only uncovered 30 piracy cases.
Most cases were on production, distribution or usage of illegal software in the auto-industry.
Mihailo Tijanic, a police advisor at the ministry of interior, told SETimes the legal framework is in accordance with EU regulations and laws.
But the low number of prosecutions and minor penalties make software piracy profitable.
Police recently detained G.C.
from Belgrade who produced and sold a large amount of pirated software for damage diagnosis on vehicles such as Honda, Fiat, Ford, Daimler Chrysler and Toyota.
He was selling software for 20 to 200 euros.
He also advertised the illegal activity on his own website, in print media and other sites that sell legal software.
"The fact that he used to sell these products without any fear of being caught shows how little they care about laws.
They know if they get caught they can always return to it in the future," said Tijanic.
On a regional level, the ministry of interior co-operates with Croatia and Republika Srpska.
But co-operation with other countries in the region depends on the way other governments deal with software piracy.
"There isn't enough initiative in countries like Albania or Montenegro.
That is why they are at the top of the software piracy list," Blagojevic explained.
There are only three inspectors in Albania in charge of software piracy crimes, while in Montenegro there is no information about it.
Developing a legal framework that protects intellectual property rights and effectively combats software piracy would positively impact Serbia's prospects for acceding to the EU and WTO.
