15/08/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/08/11
It was as if the persistent summer rain was trying to dampen the great Ramadan meal (Iftar) scheduled for August 4th in the centre of Prijepolje, a town in the Serbian region of Sandzak, which has a majority Muslim population.
However, the rain didn't stop around 2,000 people from gathering in the centre of Prijepolje for the communal meal, organised by the Turkish humanitarian organisation Bereket.
Dozens of tables, which people protected with umbrellas to prevent the food from being drenched, were set up in the town square.
The dining area was lit by street lights.
According to Islamic tradition, water should be drunk first after an entire day of fasting.
After that food may be consumed, and the best food is usually prepared for the Iftar -- various pies, bamya (meat and okra stew), salad, kanafeh, etc.
On behalf of the organiser, Sulejman Sandzak addressed those present, saying that the Bereket organisation's goal was to bring together not only followers of Islam but also members of other religions in a bid to strengthen neighbourly relations.
"The idea behind the convoy travelling around the Balkans is for us all to be together at this Ramadan sofra [table], for us to socialise and strengthen the connection between good human and neighbourly relations.
In the spirit of tolerance, understanding, respect and friendship, we will continue travelling around towns and show what beautiful things we can do together," said Sandzak.
Around 41,000 people live in the Prijepolje municipality:
around 57% are Serbs and around 41% are Bosniaks (Muslims).
The Turkish humanitarian convoy and the Ramadan meal have been held seven years in a row in various countries in the Balkans.
Attending this year was Dobro Lazarevic, a representative of the Prijepolje municipality who helped prepare the Iftar.
According to him, residents of Prijepolje have respected one another for centuries.
"We share the good and the bad, and we welcome both our holidays and those of our neighbours with joy and happiness," Lazarevic told SETimes.
He added that the communal evening meal confirmed the respect for the freedom and human rights of all the people who live in Serbia, adding that the occasion ought to contribute to the creation of an atmosphere of co-operation between religious communities and the state, as well as co-operation with one another.
Jovan Carkilovic was at the Iftar and said he came because of the respect he has for his Muslim neighbours.
"They come to my house for the slava (a Serbian religious and family tradition).
I think that is how we best maintain our friendship.
Our municipality isn't rich;
if we were to no longer keep our friendships, we would end up even worse off," Carkilovic told SETimes.
Amela Bajric, who was also at the Ramadan meal in Prijepolje, says that it is at these kinds of meals that you can feel a true community spirit.
"For us, life takes on a completely new rhythm during Ramadan.
At night, after prayers, people devote themselves to one another much more;
they socialise and eat together.
It is especially important that our Orthodox neighbours are with us because we must respect and look after one another," she told SETimes.
