14/09/2011
By Igor Jovanovic and Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 14/09/11
Only weeks after an interim agreement defused the crisis at the border, roads in northern Kosovo were again being blocked on Tuesday (September 13th) as local Serbs built barricades to protest the takeover of crossing points by Kosovo authorities.
Pristina has vowed to go ahead with the plans Friday, despite the local opposition.
"We are planning a series of peaceful protests and civic disobedience," Zubin Potok Mayor Slavisa Ristic told SETimes. 
We find the [takeover by] Kosovo customs unacceptable, because it means we will be cut off from Serbia, and the institutions of a state we do not recognise will be established."
Residents placed logs and bags of sand in the roadways, or used trucks and buses to prevent access. 
As of Wednesday, traffic was being fully or partially impeded on the main roads leading out of Mitrovica.
In the town of Leposavic, residents were allowing only one lane of traffic to remain open, in a bid to prevent KFOR from transporting customs equipment to the Jarinje and Brnjak administrative checkpoints.
In Zvecan, however, a KFOR convoy was reportedly allowed through after residents were assured that its destination was not the border control points, but Camp Nothing Hill in Leposavic instead.
As tensions mount, the Serbian government has called on the EU, UN and NATO to prevent what it described as a "unilateral" move by Pristina, saying regional stability is at stake.
The planned takeover "jeopardises the continuation of dialogue [between Belgrade and Pristina] and implementation of the status-neutral agreements that have been reached," it said.
Kosovo authorities say they are determined to proceed as planned. 
"The moment has come," Prime Minister Hashim Thaci told Radio Free Europe on Tuesday. 
"The revenues which will come [from the gates] and the flow of goods from Serbia to Kosovo will be paid directly to the Kosovo budget."
Speaking to SETimes, political commentator Fatlum Sadiku said last month's visit to the region by German Chancellor Angela Merkel was a game-changer, spurring EULEX to co-operate more closely with Pristina when it comes to the situation in the north.
During her visit, Merkel demanded that Serbian "parallel structures" in the north be shut down. 
She directly tied Belgrade's EU prospects to the issue.
"EULEX -- since Merkel's statements -- has recognised it must be [on board the] train, because it will move with or without it," Sadiku said. 
"EULEX knows that Pristina wants to extend its authority and they want to be part of any action, rather than to stay and observe like in July."
Kosovo and EULEX police are prepared for any emerging situation, Security Studies Professor Abdullah Hajdari said.
"Criminal activities such as barricades or burning of the gates will not be tolerated," Hajdari told SETimes.
Mayor Ristic, however, said Kosovo Serbs should not be obliged to accept rule by a state they do not recognise as legitimate.
"The international community did not force the Albanians to accept Serbian institutions, therefore they will not be able to force us to accept Pristina institutions either," Ristic said.
The head of the Kosovo Compromise project, Aleksandar Mitic, said that while Serbs may find the options on the table unpalatable, they have limited leverage.
"One should bear in mind that the Belgrade authorities have made EU accession their priority, which has practically stripped them of the possibility of decisive action in the matter of Kosovo," Mitic told SETimes.
