14/11/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/11/11
A diverse group of Serbian politicians, intellectuals and civil society leaders is urging the government to change its long-standing Kosovo policy in order to enable Serbia to continue the stalled EU integration process.
In early November, Liberal Democratic Party leader (LDP) Cedomir Jovanovic, Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO) leader Vuk Draskovic and Social Democrat Party leader Zarko Korac (SDU) signed a declaration named "Preokret" (a turn), which calls for changing the "Kosovo is Serbia" policy.
"The dilemma 'Kosovo or Europe' does not exist. 
Serbia must not remain cut off from modern Europe because otherwise it would mean the country will rapidly fall behind and stand not only on the EU margins, but also in the region," Jovanovic told SETimes.
He explained that since the EC told Serbia it may obtain EU membership candidacy under certain conditions, the government is wasting time toying with a policy that does not solve problems the way modern European societies do.
The declaration also states that the reality that must be acknowledged is that Kosovo has not been under Serbia's sovereignty since the 1999 war and the capitulation in Kumanovo.
Serbia must change its policy to avoid Europe closing its doors "due to the four customs officers at two border crossings", it said.
That is why Vuk Draskovic argues Serbian citizens should not be misled anymore by the government's oft-mentioned slogan "the EU as well as Kosovo".
"We need the EU, European rights and guarantees for the Serbs and the Serbian heritage in Kosovo. 
We need to recognise that Kosovo exists and to maintain the best possible economic, trade and cultural relations," Draskovic told SETimes.
The signatories invited Serbian President Boris Tadic to accept this document. 
Tadic refused, saying it is an illusion to expect an accelerated EU accession process in exchange for giving up Serbia's interests in Kosovo -- as co-operation with The Hague war crimes tribunal has shown.
"By applying Ahtisaari's plan, the Serbian people would completely disappear from Kosovo and Metohija within three decades," Tadic said.
He added that Serbia's interests cannot be redefined every few years just because international circumstances are changing.
"Countries that easily give up their legitimate interest lose credibility and are recognised by the great powers as one that new conditions can be imposed on," Tadic said. 
Another declaration signatory, SDU President Zarko Korac, says the individuals and groups that do not want Serbia to gain EU membership candidacy on December 9th are very strong.
"They organised in large part everything that is happening on the barricades in the north of Kosovo, and in recent weeks are very loud with their demands for Serbia to give up EU membership" Korac told SETimes.
Analysts say a policy change can not be expected based on appeals by several party leaders, especially because their parties represent small segments of the electorate.
"Perhaps the ruling coalition and the president will consider some of the arguments listed in this appeal, perhaps the government's declaration on Kosovo and Metohija will be more flexible for solving the Kosovo problem, but it certainly will not cause a turn," Centre for the Study of Political Alternatives Director Milan Nikolic told SETimes.
Members of the public have wide ranging reactions to the declaration. 
While there are some who support a policy change towards Kosovo, many are vehemently opposed, and still others dismiss the move as political marketing.
"It is just a campaign gimmick. 
They all talk about Kosovo in the belief it will attract the attention of voters for which they failed to provide decent living conditions," unemployed history teacher Dragica Nektarijevic told SETimes.
