13/09/2011
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 13/09/11
Macedonia's Public Defender's Office -- or "Ombudsman" -- recently concluded extensive research on gender representation and education in the country's state and local administration.
It collected data from 628 institutions and found out that while a higher percentage of employees in the administration are men -- 53% men compared to 46% women -- the gap is narrowing.
The ombudsman's research also concluded that while men hold most of the managerial positions, more women hold higher education degrees.
The research uncovered that predominantly male and female professions and ministries still exist.
Men dominate in the ministries of interior and defence.
The police and army employ 64% and 84% men, respectively.
By contrast, women are prevalent in education, health care, finance, labour and social policy and in segments of the judicial system.
Particular advances women have made are in the court administration, where they dominate on almost on every level.
In the two courts of first instance in Skopje, for example, women constitute 78% and 67% of the employees, respectively.
Moreover, women are dominant in the departments of parliament and the president's cabinet, where they represent 63% and 59% of the employees, respectively.
In the government's professional departments, the male-female gap has narrowed to less than 1%.
"To properly interpret statistical data, specific scientific methods need to be employed and all relevant factors which weigh in the result must be taken into consideration.
The Ombudman's data provide a basis for assessing the situation," Savka Todorovska, president of the National Council for Gender Equality (SOZM), told SETimes.
Todorovska explained that an improved legal framework has greatly contributed to women making advances in various fields.
Some of the laws address equal opportunity, protection from discrimination, and laws on elections, the latter including a quota for women.
"Women have equal rights but, in practice, some laws are not always consistently implemented, despite the overall positive trends," she said.
Sociologists like Tatjana Stojanovska are encouraged that things are improving for women, especially that a greater number hold higher degrees.
She, however, warns of the tendency for men to have the last word.
"We should not neglect the fact that in the Balkans the tradition of man being the 'boss' still exists," Stojanovska told SETimes.
Supreme Court President Jovo Vangelovski told SETimes that it is a fact men leave the judiciary to practice law as barristers, which gives women greater opportunities in the judiciary.
Vangelovski is not surprised that men occupy the leading positions even if they are less educated than women.
"This [practice] has its origins centuries back when men were supposed to earn money, so this is why there is the belief that men should lead," he said.
The ombudsman's findings suggest additional campaigns are needed to increase awareness of gender equality and to create opportunities for higher managerial posts for women.
"In the past 20 years, there was increased activism and specific engagement -- an increased number of women are in NGOs, in political parties and on election lists, and as a consequence, an increased number of elected women and women in position to shape policy.
Such engagement provides realistic hope that if we work on increasing awareness for gender equality on all levels, the end result will be positive," Todorovska said.
