15/12/2011
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 15/12/11
In January 2007, when Bulgaria and Romania joined the EU, members of the Union introduced various restrictions to curb the flow of migrant workers from the two Balkan nations to their labour markets.
Fears that hordes of Bulgarians would flood Western Europe in search of better paid jobs have not materialised, however, according to a report by the Open Society Institute-Sofia (OSI) published on November 30th.
Compared with the 1990s, when a severe economic crisis triggered a massive outflow of Bulgarian job seekers, emigration from the Balkan nation has declined in recent years, the study, entitled Bulgarian Labour Migration:
Do Restrictions Make Sense?, found.
"The appeal of emigration is gradually declining, as [the] unemployment rate in Bulgaria is now comparable to Western European levels, while differences in income have decreased," the report said.
Back in the 1990s, it added, "per capita income in Western Europe was four times higher than that in Bulgaria, while one decade later this ratio is 2.5 measured by purchasing power parity".
Citing official statistical data, the report noted that 217,809 Bulgarians moved abroad in the nine-year interval between the country's 1992 and 2001 censuses.
That number dropped to an estimated 175,244 people over the following decade.
"Figures suggest that an average of 24,201 Bulgarian citizens per year emigrated between the 1992 and the 2001 censuses, while the annual average between the 2001 and the 2011 censuses was 17,524 persons," the OSI said.
"Therefore, average annual emigration marked a 28% decline despite the removal of travel restrictions" after Bulgaria entered the Union.
Under EU law, a member state can keep its labour market restrictions in place for five years following a newcomer's accession.
It may then request a final two-year extension of those transitional arrangements, but only if it is experiencing serious disturbances and if this is objectively justified.
Thus, any barriers limiting the free movement of Bulgarian workers within the EU must be lifted by January 2014.
Belgium, one of the ten member states that have not done that yet, has signalled that it might open up its labour market to the bloc's two Balkan newcomers next year, when Germany will also remove its restrictions for some categories of Bulgarian workers and specialists.
The other eight that have introduced quotas or other work-permit systems for both Bulgarians and Romanians are Austria, Britain, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta and the Netherlands.
It is mainly domestic factors, such as labour productivity and unemployment, that prompt people to decide to emigrate, the OSI said.
"Taken alone, barriers play no significant role in regulating migration flows," it said.
Spain and Germany have long been among the EU's most attractive nations for job seekers from Bulgaria.
In 2009, Spain opened up its labour market for Bulgarians, while Germany has kept restrictions in place.
Eurostat data shows that the number of Bulgarian immigrants in Spain grew by 64.6% between 2006 and 2010, while in Germany it increased by 69.2%.
"Travel and labour market restrictions have never been a deterring factor of Bulgarian emigration," the OSI report said.
Boryana Koleva, a 25-year-old business administration specialist from Sofia, returned from Valencia a couple of years ago after several months of fruitless efforts to find a job.
"It was extremely difficult for foreign workers to find a job there," she told SETimes.
"Despite this, I'm planning to try my luck again soon, but in another EU country.
My sister is joining me this time."
Georgi Angelov, the lead author of the OSI report, does not expect the worsening economic situation as a result of the deepening crisis in the euro area countries to trigger a new wave of Bulgarian emigration.
"The crisis is deepening indeed.
But let's not forget that this is a crisis of the eurozone -- it is likely to have a worse impact on the countries inside the eurozone than on those outside it," he told SETimes.
"This could further undermine the attractiveness of the Eurozone [countries] for emigrants," the expert added, noting that the inflow of migrant workers into the EU was already half its pre-crisis level.
"Of course, the Bulgarian government has the main responsibility concerning the country's economic policies and performance, which will ultimately determine the long-term emigration trends" in Bulgaria, Angelov stressed.
Sevi, the 27-year-old owner of a small hairdresser's studio in Sofia, says the situation in Bulgaria "must get very bad indeed" for her to decide to emigrate.
"I just can't live in another country.
I get homesick very quickly," she told SETimes.
"Of course, if emigration is the only option for me to survive economically, I'll take it.
But I would never choose to leave before having tried all other opportunities [to stay]."
