17/02/2012
By Linda Karadaku and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 17/02/12
This week's referendum by Serbians in north Kosovo was "unhelpful" to Serbia's EU accession hopes and regional stability, but will not necessarily affect Serbia's hopes to join the Union, an official says.
EU spokeswoman Maja Kocijancic told SETimes that "unilateral moves such as the referendum" do not help to resolve the situation in northern Kosovo.
The EU position, she said, is that "the situation in northern Kosovo is difficult and it can only be resolved through dialogue and removal of restrictions on freedom of movement, not referendum."
She would not directly answer questions of whether the referendum would influence the decision on Serbia's status.
"The decision on candidate status is for the [European] Council to make," she added.
But the results of this week's referendum may be difficult for the EU and Belgrade to ignore.
More than 75% of Serbs from northern Kosovo cast votes, and 99.74% of them rejected the establishment of Kosovo institutions in their municipalities.
The vote was held in several municipalities in northern Kosovo, but was disavowed by both Pristina and Belgrade.
"This move by the heads of municipalities in northern Kosovo can only diminish the state's potential and does not benefit the interests of Serbs in [Kosovo].
This does not help the state defend its legitimate interests in Kosovo and Metohija," Serbian President Boris Tadic said.
Serbian officials were particularly worried because they are expecting the EU's decision on candidate status in late February or early March.
The head of the Serbian government's team in talks with Kosovo, Borislav Stefanovic, told SETimes that the organizing of the referendum was "political adventurism designed in the kitchen of opposition parties in Belgrade."
"However, it will not affect Belgrade's EU candidacy, because the candidacy depends on the dialogue with Pristina, i.e.
primarily on the agreement on Pristina's regional representation.
That dialogue does not refer to the issues voted on in the northern Kosovo referendum," Stefanovic told SETimes.
However, he said that Belgrade was ready for a compromise regarding talks on Pristina's regional representation, but pointed out that Pristina had "maximalist demands." Talks are scheduled for February 21st in Brussels.
Former Serbian Ambassador to Germany Ognjen Pribicevic believes the referendum will not have any direct impact on Belgrade's EU candidacy.
"It is clear to the western states that Belgrade does not wield crucial influence over the north of Kosovo.
That is why the candidacy foremost depends on reaching agreement on the regional representation of Pristina.
If that agreement is reached, Serbia will obtain candidate status," Pribicevic said.
However, Kosovo Compromise Project Director Aleksandar Mitic said the referendum's result is a challenge to Serbian authorities, which have to decide whether to hold their local elections in Kosovo this spring.
"One of Germany's key demands is for Belgrade, for the sake of gaining candidate status, is to give up on holding local elections in Kosovo.
That will now, after the clearly expressed will of the Serbs in northern Kosovo, will be very difficult to achieve and, in that context, there is a certain link between the referendum and the EU candidate status," Mitic told SETimes.
Pribicevic agrees that the government will face a great challenge.
"If Belgrade does not obtain candidacy, in Serbia that will be interpreted as rejection by the EU.
At the same time, Brussels will think Serbia does not want to join the EU, because it has not done everything to win candidate status.
After the messages from the referendum in Kosovo's north, the authorities will be under pressure regarding further moves in Kosovo, which is why it would be best if Belgrade was granted candidacy now," Pribicevic said.
Kosovo analyst Avni Zogiani, director of Kosovo NGO Cohu (Stand up), said Kosovo, after more than ten years of international administration and four years after its independence, is "practically at the initial point when it comes to its relation as a state with its Serb minority."
"The referendum is only the peak of a situation refused to be dwelt with by the internationals and locals, together.
All these years, we have heard only words for the integration of the north from all sides, at a time when this part was governed by structures that never saw themselves as part of Kosovo institutions," Zogjani told SETimes.
