14/12/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 14/12/11
A Bosnia and Herzegovina parliamentary commission, tasked with fixing parts of the constitution that have been deemed discriminatory, has missed its deadline.
The body was supposed to have agreed by now on amendments that would implement a 2009 European Court of Human Rights decision on the Sejdic-Finci case.
The court ruled that the BiH constitution violates international law because it bars ethnic minorities from running for major state posts.
Currently, the constitution says that only ethnic Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats can be elected as members of the BiH presidency and the House of Peoples.
The commission's job was to write a draft amendment that was acceptable to all political parties by the end of November.
But political disagreements have been simmering since the verdict two years ago.
The dominant parties are willing to compromise on the composition of the legislature, but remain divided over whether members of the presidency should be elected directly by one of the two political entities, or indirectly by the parliament.
Committee Chairman Sefik Dzaferovic confirmed that no deal has been reached on implementing the judgment.
Still, he noted, progress has been made.
"The commission has adopted two conclusions:
that there was no consensus that is required for proposing constitutional amendments and that the commission should continue to proceed with the work.
An agreement was reached on the scope of constitutional change, and that it should refer to the election of the members of BiH presidency and House of Peoples," Dzaferovic told SETimes.
The Commission is made up of representatives of 13 largest political parties in BiH and has met ten times.
Dzaferovic hopes that the state parliament will adopt the report of the commission and will extend the mandate of political representatives.
Jakob Finci, a member of BiH's Jewish community and one of two people who filed suit, is disappointed.
"When this committee was formed, I forecast that nothing will happen and unfortunately, my forecast was true.
BiH undertook the obligation to respect its international obligations when it signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement in 2002.
No one forced BiH to promise that," Finci told SETimes.
He noted that BiH is the only country in Europe that has failed to implement a verdict by this court.
"We can only sit and wait for a better time when the political agreement on such a simple and easy thing will be possible," Finci added.
BiH's current constitution was delineated by the 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement, which ended the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia.
It established a tripartite presidency that rotates between an ethnic Croat, a Bosniak [Muslim] and a Bosnian Serb.
In effect, the system bars members of the country's 17 national minorities, known in the constitution simply as "the others", from full participation in political life.
Legal experts say politicians bear sole responsibility for non-implementation of the verdict.
Mile Dmicic, professor of constitutional law at the University of Banja Luka, said there is a legal and political ground for the verdict's implementation.
"Politicians should focus on implementing the judgment in the constitution as soon as possible," Dmicic told SETimes.
"The responsibility is solely on the institutions of BiH, and I fear that a clear and understandable legal issue is slowly turning into a political infinitum."
Tanja Topic, a Banja Luka based political analyst, told SETimes that the case demonstrates an obvious lack of political will.
"When you want to delay something in Bosnia, you form a committee.
The fact that no one from the minority representatives was in the committee speaks the best on how serious are politicians about this matter," Topic said.
She added that a country that wants to have democratic values needs to implement the same values.
European officials have warned BiH authorities that they must implement the verdict under the country's international obligations.
"Theoretically, yes, there is the possibility of that sanctions [could be implemented, excluding] BiH from the Council of Europe, but I sincerely hope that this will not happen," Finci said.
