13/01/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 13/01/12
Whoever stole the three works of art from Athens' National Gallery -- including a 1949 gift from Picasso to Greeks for their resistance to the Nazis in World War II -- didn't have much trouble getting in or out, but will have more difficulty finding another home for the treasures, according to analysts who specialise in art theft.
Picasso's cubist bust depiction Women's Head was stripped from its frame along with the 1905 painting Mill by Dutch artist Piet Mondrian -- from the same school -- and a sketch of St. 
Diego de Alcala by 17th Century Italian painter Guglielmo Caccia. 
A fourth painting, Landscape, also by Mondrian, was dropped by the thief during a pursuit by a guard in the pre-dawn heist on Tuesday (January 10th).
Police said it was the work of one man who entered the building of the National Gallery through a small balcony door, on a side wall, after deliberately activating alarms the night before, apparently leading a guard to leave one disabled.
How the burglary was carried out has seized almost as much attention as the theft, with charges of poor security tossed around amid complaints the heist is another embarrassment for a country in the grip of a deep economic crisis and fighting a reputation for incompetence.
But what of the art?
Greek authorities said they believe the works were probably taken to benefit a private collector. 
But Dick Ellis, director of Art Management Group in England, who set up the art theft division for Scotland Yard more than 20 years ago, said there's a good chance they will be recovered and, if not, used as collateral to fund other criminal enterprises.
"Government indemnity doesn't cover theft. 
They [thieves] are looking for a ransom route that is not going to be forthcoming. 
We'll have to see the caliber of the criminal," he told SETimes. 
"It's obviously an important Picasso, and it adds to its prominence that it was given by the artist himself," said Ellis, who recovered in Serbia two Picassos stolen from a Swiss museum five years ago.
For now, Greek police are still investigating how security was breached so easily. 
Gallery officials have not provided the value of the works, on display in a heavily-traveled well-to-do area of the city, as part of an exhibition called Unknown Treasures, including works by Albrecht Durer and Rembrandt.
Citizen's Protection Minister Christos Papoutsis apologised for the loss, and said security at the gallery was "non-existent".
But Niki Katsantonis, a spokeswoman for the culture ministry, told SETimes that "The National Gallery, as well as all the other museums and archaeological sites, are equipped with modern security systems," and pointed out that there have been thefts at many other museums around the world.
She said the gallery will build a 46.5m-euro extension this year with EU funds, an addition that "won't just improve the grounds, but it will fortify them as well".
Police spokesman Athanassios Kokkalakis said, "These were no amateurs. 
Their moves and operation together were very well calculated. 
With the publicity this heist has received, it's unlikely these works will ever make their way into the black market."
Robert Wittman served as the FBI's investigative expert in art theft and recovered more than $225m in stolen goods. 
Now with his own firm specialising in recovering stolen works, he noted, "You can't judge art only on the dollar value, but what it means to civilisation. 
Your biggest agony is if it is destroyed or damaged."
He said the theft seemed to be meticulously planned to confound guards into disabling an alarm, but that the disposition of the art will be difficult.
"About 99.99% of the time they are not stolen to order, but on the ability of the thieves to go in and get them. 
Most of the time they will take what's easy to get and carry." He said art can also serve as a kind of get-out-of-jail-free card. 
"If they get caught in an armed robbery or something else, they can use it to negotiate."
Ellis said stolen art can be an insurance policy for thieves. 
"They use it as currency to fund criminal enterprises. 
They can't go to the banks, so they steal property. 
It has collateral in the black market," he added. 
Shipments of drugs or weapons can be secured using stolen art, a marker more valuable than any casino chip.
Works by Picasso lead world art sales almost every year and regularly sell for more than $25m. 
In 2010, they fetched $311.6m, ranking fourth, according to the French research company Artprice.
Since 2006, five Picassos have been stolen from museums, including in a 2010 burglary in Paris where more than $120m worth of art was stolen. 
Less than 10% of stolen art is recovered and authorities know little about what happens to it.
As he was about to visit the museum, one patron, Constandinos Malamis, told SETimes, "It doesn't surprise me. 
We don't guard things that are precious."
