14/07/2011
By Esra Serez for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 14/07/11
With bilateral trade on the rise as Iraq becomes more stable, a new border crossing is set to be opened on the country's border with Turkey. 
Business organizations are enthiusiastic.
But certain issues, including some related to infrastructure, have not yet been resolved.
"We have been holding negotiations for about a year with the Iraqi authorities on the new border crossing," explains Ramazan Isik, a representative from Turkey’s Customs Undersecretariat. 
"We must wait for the talks to finalize. 
The starting of the groundbreaking might take place within two to three months."
The parties are now discussing the location of the crossing,the two main locations under consideration being Ovakoy and Sinava, both villages of the southeastern province of Sirnak.
Iraq was Turkey's fifth largest export market in 2010, following Germany, the U.K., Italy and France. 
Turkey’s exports to Iraq have increased more than seven fold from 718m dollars in 2003 to 6 billion dollars last year, according to data by Turkey’s Foreign Trade Undersecretariat.
Meanwhile, Iraq's exports to Turkey rose from 84m to 1.4 billion dollars for the same period of time.
"A second border crossing is crucial to relieve the load on the existing Habur Gate, where trucks wait in queue for days, thus limiting trade," Mehmet Aslan, the chair of Gaziantep Chamber of Commerce, told SETimes.
Turkey's southeastern region mostly exports to Iraq, Aslan said, adding that exports will likely increase even further after the second gate is launched.
"Welfare can be shared among countries of the region, by expanding trade among them. 
Thus, we can become a regional power," he said.
Cargo trucks sometimes have to wait 15 days to cross the Habur Gate, thus, the delivery of goods is postponed and Turkish firms have to pay for the extra costs of such delays, according to Cahit Nakiboglu, the chairman of the Gaziantep Organized Industrial Region and president of Naksan Holding, a plastic goods company that trades with Iraq.
"I will use the second border gate as soon as it is opened. 
A third border crossing would even be good for our businesses," Nakiboglu told SETimes, adding that he expected Turkey’s exports to Iraq to increase substantially as the reconstruction of Iraq continues.
Trade volume between Turkey and Iraq will reach 10 billion dollars by the end of 2011, according to Rifat Hisarciklioglu, the Chairman of Turkey’s Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges, who disclosed this goal in June after meeting with the Iraq Trade Chambers Federation President Jaafar Rasol Jafaar El Hamdani in Istanbul.
However, the chairman of the Turkey-Iraq Business Council at Turkey’s Foreign Economic Relations Board (DEIK) Ercument Aksoy says there are still issues to be immediately addressed before becoming too enthusiastic.
"Authorities intend to open a second border crossing, as the starting of a route from Turkey to Egypt, but there is no infrastructure accross Turkey's border," Aksoy says.
Once they cross the border, more than 90 percent of the Turkish cargo truck drivers transfer the trucks to the locals for security reasons, said Aksoy, who has been doing business with Iraq since 1984.
"A safe system already exists, for which businessmen might not prefer to use a second crossing in the beginning."
The second border crossing will serve to expand trade between the two countries, especially after Iraq normalizes, but it might negatively affect business in Iraq’s Kurdistan region, according to Aksoy.
"Transport and insurance companies in northern Iraq do serious business with Turkish trucks. 
They would not like to give it up," he said.
