14/07/2011
By Ovgu Ulucay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul –14/07/11
Fatma Sahin has a unique position in Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's new cabinet:
she is the only woman minister.
That represents a drop from the previous cabinet, which included two.
NGOs and women's associations are concerned.
"It is a pathetic scene in Turkey, which claims to reach advanced democracy," said Fezal Gulfidan, a member of the board of directors from the Association for the Support and Training of Women Candidates (KADER), in comments to SETimes.
Sahin, who is also the first female MP from Gaziantep, will head the Ministry of Family and Social Policy.
The new name of her ministry – formerly known as the Ministry of Women, Family and Social Policies – is a source of added controversy.
"This is the assimilation of woman within the family by seeing her [only] as a member only of domestic life," Gulfidan said of the renaming.
"The only female minister has been given a political role that suits her [traditional] role within the family," she added.
"There are many women living on their own in Turkey," she says.
"In this manner they are being ignored."
In an open letter to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan in June, the Equality Mechanisms Women's Platform – an umbrella organization comprising around 80 activist groups – condemned the decision to remove the word "women" from the name.
At least five women are killed every day in Turkey, and women are barely represented in parliament and positions of power, the Women's Platform said, arguing that the renaming sends the wrong message.
Turkey, it added, is near the bottom by world standards in the areas of poverty, education, and women's health.
Under such conditions, Gulfidan argues, the government needs a ministry devoted strictly to women's issues.
Selma Acuner, a political scientist at the Women's Studies Centre at Ankara University, is more sanguine.
Promoting Fatma Sahin to the head of the new cabinet is a "promising development", she tells SETimes.
"I believe Sahin will work well because she is close to women organisations, it's as if she is coming from civil society," says Acuner, pointing out that the minister previously headed a research commission on honour killings and violence against children.
"It is necessary to give time to Sahin, to see her work," she concludes.
