14/07/2011
By Klaudija Lutovska and Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 14/07/11
Macedonia assumed chairmanship of the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005-2015, an international programme involving 12 European countries to improve Roma integration and welfare.
The Decade brings together governments, transnational organisations and NGOs to improve Roma participation in education, employment, housing and healthcare, but also commits governments to address other core issues like discrimination.
"Macedonia's chairmanship will focus on Roma education and housing in the upcoming 12 months, National Implementation Co-ordinator Nedzet Mustafa told SETimes.
Mustafa explained that since 2005, the Roma community experienced positive achievements throughout Europe.
"In Macedonia, the providing of scholarships and mentorships to secondary school students as well as securing employment via appropriate training [is particularly important]," he said.
During its chairmanship, Macedonia will organise several international workshops and conferences on developing Roma employment initiatives, explained Mustafa.
He also said education remains the bedrock of the Roma community in Macedonia and elsewhere.
The Roma are Europe's most numerous minority, 12 million strong, concentrated primarily in Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Spain and Turkey.
In Macedonia, the number of Roma is 53,000 or 2.6% of the total population, but only there are they recognized as a distinct ethnicity in the preamble of the constitution. 
The Skopje neighborhood of Shuto Orizari is Europe's first Roma municipality and the only one in the world where the Roma language is official.
World-renowned singer Esma Redzepova told SETimes that Macedonia's systematic support for Roma issues -- including the Roma primer, dictionary and grammar -- should be the basis for replication globally.
"The first song I performed setting me on the path to be recognized eventually as 'queen of the Roma song', was through the airwaves of, and with the support of Radio Skopje," she said.
One of the problems facing Macedonia leading the Decade chairmanship concerns some citizens -- mostly Roma -- who seek asylum in the EU.
After Brussels specified strict recommendations to address asylum or face abolition of Macedonia's visa-free status, the government undertook a variety of employment and social support measures which, together with tightened EU asylum practices, produced results.
According to Belgium's Immigration and Asylum Ministry data issued last month, the number of asylum applicants has fallen to less than 500 this year, down from 4000 in 2010.
Ajet Osmanovski of Macedonia's NGO sector says the Decade, however, is yet to achieve significant progress. 
The exception, Osmanovski explained, is the Decade's action plan which participating countries pay much attention to.
"The problem is the so-called institutionalisation of the Decade. 
In Macedonia, there is a national co-ordinator and a department for implementation. 
I would suggest to join these two because the co-ordinator must have under control all sectors which work within the framework of this process [Roma integration], for example a Deputy Prime Minister for Roma issues," Osmanovski told SETimes.
Osmanovski said Macedonia's chairmanship does not mean much to many of the Roma because they do not know the Decade's basic goals and results, nor understand the issues well enough.
"There are still poor and discriminated against Roma whose educational level is low, and they want results now," he said. 
Osmanovski also said that the NGO sector has played the leading role in undertaking successful initiatives to bring about Roma prosperity even before the Decade began. 
They include motivating and increasing the number of enrolled and graduated Roma students in universities.
"The Macedonian government should continue supporting these initiatives," Osmanovski concluded.

