29/07/2005
(Various sources - 22/07/05 – 29/07/05)
Albania has signed an agreement with the World Bank on a $27m loan to aid energy sector modernisation.
The 20-year credit has a 10-year grace period and an interest rate of 0.75 per cent.
It will be used for the upgrade of eight aging distribution and transmission substations.
The World Bank's latest economic memorandum on Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) highlights the persistently high and non-sustainable current account balance as the biggest challenge facing the country.
Given declining international aid, BiH must raise its domestic savings level to support the need for high investment, the memo said.
Specific steps recommended by the Bank include preservation of the currency board in BiH, consolidation of budget expenditures and tightened credit policy.
Republika Srpska's (RS) industrial output rose from 26.1 per cent year-on-year in May to 40.7 per cent year-on-year in June, according to data from the entity's statistics bureau.
Mining and quarrying industries posted the biggest gains in output, followed by manufacturing.
Output in utilities declined slightly.
The IMF's chief executive for Macedonia, Jeroen Cremers, wrapped up a several-day visit to Skopje aimed at assessing the macroeconomic and political situation.
He called on the government to maintain macroeconomic stability and improve the business climate.
He also announced that an upcoming session of the IMF board of directors would discuss the new three-year IMF arrangement for Macedonia.
Romania's Competition Council has authorised the takeover of the insurance company Omniasig and its subsidiaries by the Austrian group Wiener Stadtische.
The deal is worth 64m euros.
The French firm Alcatel signed a deal with Kosovo Telecom to upgrade and expand the province's fixed-line network infrastructure in Kosovo.
The number of fixed-line phone posts is expected to double as a result of the 17m-euro project.
The Russian aluminium firm Roussal acquired 65 per cent of Montenegro's largest aluminium plant, KAP.
Under the deal, Roussal will pay 48.5m euros for its stake in KAP and allot an extra 27m euros in 12 monthly instalments to the Montenegrin government, to finance projects of "exceptional social interest".
Turkey's government approved the privatisation of Turkish Telecom, which will enable the Oger Telecom-TIM-BT Telconsult consortium to finalise an agreement to buy the state firm.
The consortium has offered $6.55 billion for 55 per cent of Turkish Telecom.
