12/01/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 12/01/12
Following a concerted effort by health officials, approximately 70,000 Serbians are registered organ donors, and officials hope to expand the programme to make such life-saving surgeries more common.
Only 86 organs from 38 deceased donors were transplanted in 2010, according to Serbia's Directorate of Biomedicine. 
The numbers declined in 2011 however, to 56 organs from 24 donors. 
Currently, only kidney and liver transplants are being performed, although Serbian officials hope that heart transplants will be available soon. 
The process was derailed in the 1990s, when a large number of cardiologists left Serbia.
Efforts to increase organ donation have included a recent project by the Serbian humanitarian organisation Nezaboravak, titled Make Life Last. 
About 500 attended a ceremonial lunch and 283 signed their donor cards last November at the Belgrade's Hotel Continental.
"This action was supported by the public institution, a large number of individuals and public figures in the country, the head of the EU delegation in Serbia, the World Health Organisation and other international organisations," Vladimir Markovic, the president of the organisation told SETimes. 
He added that after the charity event, public interest in signing donor cards grew.
Ivana Petrovic, 28, from Belgrade, signed a donor card and told SETimes that it is a gesture all should make, pointing out that organ transplantation is based on solidarity and mutual trust, and the awareness that everyone is a potential organ donor or recipient, more often recipients than donors.
The Make Life Last project supports Serbia's health ministry project Make Life Longer. 
It started three years ago and confirms an increase in the number of donors.
To boost interest, Serbia passed a new law in 2010 aimed at ensuring no recorded misuse. 
The state also formed the Directorate of Biomedicine, in a bid to join Euro Transplant, an international organisation for organ transplantation which now includes seven European countries.
A major obstacle in organ donation is the lack of public education and numerous prejudices. 
Most of the work being done is in raising citizen awareness, first by providing basic information, followed by organised presentations of the Department of Biomedicine and the media.
Today, after some effort, Serbia has 70,000 signed donor cards and transplantation is no longer a taboo. 
Any citizen can become an organ donor, but the final decision about organ donation of the deceased, according to Serbian law, must be made by his or her family.
"The family is always asked. 
However, if the deceased member left a note, the family will, certainly, honour and respect the deceased's will and would also if the same change occurred in the meantime," Biomedicine Department Director Dr Dana Mihailovic told SETimes.
Dr Djoko Maksic, a colonel and professor of nephrology at the nephrology clinic for Military Medicine Academy, which has been working on the programme of organ legacies since 1998, tells SETimes that about 60% to 70% of the families of the deceased whose organs are adequate for transplants agree with organ transplantation.
He adds that theoretically, one deceased donor can save six to seven lives. 
But in Serbia, "just three persons can be saved by one cadaveric organ donor, because we do only kidney and liver transplants. 
Around 1,500 patients are on the waiting list for [organs]."
Mihailovic considers Serbian statistics grim because a large number of patients on the list never receive transplants. 
"World statistics show that from the total number of patients on the list: 1/3 receives organs, 1/3 switch to the next list, and 1/3 die," she said.
Transplant costs are fully covered by the state Health Insurance Fund and transplants are considered the best method of long-term treatment.
"Now, we have five donors per million inhabitants. 
We will, hopefully, have ten donors per million in 2012. 
This will increase our chances, with the entire reorganisation and acceptance of all conditions for the quality required by Euro Transplant and the EU Commission in transplantation quality … to become a full member of Euro Transplant, like our neighbours Croatia and Slovenia," said Maksic.
Mihailovic added that collaboration with neighbouring countries is extremely important in order for organ exchange at an international level.
