10/08/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/08/11
Kosovo Serbs have taken down roadblocks in Leposavic, on the road leading to the Jarinje crossing with Serbia, as well as in Zupche, on the road leading to the Brnjak crossing, media reports said Wednesday (August 10th).
But the biggest roadblock -- 100 metres long -- in Rudare remains in place and the Serbs say they are "at the ready" in case tensions erupt again.
Although there were objections to the agreement between Belgrade and KFOR, it seemed as though Kosovo Serbs would accept the document following talks with Serbian President Boris Tadić at the weekend.
However, the joint session involving the councillors of four Serbian municipalities in northern Kosovo on Tuesday ended without an agreement after only ten minutes.
During the meeting, the factions reportedly disagreed on whether the agreement is good for them and whether it should be implemented.
In addition, some groups collided with Belgrade's stance, which considers the agreement with KFOR the best possibility until new talks with Pristina start on September 5th in Brussels.
Certain analysts and state officials warned that the interruption of the session could hit Serbs in northern Kosovo the most.
"The moment when we as Serbs place ourselves on the opposite side to the state or we express disagreement with it, that is the moment we become the target of foreigners or Kosovo Albanians," Ministry for Kosovo and Metohija State Secretary Oliver Ivanovic told the Belgrade media.
Belgrade analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic also thinks that it is unwise for Kosovo Serbs to confront the Albanians, KFOR and Belgrade.
"This is a situation which is dangerous for the very existential interests of Kosovo Serbs.
Besides this, every disagreement between Serbs makes Belgrade's position in talks with Pristina difficult," Stankovic told SETimes.
In northern Kosovo, Serbian opposition parties criticised the Serbian government due to, they say, the great concessions made to Pristina.
Marko Jaksic, a representative of the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia, described the agreement with KFOR as a "betrayal of Kosovo Serbs".
"We are against the agreement between Tadic and [Kosovo Prime Minister] Hashim Thaci," Jaksic said on Tuesday.
Borislav Stefanovic, Belgrade's chief negotiator with Pristina and KFOR, tried to calm the charged situation.
"There must be understanding for the distrust among [Kosovo] Serbs;
the international community has disappointed them many times.
But I am sure we will go through this process together and the agreement will be realised," Stefanovic told Belgrade media.
He said that the agreement was partly unfavourable for Serbs because it barred the entry of trucks heavier than 3.5 tonnes carrying commercial goods from Serbia, but he added that the agreement would return stability to northern Kosovo.
KFOR also tried to ease the situation, announcing that despite sporadic blockades, its soldiers could move around northern Kosovo and that local Serbs still had time to agree.
The continuation of talks was also announced by representatives of Serbs in northern Kosovo.
However, Kosovo Compromise project director Aleksandar Mitic believes that Belgrade will resume dialogue with Pristina next month considerably weakened after the agreement with KFOR.
"Kosovo's police actions changed the reality in northern Kosovo, and Serbia somewhat verified the situation through agreement with KFOR.
Serbia will now be under pressure to recognise Kosovo customs stamps when they resume talks in September in Brussels," Mitic told SETimes.
