11/11/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 11/11/11
The Kosovo government approved a draft 2012 budget at the end of October, amounting to an estimated 1.5 billion euros in spending. 
According to Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, the focus will be on developing the economy and boosting social welfare.
For the first time, it includes provisions for the northern Kosovo municipalities, headed by mayors not recognised by Pristina.
The spending plans, however, have already become a political hot potato, with opposition parties charging that funds are being misused.
"The government has used the budget to punish municipalities in which Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) is not running," economist Liridona Konushefci told SETimes. 
"Cities which are headed by PDK will get a greater share of the budget, compared to those which are headed by other political parties.
"Prizren has a larger budget than Pec and Djakovica together, which are headed by other parties, and there are many other cases," Konushefci added.
The Vetvendosje movement has already declared its opposition to the draft bill. 
Dardan Sejdiu, an economist affiliated with the party, told SETimes that the Thaci administration is not wisely managing government revenues.
"They are trying to cover the costs with customs revenues, which already have not increased more than 15%. 
When we take into account inflation, then the increase is 4% to 5%," says Sejdiu.
The government, he alleged, lacks a development strategy.
"The government of Kosovo runs a neo-liberal concept linked to free market economy, where, in fact, we do not have an economy and a market at all. 
They do not plan capital investment, which will be able to push investment and economic development of the country," he said.
Countering these charges, a spokesperson for the Kosovo Customs insisted the authorities will be able to fulfil the budgetary obligations.
"For the customs, the 2012 budget is projected to be around 860m euros. 
The past has shown that since establishment of the Kosovo customs, we have fulfilled the projections and see no problem for the future. 
In addition, the current trends show that revenue for the next year will reach customs [budget] projection," Adriatik Stavileci told SETimes.
He added that this year, compared to the last year, the customs increased its revenue by 18%.
"Customs so far managed to raise revenues to 676.7m euros or 18.2% more than last year. 
Compared to the same period in 2010, we had a 104.5m euros increase. 
Customs collected 572.2m euros. 
This figure represents 82% of the annual plan," says Stavileci.
On November 1st, he said, the Kosovo Customs broke a new record in collection of revenues.
"In just over a day we have collected a record amount of 6m euros," he told SETimes.
