13/12/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/12/11
The World Bank Group's annual Doing Business 2012 survey ranked Kosovo 117th. 
That is better than Bosnia and Herzegovina (125th), but behind other countries in the region such as Montenegro (56th) and Bulgaria (59th).
World Bank Country Manager for Kosovo Jan-Peter Olters told SETimes that policy-makers should undertake reforms in certain areas to enable a better investment climate in Kosovo.
"This result underlines the crucial importance of continuing and accelerating reforms aimed at removing obstacles to the production of goods 'made in Kosovo' and services provided domestically," he said. 
"While Kosovo's business climate compares favorably in certain areas -- such as getting credit, resolving insolvencies or paying taxes -- other procedures and requirements pose considerably more challenges to SMEs, especially those related to protecting investors, enforcing contracts, trading across borders and getting electricity."
Structural challenges must be addressed head on, Olters said.
"In particular, the decision to use the euro as sole legal tender precludes policymakers from using currency depreciation as an instrument to boost international competitiveness and/or offset wage increases in excess of productivity growth," he said.
Arta Istrefi, a political advisor at the Kosovo Ministry of Trade and Industry told SETimes that the report does not take into account the most recent reforms in Kosovo.
"For us it is important that the negative trend has stopped…," Istrefi said. 
"We already have successfully executed a series of reforms in Kosovo but the World Bank measurements have been completed on 1 June this year and therefore are not included in these measurement reforms undertaken in the meantime," Istrefi said.
"The World Bank report is not the only factor that will affect investment. 
It is a relatively important factor, but the government is undertaking reforms for the sake of creating the best environment for doing business," she said.
She highlighted recent reforms such as the reduction in business registration time and administrative procedures for import/export.
Some citizens say they have yet to feel the positive effects of these changes.
Shaban Arifi is an Obilić farmer who moved back to Kosovo from Switzerland in 2009 to open his own business. 
He told SETimes he is not satisfied with the climate and the opportunities the country offers.
"I came here with a partner to start my own farm which would give me employment, but also financial stability. 
But I faced many bureaucratic challenges which made my partner leave the country and not invest. 
This put me under very difficult conditions," Arifi told SETimes.
Arifi said administrative procedures are too long and sometimes he needed to leave his business to run from one office to another to get documents processed.
"If I need to go to process a document or take any certificate or something similar, I must plan to close by business and run the whole day through the offices in my town or in Pristina," Arifi said.
Drita Hakaj manages a nursery and flower cultivation site in Kolić village outside Pristina. 
She told SETimes that the procedures to get a license and other permits take too long.
"We need permits and licenses to open a business and with the new fiscal numbers it has become a challenge to deal with bureaucratic procedures. 
Sometimes a week or more is needed to get them all. 
Another problem I faced was [with] the credit loan [I received]. 
The rates are too high and with those rates, reaching a profit remains only a wish," said Hakaj.
Economist Liridona Konushefci told SETimes that property issues and public administration remain the main challenges in implementing reforms.
"Property remains a challenge for [business] dealing [in Kosovo] due to missing property registers [and due to] the procedures in the courts which take years," said Konushefci.
However, Konushefci said that Kosovo still has good potential to attract investors.
"Kosovo has a young population – educated well [with foreign language ability]. 
This is an asset…for developing the economy as human resources are very important. 
Also, Kosovo has good potential to attract investors in the energy and agriculture sectors," Konushefci told SETimes.
