16/02/2012
By Linda Karadaku and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 16/02/12
The results of the Kosovo Serb referendum, released on Wednesday (February 15th), could not have been any clearer -- 99.4% of voters in northern Kosovo said they do not accept Kosovo institutions. 
Turnout for the non-binding referendum, which was held Tuesday and Wednesday, was estimated at 75%.
"The referendum was successful," North Mitrovica Mayor Krstimir Pantic told SETimes. 
He said that he expects that this will reduce the pressure of Kosovo institutions on the citizens in the country's Serb-dominated north, as well as to help the international community accept the position of Serbs who do not want to be part of an independent Kosovo.
On Wednesday, Kosovo's parliament overwhelmingly approved a declaration against the referendum, describing it is illegal. 
A day earlier, the government used the same word in its official statement, rejecting the referendum as an "illegal act ... 
[that] directly impinges on the state sovereignty of the Republic of Kosovo". 
In addition to violating international law, the government said, the referendum "clearly proves the sick ambitions and territorial claims of Serbia towards Kosovo".
Pristina urged the international community to pressure Serbia to end acts that "do not serve in any way the advancement of the Euro-Atlantic agenda, and of normalising interstate relations between the Republic of Kosovo and Serbia".
Kosovo analyst Arbana Vidishiqi, head of Radio Free Europe Byro in Kosovo, said that even though the referendum has no practical impact, "it will most certainly be used as an argument by Kosovo Serbs to demonstrate that it is not just a handful of Serbs rejecting Kosovo statehood, but rather the whole population that lives in the part."
"It will be a tool in the hands of those who de facto run the north, to show they 'deserve' to live with Serbia," Vidishiqi told SETimes.
Serbian President Boris Tadic has said the referendum was harmful to Serbia's interests and ongoing EU mediated dialogue with Kosovo.
"Now, for the first time, we officially have the mismatch between the Serbian government and Serbs from Kosovo ... 
perhaps, the international community will now have to have two negotiators from the Serbian side, official representatives of Belgrade and Kosovo Serbs," Jelena Milic, executive director of the Centre for Euro-Atlantic Studies and a member of the Forum for International Relations and European Movement in Serbia, told SETimes.
Policy Centre in Belgrade Director Dragan Popovic told SETimes that "the important consequence of the referendum is that Serbian leaders from the north lost a good portion of credibility in the eyes of citizens of Serbia. 
They certainly can not count on the [current level of] support of official Belgrade in future activities."
He also said that the situation where all the important stakeholders -- Belgrade, Pristina and the international community -- are on the same side may lead to the political marginalisation of Serbian leaders in the north, "which is good news for the stability of the region".
"One more impact is important for Kosovo [is that] Serbs in the north definitely lost their influence on Serbs south of the Ibar River. 
That should be used by Kosovo to strength influence and trust among Serbs southern of Ibar. 
This is good opportunity for real integration of Serbian community into Kosovo society, which would be also very good news for whole region," Popovic said.
Kosovo Albanian resident Shkurte Krasniqi told SETimes that holding the referendum would have bad consequences for Serbia in its EU integration process. 
"Serbia has understood by now that the political game it has played until now in the north is turning back to it on the important European processes," she said.
