13/12/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/12/11
Businesspeople and banks in Serbia were able to end months of feuding over the weekend, when both sides met with the mediation of President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic and National Bank Governor Dejan Soskic.
The two groups had been butting heads for weeks over credit and loan terms.
The business community claims that the banks were not issuing enough credit and demanded that loan terms be eased. 
Some even pressured the National Bank of Serbia governor to motivate the banks to lead a different credit policy.
The banks responded that they could not be forced into risky loans.
"The very fact that top officials had to become involved in the matter shows that the Serbian economy is facing a difficult year. 
The situation would probably be even worse if it were not for a state intervention," economic analyst Marica Vukovic told SETimes.
The meeting in Belgrade yielded a compromise to facilitate loans to companies and secure liquidity. 
The agreement envisions changing the criteria for assessing the creditworthiness of debtors, which should increase new lines of credit and ease loan repayment.
Debtors can now count on lower interest rates and longer terms of repayment.
After the meeting, Cvetkovic said the National Bank of Serbia would make "certain decisions" to enable better liquidity in the banking system. 
He also noted that similar meetings would be held monthly, so that Serbia can overcome the crisis.
Tadic said Serbia would try to be proactive to prevent the effects of a new wave of economic crisis, the impact of which is expected next year.
"We will spend a lot of energy to minimise the effects of the crisis, generate new jobs and preserve existing ones," Tadic said after the meeting.
However, Vukovic has doubts the agreement will be used for productive investment, but may be diverted towards real estate and speculation.
"I think the results of the meeting will not crucially contribute to the economy's liquidity. 
That primarily will not be the case with small and medium-sized enterprises, which are the bearers of production and growth in other states," she explained.
"The government has now gathered the most powerful businesspeople and they predominantly do not have production, but rather major retail chains, and have in the past taken loans for real estate, not for production," she added.
Objections also came in from the Association of Small and Medium Enterprises. 
"The meeting with the top of the state was attended by several businesspeople who are asking for more favourable credit terms and who employ just 1% of Serbia's workers," Association Vice-President Milan Knezevic told SETimes.
On the other hand, PSP Farman Company President Branislav Grujic, who attended the meeting with state officials, said that the ice had been broken. 
Grujic explained that a concrete agreement was reached on reducing the mandatory reserve for a certain category of loans, primarily for small enterprises.
Analyst Ruza Cirkovic, however, says she does not have much faith in meetings such as the one in Belgrade.
"The state is now taking big loans with high interest, so it is more logical for the bankers to place their funds in the state rather than in loans to the economy. 
I don't think this meeting will do much to change that logic, which applies everywhere in the world," she told SETimes.
