13/07/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 11//07/11
Serbia's image in the eyes of the world has transformed.
Say the name of the Balkan country twenty years ago, and the connotations that sprang to mind usually had to do with nationalism, ethnic hatred and war. 
While the memory of those brutal times has not vanished, they are no longer what people automatically think of in relation to Serbia.
Other, more positive meanings have come to the foreground. 
Serbia is home to the Exit Festival, which closed Monday (July 11th). 
The event is a magnet for youth from around the region and the world.
The country's EU accession prospects have become clearer, and its ICTY obligations are mostly wrapped up. 
Its people can also take pride in another arena: sports. 
The most famous name in Serbia now isn't a megalomaniac dictator or fugitive war criminal, but a top-ranked tennis player.
Serbs have been in collective state of euphoria following Novak Djokovic's Wimbledon victory on July 3rd. 
The tennis singles champion is now routinely referred to with epithets such as "Serbian hero", "the best Serbian brand" and "Serbia's ambassador to the world".
His popularity is such that citizens have even launched an initiative urging the country to issue a 2,000 dinar bank note with his image.
"He has achieved a huge success and comes from a country where success is rare," explains marketing and opinion poll expert Srdjan Bogosavljevic.
Sociologist Vladimir Goati agrees that Serbia, as a country that achieved its lowest rating after the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, the shelling of Dubrovnik, and crimes in Srebrenica, is undergoing a makeover.
"Sporting achievements, such as those by Novak Djokovic, can improve Serbia's image and make it comparable with the countries of this region," Goati told SETimes.
Post-WWII Germany also had to fix its image, he said, and it did so in various ways – such as by offering the world cheap and efficient cars.
The rebranding effort "is not happening consciously and intentionally" in Serbia, he said, but nevertheless the positive impact is clear.
President Boris Tadic was in London to watch the match. 
Afterwards, he appeared to suggest the tennis star may have a future in a different arena of Serbian life.
"I would let Novak become the president at once," he declared.
Djokovic has fans of all ages in Serbia, but the most fervent ones are the youth who see him as a role model and an embodiment of success that comes from hard work.
"We are proud of him, the whole world knows about us through him. 
I hope he'll keep on winning and win gold in London next year," fourteen-year-old Andjelija Milovanovic told SETimes.
