14/02/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 14/02/12
Serbia is preparing to issue identification cards to thousands of undocumented people, allowing them to prove their citizenship and voting rights, and also giving them greater access to healthcare, education and employment.
A new law, which goes into effect in a matter of days, targets about 6,500 who are not listed in any registry book, and about 30,000 who are considered partially legally visible people without permanent addresses.
"These persons have been registered as citizens of Serbia, but could not obtain IDs without an address.
On my initiative, this was resolved with changes to the bill on identity card and residence so these persons can now obtain documents with an administrative address, that is, their address at the Centre for Social Work," Sasa Jankovic, Serbia's Ombudsman, told SETimes.
Many people who are undocumented live in unregistered settlements and were not born in hospitals.
Whole communities remain legally invisible.
Illegally visible people are particularly susceptible to human trafficking and various abuses.
Orhan Dragas, the director of the International Security Institute, says lacking ID can be a serious security threat to law enforcement.
"If there are no ID documents of persons who committed a crime, the existing criminal intelligence database [fingerprints, DNA, and other ID methods] are unavailable to solve crimes.
Also, such persons are often victims of illegal organ trade," Dragas told SETimes.
The most common example is children.
"After nearly two years attempting to provide evidence to register three children who live with a relative, the children were illegally taken to Belgium.
One such case is a family of five, which returned to Serbia after many years of living in different Western Europe countries," Ivana Stankovic, Praxis programme co-ordinator, an organisation dealing with the protection of the legally invisible, told SETimes.
With the aim to help the undocumented persons and avoid wider social implications, the ombudsman, with Praxis, the Centre for Advanced Legal Studies, and the UNHCR, initiated a draft law amending the law on extra-judicial proceedings, adopted by the government.
Olivera Pavicevic, an associate at the Institute for Criminal and Social Research, says one solution is in building social protection systems that ensure needed resources to live a life of dignity.
"This includes opportunities for decent housing, education and healthcare, with policies aimed at 'preventing life crises' that may lead to social exclusion," she told SETimes.
