15/02/2012
By Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Tuzla -- 15/02/12
Officials in the Balkans are discussing co-ordinating their efforts in preperation for the likelihood of extreme flooding and landslides in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro, following the massive snowfall that has piled as much as 5m of snow in some areas.
Republika Srpska President Aleksandar Dzombic has suggested a joint, mutual co-ordinating body to organise flood relief efforts.
He directed his proposal to FBiH President Nermin Niksic, Serbia Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic, Montenegro Prime Minister Igor Luksic and Croatia Prime Minister Zoran Milanovic.
"We are aware of the fact that we all do our best with available capacities, but our problems will not go away with the stopping of the snowfalls," Dzombic said in a letter to the other leaders.
The proposal for the joint action has been viewed by many in region positively.
"Serbia supports this initiative because it also tries to organise itself [as] the regional headquarters in case of natural disasters.
This would enable that each country in region ...
could have beforehand organised help of neighbouring countries," Milivoje Mihajlovic, director of Serbia's office of media relations, told SETimes.
Niksic expects officials to act as fast as possible.
"I believe that the Council of Ministers would not make any obstacles in the realisation of this intergovernmental initiative and that will, as soon as possible, take specific activities," Niksic said.
The region is susceptable to flooding, and some are still recovering from flooding two years ago, in the Semberia region of Republika Srpska.
"My house was flooded then, and my family was evacuated.
That was in December 2010.
We still live at our family members', because our home was destroyed, and the promises that will be repaired are not carried out," Jovan Markovic, a resident of Dvorovi, told SETimes.
Temperatures are expected to remain below freezing for several more days, the Federal Hydrometeorological Institute said.
The necessity of the mutual actions regarding the arrangements of the river bed and making the walls which will protect the flooding is essential, as well as the supply of the machines which break the ice in the rivers.
Croatia borrowed such machines from the Hungary, and the danger of the floating ice is present in Serbia too.
"The danger of the icy waves is also present in BiH, and when it passes the period of ice and snow melting follows.
It would bring large floods and new problems especially in BiH, Serbia and Croatia," Jerko Ivanković, the commander of the Federal Headquarters of the Civil Protection, told SETimes.
Apart from the floods, the large consequences of the snow melting would be landslides.
Hazim Hrvatinovic, the director of the Federal Geology Bureau, said the whole country is being closely monitored.
"The landslides are monitored, we make priorities for the action of the most dangerous and try to minimize the possible consequences," Hrvatinović told SETimes.
