28/10/2005
(Various sources – 21/10/05 - 28/10/05)
Bulgaria's cabinet adopted draft changes in the law on excise taxes, introducing higher rates on a number of goods, including tobacco, alcohol and fuels as of 2006.
The finance ministry anticipates additional budget revenues of around 219m euros as a result of the increases.
The IMF mission and Turkey's government completed talks on the first and second reviews under a $10 billion standby arrangement with the Fund.
Both sides agreed that social security reform -- a key condition set by the IMF -- will be postponed until 2006.
The IMF's board is now expected to give the go-ahead for disbursing the first tranche of $1.6 billion.
The IMF resident representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Graham Slack, said on 25 October that the main requirement under the new IMF stand-by arrangement is the timely adoption of the 2006 budget and the implementation of fiscal policies.
He voiced concerns over the reprogramming of company debts, noting that 71 per cent of the state-run enterprises are accumulating losses.
Serbia's privatisation agency has short-listed initial bids from eight out of ten companies or consortia applying for the position of privatisation consultant for the state oil industry NIS.
The selected firms include Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch and BNP Paribas.
They will now be invited to place final bids, so the selection procedure can be finalised within three months.
An agreement on a 2.1m-euro project on sustainable returns financed under the EU CARDS programme for Bosnia and Herzegovina was sealed in Sarajevo on 26 October.
The initiative envisions the rebuilding of 158 housing units in four areas, rehabilitation of the infrastructure and strengthening of the local administration.
Greece's exports rose 9.9 per cent year-on-year, reaching 8.7 billion euros from January-September 2005, according to data from the Foreign Trade Board.
Germany and Italy remained the first two top markets for Greek exports.
Macedonia's industrial output rose by 9.4 per cent year-on-year in September 2005, according to official statistics.
The rise was attributed mainly to increased production in the processing industry and mining.
In September, industrial output also posted a 10.5 per cent increase, compared to the previous month.
Macedonia's energy regulator issued licences for natural gas transmission and distribution to the state-run enterprise Gama, and for natural gas trading to the private company Makpetrol.
The commission said it would decide on new prices for natural gas transmission by mid-November.
Austria's Erste Bank and Portugal's Banco Comercial Portugues were short-listed from a total of seven candidate buyers in the tender for privatisation of Romania's largest bank, BCR.
The two institutions will begin talks next week on the takeover of a 61.88 per cent stake in BCR.
