09/09/2011
By Aaron Stein for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 09/09/11
Although Turkey's two ideological factions, the religious conservatives and the Kemalists, have often clashed over differing interpretations of secularism, over time they have developed convergent views on Turkish nationalism.
The conservative AKP has moderated itself as part of a larger strategy to attract a wider electoral base in order to gain control over all aspects of the government. 
"In the past, Prime Minister Erdogan was saying that he was the imam of Istanbul and that he was against secularism and that someone could not be secular and a Muslim at the same time," Sena Karasipahi, author of Muslims in Modern Turkey, says. 
"Now, they [AKP] have moderated themselves to stay in power."
The real turning point for the religious conservative movement was the military's "soft-coup" in 1997, pushing the Islamist Welfare Party (Refah) out of power, followed by the party's closure in 1998 by the Kemalist allied constitutional court for violating the principles of secularism.
Since Welfare's closure, the AKP, which emerged from the moderate wing of Turkey's Islamist movement, transformed itself into a mass party structure casting a wide umbrella over different sectors of the Turkish electorate.
"The religious conservatives are the ones who have evolved and shown the greatest tendency to rethink their values," Halil Karaveli, a senior fellow with the Central Asia-Caucasus Institute and Silk Road Studies Programme, argues.
The flash point in Turkish politics is the parties' interpretation of state secularism. 
Turkish secularism has always been unique because Mustafa Kemal Ataturk instituted a number of reforms to bring religion and its practice under the vestiges of a centralised state -- something that went beyond the concept and practice of secularism (i.e. 
separation of church and state) as instituted in the West.
"They [the AKP] have embraced secularism in the proper sense that the state should be neutral and not impose its values on other minorities," according to Karaveli. 
"The secularists have become entrenched and more fanatic in their views," including their dogmatic pursuit of state controlled secularism.
However, one area where the two factions have found some common ground is Turkish nationalism, which has been catapulted to the forefront of Turkey's domestic political narrative with the rising violence in the predominately Kurdish populated southeast.
"In terms of Turkish nationalism, they are both very nationalist. 
With consideration to the Kurdish minorities, they both have reservations; they are not as flexible or as tolerant as the other liberal or socially moderate communities," Karasipahi says.
"Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan has always been a Turkish nationalist," Gareth Jenkins, a nonresident senior fellow with the Joint Centre's Silk Road Studies Programme and Turkey Initiative, explains. 
"Since the collapse of the Kurdish opening in 2009, we have seen Erdogan come out and be a lot more stridently Turkish nationalist, which has coincided with his growing influence in the AKP."
"With growing Turkish-Kurdish tensions and a potential civil war-like situation evolving, we will see religious conservatives and the secularists moving closer together in opposition to the Kurds," says Karaveli.
While religious conservatives have shown a greater tendency to take a more nuanced view of nationalism and the Kurdish issue, at the current juncture Turkish nationalism provides a rare convergence of values between Kemalists and the AKP.
