12/07/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times – 12/07/11
Ending a nearly two-week deadlock, lawmakers from the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) agreed to take their parliamentary oath on Monday (July 11th).
The agreement came after three hours of negotiations with leaders of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP).
Although parliament opened on June 28th, it has been caught in an impasse stemming from court and Supreme Election Board decisions to disqualify a number of elected deputies associated with the CHP and the pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP).
In protest of the disqualifications, 134 CHP deputies and 36 pro-Kurdish politicians declined to be sworn in.
Two CHP candidates are in detention as part of the Ergenekon investigation, while six BDP- sponsored deputies are under arrest in connection with a trial involving the Kurdistan Communities Union (KCK).
In the past, deputies who were elected to parliament while on trial or under investigation were released from prison and allowed to take their seats.
Details of the agreement hashed out between the AKP and CHP remain unclear.
A joint statement, however, spoke of a "common effort in bringing imprisoned politicians who had been elected back to parliament".
Faik Oztrak, CHP Deputy Chairman, is optimistic.
"We’ve agreed to continue our efforts under the roof of parliament by respecting the national will as well as standing up for human rights and the rule of law," he told SETimes.
"Now it is time for both CHP and AKP to work together over releasing imprisoned politicians."
"Not taking the oath prevented our deputies from starting to represent their voters at the parliament legally," he said.
"Our statement with AKP recognizes the rights of our detained MPs and we hope to see them among us very soon."
He urged the BDP-sponsored deputies "to get their message of goodwill from the CHP-AKP agreement".
Parliament's newly elected speaker, Cemil Cicek, has already begun discussions with leaders of the pro-Kurdish party.
But the BDP remains wary, saying it had not been invited to the AKP-CHP talks.
Sirri Sakik, an MP affiliated with the party, told SETimes that the BDP is looking for concrete steps and not just positive rhetoric.
"We do value the goodwill and positive messages that come from the parliament speaker.
The fact that the AKP included the Kurdish problem as part of its government programme, for the first time ever, is very important for us," he said.
"If the AKP leaders announce changes to the Constitution and laws guaranteeing basic Kurdish rights, then on our side the situation will also ease," he added
Daphne McCurdy, Senior Research Associate at the Washington-based Project on Middle East Democracy, says the Parliament crisis "is almost over".
"I think all parties realize that this impasse is detrimental to the country's future and want to resolve it, but the only way to do so is through dialogue and compromise," she told SETimes.
"This is a lesson that goes beyond the current crisis and will hopefully be applied in the interactions of the different parties throughout this session of parliament," she added.
