09/09/2011
(EurActiv, The Irish Times - 09/09/11;
AFP, DPA, Euobserver, The Guardian, The Telegraph, Deutsche Welle, Wall Street Journal, New York Times - 08/09/11;
FT, Euobserver - 07/09/11)
No country can leave the Eurozone, or be forced to do so, the European Commission (EC) said on Thursday (September 8th), following a Dutch call for heavily indebted member states, such as Greece, to be kicked out of the area if they cannot abide by its fiscal rules.
"Neither exit nor expulsion from the euro area is possible according to the Lisbon Treaty under which participation in the euro is irrevocable," Amadeu Altafaj, spokesman for EU Economy Commissioner Olli Rehn, told reporters in Brussels.
Such an option is not even being considered, he added.
Altafaj also noted that the review of the Stability and Growth Pact that sets down the debt and deficit limits Eurozone members must stick to has not been completed yet.
"We are still trying to agree what is on the table," the spokesman said.
His remarks followed a fresh Dutch government proposal, calling for the appointment of a new EU commissioner for budgetary discipline with powers to impose various penalties on countries persistently breaking the Eurozone fiscal rules.
Those would include placing such nations under the stewardship of their partners in the common currency area, curbing their access to EU funding and suspending their voting rights.
The final penalty persistent violators of the budget rules could face would be expulsion from the Eurozone, Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte and Finance Minister Jan Kees de Jager explained in an opinion piece British daily Financial Times carried on Wednesday.
"In the future, the ultimate sanction can be to force countries to leave the euro," the two officials wrote, admitting that the Lisbon Treaty would have to be amended to allow the expulsion of members from the 17-nation zone.
Meanwhile, those that do not want to adhere to the commitments they have taken up when joining the club and to play by its rules have the choice of quitting the Eurozone, they noted.
"If a country doesn't want to comply with the requirements, then there is no other option than to leave it," de Jager said in The Hague on Thursday.
"If you can't stick to rules, you have to leave the game," he added, describing such a move as a measure of "last resort."
The minister also suggested that his Finnish and German counterparts have welcomed the new Dutch ideas.
A report by Brussels-based Euobserver on Thursday however cited a European Central Bank (ECB) legal paper from 2009, according to which, a country may only exit the euro upon exit from the EU as a whole.
As to the possibility of expelling members, the study described it as "conceivable".
Greece, which became last year the first member of the common currency area to receive international financial assistance to avoid defaulting on its sovereign debt, has been reiterating in recent months that it is not planning to quit the 17-nation club.
A day after Germany's constitutional court upheld the country's participation in rescue packages for troubled Eurozone members, German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schauble warned Greece that its second bailout, approved in principle in July, is far from certain.
It is "very premature" to talk about a new rescue package for the Balkan country before it has met the reform requirements for the full disbursement of the first one, he said in an interview with Deutschlandfunk radio on Thursday.
"I understand that there is resistance among the Greek population to austerity measures," British daily The Telegraph quoted Schauble as saying.
"But in the end it is up to Greece whether it can fulfil the conditions necessary for membership of the common currency.
We offer no discounts."
