12/07/2011
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 12/07/11
After the EU Council decided on June 30th to close accession negotiations with Croatia -- and open the accession treaty path by the end of the year – a new monitoring mechanism was launched to ensure the fulfillment of Croatia's commitments undertaken during negotiations.
The Commission, by monitoring Croatia's preparations to assume full membership responsibilities, seeks to avoid a repeat of Bulgaria and Romania who entered the EU in 2007 despite considerable problems with crime and corruption.
"Monitoring reform efforts up to accession will give the necessary assurance to Croatia and current member states," EU leaders stated in the Council's report on Croatia issued on June 24th.
Croatia will be the first EU candidate country to undergo the Council's new monitoring system, which will continue until the anticipated accession date of July 1, 2014.
"Although Croatia has made great progress, Croatia still needs to continue working on the reduction of pending court cases, and ensuring a full application of the legal system for all citizens," EC Vice President and Commissioner for Justice Viviane Reding said in an interview for Deutsche Welle.
Commitments undertaken in the area of Judiciary and Fundamental Rights, including the continued development of judicial reform and efficiency, impartial handling of war crimes cases, and fighting corruption, will be published every six months in the Council's progress reports.
The Commission will send early warnings to Croatian authorities if they fall behind relevant requirements. 
The mechanism allows for "soft pressure" by the EU in the period between the end of negotiations and the accession.
Several EU governments, especially France, Britain and Netherlands, are advocating a strict monitoring of Croatia during this process.
It is clear that the EU learned a lesson from its experience with Romania and Bulgaria, where the backsliding started before their accession.
David Florian Bieber, professor for Southeast European Studies at the University of Graz, says there is another reason behind the new monitoring mechanism.
"The talks with Croatia were concluded very quickly at the end, so some of the promises, especially fighting corruption and rule of law need to be fulfilled," he told SETimes.
Croatian public authorities are optimistic and view the new mechanism as an incentive to pursue relevant reforms.
"The monitoring exercise and Croatia's overall track-record in the closed chapters have already confirmed its determination and capability of fulfilling all its commitments, overcoming various obstacles along the way and becoming a credible EU member," a spokesperson for Croatia's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration told SETimes. 
"Rest assured that this attitude will persist with equally strong commitment in the years to come."
"This new mechanism is a good sign; it demonstrates that the EU can think of new and more constructive ways to conclude membership talks and still have ways to monitor progress," Bieber says.
From a broader EU enlargement perspective, the new monitoring mechanism in Croatia is a model for future talks with other countries in the Balkans.
