09/08/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 09/08/11
Bulgaria recently released its census results, reigniting a debate about the number of Bulgarians and other ethnicities in the country, as well as other demographic characteristics.
The census registered 7.3 million people live in Bulgaria, more than half-a-million less than in 2001.
"We have one of the worst situations in Europe in terms of aging and a very serious share of the people are in their third [late elderly] age.
As a result, birth rates are going down," Bulgarian Academy of Science demography expert Elitsa Dimitrova told SETimes.
Census data show the greatest growth in the number of people over 65 -- from 16.8% in 2001 to 18.5% today.
Experts say the drop in the population is a decades-long trend mostly due to a negative birth rate, but in a third of the cases external migration is a factor.
At the current rate, the country's population will be less than 5.4 million by 2060.
More resources are needed to reverse the trend, but Dimitrova argues "it will continue to be aggravated because there will be less economically active people".
Almost a quarter of the population, or 1.7 million, are above "working age".
The part of the census concerning ethnicity proved most controversial and disparate political groups questioned whether the results reflect reality.
Many are surprised that the number of Roma decreased, given their traditionally high birth rates, though their relative share inched up 0.2% to 4.9% compared to 2001.
Dimitrova said the probable reason is that answering the question about ethnicity was optional;
many Roma probably declared themselves as Bulgarians or belonging to other ethnic groups.
The Roma remain the third most numerous ethnicity.
"It's not true that the number of Roma has dropped," United Roma Union Chairman Zarko Chankov told SETimes.
"Many Roma hide their ethnicity because they are afraid of discrimination, especially the ones who are better educated and have managed to integrate in society," Chankov said.
He insists migration abroad -- the other likely reason offered by experts – did not have a great impact because Roma could participate in the census online.
Every Roma family had at least one member remain in Bulgaria who could register them while officials visited citizens' homes.
Sociologist Tzvetozar Tomov also doubts the official figures.
"There are various assessments and some of them suggest the number of Roma is actually double what was reported," Tomov told SETimes.
Census results showed the number of Turks, the second biggest ethnic group, declined by 0.6% to 8.8% of the population.
A civil society representative from "Together for Hope", who requested anonymity, disagreed with the census data.
"If there is such a trend, it is probably due to factors such as migration and people with dual citizenship.
We have many such people in our municipality and some of them were probably not in Bulgaria during the census," the representative told SETimes.
"Another factor is aging.
There are many villages in Kardzhali that are mostly inhabited by old people," she added.
Macedonian community representatives issued a statement claiming that the number of Macedonians is grossly understated at 1,600 people, adding that the community does not recognise the results.
The census reveals that a fifth of Bulgarians have attained higher education.
"This is a positive trend," Dimitrova said, though noting that education quality is a different issue.
Various surveys suggest the standard of education has fallen dramatically in the past 20 years.
For the first time, the census included a category of people --1.2% of the population or 81,000 -- who have never set foot in school.
