11/07/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 11/07/11
Touring the facility recently in central Serbia, President Boris Tadic predicted Fiat Automobiles Serbia and the production of cars at the Kragujevac factory would serve as an engine of economic development.
His words underscored just how much hope Serbian authorities have pinned on the car factory.
The production and export of two new Fiat models should, according to Serbian officials, boost the economic recovery, as well as reduce the trade deficit.
The Kragujevac car factory, which fell to ruin in the early 1990s, will employ about 2,500 workers.
But the arrival of suppliers is expected to generate up to 5,000 new jobs throughout the country.
Prior to closing the deal with Fiat in September 2008, the factory produced 12,000 vehicles per year.
But in the early production of the Punto model, production rose to about 30,000 cars per year.
Trial production of new Fiat models is expected to begin by year's end.
Through the investments of Serbia and Fiat, which are expected to reach around a billion euros, the factory should be capable of producing between 200,000 and 300,000 vehicles per year, mostly for export.
Fiat controls a 67% stake in the joint company and the Serbian government 33%.
Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic says that Serbia could earn up to 1 billion euros from exports.
However, not everyone is as optimistic.
"Economic recovery cannot be based only on the automobile industry because, apart from tourism, it is the most susceptible to economic crises.
When such crises arise, the first two things people give up on are traveling and a new car," Belgrade economist Mahmut Busatlija told SETimes.
He adds that politicians are also excessive optimists when it comes to the new factory's export earnings.
"Even if the factory manages to export 200,000 vehicles per year, it is difficult to expect the profit per middle class model, which will be manufactured in Kragujevac, to be 5,000 euros, especially since a lot of money will be spent on the import of car components," Busatlija said.
Busatlija points out, however, that the Kragujevac factory's success could attract new investments in Serbia, which is necessary for the country's economic recovery
Everyone agrees the new factory will be a turning point for Kragujevac, dubbed "the Valley of Hunger" after the downfall of its industry in the 1990s.
Mayor Veroljub Stevanovic told SETimes that the deal with the Italians would mean the construction of new roads, new jobs and a higher standard of living.
"The hospitality sector will also develop, and many [local] construction companies have already been hired at the car factory location and in the industrial zone, [to help build] 35,000 square meters for the halls of Fiat's [affiliated] companies," Stevanovic said.
Residents are equally excited.
"I can't wait for the production of new models to start.
That will surely mean new jobs, but also more money will certainly be poured into the town.
I expect that at least we in Kragujevac will live a little better thanks to Fiat," said Kragujevac resident Mileta Stojkovic.
