09/11/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 09/11/11
Strikes in Montenegro entered their second week on Tuesday (November 8th), as an impasse continues between the country's healthcare workers and the government.
Workers are demanding a 20% salary hike, but Podgorica says there is no money.
The workers say they will increase the number of rallies and take to the streets in front of the government building if the matter is not settled in the next two weeks.
According to Vladimir Pavicevic, president of the Clinical Centre of Montenegro Labour Unions, about 5,000 employees in the healthcare sector are on strike.
"If in the next 15 days we don't come to an agreement and if our wages don't increase, there will be a lots of white coats in front of the government," Pavicevic told SETimes.
Dr Ljiljana Kavaric, president of the union of workers in the healthcare system of Montenegro, told SETimes that every day more of the country's 8,000 medical workers are joining the strike.
"Only emergency services [employees] are currently working, and we are maintaining a minimum working process," she said.
The average monthly salary for doctors in Montenegro is 470 euros, while the average salary of nurses is 270 euros.
Specialists make around 560 euros monthly.
Salaries were reduced in 2009 by 10% to 20% due to austerity measures.
Still, government officials say the workers' demands are currently unrealistic.
"Accepting the request for an increase in earnings for any sector of public administration would be contrary to policies that we defined, and it would mean additional borrowing and public debt," Finance Ministry spokesperson Marija Radenovic told SETimes.
She added that the international monetary institutions -- including the IMF and World Bank -- as well as local authorities have warned that public spending is a burden to the country's economy.
"The pressure from workers and the possible radicalisation of the strike will further complicate the situation.
Therefore, we are open and in the mood to resume negotiations and find solutions that will be a compromise for both sides," Radenovic noted.
Members of the public are also concerned about the possible longevity of the strike.
Bogdan Stijovic, 24, told SETimes that he is disappointed with the workers' action, and believes that there are employees who are in worse positions.
"They strike, and we pay for their strike.
What would happen if I must go now for some examination and the doctor simply will not accept me?
I don't support the strike and I think that they need to pursue their rights using some other methods, not on the citizens' backs," Stijovic said.
On the other hand, 31-year-old Nemanja Pavicevic, a private company manager, says that the strike should serve as a wake-up call.
"Doctors are the backbone of a society and all their demands needs to be fullfiled.
They are just people like everyone else and have to feed their families," Pavicevic told SETimes.
