10/12/2011
By Linda Karadaku for the SETimes in Pristina – 10/12/11
Tanja Fajon is the Slovenian member of the European Parliament (EP) and a member of the Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Committee (LIBE), which is in charge of most of the legislation and oversight for EU policies on freedom, security and justice.
In an exclusive interview with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku, she discusses the proposed mechanism allowing for temporary suspension of mandatory visa requirements in the case of a sudden increase of illegal migrants or asylum seekers
SETimes: What is your assessment of the political situation in the Balkan countries, specifically in Albania, Kosovo, Serbia, Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina?
Tanja Fajon: There is some positive development in some of the countries, such as Albania. 
Overall, there have been some good results in the past but a lot still has to be done. 
Serbia proved [their] co-operation with the ICTY, but more has to be done in dialogue with Kosovo and for the stabilization of the tensions. 
Candidacy status is at stake if there isn't concrete improvement.
I hope that BiH consolidates the political situation, builds a clear direction for the country's [accession into the EU] and immediately moves forward on its necessary path of reforms. 
We need to bring Kosovo closer to a visa-free regime.
SETimes: How is the visa liberalisation process going? 
How are the Balkan countries reacting to the visa-free regime?
Fajon: There are worrying numbers of fake asylum seekers in some of the EU member states. 
All five countries have met very demanding criteria for the visa-free regime – the governments have carried out very important measures against the abuses of the system.
Now it's necessary to continue with the implementation and to consolidate all efforts to fight against abusers of the system. 
I sincerely hope that [in the future] citizens in the Western Balkan [are never again required to have a visa for EU travel].
SETimes: What are some of the main problems countries have with the visa-free regime?
Fajon: We are seeing arrivals of fake asylum seekers from Serbia, Macedonia -- even from BiH -- to some EU member states. 
It is important that governments in the region take concrete and immediate measures against these abuses and to ensure that people are aware of the dangers. 
After the new wave of migrants from Arab and African countries early this year, some member states have started questioning Schengen rules, which is of great concern.
SETimes: Is there a danger that the visa-free regime could be suspended due to abuse of the system?
Fajon: At the moment, we are in the middle of negotiations between EU institutions about introducing a mechanism for the temporary suspension of visa requirements in the case of a sudden increase of illegal migrants and asylum seekers. 
I'm a shadow rapporteur for this issue in the LIBE Committee.
I support the EC proposal to implement this mechanism only in an emergency. 
But I disagree with the 50% increase in immigration numbers threshold. 
The danger of suspending the visa-free regime will of course be a threat once this document is approved by EU institutions.
There is also the danger of returning some third country nationals back to the black list in case the rules are severely violated. 
Therefore I often appeal the regional governments concerned to do everything in their power to prevent citizens abusing the system.
SETimes: If severe violations are made, would all Balkan countries be penalised?
Fajon: I won't talk about penalties. 
If a sudden increase occurs, first we will evaluate the facts…and then decide about measures to take. 
Here I believe it is very important that the EP plays an important role, too. 
There should not be a decision without consulting all three institutions. 
That is something what we try to achieve right now, too.
SETimes: What would the acceptance of this emergency mechanism mean politically?
Fajon: Although it is a very technical document, it will have a large political impact. 
Some [member states] would like to see very strict rules that would allow them to introduce suspension rather immediately. 
I have confidence in the EC and the Polish presidency that we will find a good compromise at the end.
The visa-free regime was an important step towards EU integration … especially for the young generation. 
We need to work together for our common European future and, step-by-step, bring all the countries of the region closer to the EU. 
That will mean not only stability and prosperity but also greater freedom of movement for everyone.
