08/09/2011
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 08/09/11
Since 1950, nearly 32,000 people have lost their lives in earthquakes. 
The most destructive was the August 17th 1999 Marmara quake, measuring 7.4 on the Richter Scale, which killed nearly 17,000 people and left approximately 600,000 homeless.
Marking that 12th anniversary, the government announced a national earthquake strategy and action plan.
"Our main objective is to prevent or reduce the social, economic, environmental, political and physical damage or impact of earthquakes," said Deputy Prime Minister Besir Atalay.
The new earthquake strategy draws on studies prepared by a parliamentary sub-commission, with the co-ordination of the Earthquake Advisory Board, and incorporates plans prepared by 13 institutions. 
In drafting the plan, the government also consulted relevant NGOs and academics.
Construction engineer and AKP deputy Professor Pelin Gundes Bakir emphasises the importance of collaboration among political parties, universities, engineers, architects and NGO representatives on such a crucial matter, regardless of their ideological approaches.
"Human-focused issues like earthquakes and urban regeneration should be elaborated with a supra-party approach," she says.
The plan consists of seven main objectives, 29 strategies and 87 actions. 
In this framework, new living environments that are more sustainable and resistant to damage will be established. 
The plan also aims to establish monitoring stations and an early alert system for tsunamis, as well as preparing danger maps. 
An uninterrupted communication system will also be established under the new plan.
It also initiates an urban regeneration process while strengthening critical infrastructure facilities as well as main public buildings.
However, according to the Chamber of Civil Engineers, the plan only focuses on retrofitting buildings and, consequently, excludes housing demolishment and the reconstruction of old buildings which cannot be strengthened due to financial limitations.
Experts also criticise the plan for including public infrastructure at the expense of private buildings, still leaving large sections of the population vulnerable to earthquakes.
It is estimated that in Istanbul alone, 90% of buildings are not resistant to earthquakes and a considerable budget and time -- nearly 20-25 years -- would be needed to retrofit all the buildings in the city.
On the other hand, the plan requires that natural disaster and emergency issues are included in the curriculum of primary and secondary education, while in higher education there will be specific programmes for natural disaster management. 
The plan also takes into consideration the need for protecting historical and cultural heritage from the impacts of earthquakes.
"This new plan provides a roadmap for co-ordinating multidimensional measures against the danger of earthquakes, and identifies a to-do list under independent but interdependent sub-projects. 
For this, the government adopts a long-term perspective including all physical and spatial decisions," says Professor Ertaç Erguven, head of the Earthquake Engineering and Disaster Management Institute of Istanbul Technical University.
However, the plan has not satisfied all experts, including Professor Muzaffer Tuncag, former head of the Chamber of Civil Engineers.
Tuncag argues that the plan does not break new ground as it repeats what had been said before by scientific circles and associations. 
"The main objective should be to put into practice corrective actions," he points out.
