08/09/2011
(Various sources -- 05/09/11 - 07/09/11)
Germany's top court ruled on Wednesday (September 7th) that the country's contribution to Eurozone bailouts agreed last year was legal, rejecting lawsuits aimed at blocking Berlin's participation in emergency loan packages for debt-stricken members of the 17-nation area.
The decision of the Federal Constitutional Court came in response to claims challenging the legality of Germany's decision to take part in both the first, 110-billion-euro rescue package for Greece and the 440-billion-euro European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF).
The court in the southern city of Karlsruhe required the government to get the approval of the parliamentary budget committee before agreeing to provide any further financial guarantees for future emergency loans to troubled Eurozone nations.
Judge Andreas Vosskuhle, president of the constitutional court's second chamber, said it was "a very close decision".
"It should not be mistakenly interpreted as a constitutional blank cheque authorising further rescue measures," he stressed.
Observers said the court's judgment would also prevent the introduction of common eurobonds that several countries, including Belgium and Luxembourg, have been calling for as a tool for dealing with the current turmoil in the Eurozone.
While it could effectively complicate crisis response efforts in the euro area, the court's decision was welcomed by German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Addressing lawmakers during a budget debate later on Wednesday, she said the ruling was a confirmation of her government's policy of balancing solidarity in the 17-nation euro area with member states' individual responsibility.
Defending the euro, she also stressed that its importance is not confined solely to merely a currency shared by the members of a common monetary zone.
"The euro guarantees a unified Europe," the German leader told lawmakers.
"If the euro collapses, Europe collapses."
British daily Financial Times quoted Merkel as also stressing that no countries with a shared currency had ever gone to war with one another.
The European Commission (EC) also hailed the German constitutional court's decision, which would allow Berlin to take part in future bailouts, including the second rescue package for Greece approved by the leaders of the Eurozone nations in July.
Pia Ahrenkilde, the EC's chief spokeswoman, said the EU's Brussels-based executive arm "has taken note with satisfaction of the constitutional court ruling".
The move, she added, "has an important bearing on the capacity of the Union and of its member states to act, to surmount the sovereign debt crisis affecting certain member states".
Ahrenkilde also expressed the EC's confidence that Germany's democratic institutions "will be able to comply with this ruling while ...
maintaining their capacity to act effectively and decisively".
In a televised address on Tuesday evening, Greek Finance Minister Evangelos Venizelos announced an urgent plan of immediate privatisations, pledging also that the government will speed up public sector and labour market reforms to cut public spending.
