07/09/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic and Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo and Banja Luka -- 07/09/11
Representatives of both houses in the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Assembly, as well as the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina parliament and the People's Assembly of Republika Srpska, took a collective month-long vacation in August. 
The public footed the bill.
"The collective vacation of the MPs will stop only if the BiH presidency announces it is mandatory for the council of ministers. 
However, there is no agreement about it ten months after the elections, so probably there will not be a need to interrupt the vacation," House of Representatives chairman Denis Becirovic told SETimes.
With the country still without a state-level government as it faces grave economic problems, the high-level holidaymaking has been met with derision by the general public, with some terming it a "rest from non-work".
Slavko Jovicic, a MP from the Independent Social Democrats, said he does not understand why politicians need a vacation. 
"They [the politicians] should have mobilised all institutions to work because endless problems await us that need solving," Jovicic told SETimes.
Analyst Enver Kazaz agrees, calling the behaviour criminal. 
"The country will be most happy if all politicians quit forever and take a long vacation at their own expense," he told SETimes.
Party for Democratic Progress MP Mladen Ivanjic says vacation is an example of the political parties pushing the citizens' limits, instead of forming a government to tackle very real and urgent problems.
"The responsibility falls on the governing parties which should have secured BiH parliamentary sessions in August," Ivanic told SETimes.
For many, the issue reinforces the perception of inequality between politicians and the rest of the citizenry.
"Shame!" Anto Gashic said, summing up the public mood. 
"While the pensioners fear whether they will be paid at all next month, they chose destinations for vacation that we pay for," he said.
Gashic explained he and many others honourably earned their pensions. 
Some lost their health care "while these people do nothing and get everything".
He is referring to an often discussed topic: that being a politician in BiH seems to be the most lucrative job. 
At 2,550 euros, MPs earn wages nine times higher than the average monthly wage, and more than 20 times higher than the average pension. 
This is in addition to a host of perks and benefits.
Meanwhile, BiH may soon lose over 500,000 euros in assistance from the IMF and the EU if politicians don't pass necessary laws.
"We have a set of laws, international agreements and conventions that await ratification. 
Awaiting [the politicians] are also European laws such as the Law on Census, the Law on State Property and the Law on Government Assistance," Centre for Civil Initiatives representative Ivica Cavar told SETimes.
In over 300 days since the last elections, the Council of Ministers has not formed, while the House of Peoples was formed recently and the House of Representatives has held only five sessions since it was constituted last December.
