24/02/2006
(Various sources – 17/02/06 - 24/02/06)
Meeting in Athens, the finance ministers of the Southeast European Co-operation Process countries agreed this week to push for market reforms, strengthen the private sector and improve co-operation among the region's stock exchanges in a bid to boost the economies of southeastern Europe.
"We are in a position to achieve an economic miracle in our region," Greek Finance Minister Giorgos Alogoskoufis said at the close of the meeting.
The SEECP members are Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro, Moldova and Turkey.
Albania's foreign trade deficit widened by 9.3 per cent year-on-year to 191m euros in December 2005, according to the latest official data.
The foreign trade gap increased by 20.4 per cent, in comparison to the previous month.
The EBRD released its new strategy for Romania, reaffirming support for the country's strategic goal of EU entry in 2007.
It stressed the need for improving competitiveness, attracting foreign direct investment, speeding up reforms in public administration and the judiciary, and waging an effective fight against corruption.
The EBRD also said it would provide a further 5.9 billion euros for projects in Romania, on top of the 2.9 billion euros already committed since November 2005.
Economic growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) remained strong during 2005, although the pace of growth decelerated in comparison to 2004, the World Bank said in a recent report.
It noted that BiH's industrial output growth dropped from 12 per cent in 2004 to 10 per cent in 2005, mostly because of weaker performance in the Federation of BiH.
Turkey's Oyak Group has given up a planned partnership with France's Arcelor for the Turkish state-run steel maker Erdemir.
It cited time constraints as the reason, but some sources also pointed to rumours of a hostile take-over bid for Arcelor by another international firm, Mittal Steel.
The cost of living index in Macedonia registered a 2.8 per cent increase year-on-year in January 2006, according to the latest official data.
According to the statistics, the average food and beverage expenses of a four-member household was approximately 168 euros last month.
Italy's UniCredito and Austria's Bank Austria issued a joint statement concerning the planned merger of three Bulgarian banks -- Bulbank (owned by UniCredito) and HVB Biochim and Hebros Bank (both owned by HVB-Bank Austria).
According to the statement, the merger should be completed by the third quarter of 2007.
The plan has already been approved by the Bulgarian anti-trust agency and now awaits endorsement by the country's central bank.
