09/01/2012
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/01/12
Macedonia's Ministry of Finance is planning two programmes over the next four years that will assist people obtain housing, marking a new approach to a growing regional housing shortage problem.
Since the housing subsidy law went into force on January 1st, 1,500-2,500 requests have been filed, finance ministry spokesperson Ivana Bilbilovska told SETimes, adding that public announcements and advertising will be used to attract more applicants.
Under the first subsidy program, half the monthly mortgage rate will be subsidsed for the first five years on a 20-year mortgage.
Under the second programme, the government will subsidise 50% of the mortgage to build a new house or buy an apartment up to 50,000 euros.
To avoid housing speculation and target those in need, participants in the two programmes will be forbidden to rent the property.
Eight banks have agreed to participate in the two programmes, offering mortgages rates not to exceed 4.99% in the first three years and 5.5% the following five years.
Ajladin Dalipi, a ProCredit Bank director, told SETimes that while the bank is still in the preparation phase, it will participate in the government project.
"The banking sector praises the initiative because it eases the process of obtaining housing," he said, adding that it also eases the process of doing business for the banking sector as well.
Dalipi said mortgages will be issued according to banking principles that take into account an individual's credit capacity relative to their income.
In the event of default, he said, the apartment or housing could be used as collateral.
According to the State Statistics Institute, 21% fewer home building permits were issued in September of last year compared to the previous year.
Nikola Velkovski of the Chamber of Commerce of Macedonia attributes the decline in housing starts to individuals holding back in anticipation of the government subsidy programme.
"The citizens were reserved to buy in this period because they first wanted to see what benefits and advantages the new government project offers.
Over the next few years there will be a serious increase in the construction sector, but its rate will depend on the buyers' interest.
It will in any event jump-start the economy," Velkovski said.
Velkovski noted that at a time of high volatility in currency markets and fears for the end of the euro, purchasing real estate is viewed as the safest investment.
"Many people who keep their money under the proverbial mattress will now invest in a house or apartment, because of the view it is a safer investment than putting it in a bank," he said, adding that the intention of the subsidy law is to help young people.
Unlike in Macedonia, where the demand for real estate is growing, the situation in the region varies.
The recession in Croatia led to a drastic decline in the demand for new apartments.
In Zagreb alone, there are 10,000 apartments on the market with no buyers at current prices, leading experts to believe the real estate prices will fall in 2012.
In Serbia, the demand for housing has recently grown.
Experts say many Serbs believe investing in real estate is safer compared to keeping foreign denominated currency in banks.
This has prompted the Serbian government to consider following Macedonia's example by expanding the country's subsidy programme.
Environment, Mining and Spatial Planning Minister Oliver Dulic stated recently that the government would increase subsidies and lower interest rates to increase housing demand.
"In 2011, we allocated [23.8 thousand euros] for subsidies, but in 2012 we will allocate [11.4m euros].
If there is a demand for mortgages, we will allocate and additional [4.7m euros] in the first half of the year," Dulic said.
