25/11/2005
(Various sources – 18/11/05 - 25/11/05)
The world's biggest copper producer, US-based Phelps Dodge, has been awarded an exploration license for mining operations in Kosovo, UNMIK confirmed.
The company must begin work within 90 days.
An international official called the contract a "major development and the first of its kind in Kosovo".
The province is believed to contain a minimum of 13.5 billion euros worth of minerals and metals, including copper, zinc and lead.
Greek media employees held a 24-hour strike on Thursday (24 November), demanding a new collective labour contract, better labour conditions and higher wages.
Apart from some reports on the strike, no news coverage took place during the day and the morning papers were not published.
Albania's government approved the purchase of 20,000 MWh from Bulgaria under a direct procurement procedure.
The power will help resolve the acute energy crisis in Albania.
The Turkish government plans to cut corporate tax rates to 25 per cent from 30 per cent next year, with a further 10 per cent reduction to be made over a period of four years starting in 2007.
Turkish leaders now face the task of convincing the IMF to accept the tax cut plan, aimed at boosting foreign investment.
The minimum wage in Montenegro will rise from 50 euros to 52 euros, effective from 1 December, and by another 1 euro no later than August 2006, under a new agreement between the government, trade unions and employers.
The accord is to be formally signed within the coming days.
The Macedonian government adopted the draft state budget for 2006.
It projects a nearly 28m-euro budget deficit, to be covered primarily from external credits.
The draft next goes to Parliament for approval by the end of this year.
The Republika Srpska cabinet extended the deadline for submitting bids in the Bosanski Brod tender from 24 November to 8 December.
The government said it wants to allow more companies that have shown interest in the refinery to participate in the tender.
Greece's Public Power Corporation said its net profits dropped 39.5 per cent to 155.1m euros between January and September.
It cited hikes in crude oil and natural gas prices as well as rising environmental costs as the reasons for the decline.
Romania reached an agreement with Wintershall Erdgas Handelshaus Zug, a joint venture between Russia's Gazprom and Germany's Wintershall, on the extension of a natural gas supply deal until 2030.
The deal, which has been in force since 1993, was initially due to expire in 2012.
