08/12/2011
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 08/12/11
Proposed pension reforms were adopted by Bulgaria's parliament in an 82-51 vote, with two abstentions, on Thursday (December 8th). 
The changes were supported by members of the ruling GERB party and four independent MPs, while all other parties rejected the measures.
Bulgaria's two main trade unions are threatening nationwide protests over the reform plans, which include an increase in the retirement age as of January 1st.
The leaders of the Podkrepa labour confederation authorised the syndicate's executive council and strike committee on Tuesday to "take all needed actions" to stage effective nationwide protests, including a national strike in all its forms".
Mika Zaykova, an economic expert and a senior member of the union, told SETimes that they "are just beginning preparations" for such actions, noting that there a lot of procedures they have to go through as part of the process.
She also confirmed on Wednesday that the protests would be organised jointly with the Confederation of Independent Trade Unions in Bulgaria (KNSB), the other major syndicate in the Balkan nation.
Last week, more than 15,000 workers and employees joined a rally in Sofia, called by the two trade unions, against the ruling centre-right GERB party's pension reform plans.
The two syndicates reached an agreement with the government last year, under which the retirement age would remain unchanged until 2021, when a phased increase spanning over several years would begin.
In a surprise move on November 28th, however, Prime Minister Boyko Borisov's cabinet said it would launch the long-delayed reform process as early as next year, in a bid to narrow the nearly 1-billion-euro gap in the state pension fund. 
Their initial decision was to raise the retirement age by one year as of January 1st, ahead of a new gradual increase starting in 2015.
Enraged by GERB's move, Podkrepa and KNSB have pulled out of the three-way social council with the government and the employers. 
Following the November 30th protest, the cabinet softened its proposal, but the two syndicates rejected it immediately.
The revised pension reform plan envisions that, starting January 1st, the retirement age for the general category of workers will increase by four months annually until it reaches 63 for women and 65 for men. 
Currently, they are able to retire at 60 and 63, respectively.
The required age will also go up by four months at the beginning of each of the next three years for workers and specialists in the two groups entitled to early retirement: reaching 48 for women and 53 for men in Category 1, such as miners, pilots, divers, etc. 
As of 2014, Category 2 workers, ranging from those involved in hazardous productions to public transport drivers, and ballet dancers and circus performers, will be able to retire at the age of 53 for women and 58 for men.
As of January 1st, the military and police will be eligible for retirement after 27 years of service, up from 25 now.
"They [GERB] are violating the principles of social dialogue," Zaykova told SETimes. 
"Acting behind our backs, they are introducing measures that affect everyone, as well as the labour and insurance relations in this country. 
How can we trust those people?"
Citing the ongoing crisis in Europe, Finance Minister Simeon Djankov said that there was no room for further delaying the pension reform as the three previous governments did.
"Clearly, if we do not act now, our or some future government will then face the difficulties that at least two-thirds of the European countries are going through today," he said.
International and local economists have long been warning that the continuously falling workers-to-retirees ratio in Bulgaria, which was recently ranked fifth in the world on the speed of population ageing, is one of the key problems in the pension system.
On top of that, "there are too many opportunities for early retirement and too many opportunities for getting a disability pension," Luchezar Bogdanov, an analyst with the Sofia-based Industry Watch consulting company, told SETimes. 
"As a result, there are many unsustainable ratios in the system."
That is why, one of the essential measures is to increase the retirement age, he added.
"Of course, it is equally important, if not more important, to tighten up the early retirement provisions and to raise the retirement age for people from different professions that are entitled to this," added Bogdanov. 
"Governments in all developed countries are beginning to realise that the social systems, such as they are today, are apparently unsustainable and are associated with greater risks."
Zaykova blamed the current state of the pension system in Bulgaria on the continued reduction of contributions since 2001 and on the poor management of the occupational pension funds. 
Another factor is the unfair pension distribution scheme, according to her.
Ordinary Bulgarians are also split in their response to the changes.
"It would have been better if the government had not backed off from its plan for a one-year increase [of the retirement age]," Tanya Radeva, an owner of a small trading company in Sofia, told SETimes. 
"The system is ailing and needs a surgeon, not a pain-killer."
The changes were "bad news" for Maria Nikolova, a public sector worker in her late 50s, however.
"I was hoping to retire in a year or two. 
Who knows what will happen meanwhile?" she told SETimes. 
"This is turning into a moving target that I might never be able to reach.
