06/09/2011
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 06/09/11
High-profile reforms in Greece's creaky higher education system late last month (August 24th) include the effective abolition of the all-encompassing "asylum status" enjoyed by education institutions, after an unprecedented parliamentary majority -- 250 out of 300 MPs -- ratified the framework law.
Beyond whatever ramifications in the country's higher education sector, approval by both mainstream parties -- the ruling socialist PASOK and main opposition centre-right New Democracy -- heightened speculation about a discreet "consensus" between the two major parties amid the ongoing economic and fiscal crisis.
Education Minister Anna Diamantopoulou, a former EU commissioner regarded as one of a handful of likely successors to current PM George Papandreou at the ruling party's helm, called the vote by parliament "historic", stressing that such consensus could be achieved in other areas.
Nevertheless, the main opposition party, buoyed by its lead in recent opinion polls and the government's failure to improve the economic outlook, flatly ruled out co-operation in the difficult months ahead.
"ND will never offer consensus, or rather, complicity in the mistaken [government policies] ...
Let it [the government] continue to seek a life jacket for its own incompetence and ineffectiveness," ND spokesman Yiannis Mihelakis said on August 30th.
Despite the broad political consensus for the education reforms, aimed at upgrading long-waning academic standards of both students and faculty, school "sit-ins" and one major street protest took place last week, mostly backed by professors' unions and leftist-party affiliated student groups.
For example, an "inaugural" mobilisation on Thursday (September 1st) drew about 5,000 youthful protesters who marched through central Athens.
Asked to outline his and other rectors' opposition to the reforms, Yiannis Mylopoulos, the outspoken head of Thessaloniki's Aristotelian University pointed to the "next day".
"That's the real and prolonged question:
if universities will work better," Mylopoulos told SETimes.
"There is no question whatsoever of the [measures')] implementation;
we are guarantors of legality and constitutionality," he added, while nevertheless noting the "constitutionality argument" that opponents have raised.
He also dismissed vociferous criticism that the university "asylum regime" is unique.
Vassilis Zotos, a noted architect/town planner and president of the local British Graduates Society, disagrees and criticises the system.
"Unfortunately, the only way to improve and change higher education in this country is to close universities for five years and then reopen them;
while then allowing foreign universities to operate affiliates."
He told SETimes that he has steered clear of teaching positions in Greek universities since his return from London more than 40 years ago.
As for current criticism by professors' unions, he says, "There are 65,000 Greek college students around the world at present, and most are enrolled in systems that the current government wants to institute, yet most of the academic community here is against it … the majority of the people in the country are reasonable and commonsensical, but we're governed by a minority;
the same [situation] exists in the universities."
Besides doing away with the early 1980s "asylum law" -- passed by a newly elected socialist government at the time -- other reforms include the elimination of party-affiliated ballots in student elections;
changes in rectors' elections to reduce influence by party-affiliated student groups;
obligatory registration by students every semester;
limits on the time it takes to earn a degree;
evaluation and certification of course studies;
on-line publishing of textbooks and lecture notes, and establishment of a unified post-graduate studies school.
The framework law would be implemented in stages, according to Diamantopoulou.
The first will be completed a year from now.
