04/08/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 04/08/11
Hamid Xhidiku, 75, a native of the northeastern town of Debar, is the caretaker of the oldest mosque in the centre of Tirana, the Et'hem Bey Mosque, built in the 18th century by Molla Bey.
Remembering life as it was under the communist regime, Xhidiku told SETimes he felt "like an animal" when the government of Enver Hoxha forbade religious practices in Albania.
"Imagine, I used to go to the mosque with my uncle;
he was a hoxha, and then it was forbidden.
What does one do?
The mosques in my village they turned into a store house.
At least they did not destroy it," he says.
As soon as religious practices were allowed in the 1990s, Xhidiku returned to the Et'hem Bey Mosque.
When asked what he most appreciates about Islam, he says, "a clean heart, people loving each other, not doing bad things, as one takes a look at oneself before even thinking of doing something bad to someone else."
Xhidiku has a personal image of Islam, inherited from generations before him, which has "the good heart" in the centre of religious notion.
His children are hard-working, educated and have built their lives in a country in transition.
"Those who kill [and call themselves] Muslims, they are not.
Killing an innocent person is like killing all people of the world.
They are criminals," he says while discussing "another [kind of] Islam".
His predecessor, the first caretaker of the Et'hem Bey Mosque, died while he was in the mosque;
hundreds attended his funeral.
"He reflected love and respect," Xhidiku says.
Remembering life as it was decades ago, Xhidiku recalls "we always respected one another.
During Ramadan, Catholics and Orthodox did not smoke in the market, and when they ate they would close their doors [out of respect for the fasting Muslims]," Xhidiku remembers.
Atalanta Pasko, an Albanian Orthodox, grew up along with Muslim friends.
The 60-year-old says most of her female and closest friends were Muslims.
"We would visit each other's houses and show interest in respective religious symbols of the other.
They were interested to know about our Christian symbols and my sisters and I were interested in learning about their Muslim symbols."
"There was [mutual] love based on common values such as character.
Religion was never a problem.
My sisters and I established family-like relations with them, which we continue to this day," Pasko says.
