04/08/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 04/08/11
Turkey's economic performance since the 2001 financial crisis has transformed the country from a classic economic basket case into one of the world's fastest growing countries.
However, Ankara is now facing a number of economic challenges, while the eurozone struggles with a debt crisis.
Robert Zoellick, president of the World Bank, recently warned Turkey that the economy is now operating at close to full capacity and policymakers "need to be alert to inflation risks".
The government has remained cautious over Turkey's economic performance despite solid numbers in the first half of the year, with some AKP leaders advising people to "not spend too much" as "black clouds" have started to form over the global economy.
Yet some, including AKP Vice-Chairman for economic affairs Alaattin Buyukkaya, believe Turkey is immune to a global crisis, thanks to the country's strong and dynamic economy.
"We've urged our citizens [to not spend too much] because the crisis is not too far from our borders, but it stays completely away from our economy," he told SETimes, adding the public is "witnessing how the country is ready for any kind of difficulty that may emerge from external sources".
"Turkey will not suffer [from the crisis] at all, even if [our] neighbour's problems worsen," he insists.
Turkey quickly bounced back from the 2007-2008 global financial crisis, something the government has been quick to point out, especially before the June 12th national elections.
Yet this time the situation may be very different, as the fundamentals behind Turkey's economy look increasingly shaky.
Meanwhile, some local analysts, such as Omer Faruk Colak, prominent economist and lecturer, believe that the global crisis has already arrived.
"The problem is very serious … Taking into consideration that as the EU is one of the biggest trading partners of Turkey [with 50% of Turkish exports]," he told SETimes, pointing out that a slowdown in the European market would slow Turkish growth and make it vulnerable due to its high external financing requirement.
However, of even greater concern is the current account-deficit which hit 37.2 billion dollars in the first five months of this year, a 121% increase compared to the same period last year.
"These [current-account deficit] numbers are worrying," Colak says.
"People should definitely save their money and the government, in its turn, must act quickly and more effectively to prevent the possible crisis."
On the political front, he says the opposition doesn't offer any alternatives and the AKP is on its own to develop economic policy.
Masum Turker, politician and former state minister for economic affairs, believes the possible economic crisis "became much more a political, rather than an economic issue for the government".
"Private spending is now at the level of sociological madness," he says.
"The government remained silent as it saw the contribution this spending made to the economic growth."
"This problem existed before the elections as well, but the AKP covered it over in order to win [the election]," he told SETimes, adding the government is now facing the consequences.
