06/07/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 07/06/11
Ankara took a sharp turn in its Libya policy Sunday (July 3rd) by recognising the opposition rebel movement as the country's legitimate representatives during a visit by Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu to the rebel capital of Benghazi.
"We did recognise the Libyan opposition and are ready to contribute more support, because we believe the [Libyan] crisis can be solved peacefully very soon, even during the upcoming days," the Turkish Parliament's Foreign Affairs Commission Spokesman and AKP deputy Metin Yilmaz told SETimes.
Stating that there is no "illogical change" in Ankara's approach, Yilmaz said, "Our diplomacy is based on a deep analysis of the situation … We have been very cautious in our approach from the very beginning, but now we saw the dialogue with Gadhafi became impossible."
In Benghazi, Davutoglu pledged aid to the rebels as Turkey immediately recalled its ambassador to Tripoli and froze Libyan assets. 
Turkey's Savings Deposit Insurance Fund explained it was temporarily holding the Libyan Foreign Bank's 62% stake in Turkey's Arap Turk Bankasi A.S., in keeping with UN Security Council decisions to freeze Libya's foreign assets.
"Turkey is finally in line with Libyan people - the place it had to be, but with a little delay," Hikmet Cetin, former foreign affairs minister and parliament speaker, told SETimes, adding that the change in Ankara's stance on Libyan Colonel Moammar Gadhafi's regime "was necessary months ago, more than today".
"Gadhafi lost everything and has no question on Turkey's position right now," he said. 
"We ought to have understood from the very beginning that neither Gadhafi's Libya, nor the Middle East as a whole, will ever be the same again and there is no meaning of pushing them to the past."
Libya's opposition leader Mahmoud Jebril also appeared in Ankara on Tuesday (July 5th) and later this month Turkey will host Western Allies for the next contact group meeting on Libya.
Officials in Ankara say they are willing to make all the necessary contributions they can in Libya to ensure a quick solution is found.
"Our diplomacy concretised just in time," Yilmaz said, pledging that "Turkey will do everything for the implementation of the possible agreement that the Libyan people might manage to reach at the end of the day."
Meanwhile, some AKP members are still wary of Turkey's anti-Gadhafi position, saying it might spoil the country's image and moderator role in the Arab world.
"We can't behave just as a NATO member in one night, because we have our hesitations in Libya and other Arabian countries," Fevzi Sanverdi, who chaired the Turkey-Libya Parliament Friendship Group until last month, told SETimes.
"Our Western partners have to ensure us and the Libyan people they will not let any action kill our Muslim brothers in Libya," he added. 
"The West also should accept that Libya belongs to Libyans, not for the distribution of its underground resources and wealth."
However, Oytun Orhan, a researcher at the Ankara-based think tank Center for Middle Eastern Strategic Studies, believes Turkey can now play a more independent and effective role in Libya.
"If business and political interests were shaping Turkey's official policy before -- plus there were thousands of Turkish citizens over there at the beginning of the crisis -- now, there are no concerns about that," he told SETimes. 
"Muslim Turkey, under the NATO umbrella, can provide more support to the Western Alliance's operations in Libya in a non-combat role," he says.
Looking forward, Orhan says the upcoming contact group meeting in Turkey will focus on post-Gadhafi Libya, in which Turkey already has its own political and economic interests.
