04/11/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times -- 04/11/11
The Igman Initiative, designed to help speed up the normalisation of ties between Western Balkan countries, was set up in March 2001.
It unites more than 140 NGOs from Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia.
A mid-October session in Belgrade – the initiative's 22nd since its establishment – was headlined "European Perspective, Co-operation and Stability".
The initiative's co-president for Serbia, Aleksandar Popov, spoke with SETimes correspondent Tzvetina Borisova about the reconciliation progress in the region.
SETimes:
Fifteen years after the end of the Balkan conflicts, do you believe people in the region feel more unified and reconciled?
Aleksandar Popov:
Fifteen years after the war, wounds are not entirely healed and there are substantial psychological barriers in people's minds.
This is a consequence of a very slow process of facing the past [due to] certain political options and politicians easily manipulating people with a one-sided or biased interpretation of events from the recent past.
In spite of that, however, a more favourable atmosphere has been created through civil sector activities resulting in reduced interethnic tensions and therefore a more tolerant environment has been created in the region.
Some moves of politicians currently in office contributed to that, such as the visit of [Serbian President] Boris Tadic to Srebrenica on the occasion of the 15th anniversary of the war crime committed there by Ratko Mladic's forces, as well as his visit to Ovcara, a place near Vukovar, where Serbian forces killed 200 civilians.
Other politicians have also apologised for crimes committed, and all such gestures contributed to the creation of a more favourable ambience in the region.
SETimes:
Have the wounds of the conflict begun to heal?
If yes, what are the driving forces behind this process?
Popov:
Time heals all wounds, and in the course of these 15 years that has happened.
In addition to that, the restored communication between people from the region has resulted in understanding that individuals, not peoples, are accountable for the crimes committed -- and those most responsible for them are already convicted or have been tried in the Hague.
That is predominantly the result of efforts by NGOs, which have been for years have been persistently working on coming to terms with the past and restoring the understanding and trust among the peoples and countries involved in the armed conflict.
SETimes:
How can an atmosphere of unity and stability be established in the Western Balkans?
Popov:
The best way to establish an atmosphere of stability in the region is to speed up resolving the remaining open issues among the countries that are signatories to the Dayton Agreement, and among the former republics of Yugoslavia as a whole.
The Igman Initiative defined five key open issues and they are:
borders, trying war crimes, refugees, succession and status and property issues of the citizens that emerged as a result of the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia.
Efforts are being made to resolve them, as they may be a disadvantage in the further process of, not only restoration of understanding and trust, but of EU integration as well.
It is also important to have a more intense co-operation in all areas, from economy to culture in order to restore the atmosphere of stability.
SETimes:
How much has the region's EU perspective helped in this direction?
Popov:
The Union is one of the main factors forcing countries of the Western Balkans to improve regional co-operation as it is given major importance in country progress reports on the way to the EU.
SETimes:
What were the main conclusions of this year's summit of the Igman Initiative in Belgrade?
Popov:
The main conclusion of the 22nd Igman Initiative session was that the European prospects of the region could be attained only through full partnership and that signatories to the Dayton Agreement have to support each other on the way to the EU on the principle of solidarity.
It was agreed at this session to focus future activities of the Igman Initiative on resolving the remaining open issues between the countries of the Dayton Agreement, as well as to transfer the positive experience of the Nordic model of co-operation to our region.
