06/07/2011
(AFP, BBC, AP, Reuters, Euronews, VoA, New Europe, Xinhua, Innercitypress, Radio Netherlands, Tanjug, B92, RTRS - 05/07/11)
Tuesday's (July 5th) ruling by an appeals court at The Hague was welcomed by the relatives of victims. 
The court said that the Netherlands was responsible for three deaths in the 1995 Srebrenica events. 
Dutch authorities described the ruling as "unexpected".
The lawsuit was filed in 2002 by the interpreter of the Dutch battalion, Hasan Nuhanovic, and the family of electrician Rizo Mustafic, who was killed after he was handed over by the peacekeepers to the Serb forces. 
Nuhanovic lost his father and brother, who were also turned over to the Bosnian Serbs, after they sought refuge in the UN protection force base.
The plaintiffs accused the Dutch state of negligence, arguing that they knew what would happen to the Bosnian Muslims when they ordered them to leave a "safe area".
The Dutch were in charge of an UN-set "safe area" in Srebrenica, which was overrun by Bosnian Serbs in July 1995. 
The Netherlands has said its forces were abandoned by the UN, which gave them no air support.
Tuesday's ruling overturned a previous decision by a lower-instance court, which stated in 2008 that the Netherlands cannot be held responsible for the deaths as they were not acting on behalf of their country, but rather as part of UN operations.
The latest decision said the Dutch should have known what would happen to the three men and should have not expelled them from the base. 
Although the troops were part of UN forces, they were under the "effective control" of top Dutch military and government officials in The Hague. 
The court ordered the Netherlands to pay compensation to the relatives, but its amount was not immediately announced.
Relatives of the victims hailed the ruling, describing it as historic, as it is the first time a state has been held liable for its actions as part of the UN.
"This ruling is a very good thing. 
It certainly paves the way that the Dutch state to be also proclaimed responsible for what has happened in Srebrenica, for other victims also," Sabaheta Fejzic of the Mothers of Srebrenica association told AFP.
The UN said they are looking at the ruling. 
"Clearly we want to study the entire ruling in detail ... 
and this is something that we are in the process of doing," UN spokesperson Martin Nesirky told Innercitypress.
The historic ruling comes just days before the 16th anniversary of the fall of Srebrenica in 1995, when some 8,000 Muslim men and boys were killed by Bosnian Serb forces, led by wartime commander Ratko Mladic.
Mladic was detained in May this year after more than 15 years on the run. 
He is currently on trial at The Hague war crimes tribunal on 11 counts, including genocide.
