03/08/2011
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 03/08/11
Kemal Burkay, a prominent poet, intellectual, and one of the most important figures in Kurdish politics, returned to Turkey on July 30th after three decades in exile. 
The return of Burkay, a critic of the PKK and an advocate of non-violence and Kurdish rights, raises hopes of reconciliation between Turkey and its Kurdish population.
Burkay, the founder and former secretary-general of the Kurdistan Socialist Party, fled Turkey in March 1980, shortly before the September 12th military coup. 
Under prosecution in Turkey for his political views and activities, he received asylum in Sweden where he has resided since.
The top of the government hierarchy -- especially Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan -- had encouraged Burkay's return and received him with open arms.
Known for his peaceful approach on the Kurdish issue and as a critic of the PKK's violent tactics, Burkay intends to leave his mark on Turkish politics, not as an active politician, but rather as a socialist intellectual advocating a democratic and non-violent solution to Turkey's Kurdish problem.
However, Burkay maintains sympathy towards the pro-peace Kurdish party HAK-PAR, which is largely marginalised in Turkish politics.
Speaking to SETimes, HAK-PAR leader Bayram Bozyel underlines that Burkay will be a political force above party politics, but will act in parallel with the perspective of HAK-PAR. 
According to Bozyel, "As a peace-loving person, Burkay will co-operate with all pro-peace and democrat powers of Turkey."
Merve Alici, of the anti-militarist Young Civilians Movement, characterises Burkay's return as "small for Burkay, but huge for Turkey", adding that the judicial, discursive and social transformation of Turkey -- although still deficient -- paved the way for his return.
Holding a press conference in Taksim, Burkay explained the reason for his return as "supporting the peace steps towards the Kurdish issue". 
"Whoever will contribute to this issue should be supported and we should avoid those who are trying to block this peace movement," he said.
Burkay has criticised the mainstream Kurdish movement for failing to support the Turkish government's "Kurdish opening", which has largely stalled since its inception nearly two years ago.
He hopes to reinvigorate the "Kurdish opening" with the intention of eliminating terrorism through the expansion of Kurdish cultural rights. 
Government cultural initiatives such as the state-run 24-hour Kurdish television channel TRT Ses is viewed by Burkay as an example of how far Turkey has come in recognising the "Kurdish reality" since his departure three decades ago.
At a time when talk of "domestic war" and a "return to the dark days of the past" is widespread, sociologist Arus Yumul of Bilgi University argues the return of an intellectual like Burkay is a promising development. 
"We are at a crossroads between past and future, and intellectuals like Burkay can save us from such a limbo where we have been stuck," she tells SETimes.
Professor Fuat Keyman, director of the Istanbul Policy Centre, agrees that Burkay's return comes at an especially important juncture. 
"For a person obliged to live abroad several decades due to the military coup, the timing of his arrival coincided with a normalisation process of military-civil relations in Turkey," Keyman tells SETimes.
However, given all the players in Kurdish politics, questions remain over whether Burkay has much backing or will be able to accomplish his goals.
The pro-Kurdish BDP-dominated Democratic Society Congress (DTK) has called on him to join its cause, but divides remain between Burkay and the mainstream Kurdish political movements.
Ekrem Eddy Guzeldere, from the European Stability Initiative, says Burkay's influence on Kurdish policies remains to be seen, and finds it difficult to imagine Burkay joining forces with the DTK. 
"If he does not, his political base is very small and his influence will be that of -- at most -- an influential political commentator," he tells SETimes.
