06/02/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 06/02/12
Kosovo's parliament has approved a resolution to close the International Civilian Office (ICO) and complete the Ahtisaari Plan by the end of 2012, as part of the process of ending supervised independence.
Parliament acted after the International Steering Group (ISG) recommended last month that the office could be closed this year.
"This resolution, its content and, furthermore, its approval, reflects a broad political and ethnic consensus," Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said.
The government and the ICO identified constitutional changes to end the supervised independence -- amendment of 21 laws and new legislation to be prepared and approved.
The opposition Vetevendosje Movement is against the resolution, and accuses the Thaci government of trying to "smuggle in" a special status for northern Kosovo as a price for ending supervised independence. 
Vetevendosje refused to sign the resolution.
Shpend Ahmeti, deputy chairman of Vetevendosje, told SETimes that the organisation demands full Kosovo independence and sovereignty without conditions.
"The resolution that was proposed by the Democratic Party of Kosovo does not intend to end supervision, only remove the ICO in exchange for Kosovo to further approve laws that further limit the lack of sovereignty of Kosovo in its entire territory," Ahmeti told SETimes.
Kosovo analyst Ramadan Ilazi says that the end of supervised independence is not substantial, but more rhetorical and declarative as EULEX and the Quint group will continue to maintain control and competencies in certain areas.
Thaci told reporters that he is ready to talk to Serbian President Boris Tadic.
"I am ready to discuss with Mr. 
Tadic the [Kosovo-Serbia] issues. 
But I wish to point out that for Kosovo's internal policy, we decide, not Serbia," Thaci told Koha Ditore.
In its latest report, the International Crisis Group (ICG) states that sovereignty continues to fuel tensions and violent clashes in northern Kosovo, halting Kosovo and Serbia's fragile dialogue and putting at risk Serbia's EU candidacy.
"Many Serbs in Serbia and Kosovo do not want to accept that the north will eventually fit within Kosovo's constitutional order, yet accommodation is necessary for Belgrade to succeed ultimately in its EU membership ambition," says Sabine Freizer, the Crisis Group's Europe programme director.
"For integration to be peaceful, however, it will have to be gradual and the result of political compromises and agreement," she adds.
President Atifete Jahjaga said on Wednesday (February 1st) that Kosovo institutions want to implement the constitution and the laws of the entire Kosovo territory.
It remains uncertain if politicians will reach a consensus for the north, which remains under local Serb barricades.
Burim Ramadani, a senior official with the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, says the government lacks a strategy to solve the northern problem.
"There is no consensus for a special status in the north and there will not be," Ramadani told SETimes, adding that the problem is not between Kosovo and Serbia, and "therefore it cannot be solved through a dialogue between these two states."
"The problem of the north is lack of democratisation, rule of law and economic investments," he adds.
