05/12/2011
By Erl Murati for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 05/12/11
"The dust in Tirana has some air in it," jokes environmentalist Sazan Guri, head of the Ecological European Alliance, describing the state of air pollution in Albania's capital.
He says the situation throughout the country is not much better and that Albania is one of the most polluted countries in Europe.
"The average speed of our vehicles is 7-12km per hour, while in Vienna or every other European city, the average is 50-60km per hour.
Although we have five times less vehicles than Vienna, they pollute 50 times more," Guri told SETimes.
A higher number of stops and lower speed means higher pollution, according to Guri, but that is not all.
Old cars on the roads with high gas-emissions contribute to high pollution levels, as do construction projects devoid of environmental criteria.
The widespread practice of burning garbage adds to the problem.
"Smoke coming out of car exhausts, street construction, dust and ultraviolet rays create photochemical smog, which stays at a height of up to 100m," he explained.
That smog has chemical content and is cloud shaped, often noticeable in some Albanian cities.
With pollution from "total particles" called LNPs, Tirana has an average of 323 micro grams per cubic meter of air, slightly more than four times the EU rate.
Eco Movement leader Xhemal Mato told SETimes the central problem is that the authorities don't take air pollution monitoring figures seriously.
"The alarming figures do not bother the Albanian authorities at all.
Another problem is that we monitor only the air, after the European Council [posed it as an] obligation, but not the land or water.
So we do not know what their condition is," Mato said.
Some commentators argue the attitude seems to have been inherited from earlier times when the former communist regime tried to build heavy industry -- mostly with high-polluting Russian and Chinese technology -- and environmental protection was not on the agenda.
Many of the big factories built then now lie abandoned as enormous piles of ironmongery of poisonous materials that nobody cares for, adding to the pollution levels.
Mato points to an additional problem -- the destruction of Albania's forests, as the country has lost a significant proportion of them.
"According to the European Institute that studies forests through satellite [imagery], Albania has a higher rate of forest burning this year than any other country.
Yet, nobody is planting trees and when the season comes, authorities say that they planted 100 or 200 trees, when in neighbouring countries like Macedonia they plant some five million trees in a season," Mato told SETimes.
While the environment is highly damaged, more alarming is the lack of specific interest from relevant institutions, he added.
Government representatives disagree, arguing 2011 has been a special one for forest development.
"In the International Year of the Forests, declared by the UN Forum on Forests, we have reforested and rehabilitated a surface of 1,000 hectares," Environment, Forests and Water Administration Minister Fatmir Mediu told SETimes.
Mediu claims Albania comes close to the European standards and has had some achievements in the environmental protection area.
"But the environmental issues in Albania are still acute:
inherited or created over the past two decades.
I believe these issues are a wake up call for every citizen, local and central administrator, for all the society and politicians, because it is about our own life and our childrens' lives," Mediu said.
Irked that the government is not doing much to address pollution, citizens turned downright angry at the decision to adopt a law to import waste.
Demonstrators staged street protests in early November in front of parliament.
The government argued the controversial bill would only allow a limited list of non-toxic waste for recycling purposes, but environmental activists insist that in addition to being very polluted, Albania would become Europe's backyard recycling bin.
A similar attempt was thwarted in 2004 due to strong public opposition.
