05/12/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times -- 05/12/11
Formed in 1993 in the aftermath of the Balkan War and as part of a UN-lead effort to bring to justice those suspected of war atrocities and human rights violations, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has seen its role evolve as its mandate winds down in 2012.
The creation of the War Crimes Justice Project (WCJP) in July 2010 shifted focus to making available and transparent how the tribunal's handling of war crimes cases assists both the Balkans and other global regions facing similar challenges.
In the second part of her interview with SETimes, ICTY Registry and Chambers Spokesperson Nerma Jelacic talks about equipping Balkan courts to handle war crimes cases, implementation problems and the impact as a global resource for investigating and prosecuting instances of war atrocities.
Part one of this interview can be found here.
SETimes:
Do you think local courts in the former Yugoslavia are prepared to deal with war crimes cases effectively?
Nerma Jelacic:
The completion strategy of the tribunal, adopted in 2003, which required the tribunal to speed up proceedings, has been an important catalyst for strengthening capacities of local jurisdictions.
It has spurred them not only to take on some of the tribunal's cases, but also in handling their own war crimes cases.
Numerous mechanisms have since been implemented to assist local courts in strengthening their capacities in dealing with war crimes cases.
The most recent have been implemented as part of the War Crimes Justice Project (WCJP), which lasted from July 2010 to October 2011.
The sole purpose was to facilitate transfer of knowledge and material from the ICTY to legal professionals in the region.
The tribunal trained 157 people in 32 sessions held in six jurisdictions of the former Yugoslavia.
SETimes:
How do you pass down your experience to Balkan courts?
How do you prepare them to prosecute war crimes cases?
Jelacic:
The tribunal, even from its early years, has been very active in assisting local judiciaries in handling war crimes cases.
Since 1999, the tribunal's Outreach Programme has been pivotal in facilitating capacity building of the local judiciaries through holding training seminars for local legal professionals and organising numerous visits to The Hague.
This gained increased importance and is now central to its legacy.
As part of the WCJP, numerous training sessions and peer-to-peer meetings were held in the region and at the tribunal, which enabled the sharing of expertise, knowledge and also strengthened ties and co-operation between legal professionals.
While the project ends in 2012, the legal staff will continue meeting their counterparts and assisting them with their own caseloads.
SETimes:
Where were the areas in which local legal experts most needed training and preparation?
Jelacic:
Topics covered as part of the WCJP included "how to" research sessions using ICTY Court Records and Appeals Chamber Case Law Research Tool databases and also specific guidelines to assist in effectively submitting requests for legal assistance or for variation of protective measures under the tribunal's Rules of Procedure and Evidence.
The project was preceded by a nine-month needs-assessment conducted in close consultation with legal practitioners throughout the region.
[This] culminated in publication of a September 2009 final report that identified areas where national legal systems could use assistance in dealing with increasing war crimes cases.
Another goal of the WCJP was to facilitate an exchange of experience and knowledge between ICTY senior staff and local judges, prosecutors, defence counsel and witness support providers through peer-to-peer meetings.
During these discussions, practitioners exchanged views on various topics related to the adjudication and prosecution of war crimes cases, from procedural issues to international criminal and humanitarian law.
SETimes:
What were the main war crimes-related difficulties facing judges, prosecutors and lawyers in the region?
Jelacic:
One problem was access to ICTY material.
The WCJP responded by transcribing over 60,000 pages of ICTY transcripts into Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian (BCS) and offered research tools on the website, such as the Appeals Chamber Case Law Research Tool.
Another problem was lack of support staff in local institutions dealing with war crimes cases.
The project funded placement of over 30 legal support staff members within legal institutions in Serbia, Croatia and BiH.
These young professionals came from a variety of backgrounds including law, political science and communications.
Placements provided institutions with much-needed extra assistance and enabled the professionals to gain direct experience working on war crimes cases.
Another problem was lack of contacts between jurisdictions.
These peer-to-peer meetings created personal ties in the region and strengthened co-operation and partnership.
