09/01/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 06/01/09
Southeast European countries are facing a major challenge.
As they move closer to the EU and NATO, they have to solve the problems related to human trafficking in all its forms, whether driven by prostitution and crime or simply by the desire to gain economic opportunity by migrating to affluent countries.
The Balkans have increasingly become a transit route for the illegal movement of people seeking a better life in the West.
Recently, a co-ordinated multinational police action broke an organised chain for transferring people from Albania to Greece, via Macedonia.
Dubbed "South," it involved police forces from all three countries, and resulted in 17 arrests.
The detained persons were the owners of trucks and vehicles fitted with specially made tanks for hiding economic migrants.
The migrants were paying between 1,000 and 1,500 euros for the transfer.
The sex trade is also a major force driving trafficking in the region.
Macedonia, for instance, is a country of transit and, to a lesser extent, destination for women and children trafficked from the former Soviet Union and Eastern and Southeast Europe for the purpose of sexual exploitation.
Macedonian women, meanwhile, continue to be trafficked throughout the former Yugoslavia, according to the 2005 US State Department report on this world-wide problem.
The report listed Macedonia as a Tier Two country, meaning that it does not fully comply with minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking, though it is making significant efforts to do so.
It has fallen one level, from Tier One in 2004, because of a lack of progress in strengthening its anti-trafficking efforts.
The government passed new anti-trafficking legislation in 2004, but failed to demonstrate overall improvement in enforcement and prevention, the State Department found.
Persistent institutional deficiencies in the judiciary continued to hamper the government’s ability to effectively combat trafficking.
The judicial system, the report noted, failed to appropriately and effectively prosecute, sentence, and detain traffickers or provide adequate safeguards for victims and witnesses in courtroom settings.
To remedy these problems, the government has launched an anti-human trafficking project, the National Mechanism for Co-ordination and Counselling.
The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy will carry out the project in three phases by 2006 in collaboration with the OSCE Monitoring Mission.
The partners will also involve the police, local authorities, welfare workers and NGO representatives.
The judiciary is also taking steps, for example by holding judges accountable for failing to ensure a timely court proceeding.
For example, Judge Dimitrija Cobovski was dismissed by parliament for taking 11 months to pass judgement against a notorious local pimp, Dilaver Bojku.
By law, it should have taken 14 to 60 days.
"A ruling may not be written 11 months after it was passed, and this especially in a case that stirred the country," wrote Lence Sofronievska, the chairman of the Republic Judiciary Council.
"The Bojku case has changed the excellent assessment we were given as a country in combating human trafficking," she said, referring to the State Department report.
Insufficient witness protection of victims presents another difficulty.
It was because of the seriousness of the problem that the United States and the Regional Centre for Combating Trans-border Crime donated distance witnessing video teleconference equipment to the Macedonian Public Prosecution Office.
Macedonia is the first country in the region to use such equipment in courtrooms, said US Prosecuting Attorney Garvin Corn.
The State Department report also gives a severe assessment of other countries in the SEE region.
Albania is identified as a source country for women and children trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation and forced labour, largely to Greece and Italy, where many victims are then further transited to the United Kingdom, France and the Netherlands.
Albanian children, especially ethnic Roma and Egyptian, continue to be trafficked externally for forced begging.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, according to the report, is a country of origin, transit, and destination for trafficking victims, many of them ethnic Roma.
Serbia-Montenegro is identified as a source, transit and destination country for trafficking victims and internal trafficking of ethnic Roma children for whom forced begging continues to be a problem.
Kosovo is found to be a source, transit and destination point, with internal trafficking seen as an increasingly serious problem.
In 2004, UNMIK's Trafficking and Prostitution Investigation Unit made 77 arrests, conducted 2,386 raids, and assisted 48 victims, 17 per cent of whom were minors.
Victim assistance, meanwhile, declined as increasingly sophisticated criminal networks adjusted to anti-trafficking enforcement efforts, shifting the commercial sex trade out of public bars and into private homes.
Many of the victims from BiH and Serbia-Montenegro are trafficked throughout the former Yugoslav republics and then back again in a seasonal, rotating pattern.
Of special concern for Balkan countries is the impact the problem of trafficking has on their hopes for an eased visa regime, as well as their EU and NATO bids.
Four countries in the region -- Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia and Romania -- are official candidates for membership.
Bulgaria and Romania are scheduled to join the bloc on 1 January 2007, though those plans could be delayed by a year if Brussels determines all criteria have been met.
All four candidates are listed in the US State Department report as Tier Two countries.
EU Justice and Interior Commissioner Franco Fratinni has outlined the steps which the Union expects countries to take in order to combat human trafficking.
These include strengthening border control, improving passport quality and signing agreements for re-admission -- thus enabling illegal emigrants to return to the country of transit if their citizenship can not be determined.
Some of these steps are already being taken.
Macedonia, for example, is introducing new passports containing biometric information on the holder.
It is in the final phase of negotiating eight re-admission agreements with EU member-countries, and it is developing an e-communications system for linking the border crossings.
At the same time, the ICG -- an influential US-based think tank -- has directed a measure of criticism towards the EU for what it says is an overly rigid visa regime towards Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro.
While these countries should strengthen their fight against illegal immigration, the ICG says, limiting movement and economic opportunity fuels the problem to begin with.
Failure to open the door wider to Europe can deter European values from taking root.
Closing the door to countries with Muslim populations, meanwhile, increases the potential influence of radical and terrorist groups based in the Middle East.
At the least, the ICG suggests, a more liberal policy should be put in place for certain categories of travelers -- educators, professors, students, journalists, businesspersons, high-level officials and truck drivers.
In the long term, EU membership may be the best antidote to the problem, which stands to be reduced once the economic misery underpinning it is alleviated.
