19/08/2005
(Various sources - 12/08/05 – 19/08/05)
A sixth tender organised by the Albanian power utility KESH for electricity imports has failed, after only one bid was received.
KESH is attempting to purchase electricity for around 27m euros, in order to secure supply for September to December.
The Fitch ratings agency upgraded Bulgaria's long-term rating on foreign currency debt by one notch to BBB.
The move was primarily attributed to the successful formation of a new coalition cabinet.
Other factors include the reduced level public debt, which has been brought down to 30 per cent of GDP, and very robust fiscal performance.
Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic announced the nomination of former tax administration chief Aleksandar Radovic as a new special controller of the finances of the Serbia-Montenegro Defence Ministry.
Dinkic said the newly established position is necessary because the ministry's budget has expanded to over 37m.
He called for stricter government control over defence expenditures.
Russia's Lukoil opened a warehouse in Stip, Macedonia, marking its official entry into the country's domestic market.
Lukoil plans to invest 50m euros in building a chain of 40 gas stations in Macedonia.
At least 600 new jobs are expected as a result.
The Greek mobile equipment retailer Germanos has opened a new subsidiary, Sunlight Trading, in Serbia-Montenegro.
Germanos will control 100 per cent of the company, which will sell batteries and photovoltaic systems as well as electric and electronic appliances.
The European Commission's (EC) delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) opened a tender for projects to train managers and entrepreneurs.
The EC is providing 1.5m euros in funds for the training.
Applicants must submit their proposals by 18 November.
The EBRD has endorsed the selection of Croatian subcontractors for building the Vrbovsko-Bosiljevo 2 section of the Rijeka-Zagreb motorway.
The local firm Kostruktor-Engineering will build the road section, while Hidroelektra Niskogradnja and Viadukt will construct two tunnels.
The contracts are worth 7.5m euros, 10.5m euros and 13m euros respectively.
