04/07/2011
(Deutsche Welle, The Australian, CNN - 04/07/11;
BBC, Haaretz, AFP, Reuters, Al Jazeera, AP, ANA-MPA- 03/07/11;
ANA-MPA - 01/07/11)
A mission of activists planning to carry aid to the Gaza Strip faced a major setback Saturday (July 2nd), when Greek authorities stopped their fleet and arrested the captain of one of its US-flagged vessels, spurring fresh controversy.
John Klusmire was detained on charges of attempting to leave the port of Piraeus without permission and putting the lives of 36 passengers, four crew and ten journalists at risk.
He will remain in custody until a hearing Thursday.
Klusmire's ship is part of an aid fleet of ten boats called Free Gaza, which was heading for Gaza before it was stopped by Greek authorities.
The mission was to commemorate the first anniversary of the Freedom Flotilla, which tried to break the Gaza blockade in May 2010.
Back then, Israel raided the lead vessel, leaving nine Turkish activists dead.
The captain's arrest, which came after Greek Citizens Protection Minister Christos Papoutsis announced on Friday that all vessels with Greek or foreign flags bound for Gaza will be banned from departing Greek ports for the safety of passengers, spurred protests by pro-Palestinian activists in Athens.
They insisted Greece is bowing to pressure from Israel.
Campaigners have launched a hunger strike outside the US Embassy in Athens, accusing Greek authorities of trying to thwart the mission.
Over the past weeks, Greek authorities have prevented the fleet from sailing, citing "bureaucratic problems".
Activists have accused Israel of sabotaging the mission, a claim that is firmly rejected.
"The activists are trying to blame someone for their failure -- no doubt they have watched too many James Bond films," Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman told Army Radio in an interview Sunday.
"I welcome all the efforts that have been made to stop the flotilla," he added.
Greek Foreign Ministry spokesperson Grigoris Delavekouras told EUObserver that talks with Israel have played a role.
Analysts view the development as more evidence of warming bilateral ties.
The Islamic Hamas movement condemned Athens' move.
In a statement from Damascus, the organisation said the act is "inhuman and contrary to international laws and norms".
It urged the European Parliament and all humanitarian organisations to pressure Greece to allow the vessels to sail.
Meanwhile, the Quartet of Middle East peace mediators, which include the UN, the US, the EU and Russia, issued a statement Saturday, urging "all those wishing to deliver goods to the people of Gaza to do so through established channels, so that their cargo can be inspected and transferred via established land crossings."
In a statement Sunday, Greece defended its action, reiterating it is for safety's sake.
In the spirit of compromise, authorities proposed shipping the aid using existing channels that are acceptable for Israel.
