02/09/2011
(Ynet - 02/09/11;
The New York Times, Washington Post, AP, Reuters, France24, VOA, BBC, Jerusalem Post, Zaman - 01/09/11)
Turkey's strained relations with Israel plummeted further on Friday (September 2nd) as the country announced it was expelling the Israeli ambassador and other senior diplomats.
At issue is the 2010 raid on a flotilla bound for Gaza.
Israel, insisting its actions were justified under international law, has refused Turkey's demands that it apologize and pay compensation to families of the nine victims.
"Our relations with Israel will not normalize," Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said, adding that the government in Jerusalem would have to "pay a price".
That price, he indicated, would be the lowering of relations to a charge d'affairs level, the suspension of all military co-operation, support for a UN Security Council investigation, and legal aid to those affected by the incident.
"Above all, the price will be the end of Turkey's friendship," Davutoglu said.
The diplomatic rift comes on the heels of a UN panel report which concluded that Israel's naval blockade of the Gaza Strip is legal, but that Israeli commandos used "excessive and unreasonable" force in boarding a Turkish ship, the Mavi Marmara.
The report was scheduled for official release on Friday.
However, a leaked version appeared in the New York Times one day earlier.
The flotilla raid prompted Turkey to request an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council, at which Israel faced strong criticism.
Aside from calls for a full independent investigation into the case, a number of countries also raised their voices against the Gaza blockade.
In early August 2010, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon established a Panel of Inquiry on the incident, headed by former New Zealand Prime Minister Geoffrey Palmer.
Israel and Turkey were represented by Joseph Ciechanover Itzhar and Suleyman Ozdem Sanberk.
"Israel faces a real threat to its security from militant groups in Gaza," said the report.
"The naval blockade was imposed as a legitimate security measure in order to prevent weapons from entering Gaza by sea and its implementation complied with the requirements of international law."
In an annex to the report, Sanberk said he "rejects and dissociates" himself from that finding.
Another conclusion of the panel that the Turkish representative did not support described the flotilla's attempt to breach the blockade as "reckless".
"The majority of the flotilla participants had no violent intentions, but there exist serious questions about the conduct, true nature and objectives of the flotilla organisers, particularly IHH," the Palmer report added, referring to the Istanbul-based Humanitarian Relief Foundation.
"The actions of the flotilla needlessly carried the potential for escalation."
Sanberk also disagreed with the panel's finding that while Turkey took steps to persuade the flotilla organisers to change course if needed to avoid an encounter with the IDF forces, it could have done more to warn them of the "potential risks involved and to dissuade them from their actions".
He also rejected a conclusion supporting an Israeli argument that the commandos acted in self-defence after being attacked by some of the activists on board the Mavi Marmara.
"Israeli Defense Forces personnel faced significant, organised and violent resistance from a group of passengers when they boarded the Mavi Marmara requiring them to use force for their own protection," the report said.
"Three soldiers were captured, mistreated, and placed at risk by those passengers.
Several others were wounded."
The Israeli panellist also voiced reservations to some aspects of the report, particularly the description of the force used by the IDF during the raid as "excessive and unreasonable" and denied any wrongdoing by the commandos.
"Israel's soldiers clearly acted in self-defense and responded reasonably, proportionally and with restraint, including the use of less-lethal weapons where feasible," Ciechanover said.
"The Panel's characterisation of the circumstances which led to the nine deaths on board the Mavi Marmara does not adequately take into account the complexities of what was clearly a chaotic combat situation."
According to the panel's methods of work, the body operates by consensus, but where that is impossible to achieve, Palmer and Uribe can agree on any procedural issue, finding or recommendation.
