04/10/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 04/10/11
Although the government has worked on the Pristina draft bill since 2009, it remains blocked due to disagreements between the Kosovo government and Pristina municipality. 
The high cost of the bill -- 8m euros annually – and disagreement over the Pristina Youth and Sports Hall are plaguing finalisation.
The draft bill would provide Pristina with 4% of Kosovo's budget and special status as the capital city, guaranteed by the Kosovo Constitution.
Local Governance Deputy Minister Basri Musmurat told SETimes that the law was not postponed for any political reason, but due to last year's elections and the delay in forming a government.
"[The] Kosovo government has put this law on its agenda as a strategic one, and will soon go ahead with it. 
The Pristina municipality had time to submit their comments, and did so. 
The prime minister appointed a committee to review the law and the comments."
Pristina municipality spokesman Muhamet Gashi told SETimes that the law is important for the city's development.
"The Pristina bill is more than necessary; this law is guaranteed by the constitution. 
Pristina will benefit in many aspects, both in development and citizen services provision," says Gashi.
Driton Selmanaj of the Kosovo Democratic Institute told SETimes that the Pristina bill was not seriously dealt with in the political arena.
"Politicians haven't found a common language on the issue; there have been numerous promises, but we have never seen concrete steps. 
Pristina is not a simple city; as such, it deserves special treatment, and we emphasised it last year. 
Again, I repeat, nothing should prevent the Pristina bill from being adopted," Selmanaj said.
Musmurati told SETimes that the bill will be forwarded to the government this month.
"The 12 ministry member committee, USAID, ICO and municipality associations will first send the bill to the government. 
The ministry of finance then needs to review the bill, after which the government should approve and send it to the assembly," Musmurati said.
Gashi says the municipality will manage the disputed Youth and Sports Hall. 
The municipality wants to run it while the government insists on its centralised management.
"This law provides the return of the Culture, Youth and Sports Hall to the Pristina municipality and its management, and an additional grant of 4% from the state budget, which means there would be more projects in the interest of [Pristina] citizens," Gashi says.
