03/01/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times -- 03/01/12
After numerous high-level meetings held in the course of the past 12 months in a bid to resolve the eurozone debt crisis, the situation at the end of 2011 was worse than at the start of the year. 
Amid uncertainty about the ability of the 17-nation euro area to survive the turmoil in its present format and about the future of the common currency itself, Europe is expected to slip into recession again.
The debt crisis, which started in Greece in 2010, spread to Ireland and Portugal, and continued towards core eurozone nations such as Italy and Spain, the third- and fourth-largest economies in the club. 
In the past 12 months, international ratings agencies downgraded a number of euro countries, including Cyprus and Greece. 
They also indicated that even France, the second-largest economy in the area, could lose its triple-A rating.
Eurozone crisis -- no light at the end of the tunnel
Cash-strapped Greece sank deeper in 2011, with the threat of default hanging over its head like a Damocles' sword. 
Facing an already huge and mounting sovereign debt, the country adopted a series of austerity measures to cut public spending. 
Seeing more and more money being taken out of their pockets, amid rising unemployment, Greeks responded with massive protests and strikes.
In late October, the leaders of the eurozone agreed in principle on a new rescue package, worth 130 billion euros, to help the Balkan nation avert bankruptcy. 
Just a few days later, George Papandreou, Greece's prime minister at the time, said he would call a national referendum on the deal.
His surprise move angered European leaders, with some breaking a long-running taboo by suggesting the possibility of one or more members exiting the eurozone.
Within a few days, Papandreou abandoned his referendum decision, resigned and was replaced on November 11th by technocrat Lucas Papademos, who headed an interim coalition government tasked with concluding the vital bailout agreement with the EU and the IMF.
Shortly after, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi stepped down. 
Former EU Commissioner Mario Monti, also a technocrat, took over in a bid to speed up the adoption and implementation of an austerity plan.
During the 27-nation bloc's latest summit on December 9th, the 17 eurozone leaders decided to move towards greater fiscal integration and stronger economic policy co-ordination. 
They also agreed that countries found in breach of the EU rules on public deficit and government debt should face sanctions automatically.
Bulgaria, Romania and all other non-euro members of the Union, except for Britain, said they would join the pact, which is expected to be signed in March following negotiations, which will focus also on the existing and future eurozone rescue mechanisms.
European leaders also agreed at the summit that the Private Sector Involvement component of the planned new bailout for Greece, which forces private creditors to take a 50% loss on their Greek holdings, had backfired and would not be used again.
"On Greece, it is obvious that leaders have learned from past mistakes," European Policy Centre Director of Studies Josef Janning told SETimes. 
"There is a clear expression that the haircuts for Greece were an exception and will remain one case." With the details on the other specific measures yet to become clear, he expressed reservations on the sanctions' idea.
"The whole idea of sanctions has an essential weakness -- it punishes countries with extra money while they are already short of money," Janning said.
The non-EU Western Balkan countries are susceptible to the effects of the turmoil in the eurozone, the World Bank said in a recent report. 
Trade is one of the main areas in the region's economies that will be affected should the situation worsen, which could also lead to a decline in foreign direct investment in that part of Europe.
Another potential risk stems from the fact that the share of foreign-owned banks, particularly Greek and Italian, in the total assets of the region's banking system stands at about 89%.
Commissioner: a good year for the EU enlargement process
In spite of the economic problems that have shaken the foundations of the EU, 2011 was a good year for the process of the bloc's further expansion, according to EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele.
On June 30th, Croatia wrapped up its entry talks with Brussels and then signed its Accession Treaty with the Union during its summit in Brussels on December 9th. 
The country is now set to join the bloc as its 28th member on July 1st 2013, provided Croats approve that move in a referendum on the issue scheduled for January 22nd, and EU nations then ratify the treaty.
"Despite the fact that the EU was mainly dealing with its internal issues, stabilising economy and the single currency, there was visible progress in the enlargement process" in 2011, Fuele told SETimes on December 29th.
"Another significant development [aside from the treaty with Croatia], was that the [European] Commission was able -- based on the reforms made -- to recommend starting of negotiations with Montenegro and granting candidate status to Serbia," he added. 
"Both countries have now clear timelines to achieve this."
According to the summit conclusions, Montenegro could begin its membership talks with the EU in June 2012. 
For that to happen, the European Commission (EC) report must show that the country has made progress in the implementation of reforms in the areas of rule of law and fundamental rights, and particularly in the fight against corruption and organised crime.
Serbia could be confirmed as an official EU candidate at the bloc's summit in March. 
Some of the requirements it must meet include further progress in relations with Kosovo and enabling EULEX and KFOR to execute their mandates.
Fuele further noted that in 2011 the EC recommended "for the third time in a row" that entry talks be opened with Macedonia. 
Furthermore, a "new positive agenda" was launched with Turkey "to maintain the momentum of reforms", he added, stressing that "the accession talks are the best framework to carry on with reform efforts in Turkey."
Greece has been blocking the opening of accession talks with Macedonia due to the long-running name dispute between the two neighbours.
"Saying that Macedonia has fulfilled all the criteria for starting negotiations with the EU, but that this cannot happen because of that bilateral issue sends a discouraging signal … not only to Macedonia, but the entire region," Macedonian analyst Vladimir Bojinovski told SETimes.
The commissioner viewed the steps taken in Albania in recent months to revive the political process there as "encouraging". 
He also welcomed the "political agreement on forming state-level government and launching some European reforms", which was reached by the main political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina on December 28th, ending a 14-month deadlock.
"In general, all our partners in the Western Balkans know what they need to do in order to move closer to the EU; we have identified the strong points as well as the weak points in the October progress reports and we will evaluate their progress over the coming months, helping and advising them as we are doing all along," Fuele concluded.
Bulgaria, Romania fail to gain Schengen admission
Bulgaria and Romania were initially scheduled to join the European free-travel area in March 2011. 
Although they were found to have fulfilled the technical criteria, they were unable to achieve that goal by the end of the year.
Several EU states insisted that the two Balkan countries should not be allowed to become part of the 25-nation area. 
In December 2011, the Netherlands was the only one still opposing Bulgaria and Romania's admission into the Schengen zone, which requires the unanimous approval of all members.
