03/10/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 03/10/2011
Few could have imagined that the mountains near Konjic -- a sleepy town located 50km southwest of Sarajevo -- would become the location of a nuclear bunker for the former Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito and 350 of the country's top officials.
The structure, built from 1953 to 1979 with a price tag of $4.6m, became Yugoslavia's third biggest investment.
Those who built it call the facility ''the underground city" given the multitude of networks that function independencty and provide protection to withstand up to a 25-kilotonne nuclear hit.
Some say they only worked on certain sections and were frequently replaced by other workers, while others claim prisoners were also brought in to help with the construction.
"Because my employment contract was a state secret, I could never tell anyone about my work.
My wife never knew what I did for a living and neither my friends.
Being afraid of potential sunctioning, I always completely avoided the subject," former bunker caretaker Hadzo Noric told SETimes.
Three camouflaged cottages in front of the bunker provide an entrance by means of undeground tunnels.
Reaching a depth of 280m, the bunker offers potential occupants the possibility of indefinite stay, complete with an entire infrasturcutre including air sucking and filtration systems.
The public learned about the bunker during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH.
Despite the destruction throughout the country, the bunker remained untouched.
Since, it has become a major tourist destination, and now, an art exhibit centre.
"All of the objects in the bunker are in perfect condition, they are old but they do function.
...
It is actually a small town with an area of 6,500 square meters," Biennale of Contemporary Art Director Edo Hozic said.
The Bienale ''Time Machine -- No Network'' is a contemporary art exhibit initiated by local artists.
The local artists' call quickly gained traction and 47 artists from 18 countries participated in the Bienale this year.
Major media outlets and the European Council proclaimed the Bienale, which closed last week, the ''biggest painting event ever held in Bosnia and Herzegovina''.
The Konjic tourist organization officials said more than 10,000 contemporary art copnoceurs visited the Bienale.
All visits were orginized in advance and announed to the ministry of defence.
"A visitor needs at least few hours to see the bunker itself.
In case one wants to see all art expositions in detail on 20,000 square meters exhibiting space, one needs a whole day," officials said.
Despite the expectations of significant interest, the public reacted with much greater enthusiasm than anybody could have predicted.
"There is a process taking place in Europe for a while now in which military facilities are being decontaminated by culture, so we decided to do the same with this structure too," Centre for Cultural Decontamination Director Bork Rudic said.
"Artists from all over the world enlivened this dead structure, which was our intention to begin with.
We succeeded in our wish to give it a better use than the one which was initally intended for it," a Bienale art selector and art history expert Petar Curkovic told SETimes.
