01/11/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 01/11/11
A group of students has been preventing Belgrade's philosophy and philology faculties from carrying on instruction since mid-October, in protest of the educational institutions refusing their demands.
"We demand that all students who have 48 points in the previous academic year be fully exempt from paying tuition, and the price of university admission be no higher than three [months] of minimum wages in Serbia [about 450 euros]," a student who identified himself as Vojislav D told SETimes.
Several hundred students gathered on Saturday (October 29th) in front of the philosophy faculty where they announced a "blockade festival" that would continue until their demands are met.
The students' methods vary from verbal obstruction of lectures to setting up barriers at classroom doors.
The Student Conference of the University of Serbia and Students Parliament of Belgrade University -- two official student organisations -- already accepted the Education and Science Ministry proposal that students who have earned 60 points will not pay tuition.
Protest organisers, however, rejected the ministry's offer.
Philology faculty administrators say students with 48 points are already tuition free and should not be a cause for rebellion.
"The protest is led by unidentified persons who say they stand for 'direct democracy'," Philology Faculty Dean Aleksandra Vranes told SETimes.
Professors at the faculty complain that the student protesters are arrogant and verbally harass classmates trying to listen to lectures.
"This behaviour is not appropriate in academia. 
Behaving rudely and uncultured, they have occupied some rooms where they live, cook and wash dishes. 
We are afraid unwanted events could take place for which we would be held responsible, even though we have no control over them," Slavic Languages Department head Vukosava Djapa Ivetic told SETimes.
Belgrade University Rector Branko Kovacevic asked the government to break up the blockade "peacefully or otherwise". 
He said the university can't guarantee the safety of students and educators at the Philology Faculty, and the whole academic year could be compromised if the blockade continues another 15 days.
Students say the rector is acting inappropriately.
"He is calling for dealing violently with the students, which by blocking the faculties are only asking for their rights because they have no other way to achieve them," art student Milosh Kuvekalovic told SETimes.
Annual tuition prices in Serbia vary from 450 euros at the mining faculty to 2,400 euros at the architecture and dentistry faculties.
This year, 14,000 students enrolled at Belgrade University.
"They charge us inappropriately high fees, yet we learn from out-dated textbooks which we additionally pay for. 
Often, a student must purchase more books just for one exam, because each teacher uses their textbook in order to sell it and make money," Belgrade student Ivona Pesic told SETimes.
The cost in Serbia is the highest in the region. 
For example, yearly study at the mathematics faculty in Zagreb costs 760 euros, while in Belgrade it is 1,000 euros. 
Studying architecture in Belgrade is double that of Zagreb.
