01/09/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 01/09/11
Deep differences over Kosovo were apparent at the UN Security Council's meeting on Tuesday (August 30th), analysts in Belgrade and Pristina say.
"There was a huge division among Western countries which recognise Kosovo and others that do not," journalist Agon Berishaj told SETimes.
He added that although northern Kosovo will figure strongly on the UN's agenda in the coming month, concrete results are unlikely.
At the same time, he added, any proposal to separate the Serb-dominated north will run into opposition.
"The United States, United Kingdom, Germany and France are the main countries which deal with Kosovo and supported Kosovo on the intervention in the north," he said.
"They again made again clear that partition will not be supported."
Speaking from Belgrade, Jelena Milic of the Centre for Euro-Atlantic Studies agrees that the situation is at an impasse.
"The Security Council has shown that countries that do not recognise Kosovo's independence and the legitimate functioning of Kosovo's institutions are in conflict with EULEX and KFOR," she said.
Serbia's involvement in the north, Milic added, "prevents the citizens of north Kosovo from accepting the Kosovo institutions, which often are their employers.
This situation is untenable."
Tuesday's meeting resulted in a call for Belgrade and Pristina to refrain from unilateral moves and to continue negotiations.
The council added that since Kosovo is seen as a sovereign state by many of its member countries -- including the US and the UK -- it has the right to enforce rule of law in the north.
Officials in Belgrade expressed unhappiness that the meeting did not result in a presidential statement condemning the Kosovo government's decision to send police to customs points in the north -- a move that sparked conflict and eventual intervention by KFOR.
"Why was it impossible to accept a (Council) statement about what was more or less said during this session?
Those who blocked it are carrying the responsibility regarding a repeat of unilateral acts undertaken by Pristina," Jeremic told journalists after Tuesday's meeting.
At the same time, however, Belgrade concurred with the need for talks."The Security Council is deeply divided over the issue of Kosovo and Metohija, but dialogue is the only way out of crisis.
It is clear that without a just and fair solution, there will not be lasting peace and stability not only in the southern province, but also in the region," Serbian government media office director Milivoje Mihajlovic told SETimes.
Kosovo was represented at the session by Foreign Minister Enver Hoxha, who said Serbia is financing parallel structures and paramilitary groups in northern Kosovo.
"This must end -- because it violates Resolution 1244, the Ahtisaari Proposal, and international law," Hoxha told the session.
"When these forces are being used to attack police in Kosovo, EULEX police and KFOR troops, this is a severe attack on all the established security architecture in the Balkans since 1999."
