01/11/2011
By Ivana Jovanovic and Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 01/11/11
EULEX acting head Andy Sparkes was stopped by local Serbs at the barricades in Zupce while on the way to visit EULEX officers at Gate 31 on Monday (October 31st).
Sparkes and KFOR Commander Erhard Drews were on a joint visit, but the Serbs only let the KFOR vehicles pass.
"Preventing members of the EU Rule of Law mission from moving freely through northern Kosovo does not send a good message to EU member states, which have given EULEX its mandate and fully support its mission," Sparkes said.
"Blocking the EU is like blocking your people's future;
it is contrary to the aspirations of the EU."
Serb leaders in the north have offered freedom of movement for KFOR, but not for EULEX and members of Kosovo institutions.
They say EULEX must hash out the issue with Belgrade.
The Serbs, protesting efforts by Pristina to send police and customs officials to the northern border, have been manning barricades since late July as the various parties search for as solution.
Last week, KFOR removed a barricade close to the Brnjak border crossing, but the local Serbs set up a new one on Saturday.
"We want the roadblocks to be removed;
we want freedom of movement for everybody," Hanns-Christian Klasing, EULEX press officer for northern Kosovo, told SETimes.
North Mitrovica Mayor Krstomir Pantic insists that that Serbs have a right to put up barricades in a bid to stop Pristina from imposing its governance.
"We are ready for talks at any time and any place … but only if we are treated as an equal partner, without blackmail," he told SETimes.
According to Aleksandar Radic, an analyst specialising in military and political issues, the root of the crisis is clear.
To find out who is responsible for the behaviour of Serbs in the north, and to whom they answer to, one need only look at the parallel institutions, he told SETimes.
Not only do the barricades present an obstacle to negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina, but they put the Kosovo Serbs at odds with the international community, while the lack of agreement directly impedes Serbia's prospects for EU integration, he said.
"This cannot be useful for us because it opens a question of relationship with a very clear mandate of international institutions," Radic said.
"There is a problem as to how to resolve the entire crisis in a way which can be beneficial in future negotiations," he said.
"I truly believe that the solution will be found at the political level.
The future life of Serbs and Albanians on the same territory requires a political solution -- they have to have a normal relationship," he added.
