01/09/2011
(AP, Reuters, DPA, Deutsche Welle, AFP, ABC News, SKY News, BBC, CNN, The Telegraph, New York Times, VOA, RFE/RL, Stars and Stripes, Al Jazeera - 31/08/11)
A Kosovo-born man confessed to killing two US servicemen and injuring two others at Frankfurt Airport earlier this year, telling a German court on Wednesday (August 31st) that he didn't understand why he did it.
Arid Uka, 21, who was born in the ethnically divided town of Mitrovica in northern Kosovo, but grew up in Germany, apologised to the victims' families, saying he had been influenced by online Islamist propaganda before his March 2nd attack on a US Air Force bus.
"What I did was wrong, but I cannot undo what I did," he said in a statement after the indictment was read at his trial at a state superior court in Frankfurt. 
The trial is expected to run into next year.
Uka faces two counts of murder and three counts of attempted murder in connection with the attack. 
With no evidence found to suggest he was a member of any specific group, prosecutors have not included charges of terrorism in his indictment.
If convicted, Uka could face a life sentence. 
But, if judges accept his confession, he is likely to get 15 years in prison, according to the BBC.
Uka, who was working on a short-term contract at the Frankfurt Airport's international postal centre at the time of the incident, had watched a video the previous night, purporting to show US soldiers raping a Muslim girl in Iraq. 
Entitled "what was done to our sisters", the footage that inspired him to carry out the attack turned out to be a scene from Brian De Palma's 2007 anti-war movie, redacted and taken out of context.
According to the indictment, Uka went to the airport on March 2nd armed with a 9mm pistol, extra ammunition and two knives. 
He saw two US servicemen who had just arrived from London, and followed them to a waiting blue US Air Force bus.
There were 16 unarmed American servicemen, including the driver, near or inside the bus, when Uka approached one of them asking him for a cigarette, according to different reports. 
After confirming they were US Air Force personnel on their way to Afghanistan, he "turned around, put the magazine that had been concealed in his backpack into his pistol, and cocked the weapon," said the indictment.
Uka's first victimwas killed outside of the bus. 
The suspect then allegedly boarded the bus, shouting "Allahu Akbar", the Arabic for "God is great", and killed the service member who was supposed to drive the group to the nearby US airbase at Ramstein.
Investigators say as Uka continued his shooting spree, two other servicemen were injured, one of whom has lost sight in one eye permanently. 
He then pointed his pistol at a third man's head, but it jammed and he fled the site. 
He was caught and arrested by police a short time later.
Prosecutor Herbert Deimer told the court in Frankfurt that the suspect went to the airport with the intent "to kill an indeterminate number of American soldiers, but if possible a large number".
Uka said the accusations against him were "correct" and that he did indeed want "to kill" the US airmen.
"I thought what I saw in that video, these people would do in Afghanistan," he told the court, as he read a prepared statement.
He faces a separate US indictment, which cannot proceed as long as Uka remains in German custody.
