01/10/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 01/10/11
In a step towards another obligation for EU accession, Serbia's parliament adopted a new law on criminal procedure in late September, bringing many innovations to the country's jurisprudence.
The most notable change is the introduction of "prosecutorial investigation", a practice in which a prosecutor must prove the grounds for bringing up charges against a person -- enabling a court to initiate legal process.
The previous practice of producing evidence while in trial has led to courts being overloaded with cases.
"Early rejection of charges [against a person] for which there is no reasonable doubt of having committed a criminal offense saves our judicial system time and money. 
The courts will thus be able to focus on the cases for which they know in advance are based on hard evidence," Prosecutors Association of Serbia (UTS) President Goran Ilic told SETimes.
During the investigation and the examination of witnesses, a prosecutor is obliged to call the suspect and his or her attorney to allow them to review case and all documents.
"The defense gets better terms than before. 
Now it has direct access in the work of the prosecutor and can immediately undertake steps in their favour," attorney Slobodan Beljanski told SETimes.
The suspect and his attorney have the right to collect evidence during the investigation in favor of the defense, as well as to suggest that the prosecutor undertakes actions pertaining to producing evidence.
The court may require additional evidence of the prosecutor or the defendant.
The court decides whether a legal process will be initiated at a hearing attended by the prosecutor, the defendant and his or her attorney where they present arguments.
If the indictment is accepted, the defendant can admit to a crime at the following hearing, after which at the trial he is immediately sentenced.
However, the accused can also settle the case with the prosecutor, a practice that sometimes does not sit well with the public
Last April, the public reacted furiously when popular singer Svetlana "Ceca" Raznatovic settled her case by entering a guilty plea, paid 1.5m euros and was put under house arrest for a year instead of serving in prison.
"Of course, for serious crimes, in which the prosecution has evidence, there can not be settling the case because the prosecutor will be interested to bring the accused to court," Ilic said.
Attorney Milivoj Pantelic explained the new law protects all citizens' rights guaranteed by international conventions.
"For example, someone who, during the prosecutorial investigation, applies for a job will not face any obstacles to be admitted to that position because the consequences for the defendant arise only when the court announces there are grounds for prosecution," Pantelic told SETimes.
The new law also provides for the possibility of bail and more precisely defines the criteria for imposing fines and community service, as well as replacing them by imprisonment.
The Prosecutor for Organized Crime and the Prosecutor for War Crimes will begin implementing the new law on January 15th.
"The public prosecutor office, courts and police may need longer preparation and training in order to enable them to comply with new legal models," Special Court for Organized Crime spokesperson Maja Kovacevic told SETimes.
UTS officials said they cannot determine whether the new law will improve judicial processes.
"Only when the law is applied for a year we will be able to see what the effects of this fundamental change of criminal procedure," UTS Managing Committee President Radovan Lazic told SETimes.
