18/01/2006
(Various sources – 11/01/06 – 18/01/06)
Croatia's Janica Kostelic won her first super-G race, becoming the third female skier -- after Pernilla Wiberg of Sweden and Petra Kronberger of Austria -- to have won all five World Cup events.
The event was held in Bad Kleinkirchheim, Austria.
Kostelic finished with a time of 1:09.41, followed by Austria's Michaela Dorfmeister and Alexandra Meissnitzer, who tied for second place with 1:09.51.
An exhibition dedicated to ancient Illyrian civilisation and culture and including works of students of the Albanian Academy of Arts opened last week at the National Museum of Tirana.
Albanian sculptor Fatos Kola is curator of the exhibition, which presents 70 sculptures of 48 Academy students.
The event will continue until the end of January.
The 35th anniversary of the founding of the Banja Luka Art Gallery, the predecessor of today's Museum of Contemporary Art of Republika Srpska, was celebrated in Banja Luka with a series of events last week.
The programme included an exhibition of French art organised by the French embassy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as a roundtable of art experts from the region.
The 14th annual presentation ceremony for the prestigious Lazar Trifunovic contemporary art criticism award was held at Belgrade's Culture Centre on 14 January.
Zoran Gavric received the jury's award for art criticism, while the annual awards of the Serbian Association of Art Historians went to Branislav Dimitrijevic, Mike Hanule and Nebojsa Milenkovic.
Director Georgi Dyulgerov's movie "Lady Zee" won the award for Best Bulgarian Film in 2005 at the National Cinema Centre's first annual film awards ceremony in Sofia.
Andrey Paunov's "George and the Butterflies" won the Best Documentary award, while Boris Despodov's "Tik-tak" won the prize for Best Cartoon.
Director Hristo Hristov received the culture ministry's award for life achievement.
A travelling international architecture exhibition titled "Wonderland" is currently on display at the House of the Croatian Artists' Association in Zagreb.
The ten-day exhibition, which opened on 14 January, came to the Croatian capital after being shown in nine other European states.
