29/10/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 29/10/12
Countries across Turkey and Southeast Europe are facing the challenge of keeping talented young adults from seeking careers elsewhere, and to convince those who have left to return.
Governments and organizations in several countries are using a variety of initiatives to combat what some analysts refer to as a brain drain.
Officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), for example, are hopeful that recently-instituted programmes to train young people and assist them in finding employment will soon pay off, while some businesses in Serbia and Turkey are offering incentives to lure workers who have moved abroad back home.
"Ten thousand young people have attended the Youth Employability and Retention Programme, and more than 400 of them found a job after the training," Alma Sunje, one of the programme co-leaders from the International Office of Migration, told SETimes.
BiH government agencies and NGOs initiated the programme two years ago, and have since opened 16 centres throughout the country which offer free courses in English and computer science, in addition to employment counseling.
BiH and Serbia have been most affected by brain drain, although the entire region can be a poster child for the problem, according to the annual World Economic Forum's Competitiveness Report, which covers 144 countries.
More than 130,000 youths have left BiH since the end of the conflict in 1995, and about 300,000 youths have left Serbia in the past two decades.
Some private firms, such as Coca Cola Hellenic, one of the largest regional companies, have started programmes aiming to retain the youth in Serbia.
"Coca Cola Talent is a programme through which we choose seven students for training and scholarships, and for employment at the end of the programme," Natasha Prodanovic, director of human resources at the Serbia and Montenegro part of Coca Cola Hellenic, told SETimes.
Prodanovic said her company has a large budget for personnel training and provides internships at the Faculty of Organisational Sciences in Belgrade.
"We also have a number of other programmes through which we encourage young people to stay and succeed in Serbia," Prodanovic said.
Turkish firms, such as Turkish Aerospace Industries Inc, have gone a step further, producing "brain gain" programmes which aim to lure back educated Turkish youth that currently work abroad.
Turkey's economy registered high growth in recent years and though the unemployment rate for youth is still high – more than 40 percent -- it has been steadily falling.
"We believe in reversing the traditional brain drain by attracting Turkish citizens that have closely followed advanced technologies and organisational innovations [abroad], have information skills and experience needed for our country's economy and producers to make a difference," Oya Tansu, human resources director of Turkish Aerospace Industries Inc, told SETimes.
Above-average wages and working standards, premiums and bonuses, private insurance as well as social security insurance are some of the inducements the company offers.
Tansu said information is available on the company's website and any interested engineers specialising in aerospace can apply online.
Some are skeptical that in societies adversely affected by the economic crisis, the brain gain programmes will make much difference.
"I had the opportunity to see how the 'brain gain' programme functions while I was in the US," Boris Tihi, professor of economics at University in Sarajevo, told SETimes.
"The US invites students to complete their education there, gives them scholarships, provides all the necessary conditions. 
The students' only job is to learn. 
Of course, after that, the students do not have a desire to return to BiH," Tihi said.
"For such a programmes, we need time and money. 
Unfortunately we do not have the money or the time."
SETimes correspondent Erisa Dautaj in Istanbul contributed to this report.
