08/08/2005
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 08/08/05
Serbia is grappling with the need to reform its pension system, which consumes about one quarter of the state budget.
Government revenues are being drained, yet pensions are quite low -- an average of 138 euros per month.
About 91 per cent of pensioners are forced to get by on considerably less than the average wage in Serbia.
Since any new restriction has a painful impact on retirees, political leaders are in a difficult position.
Without changes, the situation will only deteriorate.
But it is hard to ask people who already receive little to settle for even less.
There are three ways of reducing the burden of pensions on the GDP:
through an increase in the GDP, through systematic slowing down in the number of pensioners, and through reduction in the growth of real pensions.
The current pay-as-you-go system could function in the Yugoslavia of the 1980s, where there were 3 to 3.5 employed persons for every pensioner.
But under the current conditions, where the number of employed and retired persons are nearly equal, the system has gone bankrupt and only constant subsidies from the state budget are keeping it afloat.
As the World Bank report "Old Age Income Support in the 21st Century" indicates, this is in fact a global problem.
In Serbia, pension increases are no longer linked to wages, but to rises in the cost of living, with adjustments made twice a year.
It is estimated that by 2010, the average pension will drop from the current 67.59 per cent to 57.78 per cent of the average wage, excluding tax.
In return, a higher minimum pension will be introduced which will not be allowed to drop below a quarter of the net salary.
Currently that is 51 euros.
Serbia's oldest citizens, who have already lived through some of the toughest times in recent history, do not receive enough to purchase the minimum consumer basket.
The bulk of their monthly pension checks goes towards basics -- 38.1 per cent on food, 17.3 per cent on utilities and 10.2 per cent on transport.
Pensioners have nothing left at the end of the day.
"It’s an unhappy prospect in which future pensioners, after 40 years of work, could get a pension check with an average amount of 140 euros," says Marija Todorovic, president of the board of directors of the State Pension Fund.
The government is in talks with the IMF over the issue of pensions as well as health systems -- negotiations which officials describe as "difficult".
The IMF wants to see more stringent regulations adopted, with implementation beginning in 2006.
Cost of living increases should be limited to once a year, the Fund says, though it has indicated some flexibility when it comes to assigning the minimum pension.
The Serbian side faces the challenge of negotiating between the IMF requirements and pressure from the pensioners' union, which recently sent a letter to the highest state officials -- including President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica -- objecting to a new draft pension law.
The provision that has generated the most insecurity is the proposed increase in the retirement age to 65, from the current 60.
In 2001, average life expectancy for Serbian males hovered at around 69 years.
According to Todorovic, that means many members of the exhausted generation that is now awaiting retirement will not live to see their first pension, while the rest will "use it briefly".
It is becoming increasingly clear that private retirement insurance is the only way to ensure peaceful old age.
However, Serbia is not a place where mandatory private insurance could be introduced overnight.
The level of savings among citizens is too low and financial markets too shallow.
For these reasons, the only possible solution is a gradual transition with the help of private additional insurance.
Even this presents problems, as only 5 per cent of employed persons can afford paying extra for insurance.
The first firm to offer private pension funds was the Dutch-Serbian pension fund Dunav-TBI, followed soon after by two leading domestic insurance companies, DDOR Novi Sad and Delta Insurance.
In addition to fund contributions, pensions can also be acquired indirectly, in the form of life insurance.
"For the majority of citizens it will likely continue to be unaffordable to pay for their own pensions, but that is why we also have a programme for employers.
It should not be forgotten that state tax, instead of the usual 77 per cent of net salary, with voluntary insurance policy holders is only 17.5 per cent," Ratko Zivkovic from Delta Insurance notes.
The current minimum insurance payment is 7 per cent of the lowest gross salary (with all charges) at TBI, or around 12 euros with Delta.
Retirement insurance payments can be made monthly, periodically, annually or in a single payment, while membership in a retirement fund is done through an account, with a unique number to track all payments.
Thus, a client who pays 36 euros monthly for 30 years will have a lifetime retirement pension of 555 euros per month -- five times as much as the average state salary.
Instructive examples can be found elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia.
In Croatia, where the level of the average pension is 40 per cent of the average salary, private and voluntary retirement insurance has been introduced for persons below age 40.
Voluntary insurance policy holders are required to pay 14.5 per cent of their salary into the state pension fund, and 5 per cent into their private insurance policy.
It is expected that the transitional costs by 2020 will reach 1.8 per cent of GDP.
In Macedonia, meanwhile, sources of private retirement insurance have come from one of its former fellow Yugoslav states.
Slovenia's Nova Ljubljanska Banka and the Macedonian Tutanska Banka have registered the New Pension Fund -- Skopje, with an initial capital of 1.5m euros.
As neighbouring states seek to tackle their own pension problems, Serbian officials -- and ordinary citizens -- will be carefully watching.
