29/05/2012
By Anes Alic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 29/05/12
As the summer season approaches, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) dental providers are gearing up for a significant increase in business, as visitors -- primarily from Western Europe, but also from as far afield as the US, Australia and New Zealand -- take advantage of high-quality dental work and low prices.
At the Zlatan Mujkanovic dental laboratory in Sarajevo, summer is a frantic season. 
Enesa Hodzic, a dental technician and co-owner of the laboratory, told SETimes that despite the economic crisis, there has been a steady increase in business year on year.
While the summer months are the busiest for dental tourism, other holidays also see a significant spike in business, according to Hodzic, who said that not only are the prices attractive to Westerners, but the quality of work is the same as Western Europe.
BiH offers vastly cheaper dental services -- also beating out Croatia and Serbia, two other dental tourism hubs. 
Prices for dental procedures and lab work in Germany, for instance, are five times higher than in BiH, while in Spain, prices are nearly three times the amount.
"We use the same materials and have the same standards as Western Europe," Hodzic said, "and we keep abreast of all the newest technologies and ensure that our staff receive continual training in those technologies."
Hodzic pointed out, however, that 90% of the country's dental tourists are actually diaspora, returning home to take advantage of the low prices.
"BiH has still not become a hotspot for dental tourism outside of the diaspora," she told SETimes.
As such, BiH has enormous untapped potential. 
One particular EU-funded project, the Adriatic Health and Vitality Network (AHVN), seeks to mine that potential, not only in BiH, but across the region.
The AHVN, funded by the EU's Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance, seeks to establish a co-ordinated system of medical tourism that spans everything from conventional and alternative healthcare centres to thermal baths and healing spas. 
The project's objective is to create an integrated regional network that could better implement high-quality standards and promotional activities.
According to Dr Almir Pestek, deputy director of the Sarajevo Economic Institute, while the potential is vast, BiH's international image as a politically unstable country keeps it from blooming. 
The failure to form a new state government for 15 months after the October 2010 general elections added to that tarnished image.
If medical tourism is to succeed in BiH, he told SETimes, greater effort will have to be made in terms of public relations. 
The AHVN project expects to integrate a minimum of 50 tourism service providers into an Adriatic-wide medical tourism network, create industry-wide standards to be implemented across the region, and engage in a hard-hitting marketing campaign to get the word out.
There is also the need for a comprehensive approach to the medical tourism industry in BiH and across the region -- an approach that recognises the benefit of regional integration and support services that go beyond a visit to a doctor or dentist.
"Health tourism requires a multidisciplinary approach. 
Thus, besides the basic physicians' or dentists' services, it is also necessary to develop the support sector, which in turn implies logistics activities accompanying the service itself. 
It also requires a more active role of tourist associations in promoting this type of service, as well as of the state," Pestek wrote in a 2008 report.
The Adriatic region indeed has a lot to offer in the field of medical tourism, and the potential to turn healthcare into a holiday: combining high-quality procedures against the backdrop of beautiful seaside and mountain resorts. 
The challenge will be to combine these offerings into attractive holiday healthcare packages that can rival the major players in the medical tourism industry, like India and Thailand.
In addition to dental tourism potential, BiH also has other medical tourism offerings, and is home to a large number of thermal spas that could become part of a regional healthcare tourism chain promoted by the AHVN project.
Croatia and Montenegro are already popular seaside resort destinations that enjoy high-quality private medical and dental practices. 
Serbia is another hub, particularly for dental tourism, and Slovenia is an increasingly popular destination for cheap and thorough general check-ups.
