15/07/2005
(Various sources – 08/07/05 – 15/07/05)
Telekom Austria completed the acquisition of Bulgarian mobile phone operator Mobiltel.
The firm paid 1.6 billion euros for 100 per cent of Mobiltel shares, the largest amount ever paid for a Bulgarian company.
Mobitel has three million subscribers and 67 per cent of the Bulgarian mobile phone market.
In 2004, its sales totaled 455m euros.
Romania will receive 100m euros from the EBRD for a major infrastructure project in Constanta.
The proposed project will support the construction of a north-south bypass to Constanta and the rehabilitation of 10 major bridges.
The total cost of the project is estimated at 152m euros.
The Romanian government is also providing funds.
Macedonia attracted only around $150m of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in 2004, according to data released during a conference on FDI in Skopje.
The country ranks last in the region in terms of FDI inflow.
The Spanish hotel chain Barcelo announced it will invest 75m euros in Turkey over the next two years.
The firm will focus on Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir for their city hotels and resort hotels in Fethiye, Bodrum, Marmaris, Cesme, Kemer and Belek.
It forecasts creating some 1,200 new jobs in Turkey.
Many of the macroeconomic indicators for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) are positive in the second half of 2005, according to the OHR Economic Newsletter, published on 12 July.
GDP growth is above 5 per cent, investments are rising and export growth is outpacing imports, the publication said.
The World Bank board approved a $40m loan for a science and technology project in Croatia.
The credit has a 15-year maturity and a 5-year grace period.
Croatian Environment Minister Marina Matulovic-Dropulic said the government plans to invest some 3.4 billion euros in waste management through 2025.
The Italian government said it will provide a 25m credit facility for Albanian small- and medium-sized enterprises.
The financing will be in the form of soft loans and will aim to encourage development of private entrepreneurship.
The World Bank granted $8.9m to finance a water quality protection programme in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The aim is to reduce pollution of municipalities and strengthen the capacity of local utility companies.
The project covers the Neretva and Bosna rivers.
