11/11/2005
(Various sources – 04/11/05 - 11/11/05)
Albania may not be able to realise the projected economic growth target of 6 per cent this year because of the severe energy crisis, the central bank warned.
It urged authorities to take measures and minimise the country's dependence on hydroelectric power, the sole domestic energy source.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's foreign trade gap widened to 2.9 billion euros from January to October 2005, registering an 8 per cent increase year-on-year, according the BiH Central Bank.
In October alone, the foreign trade deficit stood at 347m euros, up by 12 per cent year-on-year.
Romania will receive 49m euros in EU financial assistance to help with the rebuilding of road and railway infrastructure damaged by this summer's heavy flooding, EU Local Policy Commissioner Danuta Huebner announced.
The money will be given through the Instrument for Structural Policies for Pre-Accession programme.
Eleven foreign candidates have sent letters of interest in the privatisation of Vojvodjanska Banka, Serbia's fifth largest in terms of assets, Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic announced.
He did not disclose the names of the foreign banks, saying only that four bids came from Greece, two each from Italy and France, one each from Poland and Hungary and one from an Italian-German-Austrian group.
Albania's government and an IMF mission headed by Istvan Szekely have begun preliminary talks on a new agreement.
A three-year, $42.7m Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility programme from the Fund is due to expire this month.
The Croatian company Pliva, the largest pharmaceutical producer in Central and Eastern Europe, closed the first nine months of the year with a loss of $34m.
By comparison, the company recorded a net profit of $107.3m during the same period in 2004.
Pliva attributes the drop to the unsuccessful launch of a United States subsidiary, which the company was forced to sell this spring.
Bulgaria's Parliament adopted changes in the excise tax and personal income tax laws that will take effect in 2006.
Tax rates for fuel, tobacco and alcohol will be increased, and the lowest income tax bracket eliminated.
The European Investment Bank announced it has signed an agreement with two Turkish finance institutions, Kocbank and Koc Finansal Kiralama, on a 100m-euro global loan for financing of small- and medium-sized enterprises in Turkey.
The money is to be used for projects in the industry, tourism and services sector.
