27/04/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 27/04/12
In the midst of Serbia's election campaign, promises are being made left and right. 
But all ruling and opposition parties have one thing in common – they are all promising new jobs.
Even state officials are not denying the grim statistics -- 400,000 jobs have been lost since the start of the economic crisis. 
The latest statistical data shows that the unemployment rate reached 23.7% in February. 
The records of the National Employment Service contain the names of 764,000 people seeking jobs, while in reality, the number of those not registered as unemployed is far larger.
Economist and foreign investment consultant Milan Kovacevic told SETimes that economic growth, along with the inflow of foreign investments, is the only way for the unemployment rate to decline in Serbia.
''The solution lies in a stable government and the continuation of European integration. 
That will increase foreign investment,'' Kovacevic said.
According to him, this year Serbia can expect economic growth of 0.5%, which is not enough for new jobs to be created.
''In order to create a better business climate, we also need to continue co-operating with the International Monetary Fund and cut public spending,'' he explained.
The jobless rate is a top concern for much of the region. 
Unemployment in the eurozone stands at 10.8%, and at 10.2% in the EU, less than half of Serbia's jobless rate. 
But in Southeast Europe, the unemployment rate tops 21% in Greece. 
Kosovo's unemployment rate tops 45%.
Petar Ilic, 27, a biology teacher, has been looking but unable to find a job in Serbia since graduating from university two years ago.
''I've registered with the National Employment Service and am waiting, but there are no offers for my profession. 
There are no free positions in schools, which is why I'm thinking of getting a job in some other field. 
However, my chances are slim there too; there's no work for anyone in this country,'' Ilic told SETimes.
At the same time, the rise of unemployment is resulting in growing poverty. 
According to data provided by the Labour and Social Policy Ministry, the number of welfare recipients in Serbia has climbed by one third since the beginning of the economic crisis, and estimates suggest 1,300 new applicants are added to the list every month.
''The data shows that welfare was paid to approximately 72,000 families, or 180,000 individuals, in November 2011, whereas in January and February this year it was paid to 90,385 families, i.e. 
225,586 individuals,'' Labour and Social Policy Assistant Minister Suzana Paunovic told SETimes.
