31/07/2012
By Biljana Lajmanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 31/07/12
Countries in Europe are reducing the number of diplomats, cutting foreign travel and, in some cases, closing embassies to focus on domestic spending. 
For many nations, it's a delicate balance of investing at home while maintaining a viable international presence.
"We cannot pass without saving measures. 
It will be inevitable to tighten the belt," Macedonia's minister of foreign affairs, Nikola Poposki, told reporters recently.
Romania's foreign ministry cut its staff by 500 people in 2010, many of them from foreign embassies. 
It also closed 14 embassies in Africa and South America.
Serbia's Foreign Affairs Ministry told its international staff on July 13th that salaries were being cut 10%, with additional cuts planned later in the year. 
Some embassies may run out of funding before the end of the year.
An exception is Kosovo, which is opening at least four new embassies and increasing staff in Washington, New York and Brussels.
Macedonia's foreign ministry cut its budget this year by 3.3m euros, with the biggest cuts made in the diplomatic and consular offices, where almost 2m euros will be saved. 
The ministry also plans to reduce public diplomacy, education, diplomatic training and promotion of the country.
Poposki said closing embassies will be an option of last resort, because it could have political implications on the relations with the countries where these embassies are situated.
Slobodan Chashule, the former foreign affairs minister, told SETimes that Macedonia must consider shrinking its diplomatic network by grouping the countries and covering them with a single ambassador or even with a diplomat situated in Skopje.
"Other countries will understand this move," he said. 
"The same step is [being] taken by countries that are much wealthier then Macedonia. 
We should reduce embassies that are on the periphery of our diplomatic interest. 
But by this I don't mean to close embassies. 
I mean that we should cover these countries from Skopje."
Many European countries are forced to take saving measures as well. 
Norway, for example, announced that it will close its embassy in Skopje due to the economic crisis.
Chashule admitted that cutting expenses seems inevitable at the moment, but he also said that it is dangerous fact that the saving always starts in the area of diplomacy, especially for Macedonia and its sensitive international position.
"In a time when we have crisis developing in all over the region, when our neighbours, the Greeks, in spite of the strong economic crisis, still find money for diplomacy, creating friends and for lobbying to promote its interests, it might be risky and critical to continue decreasing our budget in this field," Chashule said.
Nikola Popovski, former finance minister for Macedonia, estimates that cutting diplomatic spending actually will have little effect on the budget.
"The embassies are not big spenders. 
The costs for them are small. 
Those are mere administrative costs for their running. 
They are neither huge burden, nor will they be huge saving in the budget once the cuts are implemented. 
The only huge burden is over employment in the ministry," he told SETimes.
He claimed that in the past six years, the number of employees in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has nearly doubled, creating a long-term obligation for the state budget.
SETimes correspondents Biljana Pekusic in Macedonia, Gabriel Petrescu in Romania and Muhamet Brajshori in Kosovo contributed to this report.
