22/05/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 22/05/12
The weekend crash of a Cessna aircraft in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), killing four parachutists and a pilot, is the latest in a series of mishaps in Southeast Europe that is raising concerns about regional safety and recreational flight.
Investigators are focusing their attention on the engine of a Cessna that went down on Sunday (May 20th) near Banja Luka.
The crash came four days after a small airplane crashed in Croatia, near the town of Rogotin, killing two people. 
Serbia has seen two crashes of light planes -- in November near Trstenik, killing two people; and a crash near Mrcajevci that killed three people last April.
Five people also perished in a helicopter crash on April 26th in southeast Romania.
"These tragedies are happening more and more often in the region," Gostimir Popovic, former director of the Sarajevo-based Institute of Aeronautic Eagle, told SETimes. 
"The causes are technical defects and human factors. 
We need to see what authorities are doing to help the skydiving clubs."
Republika Srpska authorities rushed to the scene of Sunday's crash. 
More details about the cause will be made public after an investigation. 
The Banja Luka District Prosecutor's Office is also investigating the case.
"We can only say that five people lost their lives in this accident," Mirna Soja, RS Ministry of Internal Affairs spokesperson, told SETimes.
Omer Kulic, director of civil aviation at BiH's Ministry of Transportation, said that the ministry has already formed a commission that will determine what actually happened in Banja Luka.
"According to information that we have now, the cause of the crash could be a fire [in the] engine while the plane was still in the air. 
The investigation will last, certainly, three to four months, because these planes don't have a 'black box' like big passenger planes, which would greatly help to quickly find out exact causes of the fall," Kulic told SETimes.
Cessna planes, which are made by a US-based company, have a reputation for reliability and good quality, Kulic said. 
The company is a global supplier of light and midsized jets and aircraft.
Dusko Grmusa, president of the Banja Luka Skydiving Club, said the plane was in perfect condition before takeoff.
"Such things happen in aviation," Grmusa said. 
"The proof of this is often cases throughout the region. 
The plane was completely correct during the technical exams on [the ground] but, unfortunately, something went wrong in the air."
