22/05/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/05/12
The election of new Serbia President Tomislav Nikolic has sparked concern in Kosovo, leading many to believe that the new leader will push a partitioning of the country.
Nikolic's campaign stated that talks should continue with representatives of Kosovo, but that the status issue should be brought to the table.
Both Pristina and Brussels have been adamant that Kosovo's independence is not up for discussion.
"Most definitely Serbia's position will be the partition of Kosovo.
This was talked about behind doors, but now with Nikolic in power, he will seek partition of Kosovo.
Kosovo must respect its interests and review its policy towards Serbia, despite the pressure they might have from Brussels not to challenge Nikolic," Bekim Tahiri, a professor of international relations at Pristina University, told SETimes.
He said that the EU must pressure Serbia to recognise Kosovo.
"The election of Nikolic showed that there is no European Serbia.
Serbia is still influenced by people of the 1990s and the time has come [for the EU] to require Serbia to recognise Kosovo," said Tahiri.
Seb Bytyci, executive director of the Balkan Policy Institute-IPOL, told SETimes that Nikolic has strong support among Kosovo Serbs, especially in northern Kosovo, where a referendum earlier this year found near-unanimous preference for Belgrade over Pristina.
"His nationalist credentials should allow him to stick his neck out longer than [former Serbia President Boris] Tadic.
Further, if the government is made up of a Democratic Party- Socialist Party of Serbia coalition, with a Progressive Party president, Serbia will effectively have a grand coalition in power, which should make it easier for parties to share the responsibility of achieving an agreement with Kosovo," said Bytyci.
He added that the policies Nikolic chooses in the coming months will influence his position as a new leader in the region, and in Kosovo.
"On the other hand, if he employs nationalist rhetoric and policies, this, combined with the strong SPS position, can lead to a negative reaction in Kosovo and the region.
He will also have to earn the respect of the other countries in the region, especially, Croatia and Bosnia where he has was personally involved in the war," Bytyci said.
Pristina has not stated yet how Nikolic's victory is expected to influence the EU-facilitated dialogue with Kosovo.
"With regard to the agreements already reached with Kosovo, Serbia has already shown that it is slow in implementing them, so I don't think his election will affect them any more negatively," Bytyci said.
Belul Beqaj, head of the European Movement in Kosovo, told SETimes that Nikolic might seek closer relations with Russia, sparking the EU to compromise Kosovo's interest to keep Serbia on the path towards the Union.
"Serbia's approximation with the EU remains a priority, with the fear that Serbia will go towards the east," said Beqaj.
Citizen reactions also differed.
"I don't know what he will do with Kosovo, but personally I do not trust the people who worked with Milosevic," Shaqir Hoxha, a teacher from Pristina, told SETimes.
Lejla Milic, from the northern part of Mitrovica, told SETimes that Nikolic will bring new hope to the Serbs.
"He said that he will defend us and he spoke about us last night.
This shows that he is a good choice for this time in which Serbs live a life which is very difficult in Kosovo," she said.
