22/05/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 22/05/12
Austerity or Armageddon -- the choice is given to the Greeks ahead of the critical June 17th elections that could decide whether voters accept more pay cuts, tax hikes and slashed pensions, or reject austerity measures demanded by international lenders in return for 239 billion euros in two bailouts, and be forced out of the eurozone.
The leaders of the G8 countries meeting at Camp David in Maryland -- the US presidential retreat -- urged Greece to stay in the eurozone, but without offering any solutions beyond pushing growth along with austerity.
"We agree on the importance of a strong and cohesive eurozone for global stability and recovery," a final G8 joint communique stated. 
"We affirm our interest in Greece remaining in the eurozone, while respecting its commitments."
"It is good that the G8 meeting has aired support for a eurozone that includes Greece. 
But this is far from sufficient for combating a disorderly exit," former Romanian Finance Minister Daniel Daianu told SETimes.
"Greece is a major problem in itself, because regaining competitiveness cannot be attained by revamping the public sector only; and it is a long-term endeavour. 
Greece is one link in the bigger chain of vulnerable economies in the eurozone, which are plagued by uncompetitive sectors and banking problems."
Infuriated Greeks, who have been protesting, striking and rioting for two years, showed their rage in a May 6th election, giving anti-austerity parties 68% of the vote, repudiating the two dominant parties -- the New Democracy Conservatives and their partner in a shaky hybrid government, the PASOK Socialists, who joined them in supporting austerity. 
Yet, nearly 80% of Greeks want to stay in the eurozone.
Alexis Tsipras, whose Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA) finished second and is now virtually tied with New Democracy, is a vehement opponent of austerity and said he believes Greece can renegotiate the deal -- or even renege on its payments -- but stay in the eurozone.
He said Europe will not force Greece out because it fears that other countries with weak economies, such as Spain, Portugal, and Italy, will follow.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose country is footing much of the bailout bills, denied that she suggested Greece hold a referendum to decide if it wants to stay in the eurozone, angering Greeks who said she was trying to meddle.
George Stathakis, a professor of economics at the University of Crete, said he was encouraged by the G8 recommendation that Merkel's austerity-only insistence be accompanied by plans to develop growth.
"It was very positive because it opened a new agenda … a completely different framework," he told SETimes. 
"The austerity programme does not work on its own," he added. 
The Greek contradiction is obvious, he added. 
"We don't want austerity, but we don't want to leave the euro."
But Greeks may have no choice.
New Democracy leader Antonis Samaras and his Socialist counterpart, Evangelos Venizelos, said Greeks have to elect them, although their parties have been blamed for creating the crisis by generations of hiring hundreds of thousands of needless workers in return for votes. 
The only other alternative, they say, is Greece will have to return to its ancient drachma and widespread poverty or worse, with doomsday scenarios of panic, tanks in the streets and a worldwide depression.
Greek politicians complained that the Troika and German officials are trying to influence the elections with scare-mongering.
Aggelos Tsakanikas, the head of research for the Athens-based Foundation for Economic and Industrial Research (IOBE), told SETimes the pressure isn't working.
"It's pushing people towards SYRIZA," he said, adding that the G8's low-key approach was better. 
"It shows they are willing to discuss viable aspects of the programme, although Merkel isn't much for this." But, he said, the horror stories about apocalypse in Greece wouldn't come true either. 
"It's an exaggeration; no one can really predict what will happen in a bankrupt state."
Haralambos Tsardinidis, who heads the Athens-based Institute for International Economic Relations, told SETimes that cooler heads will prevail. 
"There is a bank run but its minimum … there is fear, but not panic," he said.
Kostas Ifantis, a professor of international relations at the University of Athens, said the G8's vague statement may have been a warning-in-disguise to stick to austerity.
"Greeks should not expect major changes," he said. 
"What would you expect them to say? 
‘After the elections, we'll scrap the memorandum?' Voters have to make a decision based on the truth."
SETimes correspondent Svetla Dimitrova in Sofia contributed to this report.
