23/04/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 23/04/12
Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Behgjet Pacolli has concluded a controversial agreement with Imo, a state in Nigeria, which opposition parties and some anti-corruption NGOs say constitutes a conflict of interest and harms Kosovo's drive for diplomatic recognition.
Pacolli reportedly signed a memorandum of understanding with the Imo government for a private company to build electrical and agricultural plants in Nigeria. 
The plant will supply 500 megawatts of electricity and ensure uninterrupted supply to Imo households and businesses.
"The agreement is absurd because it stipulates the Kosovo government will guarantee those investments," Ardian Demiri of the Kosovo Society for Social Research told SETimes. 
"Imagine if the companies fail to make the investments and the Imo government goes to an international court or asks Kosovo to finish the investments."
Government officials, however, defended the move and announced a delegation will visit Nigeria in mid-May under the auspices of the commerce ministry, the chamber of commerce and business community to further explore economic co-operation to reduce Kosovo's endemic unemployment.
"When the international consortium will begin the work, Kosovo will have the possibility to integrate this project with its capabilities; we look for manpower and project engineers," Jetlir Zyberaj, political adviser to Pacolli, told SETimes.
Zyberaj explained that the Kosovo budget is not implicated and the project will open up much-needed employment opportunities.
He also said during Imo Governor Okorocha's visit, Kosovo ministers Blerand Stavileci and Memlil Krasniqi attended the meetings, in which an agreement was reached for co-operation and exchange of professional experiences, especially in agriculture.
The agreement has not been clearly explained to the public, according to Gentiana Petrova, national co-ordinator at JEF Kosova, a local NGO that deals with anti-corruption.
"Regardless of the figure and the contribution, the funding does not need to be done by government members. 
It would be welcome if an investment is made to fight poverty in Kosovo or towards anything important and profitable for our country," Petrova told SETimes.
She said if the agreement is indeed bilateral as stated in public announcements, it should be sent to parliament for approval -- as per the constitution -- or published by the foreign ministry or in the Official Gazzette.
"It is clearly in violation of Kosovo legislation and presents a conflict of interest," Petrova said.
The Anti-corruption Agency said it is investigating, given Kosovo's law which prohibits senior officials from acting on behalf of private companies while serving in government.
Pacolli has been credited for gaining recognition of Kosovo by several African countries such as Ghana, and is leading a campaign to gain more recognition from other African as well as Latin American countries.
Many doubt the number of recognitions -- 89 according to the government, but fewer according to foreign diplomats -- including whether Nigeria and Uganda recognised Kosovo, both credited to Pacolli.
"We have to think more in terms of rule of law rather than the country's image, for the development of the public and the state," Dardan Sejdiu, of the opposition Vetvendosje, told SETimes.
Sejdiu argued that any international lobbying should highlight achievements in state building, development and the rule of law.
Pacolli's investment plans in Nigeria will harm the lobbying campaign of Kosovo in general, according to Berat Bejtullahu, a researcher at the Centre for Conflict Research and Resolution in Pristina.
"It will become the argument by Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic who has accused Pacolli several times of buying recognitions. 
The Kosovo government should take a position on this issue, and distance itself from this investment agreement," Bejtullahu told SETimes.
He characterised Pacolli as a very controversial figure in Kosovo politics because of his business ties with Russia and other former Soviet republics, in spite of doing much to secure Kosovo's recognition internationally, even from countries like Ghana which had firmly opposed it.
"He has a mixed image and so does his work," Bejtullahu said.
