29/08/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 29/08/12
Kosovo is negotiating agreements with Germany, Albania, Slovenia and Italy for the appropriate extradition of convicted criminals, after successfully signing agreements with Macedonia, Turkey, Switzerland, Belgium and Ireland.
The agreements are part of Pristina's final negotiations on several bilateral agreements on criminal issues, and are a significant step forward for the four-year-old state in developing criminal justice and resocialisation programs for convicts, and integrating fully into the international community.
Similar agreements with Austria, Czech Republic, Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Belgium, have been ratified by parliament -- they were signed by the former Yugoslavia.
Arber Gegaj, general director of the international judicial co-operation at the Kosovo Ministry of Justice, told SETimes that 12 people have been extradited to Kosovo since January, and 18 people were extradited last year.
"All cases of extradition are initially presented in front of the justice bodies and if the person has been sentenced, he is sent to serve the jail term, if he is in the phase of prosecution, the penal procedure against that person takes place," Gegaj said.
However, according to the European External Action Service, the extradition procedure is not automatic.
There are built-in safeguards that ensure discretionary power for judicial authorities to deny extradition.
The enforced transfer of persons to and from a non-EU country is regulated mainly through individual extradition agreements that member states make with a third country.
Extradition between two sovereign countries has limitations.
States do not usually extradite their own nationals, and extradition is only possible in cases where the crime constitutes a serious criminal offence in both the requesting and the requested country -- called the double criminality principle.
Some officials are raising concern, however.
"Kosovo institutions are not showing effectiveness in facing the actual level of crime in the country.
A massive transfer of persons with criminal background, would double the crime level," Ramadan Ilazi, co-founder of Kosovo NGO FOL (Speak UP), told SETimes.
Kosovo lawyer Tome Gashi points out another problem, saying that resocialisation of those people in Kosovo is difficult, because the new state does not have yet such institutions.
"It's not resocialisation that is expected from somebody who has been sentenced for criminal acts, what is expected is having him serve the punishment for what he has done," Gashi told SETimes.
