09/09/2005
(Various sources – 02/09/05 – 09/09/05)
Romanian Economy Minister Codrut Seres announced that domestic gas and electricity tariffs will not be changed during the rest of this year, but will most likely be raised starting in 2006.
Seres also confirmed that the national gas operator Romgaz is in talks with Russia's Gazprom on natural gas import quotas for the fourth quarter of 2005 and the first quarter of 2006.
Greece's growth rate will be around 3.7 per cent this year, below the government's target of 3.9 per cent, the national statistical service announced.
The country's economy grew by 3.7 per cent year-on-year in the second quarter of 2005, compared to 3.5 per cent in the first quarter.
Nova Ljubljanska Banka (NLB) of Slovenia purchased an 81 per cent stake in Bosnia and Herzegovina's Tuzlanska Banka for a reported price of 26m euros.
NLB already has a controlling stake in three other Bosnian banks:
CBS Banka, LHB Banka and Razvojna Banka.
The final public auction in the privatisation of the Turkish oil refinery Tupras will take place on 12 September, according to a statement from the privatisation board.
Nine consortia and individual firms will bid for the refinery, including the Petrol Ofisi-Tupras consortium, the Zorlu-PKN Orlen consortium, the Koc-Aygaz-Opet-Shell consortium, Austria's OMV and Hungary's MOL.
The Bosnian power engineering company Energoinvest announced that it won a 22.8m-euro contract in Algeria.
The firm is to construct a 400kv long-distance electricity transmission line.
The Croatian power utility HEP has announced it will invest 29m euros in upgrading old heating pipeline networks in Zagreb and Osijek.
The bulk of the cost -- 24m euros -- will be paid via a World Bank loan, after an agreement is signed in 2006.
The 70th Thessaloniki International Trade Fair began Friday (9 September).
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis was scheduled to address the opening ceremony.
Unions have announced protest marches and rallies to express their opposition to social security and labour system reforms.
The stock exchanges of Cyprus and Greece will launch a common trading platform under a contract to be sealed formally next week.
According to the head of the Cyprus Stock Exchange, Akis Kleanthous, said stocks traded on the platform would be denominated in euros.
