27/07/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 27/07/12
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon wrapped up his trip to the former Yugoslav republics this week with an official visit to the memorial centre in Srebrenica on Thursday (July 26th), causing a sharp reaction in Republika Srpska (RS).
Serb officials, veterans and victims' organisations condemned Ban's visit and said that he should have seen other places where Serbs and other nationalities suffered.
Darko Babalj, Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) deputy, said that everyone was pleased with Ban's visit, but the speech that the UN chief delievered to parliament seemed a bit "one-sided."
"We are disappointed by the fact that the Ban went to honour only the victims of one nation. 
There are three nations in BiH and on all sides people were killed in the war. 
It would be much better for world's officials to focus on economic problems rather than hold political speeches when they arrive in BiH," Babalj told SETimes.
Nedeljko Mitrovic, president of RS's Organisation of Families of Captured, Killed Soldiers and Missing Civilians, said that ignoring Serbian victims has become the practice of international officials visiting BiH.
"It turns out that only Serbs are blamed for everything bad that happened here. 
Ban is representative of all people and not just one," Mitrovic told SETimes.
Ban met with the BiH presidency members and representatives of the Council of Ministers of BiH, and gave a speech in the state assembly.
"The UN has not fulfilled its responsibility [by failing] to prevent the Srebrenica genocide. 
We learned our lesson from this horrific incident. 
It can be compared with today's situation in Syria, where the international community is on the test again," Ban told assembly delegates.
After Ban's address, RS President Milorad Dodik told reporters that the reason the conflict began was international recognition of BiH as a state.
Mujo Hadziomerovic, president of the Bosniak Club of delegates in the National Assembly of the RS, said he was surprised by Dodik's reaction.
"If one man who is on a such a large political position operation had the strength to come to BiH and to say 'We were wrong, forgive us,' I can't understand why ... 
someone who lives in BiH [would] say something like that. 
By visiting Srebrenica, Ban sent a message that the international community strongly supports BiH, and that justice will be done," Hadziomerovic told SETimes.
Citizens also have a divided opinion on the visit.
Seada Livnjak, 35, from Doboj says that RS officials reacted without reason.
"The man was clearly told that he is going to Srebrenica to pay respect to all victims. 
It is normal to do such thing on the place where the biggest number of victims lost their lives. 
These reactions only produce further disagreement," Duvnjak told SETimes.
Mark Kosljenovic, 28, from Banja Luka, thinks that issue of the Srebrenica visit is being used for political purposes.
"Thousands of Serb civilians were killed in the war. 
No one even remembers these people when they come in BiH. 
I believe that politicians do not even remember the victims of Srebrenica. 
They only come there to make a picture of themselves, give the statements to the newspapers," Kosljenovic told SETimes.
