27/09/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/09/12
Both Serbia and Kosovo will benefit from high-level dialogue to solve the issues that have plagued the two countries since Kosovo declared independence in 2008, analysts said after Serbian President Tomislav Nikolic told the UN General Assembly that Belgrade wants direct negotiations.
"There will be no further progress in accession to the EU if Kosovo and Serbia do not normalise relations and resolve the problems in northern Kosovo. 
This is a more immediate issue for Serbia, since it is far ahead in the regatta for EU membership. 
But Kosovo now has a chance to be catching up. 
It should use the opportunity," Daniel Serwer, a professor of conflict management at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, told SETimes.
Although Belgrade would never recognise Kosovo's independence, the country wants to achieve "a lasting peace between Serbs and Albanians" and supports talks at the "highest political level," Nikolic told the UN General Assembly in New York on Tuesday (September 25th).
"We strongly desire that the talks continue in good faith and with good intentions, taking into account, among other things, that it is important to keep the dynamics of the European integration of Serbia and of the Western Balkans as a whole in order to ensure progress and stability of the entire region in the long term," Nikolic said.
Hysni Fejza, executive director of the Kosovo Institute for Peace, says the future dialogue will be the last phase to solve the open issues between the two countries.
"The dialogue will bring benefits for both Belgrade and Pristina in the economic field and the well-being of the two nations and also progress in the European integration processes. 
This dialogue will also facilitate the interethnic co-operation and the interethnic communication within Kosovo, between Albanians and Serbs," Fejza told SETimes.
Kosovo representatives should compile and define the plan for the talks with Serbia, define the topics for discussion and put the red lines for what cannot be discussed, he said.
Some officials in Belgrade were critical of Nikolic's speech.
Cedomir Jovanovic, leader of the opposition pro-European Liberal Democratic Party, said Nikolic had not offered anything new regarding the European, Kosovo and foreign policies in his speech.
"Instead of a plan for what Serbia wants, we've again heard what it is we don't want ... 
Serbia needs a policy with a vision and brave leadership, rather than empty phrases on the public stage, with simultaneous condescension in direct political contacts with the world's leading countries," Jovanovic said.
Milos Jovanovic, vice president of the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia, said Nikolic missed the opportunity to define a new policy on Kosovo and is maintaining the illusion that the "both Kosovo and the EU" policy is possible.
"It is clear, however, that the processes of defending the territorial integrity of Serbia and European integration are mutually exclusive," Milos Jovanovic said.
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci reiterated his country's stance that the dialogue cannot include talks on Kosovo independence, integrity and sovereignty.
EU High Representative Catherine Ashton met with Thaci in New York on Tuesday and said that "difficult decisions would be needed both in Belgrade and Pristina, and both sides needed to be ready to engage, including at political level."
"[Ashton] welcomed the recent progress in the implementation of the agreements reached in the dialogue so far, and stressed that full implementation of all agreements is expected without delay," according to the EU.
Kosovo residents have mixed views.
Kosovo resident Magdalena Noshi, a 28-year-old nurse, says the problem between Kosovo and Serbia can be solved only when "Serbia accepts Kosovo and its existing borders."
"As long as Serbia does not give up from its pretentions on Kosovo, there will be no final solution in our relations with them," Noshi told SETimes.
