26/09/2012
By Drazen Remikovic and Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times -- 26/09/12
This year's Jackal Stone exercise, a multinational special forces training exercise hosted by Croatia for the second time since 2009, closed on Tuesday (September 25th).
A total of 2,000 special operations personnel from nine participating countries -- Croatia, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and the US -- and observer nations Finland and France took part in the drills.
The exercises were conducted in various locations throughout the Adriatic republic.
The focus of the exercise was on the global fight against terrorism.
Participants were given a scenario in which a criminal group stole nuclear, biological and chemical material from an industrial plant in the fictional country of Freedonia.
The material was to be delivered to a terrorist organisation.
Working together, participants hunted down the gangsters and recovered the material, only to find out that the group had tentacles extending deep into Freedonia and must be stopped.
A coalition of NATO member nations is then formed to help Freedonia deal with its insurgency problem.
The main objective of the exercise was to build special operations capabilities and improve interoperability among European partner nations, so they can better deal with common challenges and meet common goals.
The special forces personnel conducted operations of special reconnaissance, including surveillance and direct operations at sea -- such as the interception of boats and capturing bases -- mostly at night.
"The importance of these exercises is crucial for the army, especially as this exercise aims to expand co-operation and interoperability between the armed forces of participating countries, in order to strengthen regional security and stability, procedures and training ...
planning and implementation of activities of the Special Operations forces," Mislav Simatovic, spokesman of the Croatian Defence Ministry, told SETimes.
"It is about building structures within a single exercise with an emphasis on the needs of the armed forces of Croatia, and the civilian community," he said.
"They represent a very important aspect of civil-military co-operation."
Igor Tabak, a military analyst and president of Udruga OBRIS-Obrana i sigurnost, a defense and security NGO, said that such exercise provides an opportunity for national troops to compare the corresponding parts of their armed forces with those of other countries.
"The importance of such exercises is great, because these are some of the few [armed forces] still able to deepen their training and field checking.
Such activities represent a driver for maintaining acceptable activities of the armed forces," Tabak told SETimes.
Croatia President Ivo Josipovic visited the soldiers during their exercise, expressing satisfaction with the success of the country's military.
"This exercise is an example of how multinational forces work in a very delicate situations, because we are talking about elite troops.
Our partners are satisfied and all praised the ministry of defence and armed forces for the organisation of this great exercise," Josipovic told reporters.
