16/05/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/05/12
The penetration of the internet in Kosovo is similar to wealthier nations such as Greece and Bulgaria, despite Kosovo's poverty and rampant unemployment, according to the first comprehensive study of internet usage in the Balkan nation.
The Kosovo Association of Information and Communication Technology (STIKK) notes that internet penetration is 72.1%, meaning nearly three-quarters of the population has access to the global computer network. 
The organisation did a scientific study of Kosovo’s internet usage and availability for a report published this year.
That's an increase of 19% over findings in 2009 by Index Kosova, a private public opinion, media and market research company in Kosovo.
STIKK's study is intended to provide a baseline for comparison in subsequent years. 
It's significant because it indicates that despite Kosovo’s 45% unemployment rate and its poverty -- the annual wage is 6,500 euros, the lowest in Europe -- its population is as connected to the global community as are citizens of wealthier nations.
"It is more than obvious that potential foreign investors and local businesses will want to make use of Kosovo's internet infrastructure and work force potential to further develop their businesses," STIKK says in the report.
As would be expected, people ages 10-19 and 20-29 are most likely to use the internet.
"Young Kosovars are passionate, everyday internet users in English and internet literacy is satisfactory," Vjollca Cavolli, STIKK’s executive director, told SETimes.
More than a third of the population has a Facebook or another social network account.
Cavolli explained the reasons for the explosion in internet use are similar regionwide. 
They include the quick expansion of the private sector online, lack of market regulation, as well as a determined youth which demands to be connected via social networks like Facebook and follow world trends.
But the expansion of the internet in Kosovo is greater in rural areas, where villagers have begun to view it as a tool that can potentially aid their business.
Fitim Kastrati opened the first internet cafe in the village of Balofc, near Podujevo, in 1999.
"After the [1999] war, people wanted to stay in touch with their families abroad, and young people were focused more on playing games," Kastrati told SETimes.
But by 2003, Kastrati closed the cafe because almost every household had obtained a personal computer and he began providing internet services to the entire village.
"Some use it for business, but many have families abroad and want to remain connected. 
This [mix] is positive because it shows the development of society since 1999," Kastrati said.
Despite the internet's usefulness, more traditionally-oriented parents are pushing back.
"The reason [for a household] not to have an internet connection most often is not a lack of infrastructure. 
Usually, people say it is cultural values having to do with the decision by the head of family not to allow an internet connection at home," Cavolli said.
Yet the number of young internet users is expected to grow.
"Society needs to be fully aware of the fact that children are vulnerable and very easily can become victims of the internet. 
In this context, the issue of child pornography needs to be addressed proactively. 
The international community is working on preventative measures and this issue will become a matter of discussion and risk in every community, including Kosovo," Cavolli said.
Young people, however, insist the internet is an indispensable tool in their education, or as means to study abroad as well as to stay socially connected.
"I use the internet to stay connected with friends; since I began my studies it has become a very important part of my life as a student," Kushtrim Haradinaj, a student of economics in Pristina, told SETimes.
Another student, Shkurte Jashari, told SETimes she always wanted to study abroad but studying in Europe posed great financial challenges.
"It was suggested to me to look into the distance learning programmes in the United Kingdom, and now the internet is something I use every day for my studies. 
And I get a degree at the end," Jashari said.
