24/07/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European times in Zagreb -- 24/07/12
NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen gave Croatia high marks for its defence and security reforms during an official visit to Zagreb earlier this month, before the 2012 Croatia Summit -- which focused on the rule of law and building stability by "Keeping NATO's door open" to aspiring member nations.
Officials pointed out that Croatia, which joined NATO in 2009, plays an important role as a peacekeeper by building co-operation in the Adriatic region and the Western Balkans.
Rasmussen said that Croatia has contributed "fresh energy" and "fresh ideas" to projects such as the Military Police School in Kabul on which it is co-operating with other countries that aspire to become NATO members -- Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Montenegro and Macedonia.
"Together, under Croatia’s leadership, those countries are building stability in Afghanistan – and co-operation between themselves," he said.
"They are building security in the heart of Asia but also in the heart of Europe."
In addition to joint missions, Croatia has made a series of internal reforms that have led to stronger security systems in the country, according to the defence ministry.
Those changes are reflected in legislation and enforcement strategies as well as in the improvement of training programmes.
"It is important to emphasize development of long-term defence planning and strategic documents, continually investing in the construction and maintenance of defence capabilities, the preparation and certification of military power, raising the level of interoperability, training, skills, adoption of the doctrine and standards, and participation in the allied forces of high alert," ministry spokesman Mislav Simatovic told SETimes.
When it comes to regional co-operation, NATO officials stress the importance of joint participation in the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) peacekeeping operation in the framework of the US-Adriatic Charter, he said.
Simatovic also mentioned Croatia's implementation of the Smart Defence Project, for cost cutting measures, and the expansion of the Connected Forces Initiative, for education, training, and joint exercises as further examples of the country's ongoing reforms since accession into NATO.
Croatia has been working with Kosovo and the rest of the countries in the region on projects such as the one in Kabul.
Though most of those countries received positive ratings during NATO's Summit in Chicago last May, work is still being done to enhance co-operation in the region and to encourage further reforms in order to bring them into NATO as members.
To date, BiH has not yet received a Membership Action Plan, while Montenegro, Macedonia and Georgia are just beginning the application process.
Serbia's official position remains one of military neutrality.
After the Croatian Defence Ministry announced "no increase" in the budget for 2013, Croatia must reduce unnecessary costs in order to move forward with reforms and modernisation.
"You don't need 500,000 troops to demonstrate combat capability as it was needed in the past -- just 17,000 professional soldiers," explained General Ivan Prodan, president of the Croatian War Veterans Association.
"Officials should invest more in the education of soldiers and reduce unnecessary costs," he added.
Fulfilling its development obligations in light of the economic crisis is "difficult," but NATO recognizes Croatia's "sincere intentions to carry out the whole reform process," according to Davor Djenero, a professor at the Faculty of Political Sciences in Zagreb.
According to Rasmussen, "It is not an easy path.
But as Croatia’s example shows, it can be done.
And it is worth the effort."
