15/05/2012
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 15/05/12
A small percentage of women in Macedonia are taking jobs in professions long dominated by men -- driving city buses and taxis -- and by extension, are confronting the prejudices of a society that still views these jobs as men's work.
The Public Transportation Company of the City of Skopje employs six women, who deal with both the stereotype and traffic jams on a daily basis as bus drivers.
Company spokeswoman Anna Gruevska tells SETimes that these six are every bit as qualified as their male colleagues.
"During the employment process, regardless of the gender of the candidate, everyone should have a Category B driver's license and must also attend training. 
In the future we expect the practice to continue and even increase the number of women drivers of city buses."
Bus driver Vesna Najdovska told SETimes "I am daily confronted with the stereotypes that this is a man's job. 
But I do not pay attention to people a lot. 
People look at me with a little suspicion when they board a bus, but after arriving at the desired destination, they wave hands satisfied. 
With the new double-decked buses, which we are now driving through the streets of Skopje, the whole process is much easier. 
After successful completion of training, everything is easier."
Not every driver ends up staying on the job however. 
Some complain they are underpaid, given the stress of the job; others say they end up on the late "third shift," which they view as a bit risky.
Donka Lazarevska heads the Skopje taxi company Nase Taksi and says they had four female drivers at one point, but all have since quit.
Riva, another taxi company that services Skopje, employs two women who have driven for the past six years, and would welcome more.
Riva chief Olivija Blazevska told SETimes the two are "great women drivers, professionals, who love their job. 
Maybe someone will look at them strangely at first when they enter the car, but once the ride starts, our customers know immediately that they are quite careful drivers. 
The customers request the same taxi in their next call. 
That means that our women drivers are getting on well in their profession."
As of now, Sloboda, the Association of Private Carriers for the city of Skopje, has no women as bus drivers. 
"But we remain open to co-operation and also encourage women who are willing to face this challenge to be part of our team," company administrator Kemal Murik told SETimes.
Last month it was announced that Skopje will be getting a tram system, which eventually could provide quick and cheaper transportation. 
Still unclear is whether women will be encouraged to apply for these jobs.
