07/10/2005
(Various sources – 30/09/05 – 07/10/05)
Albania's tax inspection authorities have closed over 70 illegal enterprises in the Durres district in a regional operation against unregistered businesses, Taxation Police Director Fadil Canaj announced.
An action against 63 violators in Tirana is expected in the coming weeks.
The government said last month it would crack down on illegal businesses, of which there are as many as 45,000 in Albania.
Bulgaria's Parliament ratified an agreement on the Third Programmatic Adjustment Loan from the World Bank.
The $150m credit, agreed on by the previous administration, will support the government's middle-term strategy for structural reforms, aimed at poverty reduction, maintenance of economic growth and EU accession.
The loan has a 17-year maturity and a 5-year grace period.
During a visit to Athens, EU Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Joaquin Almunia praised Greece's progress in reducing its public debt -- one of the highest in the Union.
He said the Commission is expecting a report from Greece on the performance of the country's economy in 2005 and the outlook for 2006.
Croatia's Transport Ministry announced that two new terminals would be built at the Ploce seaport in 2006.
The 79m-euro project will be supported by the World Bank, which already financed the preparation of a feasibility study.
Construction could begin at the end of 2006 and be completed in two years' time, according to the ministry.
The rating agency Standard & Poor's said it has downgraded the Croatian food retailer Agrokor by one notch to B from B+, with a negative outlook.
It cited a deteriorating financial profile along with an aggressive expansion policy.
Agrokor has a 26 per cent share of the Croatian food retail market.
Macedonia's foreign trade deficit stood at 635.3m euros from January-August 2005, according to official data.
The overall trade volume in the period amounted to 2.8 billion euros, marking a 20.2 per cent increase year-on-year.
The leading partner in both exports and imports continued to be the EU.
Fifteen companies have applied to participate in the auction for the Turkish GSM carrier Telsim, scheduled to take place on 13 December.
The candidate buyers include the leading domestic groups Koc, Sabanci and Dogan as well as international giants Vodafone, Sistema, France Telecom and Telenor.
