15/05/2012
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 15/05/12
A flat tax implemented in the last decade in most regional countries did not significantly improve economic growth, foreign direct investment (FDI), employment or tax revenues, and some experts argue the region is better off scrapping it.
Bosnia and Herzegovina introduced the most competitive rate of 10% in 2004; Albania followed in 2007 and Bulgaria in 2008. 
Romania introduced the highest flat tax rate at 16% in 2005, followed by Montenegro's 15% flat tax in 2007. 
Serbia has had a 14% flat tax rate since 2003.
"At that time [2007], Bulgaria, Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro were competing with the EU and OECD with a particularly low corporate profit tax. 
Albania did not have the luxury to be left behind in this 'tax battle' to gain FDI," Florian Mima, a Democratic Party member who worked on implementing the flat tax system in Albania, told SETimes.
The Albanian government -- and those in the region -- said they hoped to boost FDI as well as consumption from high and middle income earners.
"The overall tax reform actually helped simplify the tax system, increase investment, exports, employment and citizen income. 
It also confronted corruption and the informal sector," Mima said.
But Albania's Socialist Party opposition is leading the charge to return to the progressive tax system if it wins the general elections next year.
"The flat tax system should be revoked because it is not honest or fair," Ilir Beqja of the Socialist Party told SETimes.
Some tax experts like Xhavit Curri, former deputy head at Albania's General Taxation Directorate, agree, arguing the flat tax increased the fiscal burden for most Albanians.
Importantly, it transferred the burden from companies to individuals and therefore affected consumption.
"Individuals pay ten to 20 times more tax compared to progressive taxation. 
Taxes for employees in both the private and public sectors increased 95%. 
In just one year, the government collected $120m [93.5m euros] more from low and middle wage earners," Curri told SETimes.
Opinions are also divided on whether businesses profited from the tax reform. 
Mima argued that more money in the hands of businesses translated into more investments, exports, employment and more income for the citizens.
"Businesses, due to their intuition, can invest more and better than the government with the money saved from paying fewer taxes," he said.
By contrast, Beqja argued the big corporations -- which constitute 10% to 15% of the businesses in Albania -- profited. 
"They account for 25% of the turnover and get 50% of the profit and are the real beneficiaries in this story," Beqja said.
Since implementing the flat tax in 2007, 22,000 workers in labour-intensive positions lost their jobs, according to Arbjan Mazniku, who is overseeing the Socialist Party's labour policy platform. 
Labour-intensive jobs rely more on people than manufacturing jobs, which are more reliant on machinery.
"The flat tax has ... 
increased the labour costs and strangled a sector that employs one in three citizens in Albania," Mazniku told SETimes.
But Democratic Party MP Selami Xhepa said the flat tax is usually recommended for countries with weak tax administration, such as Albania.
"The lower tax burden served as compensation for bad governance and high transaction cost, meaning the lack of efficiency is balanced with lower taxes," Xhepa told SETimes.
Due to the flat tax, Albania's overall tax is below the world average, but compliance is more time-consuming and individuals must send more tax payments.
But the most difficult effect is the increased tax burden on low and middle income wage earners throughout the region, according to Milojko Arsic, economic expert at Serbia's Foundation for the Advancement of Economics.
Arsic argues the solution is to reduce taxes on those wage earners and increase the value added tax (VAT) instead. 
"With more revenues from the VAT, the government may more accurately target measures for the population's vulnerable segments," Arsic told SETimes.
In addition, VAT increases would only slightly affect consumption among low income people. 
The rate in Serbia is 18% for most goods and 8% for "basic commodities" such as bread, milk and medicines.
So far, the flat tax has not brought the desired effects. 
In fact, according to World Bank and EBRD 2011 reports, the FDI has declined regionwide.
In Albania, BiH, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, FDI slowed since the second half of 2008, and it is now 60% less than the pre-crisis 2007 level.
In Bulgaria, FDI fell from 9.5 billion euros in 2008 to 1.9 billion euros in 2010, according to the EBRD 2011 report. 
Similarly, Romania has experienced decreasing FDI for at least four years.
