24/08/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 24/08/12
Media freedom has been on the decline in Bulgaria for the past few years, various media and democracy organisations have pointed out in recent months. 
The situation has drawn concerns among international observers and officials, including at the European Commission (EC), which has pledged to keep a close watch on developments in the Balkan country.
EC Vice President Neelie Kroes, who also serves as digital agenda commissioner and the commission's head of media policy and regulation, is due to attend a conference on broadband internet in Sofia in September. 
She is also expected to hold talks with Bulgarian officials and representatives of the country's media sector.
The Dutch commissioner plans to raise the issue of violence and death threats against journalists at the meeting, her office confirmed in an e-mail to SETimes on Thursday (August 23rd).
Threats against Bulgarian journalists prompted the Vienna-based South East Europe Media Organisation (SEEMO), an affiliate of the International Press Institute, to issue twice express concern in less than a fortnight.
One was August 3rd, following the unsuccessful investigation of a fire that destroyed a car owned by journalist Lidia Pavlova, who had been investigating two of Bulgaria's most notorious mobsters, Plamen Galev and Angel Hristov, better known as the "Galevi brothers."
"So far, most reported attacks and threats against Pavlova have gone unpunished," the watchdog noted in its statement. 
It also quoted SEEMO Secretary General Oliver Vujovic as voicing hope that Bulgarian Interior Minister Tsvetan Tsvetanov "in co-operation with the ministry of justice, reopens the investigation and all the perpetrators of different attacks against Pavlova are found and brought to justice."
Just 10 days later, the Vienna-based watchdog issued a new call on the authorities in Sofia to investigate threats against Spas Spassov, a Varna-based correspondent for online daily Dnevnik. 
and the national weekly Capital.
Spassov, who has been investigating a controversial development project in the Black Sea resort city of Varna, received a parcel on July 31st containing a copy "The Art of War," with a dedication signed by Marin Mitev, a co-owner of TIM Holding, a powerful economic group associated with the project.
"If you cannot make friends or win them, it is better to leave them alone," the dedication read, adding in post scriptum that "The world is small and it cannot be governed from Singapore."
The first part was viewed an apparent threat to Spassov himself, while the second referred to the publishers of Dnevnik and Capital.
"I call on the Bulgarian authorities to take these threats seriously and investigate their origin. 
Journalists have to be protected and work in a secure environment," Vujovic said August 14th. 
"In a democracy, critical writing has to be accepted and journalists and their families cannot be threatened."
The threats came against a background of growing tension between the Union of Publishers in Bulgaria and New Bulgarian Media Group -- the two biggest players in the Bulgarian media sector.
The Union, represented by Ognian Donev, the owner and CEO of Bulgaria's biggest pharmaceutical company Sopharma, and former banker Lyubomir Pavlov, entered the stage in 2010, when they bought the Trud and 24 Chasa dailies from Germany's WAZ Media Group.
The New Bulgarian Media Group, which has bought at least six newspapers, as well as Sofia-based television stations TV7 and BBT, is run by former state lottery head Irena Krasteva. 
Her son, Delian Peevski, is a member of the parliamentary group of the Movement for Rights and Freedoms.
The conflict deepened recently when the Union's publications experienced distribution problems, with each then flinging accusations against the other. 
Krasteva's media featured numerous reports on the high prices of Sopharma medicines, while her opponents accused her of unfair practices in response.
Pavlov and Donev were then charged with money laundering in connection with the deal with WAZ Media Group. 
They were later accused of other, unrelated financial crimes as well.
