28/03/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/03/12
In an effort to expand literary co-operation between Belgrade and Pristina, editors of the cultural literacy periodical Beton -- a supplement of the Serbian daily Danas since 2006 -- came up with the idea to translate and publish writings by Albanian authors from Kosovo for a Serbian audience.
After meeting with several such writers at the Book Fair in Leipzig, Germany, the idea was upgraded to publishing an anthology of modern Albanian literature in Serbian, and an anthology of Serbian literature in Albanian.
A year later, this month, the two books were published.
These two anthologies -- named, appropriately, From Belgrade with Love and From Pristina with Love -- contain exclusive literary works created in Kosovo and in Serbia after the 1970s.
The authors -- which include Jeton Neziraj, Shkelzen Maliqi, Sasa Ilic, Milos Zivanovic, Halil Matoshi and Arbeni Idrizi -- said they were honoured to take part in the project.
"It is a great satisfaction to find your works here and I am very happy because of that," Serbian writer Zivanovic told SETimes.
Albanian writer Neziraj said that he has great feelings because of this project -- not only as a writer, but as a human being.
"Overall, this is more than an ordinary cultural project," he told SETimes.
Pristina's Centar Multimedia, a Kosovo NGO and centre for the visual arts, and the European Network for literature and books also supported the project.
According to the Beton team, the hardest part of the project was taking the first step.
"We talk about this like it is a special event and, unfortunately, it is.
This is not normal -- normal is that writers work together and communicate," Beton 's Tomislav Markovic told SETimes.
Zivanovic stressed the difficulties with the translations.
There are no Albanian interpreters in Serbia aside from one university professor who took a small part of the translation.
"The most was translated by the Albanian translators who are bilingual," Zivanovic told SETimes.
"The difficulties we encountered [included] resistance from the media in Serbia and the resistance of bookstores to offer [the books]," Beton representative Sasa Ciric added.
However, the anthologies were heavily promoted.
The first event took place at the Leipzig Book Fair, two were held in Belgrade and Pristina, and the last took place in Vienna.
The Vienna event was attended by Serbian Ambassador to Vienna Milovan Bozinovic, as well as by Kosovo Ambassador Sabri Kicmari.
Beton writer Ilic described his meeting with Bozinovic as one of his strongest impressions.
"After the promotion, I went to thank him for coming and he said, 'I know that many people in Belgrade do not like this project now, but the day when it will be the foundation of some future relations will come, and that's why I came,' " Ilic told SETimes.
Relationships have already flourished due to the project, and the Kosovo writers were invited to present their works at the recent festival of small literature in Zagreb.
"These anthologies are a [the result of] serious effort to introduce literary scenes of the two countries and to forward to each other the messages of trust beyond the endless prejudices, hatred, war pain and suffering, above all political and other obstacles that may exist," Neziraj said.
A new joint project between Beton and the Kosovo writers -- an international poetry festival titled Polip -- will be held from May 11th to 13th in Pristina.
Beton will soon be published in Albanian, and translations of two more books are in the process -- a book of poetry by Albanian poet Arben Idrizi and a book of Serbian poetry by Zivanovic.
