27/03/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 27/03/12
Two political parties appear set to dominate in Serbia's May 6th state parliament and local assembly election, but neither is likely to win enough votes to constitute the parliament on its own.
According to a poll released on Monday (March 26th), the opposition Serbian Progressive Party is supported by 33.2% of respondents, while the ruling Democratic Party, headed by President Boris Tadic, gets support of 29.1%.
The poll, conducted by Belgrade-based Faktor Plus, was conducted the week of March 18th, and is based on the responses of 1,184 people. 
It has a margin of error of plus or minus 3%.
Negotiations on forming the cabinet must begin immediately after the vote, as the final deadline for the new parliament to convene is June 9th. 
The new government must be formed by September 8th.
According to pre-election agreements, numerous smaller parties will rally around these two parties, so odds are that the reformed Socialist Party of Serbia, once headed by strongman Slobodan Milosevic and now fronted by Milosevic's former aide and current Deputy Prime Minister and Interior Minister Ivica Dacic, will be a major political player.
The Socialist Party is an important part of the current pro-European ruling coalition in Serbia. 
It is participating in the elections together with parties they shared an election ticket with in the previous elections, United Serbia and the Party of United Pensioners.
Tadic has said the elections provide an opportunity for Serbia to once again affirm democracy and for the citizens to choose a better future.
"The elections are always a special moment. 
We fought for years and decades to establish democracy in Serbia, but today we have a different atmosphere and I believe we can unite around the central strategic objectives in the election process," he told journalists.
The citizens, he added, will also have a chance to solidify the institutions, while the government should be formed immediately after the election process, to tackle the difficult situation in the country as soon as possible.
"The future government will have to make difficult and complex decisions in order to secure a better future for the citizens," Tadic said, urging voters to turn out for the general election.
Analyst and head of Transparency International in Serbia Vladimir Goati forecasts that the Democrats and the Progressives will win more than 60% of votes and possibly even more than 70% of mandates.
"There is a very small difference between the two parties, the Serbian Progressive Party and the Democratic Party. 
The Progressives, according to the latest opinion polls, are ahead by a few percent, but the coalition power of Nikolic's party is much lower," Goati said.
He said the Democrats hold greater coalition potential, which could prove to be crucial. 
"The 'bouquet' of smaller parties led by the Socialists will tip the scale. 
It seems more likely to me that the Democratic Party will form the new government," Goati said.
There is some mention of the possibility of the presidential election also being held, along with the parliamentary and local ones, even though that vote is not due until January 2013. 
For that to happen, the deadline for early calling is April 6th, in which case, according to Goati, the Democratic Party will have an even bigger advantage.
"The Democrats have Boris Tadic, a candidate that stands out from the others, hence the party would win some votes on his account as well," Goati said.
He expects that about 60% of voters will turn out at the polls, which is the European average.
Representatives of the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy, which monitored the previous election cycles in Serbia, say that the coalitions centred around the Democratic Party and the Serbian Progressive Party will win over a quarter of voters each.
"Because of that fairly equal struggle, the final makeup of the government will be decided by certain smaller parties and coalitions that will appear in the elections and decide who to form the ruling majority with," Centre representative Djordje Vukovic said.
Belgrade resident Milan Trajkovic, 32, for the first time will not vote, because he is disappointed in all the choices.
"They're all the same and they've all cheated us," Trajkovic said. 
"The situation in the state is so bad and I have no faith in any of the existing parties. 
I'm waiting for new people to show up and to give them a chance and my vote."
