19/06/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 19/06/12
Serbia President Tomislav Nikolic managed to reduce the turmoil caused by his election and some surrounding controversies by holding a series of productive meetings with European officials in Brussels last week.
The election of Nikolic -- a nationalist who in the past closely co-operated with Hague tribunal indictee Vojislav Seselj -- created a storm in the region and beyond.
Tensions were notched up by Nikolic's statements that came just days after his swearing in, where he said there was no genocide in Srebrenica and that Vukovar is not a Croatian town.
After his split from Seselj in 2008 and founding a new party, Nikolic has been presenting himself as a pro-European politician who advocates Serbia's membership in the EU.
Nonetheless, after his statements and several snubs by surrounding nations -- of Serbia's neighbours, only Montenegro and Republika Srpska sent representatives to Nikolic's inauguration -- doubt rose about Serbia's European future.
However, Nikolic's visit to Brussels on Thursday (June 14th) sent optimistic messages.
Nikolic met with High Representative Catherine Ashton, European Council President Herman van Rompuy and EC President Jose Manuel Barroso.
The new president professed that there is no better future for Serbia than the EU.
"I think that I've convinced [Ashton] that I'm not even thinking about the possibility of a better future for Serbia and Serbs outside of EU membership," Nikolic told reporters, adding that Serbia will do everything necessary to possibly get a recommendation for accession talks this year.
Kosovo was also among the discussion topics.
Nikolic conveyed the stance that the negotiations with Pristina should be resumed by the new Serbian prime minister, who is to be appointed soon.
Ashton said she was very satisfied with the meeting.
"I conveyed to Mr. Nikolic that I expect him to continue the European path and that the entire EU is supporting Serbia in those efforts.
I also underscored that certain issues need to be resolved in order to move forward," she said in a statement.
The high representative added that the two also discussed the importance of regional co-operation and reconciliation and stressed she was "encouraged by what I've heard, that Serbia will continue to contribute to the stability and progress of the whole region."
Petar Petkovic, spokesman for the Democratic Party of Serbia, told SETimes he was not surprised by Nikolic's statements in Brussels, since the aim of making Serbia a member of the EU is the official stand of the newly elected president.
"During our talks, and providing support to Nikolic in the presidential runoff, we agreed that the people should have the final say in a referendum on whether Serbia will join the EU," Petkovic said.
Ivan Bauer, marketing professor at the Faculty of Economics, Finance and Administration, also gave Nikolic high marks.
"When it comes to the content of the messages conveyed to Brussels by President Nikolic -- and Brussels' response to them -- I'd say it was all done very properly and is a pleasant surprise for everyone," Bauer told SETimes.
"All in all, President Nikolic's presentation in Brussels … can be assessed as successful, and based on it, one cannot see any reason to fear for the continuation of Serbia's European path."
