03/02/2006
(Various sources – 27/01/06 - 03/02/06)
The IMF board approved concurrent three-year arrangements with Albania under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and the Extended Fund Facility for Albania.
The assistance, totaling $24.7m, is meant to support the government's economic reform programme and poverty reduction in the country.
The EBRD granted a 55m-euro loan to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) for modernisation of the country's power distribution network.
It has a 15-year maturity and a 4-year grace period.
Of the total amount, 19m euros will go to the two power utilities in the Federation of BiH and 17m euros for the one in Republika Srpska.
Romania and Ukraine have agreed on increased co-operation in the energy sector and plan joint oil and gas drilling and production in the Black Sea shelf, it was announced after talks between Romanian President Traian Basescu and his Ukrainian counterpart, Viktor Yushchenko, in Kiev on Thursday.
They met after Basescu's arrival on a two-day formal visit to the capital.
Representatives of the Bosnian and German governments signed an agreement on an 8m-euro credit line from Germany's KfW for BiH municipal infrastructure projects.
The financing will be made available to BiH recipients in the form of loans granted under favourable conditions.
Russia's Gazprom will not change the terms of the existing long-term agreement on natural gas transit with Bulgaria, it was announced after a meeting between Russian Energy Minister Viktor Khristenko and his Bulgarian counterpart, Rumen Ovcharov, in Moscow.
The news followed a spate of controversial media reports suggesting that the Russian side wants changes to the terms.
Khristenko signaled that Russia would seek a further 20-year extension of the agreement, which is set to expire in 2010, as well as a green light for Russian participation in major Bulgarian energy sector projects.
Representatives of the Croatian government and a European Commission delegation sealed two memoranda on financing Croatian projects under the EU pre-accession programme ISPA.
Under the agreements, the EU would provide 28.7m euros for a project to rehabilitate a railroad, as well as 22.5m euros for a project on water and waste treatment.
The Greek government sealed a strategic partnership agreement with Microsoft on 1 February, under which the Greek public administration would buy Microsoft software licenses under preferential terms as well as obtain training.
The deal is part of Athens' digitalisation and modernisation strategy for the state administration, and enhancement of the Greek IT sector.
