12/04/2012
By Aleksandar Pavlevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 12/04/12
Frequent gasoline price increases this spring are straining already-burdened regional economies, but some governments are taking measures to address the problem in the face of almost certain additional price hikes.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), gasoline prices rose seven times this year to record levels, though prices are still the lowest in the region.
"It is clear the distributors and refineries crossed all limits, and the oil products are 30% more expensive than they should be," Dragovan Petrovic, of the Republika Srpska Consumers Association, told SETimes. 
"The situation is the same in all regional countries."
After dropping to about $80 a barrel last fall, the price of oil has been creeping steadily higher, nearing $110 a barrel in the last month. 
Oil this week has remained over $100 per barrel, and experts say the price increases affect everything from public transportation to basic commodities.
"More than two-thirds of consumers fear the [gasoline] price increases because it threatens their household budgets and purchasing power," Gordana Bulic, of the BiH Consumers Association, told SETimes.
Businesses are also affected. 
Macedonian companies used nearly 190,000 tonnes of oil and oil derivatives last year, but operating costs rose by 25% -- an estimated 20m euros -- solely because of gas price increases.
"Importers of production equipment and machinery face [not only] higher purchasing prices but also tax increases as well, which stifle production and economic growth," Ljiljana Koneska, economics professor at the European University in Skopje, told SETimes.
Koneska argued that the situation may be compared to the 1970s oil shock, when the price of a barrel of oil rose from less than $3 per barrel to $38 in less than a year. 
The subsequent normalising of oil prices however, was not accompanied by a corresponding reduction in the cost of goods and services, which caused great hardship.
"As a consequence of the gasoline price increases now, coal, electricity and prices of other fuels have also increased -- in fact, prices of all products and services -- creating a vicious cycle," Koneska said.
Businesspeople and citizens are urging governments to take immediate measures, including reducing the excise tax on oil and abolishing the duty on oil reserves to reduce the price of derivatives.
Serbia did intervene and reduced the price of fuel last month. 
Commerce Minister Dusan Petrovic announced the oil derivatives market has stabilised and no further increases are expected.
Similarly, Croatia limited the price of gasoline to 1.64 euros per litre. 
If the price exceeds the limit, the government will take immediate action cut the fuel excise tax and bring down the price.
Regulations in both Serbia and Croatia stipulate that prices can be corrected once a month and once in two weeks, respectively.
There is no law in BiH regulating oil and oil derivatives, and because prices are set freely by oil companies upon approval by the entities' trade ministries, price corrections can be made anytime.
In contrast, the Energy Regulatory Commission in Macedonia determines the price of gasoline. 
Last year, the government abandoned part of its income from taxing oil derivatives, which temporarily reduced prices.
"Macedonia has the lowest taxes [in Europe] and tries not to raise them; we ... 
even try to reduce taxes," Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski has said.
The situation is more complicated for regional EU member countries, where over 60% of the total cost of gasoline is taxed.
"Greece leads the region: financial obligations to the state there exceed 80% of the gasoline price and continue to grow. 
This is part of the EU's general failure of fiscal policy, which burdens energy products with abnormal rates," Victor Trifunovski, owner of a transport company, told SETimes.
Given the differences in government responses, and well aware of the overall economic damage of continuous oil and oil derivatives price hikes, some gasoline dealers have announced they may forego some profits and reduce prices at the pump.
"If the hikes continue in Skopje, I will cut the price for my regular customers," Mite Jovanovski, owner of Makoil stations, told SETimes.
