11/04/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 11/04/12
Marios Lolos, president of the Greek photojournalists union, was in the midst of an argument between journalists and police who were trying to keep the media away from an April 5th protest in Athens' Syntagma Square.
When he turned away, he was struck on the back of the head with a studded metal glove.
Doctors say the blow cracked his skull and has left him without feeling in part of one arm.
"It was a homicidal attempt," he told SETimes from home, where he was recovering after surgery.
"I had been threatened and named as a target.
It was the third time I've been attacked.
The union has been photographing documentation against the police because they are constantly attacking members of the press."
He was the third journalist who claims to have been assaulted by police during the protests over the suicide of a 77-year-old pensioner who killed himself this month because his pension had been cut so much by Greece's austerity measures that he couldn’t afford his medicine.
Over the last year, three other journalists said they, too, were beaten by police while covering protests.
Each time, the Minister of Citizen Protection promised an investigation -- reiterated again after the assault on Lolos -- but no one has been prosecuted for any alleged violence against journalists, or demonstrators, despite video and photographic evidence.
A police spokesman was not available for comment.
The assaults illustrate the tension between journalists and police during two years of protests, riots and strikes that brought down the previous government and has torn away the social fabric of a country under economic siege.
And, said Lolos, it has put journalists in danger, especially during battles between riot police and hooded anarchists tossing petrol bombs and fleeing from tear gas, stun grenades and batons.
"We don't position ourselves behind the lines of the cops," Lolos said.
"We are among the demonstrators in the middle.
We have exposed many violent cases.
As the crisis escalates, and there are more violent protests, [the police] don’t want professional witnesses to the level of systematic violence they use against demonstrators, no matter how peaceful they are."
Dimitris Messinis, general-secretary of the executive council of the Foreign Press Association in Athens, said the assaults are deliberate and aimed at intimidating journalists.
"It's barbarism … when you have a police officer running up to you and smashing your head, it's an intentional hit," he told SETimes.
He said his son, a photographer for AFP in Athens, was beaten badly by police while covering a 2010 demonstration.
After Lolos' assault, Greek photographers demonstrated in the country’s second-largest city of Thessaloniki, laying down their cameras and producing blown-up photos they said provided proof of police assaults on journalists, showing police swinging batons at photographers.
Lolos' union put out a statement decrying such attacks that have gone unprosecuted.
"Systematic and repeated attacks against people of the press when they are doing their jobs, which violate even the most fundamental of human rights, cannot be seen as arbitrary;
even the most naive can surmise that they are meant to gag the press," it said.
In October 2011, Tatiana Bolari, a photojournalist working for AFP, was beaten repeatedly by a riot officer while covering a large anti-austerity protest.
Images of the attack made their way around the world.
Last June, journalist Manolis Kypraios permanently lost his hearing when a police officer threw a stun grenade at him during a riot in Syntagma Square, prompting reactions from human rights groups.
Alkis Konstantinidis, a photojournalist for the Athens News Agency, told SETimes "The country is in this situation of uncertainty and excessive violence on the streets and we have been assaulted as professionals by police.
Most of the times it was unexpected and they didn’t have any reason … maybe it was to make us keep a distance."
