17/08/2012
By Ana Lovakovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 17/08/12
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is intensifying efforts to regain possession of its property in the former Yugoslav republics estimated at over billion euros, but critics said the move may be too little and too late.
In accordance with the 2002 succession agreement of the former Yugoslavia, signed under the UN auspices, BiH has not regained any property in Croatia, Serbia, Slovenia, Kosovo and Montenegro.
The agreement allows the former republics to enter recovery procedures to place the assets in use.
"The question now is whether the treaty expired or it is time to begin such procedures," Duljko Hasic, economic analyst at BiH's Foreign Trade Chamber, told SETimes.
Hasic said that despite passivity of past BiH governments as well as what he called political obstruction in neighbouring countries, BiH must have equal treatment under the international agreement.
"BiH's state institutions completely failed, as did the politicians, who in the past 10 years did nothing to solve the problem. 
The chamber has warned the government that the principle of reciprocity has to be respected," Hasic said.
Serbia and Croatia own much of BiH property but Serbia plans to nationalise all non-privatised property and Croatia will enter the EU next July, posing additional difficulties for BiH to reclaim its property.
BiH firms like Energoinvest, Shipad, Chajavec, Agrokomerc incur huge losses because their own property sits unused or is being used by others.
"Solely in Serbia, there are over 1,000 structures, showrooms, warehouses, retail space -- 1.7 million square meters worth 4 billion [convertible marks]. 
At the same time we are crying out for IMF funds and enter into credit bondage," Hasic said.
Shipad Export-Import, Shipad Komerc and BiH's mines and railway own property with the highest monetary value, such as resorts on the Dalmatian coast.
BiH has initiated more than 30 lawsuits in various cities in former Yugoslavia, including in Belgrade and Zagreb.
Serbia has not closed a single case.
BiH has not exhausted its legal remedies to gain access to the international commercial arbitration in Paris, according to Sead Rahimic, acting director of the Agency for Passive Balance of Enterprises and Banks.
"All cases we have before Serbia's constitutional court will go before the international court in case they are rejected," Rahimic told SETimes.
Even BiH's entities are taking action. 
Republica Srpska's general attorney's office hired a legal representative, Croatian lawyer Ante Nobilo, to reclaim property in Slovenia and Croatia, estimated to be about 1 billion euros.
Officials could not say when the property reclaiming process will end, but BiH is about to sign a bilateral agreement with Serbia regulating legal aspects of relations concerning property.
Zenit Kelic, assistant minister of finance of BiH, said he will soon meet representatives from former Yugoslavia to discuss the recovery procedures.
"BiH's approach is [that recovery] should not be made conditional to any arrangements and must be applied in full. 
We will request its unconditional implementation," Kelic told SETimes.
