16/08/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 16/08/12
Croatia will become the 28th member of the EU next July, and from then on will be part of a unique customs union and will trade with other member states, where they will no longer need customs control. 
The borders of Hungary and Slovenia will have to be opened completely in upcoming year.
This border opening and free-goods traffic will cause problems for employees in the shipping and customs sectors. 
Once the country joins the EU, their services will be moot.
About 600 companies are authorised and licensed as freight forwarding services with a total of 3,500 employees. 
It is expected that the majority will be laid off, the customs service told SETimes.
Hill R is a company that specialises in custom services and employs seven people. 
After next July, only two will stay on.
"Unfortunately, tools for fight don't exist. 
[Our knowledge is] not necessary anymore to anybody. 
Some may find jobs in warehousing, but because of the recession the number of these people will be smaller because companies with this core business are big and already have their own workers," owner Goran Hill told SETimes.
An added obstacle, he said, is that many of the employees in these companies have only completed secondary school, which could complicate their employment chances.
Due to the fact that the companies that will be affected are all privately owned or are branches of large international companies, the state does not have a solution to the problem.
"In Croatia, a solution for this issue does not exist, and it should not be expected. 
The shippers who are … going to lose their jobs or businesses could be forwarded to [other sectors]," Bosiljka Horvat, president of the International Shippers Union, told SETimes.
However, all is not bleak for employment opportunities. 
When borders between Croatia and its member neighbours are liberalised, there will need to be increased control.
Croatia's border with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is expected to pose a problem. 
The Croatian-BiH border is 1,000km long and includes the point of Naum Bay, the only BiH sea exit. 
The tough political situation in BiH and the lack of a common customs policy could become a serious issue in border management for Croatia.
In order to avoid surprises, Croatia began to prepare for the control of its border in 2002 through a project that aims to expand the border police.
"[Currently] the border police has 6,000 officers, which is almost twice what it was at the beginning of the project. 
A new training system, according to European standards, has been established for all of them. 
During the training, they are learning … European and Schengen laws, new forms of vehicle smuggling, forgery of documents as well as risk analysis and assessment," Jasna Kancir, the vice president of EU Educational Forum in Croatia, told SETimes.
Since the training for border police officers is an ongoing process which will progress, there will be numerous employment opportunities.
Iva Jandric of Zagreb, an employee of Hill R for 15 years, went back to school in preparation for finding a new job. 
"I am not sure it will help me to find new job as well as experience I got here during last 15 years. 
I am trying to find new job via personal connections, web job portals but it is not so good situation," she told SETimes. 
"But, I still hope and don't give up. 
Maybe this will be the chance of my life and some new door could be open."
