21/03/2012
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Tuzla -- 21/03/12
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) presidency member Zeljko Komsic resigned from his post as Social Democratic Party (SDP) vice president and longtime member of the party's senior leadership on Tuesday (March 20th).
Komsic, the Croatian member of the tripartite presidency, is one of the most popular politicians in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"I remain a member of the [BiH] presidency and I will continue in this position to work at full capacity with all obligations to the state," Komsic told the media after announcing his resignation from the party.
Although there has been no reaction from SDP, many speculate that Komsic's abrupt move stems from his falling out with party President Zlatko Lagumdzija, who supported Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic's candidacy for UN secretary-general.
The SDP president's visit to Belgrade last week was the culmination of the disagreement, as Lagumdzija ignored the opposition to his support for Jeremic from Komsic and party members and supporters.
"It is good to reach consensus and have the name of one candidate.
We need ...
give a support to Jeremic.
Otherwise we would be frivolous politicians with no common position," Lagumdzija told reporters in Belgrade after a meeting with Jeremic on March 14th.
The SDP became the strongest party on the political scene in BiH in the last general elections in 2010.
Ironically, the results of that election were the centre of the party's tension.
Many party members felt that Lagumdzija's decision to form a coalition with the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) was autocratic -- and was considered a betrayal by most of the party cadres and citizens who supported the SDP in the elections.
"Lagumdzija and Komsic have ruined the SDP by turning it into a hostage of personal political desires.
Their conflict is only an indication of irresponsibility by the state," professor at Philosophy Faculty in Sarajevo Enver Kazaz told SETimes.
Conflicts have long been present in the SDP.
Many prominent members have left the party.
"The party forgets the principles of social democracy.
This is its fundamental principle, and these events in the party are the price of that act," former SDP member Senad Pecanac told SETimes.
Sulejman Tihic, a leader of the SDA, said he believes that the Komsic's resignation could influence the country's foreign policy.
"This can complicate the functioning of the BiH presidency and the ministry of foreign affairs with regard to the fact that Komsic, together with other members of the presidency, are in charge of foreign policy," Tihic told SETimes.
Just months before the October local elections, the resignation has shaken voters, and puts the SDP in a difficult position in light of Komsic's popularity.
"He never favored one nation.
He fought for the country, for BiH.
Because of that I was motivated to vote for him," Selma Gunic of Sarajevo told SETimes.
"This country needs politicians like Komsic.
If a party has betrayed his views the logical step is to leave it.
These moves are reason for more intensely supporting him," Tulza resident Ivica Tomic told SETimes.
