30/10/2006
Romania's Ovidiu Patrascu finished second in the FIFA 2006 event at the World Cyber Games in Italy -- the highest place yet won by a Romanian in an international computer gaming competition.
Silviu Stroie, the president of the Professional Gamers League, described Patrascu's performance as a great success and said he hoped it would help boost the Romanian computer games market and promote favourable legislation.
Some 800 gamers from 70 countries competed for nearly 400,000 euros worth of prizes at the Games.
Greece said it has put into operation the first floating desalination platform in the world, with the goal of addressing drinking water shortages on its Aegean Sea islands.
The facility uses wind generators to produce the energy needed to remove salt from sea water and is designed to work even in adverse weather conditions.
Turkey's State Railways Association has launched a pilot project to introduce internet access on trains.
Testing has reportedly begun, and the Ankara-Istanbul line will soon feature a 24-hour wireless connection.
Ankara Express trains will be the next to receive the service, which is free of charge.
The latest survey by Albania's Institute of Statistics (INSTAT) found that internet usage in the country remains far below the level in EU member states.
While private companies, banks, state institutions and NGOs show a rise in internet use, access among households still lags.
Only 1.5% of Albanian families in urban areas said they internet access from home, while 42% go to internet cafés;
21% use the internet at work, and 18.6% have access at school.
INSTAT also said that people between 16 and 21 years of age are the largest group of internet users, accounting for 36% of the total.
Zagreb's Sheraton Hotel hosted the 12th Audio Video Show - Zagreb 2006.
The fair presented the latest innovations in home electronics, high quality audio-video equipment, software, multimedia and photography.
Among the participating companies were Panasonic, Philips, Samsung, Sharp and Toshiba.
(Various sources – 23/10/06-30/10/06)
