20/03/2012
By Biljana Lajmanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 20/03/12
Three workers were severely injured last month while repairing an elevator at the Psychiatric Clinic in Skopje.
An inspection after the accident showed that the company employing the workers did not take the necessary measures to protect them.
Forty-four workers were killed and another 85 were injured on the job in 2010 in Macedonia, according to the latest data from the Organization for Work Protection.
The numbers issued by the Macedonian Ministry for Labour and Social Policy appear to be lower, but they also confirm that in many cases authorities establish that the company is not compliant with the country's workplace safety laws.
Five years ago, parliament passed a law for workplace safety, according to European standards -- but in many companies employees continue to work below the compulsory safety criteria according to the law.
Accidents are most frequent in the construction, mining and textile manufacturing sectors.
The Construction Union has been appealing to the government for some time.
It is not enough to have European laws for work safety in Macedonia, they say, companies must also implement them.
There are nearly 4,000 construction companies in the country, and many -- especially the smaller ones -- fail to comply with regulations, Construction Union President Pavel Trendafilov told SETimes.
"The employer should care for protecting the worker -- not just because he is scared of inspections and punishments.
If the worker is well protected, we will see multiple benefits.
First, he is healthy and capable.
Second, there is benefit for the company since the worker can work and fulfill its assignments.
Third, there is a benefit for the state also, because work injuries tend to cause losses in the state budget as well," Trendafilov said.
Employers also agree that it is important to implement and further build upon the standards for workplace safety.
But the implementation of these standards, which are higher than in some European countries, is too big of an expense for many Macedonian companies, Organization of Employers President Dimitar Stojanovski told SETimes.
"The expenses for risk accession are same for everyone, regardless of the industry concerned.
The work protection measures are same for all job posts, regardless the specific risk on some of them.
On one hand, we have to detail measures even where there is no real need for that.
On the other hand, we have examples where omissions are allowed even in the most sensitive places," Stojanovski said.
The focus of the work protection should be on the most dangerous professions that carry a real risk potential, he said.
Trendafilov does not agree that the measures might be too costly for the employers.
"Is there anything more valuable than human life?
If the standards are over expensive for someone, maybe he should consider not entering the business at all."
But the risks are not just limited to Macedonia.
The construction is the most dangerous profession in Serbia as well.
Every year approximately 40 people lose their life and another 25,000 are injured on construction sites.
One of the reasons for this lies in the poor training of the workers.
"On almost every construction site we have people that have lost their previous jobs and they don't even know how to walk on a scaffolding," Zvezdan Marceta, a construction worker from Zemun, told SETimes.
"Workers are not trained for safety in the workplace and they don't have the necessary equipment," Serbian Independent Construction Union President Dusko Vukovic told SETimes.
The Serbian Administration for Work Safety and Health adopted a special decree for safety on construction sites last year, introducing requirement for investors to put to work safety co-ordinators at these locations.
The punishment for not complying with the strict rules ranges between 8,000 and 10,000 euros.
Due to inexperience, workers under the age of 25 are the highest risk group for work site injuries in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Workers older than 55 are least affected.
Doctors usually only keep track of injuries, rather than prevent them.
"It is impossible to achieve absolute work safety.
It is extremely important to prevent every injury, but simply there is not enough attention paid to that," Tuzla Health Centre's Dr Jasenka Kurtovic told SETimes.
Bulgaria is one of the rare countries in the region that registers a decreasing trend in workplace accidents.
A total of 2,752 workplace accidents were registered in Bulgaria in 2011, down from 3,025 a year earlier, according to the National Social Security Institute in Sofia.
The number of fatal injuries at work also fell -- from 94 in 2010 to 86 last year.
The European Agency for Safety and Health at Work warns that 35% of the workers in the European countries feel that the work they do has negative effect on their health.
Moreover, the new technologies, biological hazards and the work on complex machines increase workplace risks and require even higher work protection standards.
SETimes correspondents Biljana Pekusic in Belgrade, Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo and Svetla Dimitrova in Sofia contributed to this article.
