13/08/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 13/08/12
Areas in Athens that earlier this year that were filled with immigrants -- both legal and illegal -- are nearly empty after a police roundup took place last week under the ironic code name Xenios Zeus, a Greek phrase for hospitality.
More than 8,000 immigrants were detained this month as Prime Minister Antonis Samaras sticks to a campaign pledge to empty Greece's cities of illegal foreigners, many who are from Africa, Asia and the Middle East.
Many immigrants say they see themselves as scapegoats to detract attention from the country's floundering economy and the austerity measures that have put 1.15 million Greeks out of work.
Many Greeks view immigrants as competition for jobs and blame them for a rise in crime.
The sweep brought blistering criticism from human rights groups, but has been defended by police and the government that says it is overwhelmed with an influx of immigrants who use Greece to seek asylum or as a jumping-off point to get to other EU countries.
"We will not allow our towns, or our country, to be occupied and become a migrant ghetto," Public Order Minister Nikos Dendias said, as plans continued to build eight detention centers capable of holding up to 10,000 immigrants.
Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees said that police are profiling immigrants and treating them like criminals while subjecting them to inhumane conditions.
"Nobody says the country doesn't have the right to control migration, but what we're saying is to do it in line with international standards," Lia Gogou of Amnesty International told SETimes.
"They are picking up people on the basis of their color."
More than 2,000 police officers have been put into the sweep and 2,000 immigrants picked up were charged with being in the country illegally.
The numbers of illegal immigrants has risen by 60 percent in the last two years, to about 470,000, according to the Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy.
Immigrants, including those living in the country lawfully, make up as much as 10 percent of the population.
Compounding the problem is a sharp rise in attacks on immigrants, some of which the police have tied to the neo-Nazi group Golden Dawn, whose immigrant-bashing political platform earned it 18 seats in parliament.
It has denied any involvement in the assaults.
Not everyone is critical.
"Nobody knows how many illegal immigrants there really are and in the center of Athens it was getting worse," Antonis Klapsis, head of research for the Konstandinos Karamanlis Foundation for Democracy, the think-tank of Samaras' ruling New Democracy party, told SETimes.
Before the sweep, some areas such as Omonia Square, two blocks from City Hall, were overrun with drug dealing, prostitution and crime and filled with illegal immigrants.
"There is pressure from the public for the government to do something … it's nice to talk about human rights but there people who have been mugged and are victims," of crime from immigrants, he said.
Islam Robiol, 34, from Bangladesh, who works in a restaurant, said the sweep has been unfairly indiscriminate.
"The police don't look to see if a man is good or bad," he told SETimes.
Nearby, Daniel Owen and Joseph Uche, from Nigeria, walked nervously even though they have temporary residency papers.
Owen, 22, told SETimes that he and his friend are wary.
"Too many people have been picked up.
We have no human rights," he said.
The government isn't relenting, despite the criticism.
Earlier this month, 88 undocumented Pakistanis were put on planes, accompanied by guards, back to their home country.
That was less than the 100 illegal immigrants said to sneak into the country through Turkey every day, as the government plans to build a barrier on the border.
Judith Sunderland, senior Western Europe researcher for Human Rights Watch, which documented thousands of attacks on immigrants in Greece, said the round-up is worrying.
"It seems like they are going ahead with indiscriminate sweeps and targeting people based on their appearance," she told SETimes.
"People are getting caught up in it who otherwise should not be sent back to their countries, such as asylum seekers."
But Klapsis said while many immigrants came to Greece hoping to find a better life, there are just too many of them for the country to handle.
"You can't save everyone who's desperate," he said.
