29/08/2006
Hungarian Foreign Minister Kinga Goncz was in Romania on Monday (28 August) to meet with President Traian Basescu, Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu and counterpart Mihai Ungureanu.
Talks focused on bilateral co-operation.
Bulgarian Interior Minister Rumen Petkov left on Sunday (27 August) for a two-day visit to Romania to meet with counterpart Vasile Blaga.
The two are expected to sign a border control agreement and programme for co-operation in the fight against organised crime for 2006-2007.
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis met on Monday (28 August) with General Confederation of Greek Labour President Yiannis Panagopoulos ahead of September's Thessaloniki International Fair.
Economy and Finance Minister Giorgos Alogoskoufis, Development Minister Dimitris Sioufas and Labour Minister Savvas Tsitouridis also attended the meeting.
Turkey's Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul was in Syria on Tuesday (22 August), as part of a regional tour focused on the Middle East crisis.
Gul held meetings with President Bashar al-Assad and Foreign Minister Waled al-Muallem.
During a visit to Banja Luka on Tuesday (22 August), Bosnia and Herzegovina Minister for Human Rights and Refugees Mirsad Kebo said the country's future could be built only on the basis of agreement and interethnic dialogue.
He met with Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik and local Serb religious leaders during the visit.
EU special envoy for Kosovo Stefan Lehne arrived in Pristina on Tuesday (22 August) to urge leaders to make more progress in implementing UN-set standards.
He held talks with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and the leader of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, former Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj.
Bulgarian Defence Minister Vesselin Bliznakov kicked off a three-day formal visit to Romania on Thursday (24 August).
He and counterpart Teodor Atanasiu focused on regional and international security and bilateral military co-operation.
Richard Lugar, chairman of the US Senate's Committee on Foreign Relations, visited Tirana on Friday (25 August).
Meeting with Albanian President Alfred Mouisu, he said the US hopes that Albania will be among the countries invited to become members of NATO in 2008.
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari arrived in Kosovo on Wednesday (23 August) to appeal for a compromise on decentralisation and minority rights in the province.
Ahtisaari met with political leaders and the negotiating team for the status talks, urging them to accept a set of recommendations by UN experts.
(Various sources 22/08/06-29/08/06)
