15/03/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/03/12
Kosovo faced intermittent electricity cuts, Macedonia and Serbia both declared energy crisises and Albania faced enormous problems in distribution -- all due to Mother Nature's whims this winter.
With more than a month of frigid temperatures and massive snowfall, the Balkan region faced one of the worst winters in decades.
Aside from the impact on production, the bone-chilling temperatures increased energy consumption in the region.
Macedonia, Greece and Montenegro are all importing electricity this winter.
Hydro-electricity plants in Serbia were producing their lowest level since 1926 because of decreased water flow.
Romania reduced power exports after its leading producer, Hidroelektrika, was forced to terminate commercial contracts in the wake of an October accident, and Republika Srpska was forced to cancel sales contracts because of the drought.
In late February, Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha told his council of ministers that Albania is facing its worst energy crisis ever.
With almost 100% of the country's energy being produced by hydro-electricity plants, major troubles arose when the water sources for the plants froze over.
"We will continue to buy [electricity].
We are ready to bring the budget in parliament [for approval], so that energy is not lacking.
We consider it just as bread, water and medicine," Berisha said.
In early February, Macedonia declared an energy crisis to be able to deal with consumption needs.
The government urged energy saving measures be taken -- but power restrictions were not imposed and electricity prices did not rise.
"The state of crisis is declared as a result of the serious disruption in the operation of the power supply system and the impossibility of its functional sustainability, lack of electricity in the system accompanied by impossibility of import … as well as the extremely increased consumption of electricity resulting from the low temperatures," Economic Affairs Vice-President Vladimir Pesevski said mid-month.
While natural factors influenced the energy crisis, political ones also played a role.
Since 1999, Kosovo and Serbia have maintained the unresolved issue of energy transmission.
Zana Bajrami-Rama, spokesperson for the Kosovo transmission company KOST, told SETimes that the country is facing financial losses due to interference by the Serbian electricity company.
"Serbian Transmission Operator (EMS) … is causing serious financial damage to KOST and Kosovo consumers in general by violating the provisions of the Community Treaty on Energy for Southeast Europe," Bajrami-Rama said.
She says that EMS is claiming ownership of the transmission assets that belong to KOST, thus allowing the Serbian company to benefit from the transit of electricity through Kosovo, and by selling the right to use the interconnection lines of Kosovo.
The increased prices for imported electricity comes because operators need to pay VAT to Serbia -- raising the cost in Kosovo to about 20% higher than in other countries in the region.
"Electricity exported by trading companies in Kosovo [is considered an import by EMS], and traders are required to pay [a 19%] VAT -- a value which is then included in the price of imports to Kosovo.
In this way, the operator also causes indirect damage to the increasing price of energy imports, which in the end is paid by Kosovo consumers," Bajrami-Rama told SETimes.
Renewable Energy Association of Kosovo deputy head Pellumb Gjinolly said that Kosovo has electricity problems because it cannot afford consumption needs.
"Kosovo has the capacity to overcome the energy problem," by creating a diversification of energy resources.
In addition to energy from coal, alternative energy must be considered, Gjinolli told SETimes.
In Albania, the problem is somewhat different.
Albanian Institute for Economy and Politics head Dhurata Shehu told SETimes that the electricity problems in the country are due to its dependency on hydro power.
"We depend on hydro power, and this means that in some periods we will face problems.
The government must think of how to produce energy, but also that the liberalisation of a regional market on energy would create better opportunities for all countries," Shehu said.
"Albania and Kosovo have [launched] projects on the transmission system [which] will serve as a good basis of energy integration between the two countries," Shehu said.
