31/07/2006
The Romanian government has launched the country's first national campaign to promote Internet use.
According to Minister of Communications Zsolt Nagy, the goal is to boost the number of Internet users by 5 per cent next year.
Activities include an IT caravan equipped with a mobile computer lab, as well as public centres offering free web access.
Currently some 28 per cent of Romanians are estimated to use the Internet on a daily basis.
The largest international producer of human vaccines, France's Sanofi Pasteur, is reportedly interested in acquiring a stake in Croatia's revenue-losing Institute of Immunology.
No specific information is yet available, other than that the Croatian government intends to retain the controlling stake.
The health ministry says the institute's disappointing performance is due to poor management, and that a foreign partner could help turn things around.
Some 1,000 in-vitro interventions will be financed from the state budget under a project of the Serbian Health Ministry.
According to Deputy Health Minister Vasilje Antic, eligible couples can begin applying in October.
Costs of in-vitro fertilisation currently stand at about 4,000 euros per couple.
While still well below the EU average, broadband Internet connectivity in Greece has expanded almost threefold in the past year, according to a recent analysis presented by the Greek government.
It attributed the increase to a drop in fees -- between July 2005 and July 2006, the monthly cost of 84kbps ADSL fell from 53.20 euros to 23.40 euros.
Currently, around 2.66 per cent of Greek households have broadband.
The new Thalassokosmos (Sea World) aquarium in Iraklio, Crete opened on 22 July.
According to Greek Development Minister Dimitris Sioufas, the complex will be a valuable tool for scientists who study the sea life of the eastern Mediterranean.
The aquarium, run by the Hellenic Centre for Marine Research, has a visitor capacity of 300 people.
Albania's Agency for the Legalisation and Urbanisation of Informal Areas opened a tender for the construction of a satellite map which will cover the entire country.
One Italian and two German companies reportedly have indicated interest.
The map would help address the land legalisation process and the problem of illegal construction.
(Various sources – 24/07/06 - 31/07/06)
