30/10/2006
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 30/10/06
Romania and neighbouring Bulgaria are less than three months away from becoming the EU's newest member states.
Much recent discussion has focused on Brussels' insistence on further monitoring and the reluctance of some existing EU members to admit Bulgarian and Romanian workers.
But what about the economic situation in the two countries themselves?
Ultimately, the ability of both countries to adjust to a new, competitive environment may have more of an impact on labour flow than the policies decided on in Dublin or London.
As it happens, the economic prospects in Romania have brightened just in time for membership.
In many respects, the country is booming.
The GDP's growth rate was 6.9% in the first quarter of this year, and it sped up to 7.8% in the second quarter.
Disinflation has continued.
December to December inflation will likely be close to this year’s target, 5%, down from 8.6% in 2005.
Industrial production has made a remarkable recovery after a series of heavy shocks.
A severe appreciation of the domestic currency (due to massive capital inflows) and a sharp rise in energy prices (as a prerequisite of adjusting domestic relative prices to EU levels) have strained not a few industries in the last couple of years.
Indeed, the growth rate of industrial output slowed down in 2005, and a bad harvest diminished the rise in GDP to 4.5% in 2005 -- a sharp fall from the peak of 8.3% in 2004.
The speed with which industry has recovered suggests that efficiency reserves are still quite high in the Romanian economy and that shocks can be dealt with adequately, provided management is good and the transfer of new technologies is satisfactory.
Budget revenues have been bulging and may jump above 32% of GDP this year (from around 30% last year).
This trend seems to vindicate those who supported the introduction of the 16% flat tax in 2005.
It should be noted, though, that additional revenues have been pumped into the budget because of a very high economic growth rate, and also because the flat tax has been implemented in areas where no, or lower, taxes were levied earlier.
Higher budget revenues help finance badly needed investment in education and infrastructure at a time when EU accession is putting pressure on the government to boost the production of public goods.
Unemployment is slightly above 5%, though this is due greatly to massive migration.
Not least, rapidly growing exports are to be mentioned;
their rise has been over 18% in the first semester of this year.
Overall, the Romanian economy is cruising at a fast pace, defying less optimistic forecasts.
However, some things need to be qualified.
To begin with, it is legitimate to ask whether the pace of economic growth is sustainable.
There are data that compel a more nuanced view of the inner dynamics of the Romanian economy.
For instance, exports have been increasingly outpaced by imports in recent years and the current account deficit has surged to a probable 10% of GDP in 2006.
The financing of large current account deficits has not been a problem in recent years, owing to large inward foreign direct investment.
But the situation may change in the years to come, following the end of big privatisation deals.
Even if greenfield investment grows after EU accession one should not bet on a complete offset effect.
Some analysts have warned of the threats that large current account deficits pose to several emerging economies, including Romania.
These dangers must be assessed within the context of free capital account rules (a must for a EU accession country), the tightening of monetary policies in both the EU and the United States, and, not least, the heavy borrowing in foreign currency done by individuals and resident companies.
However, budget policy cannot do much in order to correct rising current account deficits when domestic credit to and external borrowing by the private sector are surging.
At the end of July credit to the non-governmental sector grew by over 100% in Romania, as compared to July 2005.
The share of internal credit to GDP in Romania is at the low end of the spectrum in Europe, and commercial banks would like to capitalise on the assumed bright prospects for an economy that will become part of the EU in 2007, and that has been growing very rapidly in recent years.
Along with rising deficits, a number of other factors -- inflationary pressures due to a rise in aggregate demand after accession, a monetary policy regime (inflation targeting) that implies exchange rate flexibility, and likely increases in the burden on the public budget (due to EU accession commitments and the need to develop domestic infrastructure) -- point to a more sober view for the longer term.
A recent World Bank report hails Romania’s reforms and fuels high expectations for post-accession years.
Arguably, however, a growth rate that ranges between 5.5-6% annually is more in tune with the actual underpinnings of the Romanian economy.
Were these underpinnings to move in the right direction, a higher durable economic growth rate would be feasible.
The Romanian economy needs more fixed investment, a better infrastructure and for sustaining growth rates of above 6% yearly, on average, over the longer term.
More significantly, it needs faster absorption of new information and communication technologies.
R&D is expected to rise to 0.7% of GDP in 2007, but this is still far from the Lisbon Agenda requirement of 3%.
Even if the figure came close to 2% by the end of the decade, intensity of economic innovation and the pace of new technology transfers will be essential for Romania.
For this to occur widely, good management practices have to be undergirded by better training.
High technology absorption would raise overall productivity and allow Romania to catch up economically inside the EU as well as compete better in the global economy.
If the growth differential stays around 4% in Romania's favor, in conjunction with a possible 2% average annual exchange rate appreciation of the domestic currency (until adoption of the single currency), income per head in Romania could reach around 60% of the EU average in a decade.
Meanwhile, a high ratio of EU funds absorption would help modernise the rural economy and reduce migration.
This would not be an unsatisfactory performance.
Public policy, though, will have to play a major role in bringing it about.
