27/09/2006

Archaeological authorities in Greece have given Oscar-nominated actress and playwright Nia Vardalos permission to shoot scenes for her new film at the Acropolis. 
The movie, to be titled "My Life in Ruins", will be produced by Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson. 
Filming is expected to begin in mid-October.
***
Serbian tennis star Jelena Jankovic moved up one notch, from 17th to 16th place, in the latest Women's WTA Tour Rankings. 
The rise was due to her strong performance in last week's China Open, where she reached the semifinals. 
Although she ultimately lost to the world's number one player, France's Amelie Mauresmo (6-1, 3-6, 7-6), Jankovic marked her best career achievement thus far.
***
Renowned Bulgarian actress Pepa Nikolova died aged 60 in Sofia on 22 September. 
Since beginning her career in the 1960s, Nikolova played some of the most colourful female roles in both the Bulgarian cinema and theatre. 
In the past few years, she had her own TV talk-show, focused on social and public problems.
***
Hollywood star Richard Gere and the crew of "Spring Break in Bosnia" left Sarajevo on 22 September after ten days of filming at various locations, including Sarajevo Airport. 
The 57-year-old Gere plays a reporter, who along with an experienced cameraman (Terrence Howard) and a young fellow journalist (Jesse Eisenberg), sets out on an unauthorised mission to capture Radovan Karadzic. 
Filming now continues in Zagreb.
***
The US government granted $27,000 for the preservation and maintenance of one of the world's most ancient observatories, the 3,800-year old astronomical observation site Kokino in Macedonia. 
A contract was signed on 20 September between US Ambassador Gillian Milovanovic and Macedonian Culture Minister Ilirian Bekiri.
***
Albanian director Dimitar Orgocka won the award for best director at the 5th edition of the Festival of Albanian Drama, held in the Macedonian town of Debar from 16-22 September. 
The awards for best actor and best actress went, respectively, to Xhelal Tafa and Ilka Muja, both from the Alexander Moisiu Theatre in Durres. 
The culture ministers of Macedonia and Albania, Ilirian Bekiri and Bujar Leskaj, attended the official awards ceremony on 22 September. 
A total of 12 theatre troupes from Albania, Kosovo and Macedonia participated in the festival.
(Various sources – 20/09/06 – 27/09/06)
