12/03/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 12/03/12
Serbian and Montenegrin police agreed to jointly patrol the Montenegro coast during the upcoming tourist season, as well as to form teams to fight organised crime in the latest example of regional police collaboration.
"We want to show the public that police co-operation between the two countries is essential [to preventing crime]," Serbia's Police Chief Milorad Veljovic said.
Montenegro police's spokesperson Radomir Radunovic told SETimes that freedom of movement and criminals who do not see borders as a deterrent necessitate such an approach.
"It involves the exchange of police experience, professional training for the members of the two police [forces] and assistance with investigations," Radunovic said.
Podgorica tourist agency Liky Turs owner Zeljko Likovic is among the many tourism workers who welcomed the police agreement to collaborate.
"It is very important that our visitors feel safe in Montenegro. 
I will not say Montenegro is unsafe, but this move is important for the purpose of prevention so that people have someone to turn to for help if necessary," Likovic told SETimes.
Liky Turs booked more than 2,000 tourists from Serbia last year and Likovic expects an even greater number of Serbian vacationers this year.
Belgrade resident Dragan Samolov, 43, said his family vacations every year in the Montenegrin town of Kotor and has never had any security-related problem.
"Throughout all these years, I have seen young people, whose blood is a bit hotter than ours, older people, occasionally fight. 
This is not a big deal; it happens everywhere," Samolov told SETimes.
Samolov explained that some lately carry concealed guns and the police would do well to address the issue. 
"Still, visiting Montenegro for two decades, I have not seen any fight involving arms."
Officials say the agreement builds on the lasting co-operation between Serbian and Montenegrin police forces.
Radunovic added that Montenegro is open to co-operating in a similar manner with other regional police forces.
Joint police work is not new to the Croatian police, which have implemented the Safe Tourist Season project together with police forces from Slovenia, Hungary, Austria, the Czech Republic and Germany.
Hungarians constitute the largest number of visiting officers to Croatia because a large number of Hungarian tourists vacation regularly on the Croatian coast. 
Forty Hungarian officers patrolled the Croatia coast with their Croatian colleagues last summer.
Bosnia and Herzegovina border police have also jointly worked with their Croatian counterparts. 
They typically patrol along the Sava River, which constitutes a border between the two countries.
Similarly, Kosovo police have been co-operating with the Albanian police for two years, jointly enforcing road safety during the summer season in Albania, where many Kosovo Albanians vacation.
Banja Luka Security and Protection Faculty Professor Predrag Ceranic told SETimes that joint police work is an excellent form of co-operation, given that criminals are adapting and reorganising regionally to outsmart the police.
"The criminals co-operate with their counterparts from neighbouring countries so it is essential that the police co-operate as well [to be able to counter them]. 
This will become a trend in the region and it will definitely be harder work for the criminals in such conditions," Ceranic said.
Veljovic suggested that police forces continue the trend in the region and beyond. 
"We want the police co-operation between Serbia and Montenegro to be used as an example for the entire region and perhaps in Europe as a whole."
