09/05/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 09/05/12
Life for former Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader is not getting any easier. 
In what is the sixth criminal probe that includes him, he came under investigation last week on suspicion that he misused his official position and misappropriated money.
Vuk Djuricic, spokesman of the state anti-corruption office (USKOK), told SETimes that four men are being investigated for the illegal sale of a private office building for well over market value to the Croatian government.
Besides Sanader, USKOK suspects that former Minister of Regional Development, Forestry and Water Management Petar Cobankovic, former Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) MP Stjepan Fiolic and court expert Mate Bitanga were involved.
The office building -- on Planinska Street in Zagreb -- was first owned by Fiolic's chain of butcher shops. 
He did not sell it directly to the government, but to Hypo Leasing Croatia, which then leased it to the government for a ten-year period for 8m euros plus VAT -- about 3.5m more that the building was worth.
USKOK arrested Fiolic, who told USKOK investigators that he plotted the building's sale with Sanader, who pushed it through the government.
Fiolic was released on May 4th after spending a week in custody.
Cedo Prodanovic, a lawyer on Sanader's defence team, emphasised that these are very complicated cases in which hundreds of witnesses will testify.
"Sanader has been officialy charged in three procedures. 
These are the case of Hypo Bank and INA MOL, which were merged into one charge, and Fimi Media, which is the most complicated case of all. 
In the other three [cases], official charges have not been filed yet," Prodanovic told SETimes.
Kresimir Devcic, a judge in the Zagreb County Court, which is hearing the proceedings against Sanader, said that it is difficult to predict when the trials will be completed.
"I can only say that so far there has been no attempt to delay the process by the defence," Devcic told SETimes.
The defence attorney agrees.
"It is very difficult to say when the trials will be over, but we expect the judgmement for the first indictment [Hypo MOL and INA] to be announced by the end of summer," Prodanovic said.
Sanader was prime minister of Croatia from 2003 to 2009, when he resigned his post, as well as that as head of the HDZ, and handed both over to Jadranka Kosor.
The entire party is under criminal proceedings, accused of illegally taking 4m euros, while Sanader is charged with illegally taking half of that sum.
The Fimi media case, named after the firm from which the money was allegedly drawn, is the biggest case in Croatian legal history.
