09/05/2012
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 09/05/12
After a sustained protest from journalists and media watchdogs, Kosovo President Atifete Jahjaga on Tuesday (May 8th) rejected a proposed law that would have criminalised libel and allowed journalists to be jailed if they didn't reveal their sources.
In a statement, Jahjaga called the proposals contrary to Kosovo's Constitution.
She sent the proposed penal code back to parliament for review and changes.
Journalists welcomed the decision.
"The parliament of Kosovo has always had one point in mind:
legal regulations should support the work of journalists," Oliver Vujovic, secretary general of the Vienna-based South East Europe Media Organisation, told SETimes.
"Journalists are a strong power for the democratic development of Kosovo, and politicians in parliament should understand it.
This draft was a small mistake by the parliamentarians, and mistakes are part of the work, and I believe that the parliament of Kosovo will now work on a better document."
Arben Ahmeti, head of the Association of Professional Journalists of Kosovo (APJK), commended journalists and international organisations for resisting the proposed law.
"APJK assesses that with such a decision, press freedom in Kosovo is saved, which was seriously jeopardised by the content of actual code," he told SETimes.
Violations under the proposed code were punishable by a prison sentence of at least three years.
That provision, and the requirement that journalists reveal their sources, was strongly criticised by local journalists, civil agencies, the Association of Professional Journalists of Kosovo, as well as SEEMO and the international media watchdog Reporters Without Borders.
The government proposed the laws despite warnings by journalists and media watchdogs that it would significantly erode the already precarious media freedom in Kosovo.
Kosovo journalists boycotted news of state institutions on May 3rd, World Press Freedom Day.
Daily newspapers published "Stop Playing" on their front pages in a traffic-like sign and did not cover the institutions' activities nor broadcast them.
"If this law were effective two months ago, I would be obliged to reveal the source of my story, something that would be against the principles of a free press," freelance journalist Kastriot Jahaj told SETimes.
An official sued him for defamation after he exposed the official's corrupt practices, but a Pristina court found Jahaj not guilty.
In an attempt to prevent the revised law from taking effect, media representatives met with Jahjaga and asked her not to sign it nor return it to parliament.
Justice Minister Hajredin Kuqi sent a letter of support to the media calling on Jahjaga to send the law back to parliament and promised to lobby there to reject the two controversial articles.
Kuqi promised to resign if the law had gone into effect, even though his ministry sponsored the proposal in parliament.
Ahmeti says he was not convinced that Kuqi can deliver the draft law without the articles directed against journalists.
"The journalist community will itself continue the fight against attempts to limit press freedom," he said.
