25/10/2006
Several Macedonian journalists and photographers were honoured by the UN for work dealing with poverty in the country.
Todor Stojcevski won first prize for best story in a printed medium for his feature on Roma education;
awards also went to Ljubica Grozdanovska and Maja Tomic.
Dragan Antonovski won an award for his documentary "The Key is in Your Hand", while Belinda Koka received the prize for best radio show.
The photography prize went to Tomislav Georgiev.
The UN office in Macedonia presented the awards as part of UN day commemorations.
Romania's Marian Dragulescu won two gold medals at the 39th World Championships in Artistic Gymnastics, held in Aarhus, Denmark from October 13th-21st.
Dragulescu won the world titles in the Men's Floor Exercise and Vault events, and finished eighth in the Horizontal Bar category.
Another Romanian gymnast, Sandra Raluca Izbasa, won a silver medal in the Women's Beam event and a bronze in the Women's Individual All-Around event.
Among other participants from Southeast European states, Bulgaria's Jordan Jovtchev won the second place in the Men's Rings event.
UNESCO said it would grant $25,000 to Bulgaria for recovery of the ancient Thracian complex of Perperikon and the Tatul tomb in the Rhodopes Mountain.
The sites suffered damage in an earthquake last March.
The renowned Macedonian actress Mara Isaja passed away at the age of 79 in Skopje on October 23rd.
Isaja, who was of Romanian origin, came with her family to Macedonia in 1951 and later became one of the most talented and popular figures on the Macedonian theatre scene.
She was the holder of prestigious festival awards from Macedonia and abroad.
The young Turkish soprano Burcu Uyar won the DEBUT 2006 European opera competition in Mannheim, Germany last week.
Second was Russia's Olga Peretyatko, followed by Tae-Joong Yang of South Korea.
German director Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck's film "The Life of Others" won both the jury and audience's awards for Best Feature Film at the 4th Zagreb Film Festival, which ended on October 21st.
Romanian director Corneliu Porumboiu's "12:08 East of Bucharest" received special recognition from the jury.
(Various sources – 18/10/06-25/10/06)
