03/04/2012
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/04/12
Lack of co-ordination between the government and parliament over the new head of the Energy Regulatory Office Board (ERO) has postponed an energy price increase that was planned to take effect on Sunday (April 1st) in Kosovo.
On Thursday, parliament rejected the government proposal to fill the vacant top position in the ERO after Ali Hamiti's term ended few weeks ago.
The government proposed Enver Halimi for the position.
But the Assembly Committee for Economic Development, Infrastructure, Trade and Industry said Halimi lacks the correct background for the post, and asked the government to submit a new candidate.
The head is the only authority that can convene an ERO Board meeting and take the final decision on the Kosovo Energy Corporation's (KEC) request to increase energy prices.
ERO spokeswoman Adelina Murtezaj told SETimes that everything depends on the assembly.
Under the KEC plan, residents will face a 23% rise in their April energy costs.
The Regulatory Office has voiced some reservations about the amount of the increase.
Two other options that were presented by KEC were 12% and 9% hikes, but that amount would need to be accompanied by more financial contributions from the government, KEC spokesman Viktor Buzhala told SETimes.
It's still undecided which option will prevail, but it is obvious that an increase in the energy price will occur.
A group of NGOs say the energy network is not maintained appropriately by KEC, which is causing financial losses as well as power losses -- as in the cases of power theft.
According to Buzhala, around 20% of energy is lost due to theft -- around 40-50m euros.
More than 10,000 cases of theft are pending in courts.
"KEC is doing a continuing effort to minimise commercial losses," Buzhala insisted.
Citizens have not reacted well to the news of the price increase.
"I managed to organise my life somehow with my pension, but now I have to rearrange my expenses, a solution that will be very difficult for me to find," pensioner Hysen Kqiku told SETimes.
"Instead of thinking of new jobs, they are thinking only of price increases," Kqiku said.
But at the moment, the price is set and there are no options to oppose it.
KEC stops supplying families that don't pay their bill.
Kqiku is aware of that, which is a dimension that further angers him.
"It is a sin to cut the power for someone like me who has 180 euros monthly -- it is practically impossible to cover all state services," he said.
While new energy tariffs affect citizens, they will also impact commerce and businesses.
Genc Totaj is an owner of a supermarket in the southern town of Prizren.
"I'm concerned by the increase as it makes me spend more on energy instead of spending on other purposes related to my commerce," he told SETimes.
Even small businesses in Kosovo possess generators, as energy supplies are not stable.
In the last five years, Totaj has purchased three such generators.
Mitrovica is one of the towns that is hardest hit by power cuts.
Jahir Hodaj has run a fast food restaurant in the city for more than 20 years.
"I'm facing serious challenges to maintain my production, and a new power price will further complicate my position," Hodaj told SETimes.
