07/09/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 07/09/12
Kosovo and Serbia civil society share the opinion that communication between the people and the societies could solidify the basis for reconciliation.
Sonja Biserko, head of the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia, said communication between the countries' civil societies, which are comprised of NGOs and institutions, is important in order to bring people together and to change perceptions.
"It is an important channel of communication," Biserko told SETimes. 
She said it is necessary to also create a commission for reconciliation, similar to that in South Africa, and have both societies face the past.
"This will be a long-term process, but civil society can prepare the ground for that," she said.
Kosovo and Serbia started EU-mediated technical dialogue last year, which is expected to be raised to high-level talks, and cover more sensitive issues including the future of northern Kosovo.
Daniel Serwer, a professor of conflict management at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, says both kinds of communications, political and civil society, are needed.
"It is important for Serbs to visit Kosovo and get to know the reality there. 
It is also important for Kosovars to visit Serbia. 
Better social understanding will help the political negotiations, and better political relations will improve social understanding," Serwer told SETimes.
But Belgrade's policies and the restriction of movement between Serbia and Kosovo has dampened civil society co-operation.
Nevertheless, civil society groups have found a way to communicate, even in Mitrovica which has a Serb majority. 
One NGO, Community Building Mitrovica (CBM), was established in 2001.
"It was co-operation between colleagues in CBM and other organisations in the north. 
It was quite difficult at the beginning but we managed to reach out different organizations and people, start our activities in different fields, target different groups from Mitrovica region and serve as a bridge between the communities," Aferdita Syla, CBM executive director, told SETimes.
CBM's partners in the north include Radio Contact Plus, Radio and TV Mitrovica and the Centre for Civil Society Development.
"Now we have partners all over the north. 
CBM has grown and it has around 60 people involved, out of them, around 35 percent are Serbs, 60 percent are Albanians and 5 percent come from other communities," Syla said.
Syla said that despite tensions and division, there are common issues for all the communities in Mitrovica that are not addressed. 
These include the high rate of unemployment, water and energy problems, as well as social problems.
"Everything is so politicised especially in the area where CBM works, but politics is challenged when there is a strong civil society," she adds.
Two youth NGOs, Syri I Vizionit (The eye of the vision) from Peja in Kosovo and Ethnicity Research Center in Belgrade, have been working together on a British-financed project that aims to get young people "to learn about the culture, perspective, social, economic and political context and how to use it all in reducing the negative social stereotypes."
Under the project, the NGOs organised training on multiculturalism, dialogue and human rights; study visits and joint events highlighted co-operation between young people of Serbia and Kosovo.
According to the centre, multiculturalism, human rights, community development, youth policy, democratic dialogue or the role of youth in society, are some of the issues for the young people in both countries.
Veton Mujaj, the executive director of Syri I Vizionit, said the co-operation between the two worked. 
"NGOs are more open minded, the young people from Serbia who were part of the program did not have much prejudices, they were even surprised when they came and saw with their own eyes," Mujaj told SETimes.
Mujaj believes there should be more such initiatives. 
"There should be communication between the people in Kosovo and Serbia…this kind of communication is a predecessor of the political communication between the two states," Mujaj said.
