26/04/2006
(Various sources – 19/04/06 – 26/04/06)
Macedonia's contestant in this year's Eurovision Song Contest in Athens, Elena Risteska, spoke in the Albanian language during an interview with Alsat M, expressing her aim of representing all citizens at the competition.
"In Athens, I am going to sing for the entire country," Risteska told her Albanian-language viewers.
She will be singing "Ninanajna", composed by Darko Dimitrov with lyrics by Rade Vrcakovski.
The 18th edition of the Sarajevo International Book Fair took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina's capital from 19-24 April.
A total of 175 printing houses participated in the event.
This year, the traditional annual awards for best publishers went to the Sarajevo-based companies Conectum, Sahinpasic and Zoro.
The third edition of the Balkan Fever festival began in Vienna on 21 April.
The programme includes 20 folklore, jazz and ethno concerts by performers from all countries in the Balkan region, including Bulgaria's Teodosi Spasov, Macedonia's Vladko Stefanovski and Serbia's Miroslav Tadic.
The event lasts until 15 May.
Members of the legendary Yugoslav-era band Lep i sol -- Vlatko Stefanovski, Bodan Arsovski, Kokan Dimushevski and Garabet Tavitjan -- will reunite this autumn for a tour of the neighbour countries.
The tour will include concerts in all major cities and will be dedicated to the 30th anniversary of the band's establishment.
The musicians also plan to come together in the studio, to record a joint album with traditional Macedonian music.
Albania's government decided to establish a national office for copyright protection within the framework of the culture ministry.
The new institution will have regional branches across the country and will be authorised to tackle copyright-related problems, as well as compile and maintain a registry of intellectual property.
The fourth edition of the Festival of Science opened at the Technical Museum in Zagreb on 24 April.
The four-day festival includes exhibitions, book and CD promotions, and roundtables in Zagreb, Osijek, Rijeca and Split.
It is dedicated to the 150th birthday of Croatian inventor Nikola Tesla and the 100th birthday of Bosnian-born Croat chemist Vladimir Prelog.
A collective exhibition of icons by 22 Romanian artists opened at the Comedy Theatre in Bucharest on 21 April.
The six-day exhibition was organised by the Arta e Arta foundation on the occasion of Orthodox Easter.
