25/09/2006
The technology is already in place for 3D TV sets, says a European consortium researching the issue.
According to the group's co-ordinator, Turkish professor Levent Onural, stereoscopic sets giving an impression of depth could be commonplace in a few years.
However, viewers will have to wait longer for higher-end holographic television, he says.
Advancements in technology mean a more comfortable viewing experience, without special glasses, making 3D more feasible commercially.
The 12th Mediterranean Meeting of Child Neurology took place in Durres, Albania from 14-16 September.
International scientists attending the event praised the Albanian scientific community for advancements in the fields of neurogenetic syndromes and epilepsy.
Among the key reports presented was one on cerebral paralysis in pre-term infants.
Serbian scientist Miodrag Stojkovic announced that his team has managed to derive, for the first time, stem cell lines from non-viable early human embryos.
Stojkovic, a member of the British group that cloned the first human embryo in 2005, recently established a joint venture in Leskovac, Serbia with the Italian firm Sintofarm.
The Serbian Healthcare Ministry has provided 1m euros for modernising the Belgrade Institute for Rheumatology.
According to institute head Nemanja Damjanov, the funds were being used for the purchase and installation of a sophisticated digital X-ray system.
Croatian Oracle users will meet in the town of Umag from 17-20 October.
Some 115 members of the Croatian Union of Oracle Users and 35 Oracle partners are expected to attend the forum.
According to organisers, the purpose is to showcase the latest achievements and applications of Oracle technology in Croatian business.
The rate of internet usage by businesses in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) rose by 35% in 2005 compared to the previous year, according to a study prepared by the BiH Ministry of Transport and Communications and the UNDP in BiH.
It found that BiH has good conditions for developing internet infrastructure, but authorities should take steps to ensure steady progress.
(Various sources – 18/09/06 - 25/09/06)
