24/07/2006

Bulgaria has been accepted into the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) as a fully fledged member. 
SCAR, an interdisciplinary committee of the International Council of Scientific Unions, is in charge of initiating, developing and co-ordinating high quality international scientific research in the Antarctic region. 
According to the organisation, Bulgarian scientists are among the most active Antarctic researchers, mapping Livingston Island in 2005
***
The Greek government has decided to support the One Laptop Per Child initiative, launched by Nicholas Negroponte, an American of Greek origin and former head of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Media Lab. 
As part of the initiative, laptops will be sold to the Greek government for a price of $100 per unit, and distributed at no cost to schools.
***
Turkey's state-run telecom operator, Turk Telekom, will cut the price of its ADSL broadband service by 18 per cent, announced the company’s head Paul Doany. 
The speed of ADSL connections has also been doubled to 256kbps. 
Doany said that Turk Telekom had 2 million ADSL subscribers in June -- almost five times more than in 2004.
***
Bulgaria's Ruse University, along with the Civil Protection Authority and four other European universities, is developing a robot that could assist rescue operations in accidents, emergency situations and terrorist attacks. 
The robot would be able to climb eight-story buildings and use breath detection to track down people beneath wrecks. 
Testing of the 2m-euro machine will begin in the spring of 2007.
***
The Albanian government decided to make the registration of mobile phone SIM cards mandatory. 
The government hopes stopping the use of anonymous SIM cards will remove one of the main obstacles in anti-crime investigations.
***
Serbia exported scientific-related goods and services worth 30m euros in 2005, announced Minister of Science and Environmental Protection Aleksandar Popovic. 
He added that the exports in the sector rose nearly four times in the past three years. 
Last year, 70m euros of government funding were allotted to the science sector.
(Various sources – 17/07/04-24/07/04)
