05/03/2012
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 05/03/12
The Mrdak family lives in the apartment in Belgrade where most of the things have been bought thanks to bank loans and credits.
"First we took a credit to go on a honeymoon two years ago, but then I inherited this apartment and we moved in.
We had to repaint it, buy new furniture, a new refrigerator, repair things.
Recently, we had to buy a car because of the baby, so we took another loan," Vladimir Mrdak told SETimes.
The family will need at least five years to pay off their current debts.
In the mean time, they will probably take another bank credit for something else.
This is a common story for most Serbs.
When asked, families usually say they survive only due to the loans and credits.
But families are not the only ones.
The government has been taking loans from the IMF and the EU.
A recent report by the Fiscal Council of Serbia estimated that the government is indebted for more 14.4 billion euros to international lenders;
the economy has a 19.3 billion-euro debt, while citizens owe 5.7 billion in loans.
"All employed people of Serbia would have to work for free for almost five years to repay these debts," economist Milan Culibrk told SETimes.
The Council, which is in charge of control of the fiscal policy of the state, revealed that to repay its debts, Serbia will have to allocate 5.1 billion euros from the state budget -- almost 14% of its GDP.
"We estimated that the state's debt will by the end of this year reach 50% of GDP -- which is more than the law allows," Fiscal Council member Vladimir Vuckovic told SETimes.
According to Vuckovic, the government has broken two laws already -- the law on the state budget and the law on the budget system -- according to which, public debts shouldn't exceed 45% of the GDP.
However, there are no measures or restrictions that can force the government to comply with the laws, nor can it hold the offenders accountable.
"The government should adopt a clear plan of credible measures in order to pay debts in the legally stipulated time," said Vuckovic.
Ministry of Finance State Secretary Dusan Nikezic told SETimes that although the state is indebted, it is still within normal limits.
"The financial crisis has slowed the process of debt repayment, but we are paying it off and we follow the suggestions made by the IMF on savings.
We are planning to save up to 300m euros by the end of this year," Nikezic said.
According to the ministry, out of all the Southeast European countries, only Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are less indebted than Serbia.
"Serbia should use new loans from the EU and IMF to invest in companies that will focus on exports, or at least replace the imports and keep the money in the country," Culibrk said.
While the state can use the new loans to invest the money and get the profit out of it, ordinary citizens do not have this option.
Their money is spent in advance on living expenses and basic needs.
And even these debts will be hard to pay off.
Due to the attenuation of the Serbian dinar, credit users today owe 80 billion dinars more than at the beginning of the year.
