23/10/2006
Greek scientists are participating in the European Space Agency's (ESA) Solar Orbiter project, which aims to launch a satellite for probing the innermost regions of the solar system, announced the country's ESA representative, Kanaris Tsiganos.
Greece has so far contributed 8m euros to the project and is considering an expansion of its role, he said.
The Solar Orbiter unmanned mission will cost at least 500m euros and is expected to be launched in 2015.
A team of seven Bucharest students is working on the first Romanian micro-satellite -- Goliath, a cube 10cm in diameter, based on a concept developed by researchers at Stanford University and California Polytechnic State University.
The Goliath satellite will be launched in October 2007 by the European Space Agency and will orbit the Earth at an altitude of 640km, with a speed of 8km per second.
It will remain in space for about a year.
The satellite will have three missions:
detecting micrometeorites, measuring the intensity of gamma radiations and taking pictures of the Earth with a minuscule camera.
Bulgaria will open its own Centre for Space Monitoring in mid-2007, Deputy Prime Minister Emel Etem announced last week.
The contractor for building the facility will be selected by the end of October.
The centre will be equipped with a database and monitoring system that can provide real-time information about crisis regions.
It will be part of the national early warning and rescue system.
A new report by UNESCO hails Turkish scientific publications as "splendid" and says their number increased threefold between 1997 and 2002.
In general, a comparison between 2002 and 1992 shows remarkable improvement, it said.
In the overall UNESCO science ranking, Turkey moved up from the 37th place to 22nd place last year.
An international conference on south-Slavic and Balkan languages opened in Sofia on Wednesday (October 18th).
Researchers from Albania, Bulgaria, France, Greece, Italy, Macedonia, Norway, Romania, Serbia, Spain and the United States are participating.
(Various sources – 16/10/06-23/10/06)
