22/09/2006
Iceland's Actavis withdrew its bid for Pliva, leaving US-based Barr Pharmaceutical as the only bidder for the Croatian pharmaceutical producer.
The move came after Barr upgraded its offer to $141 per share.
Actavis said it was unwilling to jeopardise its development plans by overpaying for Pliva, whose price is already close to $2.5 billion.
Turkey's Competition Board said it has re-endorsed the privatisation procedure for the top steel maker Erdemir, 46.12% cent of which was sold to the local OYAK group this winter for 2.2 billion euros.
The sales process was suspended in May, when the country's top administrative court, the State Council, discovered legal violations.
The privatisation and restructuring of Erdemir is a priority issue in the IMF-backed government programme for economic recovery.
The Republika Srpska (RS) privatisation directorate decided to extend the deadline for submission of bids in the sales tender for the RS telco Telekom Srpske by one month, from 4 October to 3 November.
According to RS Transport and Communications Minister Nedeljko Cubrilovic, the move will give candidate buyers more time to get acquainted with Telekom Srpkse's activities.
Eleven companies, including Austria's Telekom Austria, Norway's Telenor, Hungary's Magyar Telekom, Serbia's Telekom Srbije and Russia's Sistema Telecom have shown initial interest.
The Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina is in talks with the international rating agencies Standard & Poor's and Fitch regarding the assignment of a new credit rating.
According to central bank governor Kemal Kozaric, initial discussions were held during the IMF-World Bank annual meetings in Singapore.
BiH currently has a B2 credit rating, with a stable outlook, from Moody's.
A total of 85 companies, including 45 foreign firms, have submitted letters of interest in the ongoing tender for building small hydropower plants in Macedonia, according to the economy ministry.
The deadline is 29 September.
Serbia launched a tender procedure for the issuance of a third mobile phone licence in the country, with a starting minimum bidding price set at 320m euros.
The licence will be valid for ten years, with the option for another ten-year extension.
Candidate buyers must have at least 3 million subscribers and reported revenues of at least 500m euros for 2005, and cannot already hold a mobile phone licence.
The deadline for submitting bids is 6 November.
(Various sources – 15/09/06 - 22/09/06)
