22/08/2006
Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis began a Middle East tour Tuesday (22 August), aimed at confirming her country's interest in the region ahead of assuming the presidency of the UN Security Council on 1 September.
Bakoyannis will visit Cyprus, Lebanon, Jordan and Israel.
Meanwhile, the Greek Foreign Affairs and Defence Council met on Tuesday to discuss possible participation in a UN-led force in Lebanon.
An EU expert mission arrived in Sofia on Monday (21 August) to assess Bulgaria's progress in the fight against organised crime, corruption and money laundering.
The visit is the last inspection by the European Commission under the Justice and Home Affairs chapter before the monitoring report on Bulgaria's progress in the EU accession process is released.
UN war crimes tribunal chief investigator Patrick Lopes-Terres was in Belgrade last week and met with officials in charge of implementing Belgrade's action plan for co-operation.
The focus of talks was fugitive war crimes indictee Ratko Mladic.
Bosnia and Herzegovina High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling and US Ambassador to BiH Douglas McElhaney met with Prime Minister Adnan Terzic in Sarajevo on Thursday (17 August) to discuss the latest developments in the country.
The three agreed that Republika Srpska's refusal to compromise in areas of police reform could have serious consequences.
The fifth anniversary of the signing of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, which ended months of fighting in 2001, was celebrated on Thursday (17 August) in Ohrid, Macedonia.
President Branko Crvenkovski said that since the agreement, Macedonia has become "a country of strong interethnic trust and tolerance, a candidate for full-fledged membership in the EU and NATO".
Albanian Customs Service General Director Perparim Dervishi and UNMIK Customs Service Director General Paul Acda met on Thursday (17 August) in Pristina to discuss ways to boost co-operation between their services.
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Ivana Dulic-Markovic and Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic met with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn in Brussels on Thursday (17 August) to discuss a package of proposals aimed at restarting dialogue with the EU.
(Various sources 15/08/06 - 22/08/06)
