01/10/2012
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 01/10/12
The Balkan countries have great potential to develop a web economy, IT experts concluded at the Webfest conference held in Budva, Montenegro.
The conference, which was held September 20th and 21st, is part of the Webfest, Southeastern Europe's largest Internet festival.
Founded in 2007, Webfest is an annual festival that takes place from September to November in Serbia and Montenegro and gathers web experts from around the world.
The festival includes the conference, competition for the best regional website and web projects and an award for the best regional Internet startup.
According to organiser ME Registry, the festival is the region's effort to raise public awareness about Web technology, accomplishments, Internet communication and web economy.
"Webfest is a conference that celebrates Internet innovation and individuals who foster online growth.
Our mission is to increase the quality of life of ordinary people in the region, and to some extent on a global level," Predrag Lesic, executive director of ME Registry, told SETimes.
According to Lesic, the festival aims to raise awareness about the Internet and its possibilities through education, competition and awards.
The festival has consistently grown larger over the years, drawing the attention and participation of authors, artists, businessmen, educationalists and scientists.
"Some things changed over the last two years for better.
We want through the Webfest and other similar activities, to provide and give support for young people to develop their own business and make working places, instead of waiting for others to hire them," Lesic said.
One of the biggest points of interest is the submission of new and innovative Internet projects and websites for award consideration.
Since Webfest began, 5,000 websites and Internet projects have competed in the festival.
Dejan Nikolic, one of the winners of the 2011 Webfest for the best website, said that these kinds of festival are true refreshment for the regional Internet scene.
According to Nikolic, most people are not aware of the potential that Internet technologies have.
"I think the main reason why we don't exploit Internet and its possibilities is a fact that we didn't have our own services before Google and YouTube came on our country.
In Bulgaria, for instance, neither YouTube nor Gmail are the leading Internet service because Bulgaria made their own search engines and services before," Nikolic told SETimes.
This year for the first time, Webfest introduced the Web-Up.ME competition, to find the best start-up in the region.
The winner is given the opportunity to present at the New York TechCrunch Disrupt summit in 2013 and chance to achieve worldwide fame.
Croatian site Mediatoolkit, which makes searching news and media sites easier, was this year's winner and will represent the Balkan region in the New York.
Mediatoolkit founder Filip Topol said the award is an indicator that Balkan Internet developers are on a good path.
"Going to the New York TechCrunch Disrupt is a great opportunity for us and for the whole region to show the world what potentials we have," Topol told SETimes.
There are over 10.5 million Internet users in the Balkans, according to the findings by Huge Media in 2012.
In the former Yugoslavia, Slovenia has the highest Internet service penetration (63.29 percent), while Bosnia and Herzegovina have the lowest (51.76 percent).
