29/04/2013
By Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 29/04/13
In an unprecedented move in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the State Investigation and Protection Agency organised a anti-corruption actions against 19 political ofificials, including Federation of BiH President Zivko Budimir.
Also arrested Friday (April 26th) were the Commission for Pardons in FBiH President Hidajat Halilovic and Budmir advisor Petar Barisic.
The actions were jointly conducted by the military, the police and the prosecution in both entities.
"The goal of [the] activities is to detect corruption criminal offenses perpetrated by the highest officials of the Federation," Boris Grubešić, FBIH Prosecution spokesman, told SETimes.
"The arrested are suspected of criminal offences related to corruption, abuse of power, illicit trafficking in drugs and organised crime," Kristina Jozić, a spokeswoman for the Agency for Investigation and Protection Agency, told SETimes.
Budimir is suspected of corruption and taking bribes to pardon several prisoners.
The vice president freed 96 prisoners, including 36 murderers, last year.
The BiH Ministry of Security backed the action.
"The fight against organised crime and corruption and their detection is an absolute priority for law enforcement agencies," Security Minister Fahrudin Radoncic told SETimes.
Agency members also searched the offices in the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina building in Sarajevo and the FBiH government building in Mostar.
State Prosecutor Oleg Čavka did not comment on the speculation that Budimir called on his immunity.
According to the state Pardon Act, the president and vice presidents of the Federation of BiH, members of the government of the Federation of BiH, as well as members of the cantonal government, are only immune from civil liability.
"Budimir has no immunity from criminal liability.
Investigating authorities [must have] very strong evidence to take this step," Almasa Smajlović, a lawyer in Sarajevo, told SETimes.
"The investigating authorities must now seek the position of the Credentials and Privileges Commission of FBiH parliament, which will decide on immunity.
If it is proven that Budimir overstepped his authority and if there is reasonable suspicion of having committed a criminal offense, the commission will remove his immunity and proceed with process," Kasim Trnka, a professor at the Law Faculty at The University of Sarajevo, told SETimes.
What other actions can BiH take to boost its fight against crime?
Tell us what you think in the comments.
