23/06/2006
Bucharest Mayor Adriean Videanu urged foreign investors Thursday (22 June) to become involved in public-private partnerships to carry out renovation plans for Romania's capital.
UNDP-backed renovation projects -- which include infrastructure improvements, new parking lots, building a subway, and improving the environmental conditions -- are expected to begin later this summer.
"My decision is to support investors, as their contribution is essential to the development of the city," Videanu said.
A roundtable discussion of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) business potential was held in Sarajevo.
Representatives of companies from BiH and other countries in Central and Eastern Europe warned that political and economic barriers still block the entry of foreign investors and constraing economic growth in the country.
Kosovo's Energy Minister Ethem Ceku announced the start of a project to construct a new thermal power plant in the province.
The plant would be the largest investment in Kosovo since 1999, and would have the capacity to produce between 1,800 and 2,100 megawatts of electricity.
Companies from France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Turkey and the United States have reportedly already expressed interest in the project.
Kazakhstan's largest bank, Turan Alem Bank, will buy a 34 per cent stake in Turkey's Sekerbank, under a sales agreement signed on 21 June.
According to local media, the deal amounts to $261m.
It is expected to be finalised by 31 October.
Cyprus and Greece are among 14 EU member states that will benefit from a new EU financial package, worth 50m to 65m euros, for support of the poultry market and overcoming the losses from the bird flu.
Under the initiative, approved by the bloc's management committee for eggs and poultry on Thursday (22 June), the EU budget will finance 50 per cent of measures against bird flu undertaken by the two countries.
The Romanian government decided to extend by three months the deadline for completing the privatisation of the Romanian Commercial Bank (BCR) by the Austrian Erste Bank.
It said the move was necessary because the state antitrust body has not yet presented a position on the deal.
The Czech power utility CEZ announced plans to open trading offices in Serbia and Kosovo this summer, as well as its possible participation in a future tender for two new power stations in Macedonia.
According to the company, the new offices are part of CEZ's overall expansion in Southeast Europe.
(Various sources – 16/06/06 – 23/06/06)
