27/04/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/04/13
The recent privatisation of Kosvo's Post-Telecom will be a strong contributor to the country's budget through tax payments and dividend sharing, government officials said.
"The new enterprise has provided guarantees to all employees for the next three years and obligations to the public enterprise, the Kosovo Post, to use its physical assets," Kosovo Minister of Economic Development Besim Beqaj said.
The sale of the shares of the Kosovo Post and Telecommunications "will create a strategic public-private partnership to develop this sector," Beqaj said.
The April 15th privatisation moved 75 percent of the telecom's shares to a consortium of Germany's ACP Axos Capital and US-based Najafi Companies, in partnership with British Telecom.
The shares were sold for 277 million euros.
The current tender was delayed twice after the bidding companies required more time to ask for financial backing from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the World Bank.
Kosovo Post-Telecom has more than 1 million mobile users, more than 100,000 landline customers and provides internet and cable TV services around the country.
The government will retain management the postal arm of the company.
In 2011, the government failed to privatise the company due to corruption concerns and the withdrawal of Hrvatski Telekom.
But while the government hopes to attract more investors in the country by using the telecom privatisation as an example, the opposition Democratic League of Kosovo and Vetvendosje movement have expressed concerns over the sale.
The telecom was the only public company that brings in a profit every year, Shpend Ahmeti, deputy leader of Vetevendosje Movement, said.
The party disagrees with the privatisation due to irregularities and lack of transparency.
"The privatisation was never brought to the assembly for a decision," Ahmeti said.
Agron Demi, the executive director of the GAP Institute, told SETimes that the sale of the telecom was illegal because, according to the Law on Public Enterprises, the government may sell shares of a public company only after obtaining approval in parliament, which did not happen in this case.
On July 27th 2010, the assembly approved the sale of shares in principle, but the plan needed to be tabled for final approval, which did not happen due to the extraordinary elections which took place later that year.
Similar concerns were expressed by Parliamentary Speaker Jakup Krasniqi, who has called on EULEX to investigate the sale.
According to Ahmeti, the assembly has launched an initiative to establish an investigative committee to look into the sale, and will also seek the suspension of the privatisation.
"[We will] take other legal actions … if this process continues," Ahmeti said.
Over the last six years, the telecom dividends have brought in 410 million euros to the state budget, Demi said.
Therefore, the 277 million euro sale price is extremely low, he said.
"But what is more worrying is the credibility of the potential purchasing company, because we are the only country in the region in which credible investors showed no interest, and it should present a concern for Kosovo's society," Demi said.
Demi criticised the government for not being transparent and not reveling the names of shareholders of Axos Capital.
Vetvendosje Movement has expressed concerns that some of the shareholders might be individuals close to, or members of, the government.
"The government of Kosovo has continuously decreased the telecom's value, allowing corruption cases, higher wages, employment through family and party ties," he said.
Ahmeti said the telecom was privatised because of mismanagement and that a corrupt government was leading the process.
"So [the] profits are going to someone else, and we will pay the social effects for workers.
This is the opposite of all theories of proper economic policy," Ahmeti said.
How do you think the privatisation will impact Kosovo's economy?
Tell us what you think by making a comment below.
