29/03/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 29/02/13
More than 2,000 citizens of Bosnia and Hercegovina's (BiH) Visegrad municipality gathered to protest a recent nickel extraction plan announced by municipality officials who are hoping to spur economic development in the struggling region.
Citizens wearing face masks, doctor's uniforms and bandages expressed their dissatisfaction with the decision of city officials to allow exploration.
Vidoje Madzar, 48, a cobbler from Visegrad, said he attended the protest as he worries over "the future and health of our children."
"The experts said that nickel is 100 times more poisonous than any other ore. 
We'll not allow our beautiful landscape to become a desert for someone's profit," Madzar told SETimes.
City authorities see no obstacle in the venture, and have already granted concessions and permits for research, expecting industrial development to yield a major economic benefit.
According to the Sarajevo Geological Agency, at least 200 million tonnes of nickel reserves reserves are in the Vardiste area near Visegrad.
The Rudo municipality in eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) also issued permission for nickel extraction on its territory in February. 
Rudo Mayor Rato Rajak rejected claims that the exploitation of nickel will cause environmental damage and affect people's health, and said that the effort can only yield benefits.
"We decided that the investor can explore the territory of our municipality to find nickel, and made concession for the citizens to express their opinion at referendum. 
It's unimaginable what the effort could do for such a small place. 
Thousands of jobs, flourishing economy ... 
Of course, the investor will have to guarantee safety. 
I also live here and am not crazy to let someone poison me. 
I suggest that we, as officials, visit a country that extracts nickel, and first hand see how nickel exploitation impacts the environment," Rajak told SETimes.
The average market price of nickel is 20,000 euros per tonne.
Though there is no nickel exploitation in the Balkans yet, experts are warning that worldwide, countries that engaged in nickel exploitation suffered environmental disasters.
"Russian city Norlisk is also known as the 'city of horror.' It's the world's largest nickel extraction complex, where nearly 500 tonnes of nickel oxides and 2 million tonnes of sulphur dioxides are released annually into the air. 
The extracted ore leaches with sulphuric acid to form nickel.
"It's common knowledge that sulphuric acid is deadly. 
If we begin with exploitation, it'll be a disaster. 
The environment will not survive. 
Bosnian and Balkan rivers, now one of the richest wildlife rivers in Europe, will completely die off," Rajko Cvijic, professor of mining and ecology at the Prijedor mining faculty, told SETimes.
Last year, a toxic leak at Europe's largest nickel mine, in Talvivaara in north-eastern Finland, became a major environmental accident. 
Thousand cubic metres of toxic outpour was released into nearby environment in three days.
Besides Russia, the largest exploiters of nickel are Canada and Australia.
Serbia is also planning on nickel exploitation in the future, and the citizens of Uzice, Trstenik, and Vrnjacka Banja, where the exploitation is soon to start, held several protests in the last few months.
"The goal is first to see if there is nickel in the area. 
The first phase is drilling, then, feasibility, to determine profitability, and the third is factory and mine construction. 
We have necessary permits," Radoslav Vuckovic, director of the Serbia Nickel company, said at a public debate organised by the Belgrade Mining and Geological faculty.
But some citizens are not happy.
"Food chains will be poisoned. 
We'll fight illness and diseases, tumours, polluted water, air and land. 
Only those who will exploit nickel would benefit from it," Milica Markovic-Vojic, chairman of the environmental board at the assembly of Serbia, told SETimes.
The same company applied for nickel research in BiH.
