29/03/2013
By Menekse Tokyay and Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Istanbul and in Bucharest -- 29/03/13
Building on a series of high-level meetings, Turkey and Romania signed off on an action plan this month to enhance strategic co-operation on a host of common bilateral, regional and international interests.
"The action plan is structured in various fields of activity and includes proposals and projects of bilateral co-operation:
politics, consular, military and security, economy, energy, industry, transports, internal affairs, asylum and migration, environment, agriculture, labor and social protection, culture, education, media, tourism, European affairs, regional and international cooperation," the Romanian Foreign Ministry told SETimes of the co-operation protocol.
The broad-based action plan advances the strategic partnership agreement signed between the two countries in 2011 by reinforcing it with concrete proposals.
The backbone of the strategic partnership is trade and investment.
Among non-EU countries, Turkey is Romania's No.
1 trading partner.
About 13,000 Turkish companies are active in Romania, employing more than 150,000 people, with total investments in the country topping 5 billion euros.
Officials at the Turkish Businessmen's Association in Romania (TIAD) said the partnership gives stability to Turkish businessmen and hailed what the association called "a source of stability in the Black Sea region."
The economic dimension of the relationship supports the political-security component hinged on the European Union and NATO to foster peace, stability and prosperity in the Balkans and Black Sea region, where the two nations have common interests, Birgul Demirtas, a Balkan expert at Ankara-based TOBB University, told SETimes.
"Turkey gave utmost support to the Romanian membership to NATO, and hence Romania has now been a staunch supporter of Turkey’s EU accession process," she said.
"Their close partnership … with regard to the construction of anti-missile defence shields in both countries is important and is an issue bringing the two countries closer."
Under NATO's Smart Defense Initiative and Ballistic Missile Defense system, Turkey is hosting an early warning radar system near Malatya, and anti-ballistic missiles interceptors are planned to be placed in Romania by 2018, officials have said.
Romania will assume the chairmanship of the South-East European Co-operation Process (SEECP) that brings together Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Albania, Serbia, Greece, Croatia, Moldova and Montenegro in the second half of 2013.
As confirmed by the Romanian foreign minister in his latest visit to Ankara, reform of SEECP is on the horizon in line with Turkey's proposal in 2010 to make it institutionalised and increase its effectiveness as one of the main political forums of the region.
Fatih Karamanci, head of the Turkish-Romanian Business Council at the Foreign Economic Relations Board, said the main sectors where Turkish companies focus in Romania are industry, construction business, banking and finance, agriculture, trade and tourism, along with media and the appliance sector.
"However, in order to meet such a target in bilateral trade there needs to be more diversification in the products and the markets for the investors," Karamanci told SETimes.
"For instance, Turkey should be much more 'marketed' in Romania in terms of its developed and advantageous health tourism."
Karamanci said business co-operation between Turkish and Romanian companies should also be an attraction for third-country investors desiring to be active in Romania.
The Turkish-Romanian Business Council is in close co-operation with TIAD and is willing to organise joint activities in agriculture, industry, tourism and logistics, he said.
"The determination of a strategic framework between the two countries will have a significant positive impact over the mutual trade volume and cultural exchanges," Karamanci said.
