26/04/2013
By Kruno Kartus for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 26/04/13
Research by the Anti-corruption Student Network shows that many students and teachers are ready to co-operate to report corruption cases, but they prefer to do so anonymously.
"Only 6.9 percent of students said that they would not report a professor receiving bribe, 66.3 percent said they would but if the reporting is anonymous, while as 26.8 percent would report it even if they have to reveal their identity," Marjan Zabrchanec, executive director of the Youth Educational Forum, told SETimes.
Croatia's anti-corruption police unit has revealed dozens of corruption cases in the country's education system since 2008.
In a recent operation codenamed "Index," anti-corruption police arrested 39 people on suspicion of buying and selling exams at the faculty of economics in Osijek.
"They are suspended of committing … abuse of office and authority, bribery, illegal mediation and instigating the abuse of position and authority and illegal mediation," Vuk Djuricic, police spokesman, told SETimes.
Students, assistants and mediators were also arrested in the operation.
"We have reasons to believe that professors and assistants at the faculty of economics in Osijek during 2010 and 2011 … repeatedly [gave] passing grades to the suspected students … for which they repeatedly received the money and various gifts."
Faculty officials said that all employees unanimously support the action in uncovering and prosecuting illegal activities and individuals from their environment, because "they obviously don't belong to the academic community of the honourable and valuable, who faithfully perform their duties."
"Unfortunately, these events have caused great damage to the reputation of the college … [but] we are confident that it will contribute to the completion of the process of consolidating and validating all the positive aspects of our work that we have for years been successfully creating," faculty Dean Zeljko Turkalj told SETimes.
A Youth Educational Forum survey in Macedonia showed that 28.3 percent of students at St. 
Cyril and Methodius would not report corruption, because they said nothing changes, whether it is reported or not reported. 
More than 20 percent feared revenge from those reported and 17 percent said they did not know where to report corruption.
According to a research carried out by Transparency International, every fourth student in Bosnia and Herzegovina has faced corruption.
"Corruption is everywhere, even in colleges," Emir Muhamedagic, the spokesman of the student parliament at the University of Sarajevo, told SETimes. 
"Three years ago, we opened an anonymous line through which students can report corruption. 
No application has yet occurred. 
People are probably scared. 
I believe that competent investigating authorities should be more interested about this problem."
Correspondents Kruno Kartus in Osijek and Marina Stojanovska in Skopje contributed to this report.
What's the best way to fight corruption in the education system? 
Add your thoughts below.
