28/03/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 28/03/13
After facing strong criticism, MPs of the ruling Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) withdrew their request to establish an ad-hoc committee in parliament to examine alleged procedural violations in the Kicina court case.
Critics said that reopening the case, which was closed by the Supreme Court, would encroach on Kosovo's judiciary sector.
The Kicina case concerns the killing of an Albanian man who worked as a Serbian policeman prior to the 1999 Kosovo war, as well as his family.
Three people, including two former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army, received 30-year prison sentences but a man who was involved in the killing and provided statements of evidence of criminal wrongdoing received an 11-year prison sentence.
The case is perceived by some as controversial because due to rumours of lost evidence and that the case was built on the confession one participant who reportedly changed his statements several times.
Another of the four sentenced people claimed UNMIK forced him to sign a confession statement.
Adem Grabovci, chairman of the PDK's parliamentary group, said the transcript of the parliamentary debate on the issue is being sent to judicial officials to review the case once again.
"From discussions here are raised some doubts [about the verdict]," he said, "so we ask that the record to be sent to the relevant bodies."
Kosovo needs to implement judicial reforms that form a clear division between the powers of the judiciary, executive and parliament, analysts said.
"What is needed is professional recruitment completely insulated from politics.
Financial independence of the judiciary should be ensured, the judiciary must have the full right to assign its own budget and seek it directly from parliament rather than have the government decide on it," Seb Bytyci, executive director of Balkan Policy Institute, told SETimes.
The assembly is a political body, and justice cannot be at the mercy of political debates, according to Ramadan Ilazi, executive director of the Kosovo Peace Institute.
"Moreover, discussion of court cases in the assembly is a threat to the work of the judges," Ilazi told SETimes.
According to Betim Musliu, senior researcher at the Kosovo Law Institute, the country's judicial council and prosecutorial councils should protect judges and prosecutors from external influences in whatever form.
"Laws should be regulated in such a way to create balance and equal control between the branches of power, not as now, where the government and parliament have created extreme dependence on the judiciary through its funding," Musliu told SETimes.
The Kosovo constitution guarantees separation of powers and emphasises checks and balances among the executive, legislative and judicial branches of government, he added.
"Legislators should create laws that ensure a fair and better functioning judicial system, rather than interpret cases already closed by the courts," Musliu told SETimes.
"The politicians' mentality that they are God for the state has led to the occupation, or their tendency to occupy every segment of society, including the judiciary."
The Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) is the only political party in parliament that opposed the debate on the Kicina case.
