21/08/2006

Among non-EU countries in Southeast Europe, Croatians spend the most on telecommunications, an EC survey found. 
According to the poll, households in Croatia spend an average of 30 euros a month for fixed line and mobile communications and for internet access. 
Next comes Montenegro, whose citizens spend around 24 euros monthly, followed by Bulgaria (14 euros) and Turkey (10.4 euros). 
By contrast, households in EU member states spend an average of 53 euros monthly.
***
There are currently around 115,000 internet users in Montenegro, according to a government analysis on the IT and telecommunications situation in the country. 
The internet penetration rate is thus estimated at 17.5 per cent. 
The most common connection speed is 200 Mbps.
***
The Albanian government has decided to allocate an additional 151,000 euros for the treatment of patients suffering from chronic renal insufficiency. 
Kidney transplants currently are only available abroad, usually in Turkey and Greece, while the capacities for treatment with hemodialysis are limited. 
Albanian hospitals can provide hemodialysis treatment only for 150 patients. 
However, as a result of a new co-operation agreement with Italian and Egyptian doctors, the first kidney transplant could be attempted in Albania next year.
***
Turkey's leading fuel distributor, Petrol Ofisi, announced it has reached a deal with the British firm Oxonica, which conducts active research studies in nanotechnology. 
Oxonica will supply the Turkish firm with a fuel-borne nanocatalyst product, Envirox Tm, which reduces air pollution. 
The project will be launched in a few months.
***
Romania will take over the chairmanship of the International Commission on the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR) in 2007, Environment Ministry State Secretary Lucia Ana Varga announced. 
Curbing the effects of natural disasters in the area would be a top priority, she added. 
ICDPR member states met last week in Vienna to discuss Romania's proposed mandate.
***
The Croatian town of Crikvenica launched an electronic portal presenting information about tourist destinations and facilities in the area. 
If the pilot e-tourism project is successful, other key tourist sites may also follow Crikvenica's lead.
(Various sources – 14/08/06 – 21/08/06)
