26/03/2013
By Cornelis van Zweeden and Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times -- 26/03/13
Cyprus faces a massive contraction of its economy as a result of bailout deal struck with its creditors, analysts said. 
But the worst-case scenario of a euro exit has been avoided.
"A disorderly default would have impoverished everyone," Adriaan Klop, chief investment officer at Bryan Garnier Asset Management, told SETimes.
Alex Sakellariou, a researcher at Panteion University in Athens, acknowledged Cypriot banks had problems.
"Russian oligarchs had their money there and this was not accepted by the EU," he told SETimes.
The 10 billion euro bailout deal involves closing the country's second biggest bank, Laiki Bank.
Deposits up to 100,000 euros at Laiki Bank will be moved to the Bank of Cyprus, the country's biggest bank. 
But holders of deposits over that amount at Laiki Bank will face massive losses. 
Bondholders and shareholders stand to loose everything.
Although details about the deal were sparse, it seemed Cyprus would not put in place capital controls. 
Laiki Bank will be closed down before the banks, which have remained closed for over a week, reopen. 
That will limit the drain of large depositors to those at the Bank of Cyprus.
The Breugel Institute in Brussels applauded the likely departure of large depositors, many of whom are Russians.
"This serves as a wake-up call for bondholders,'' Klop said. 
"Bailing in bondholders will become the rule as of 2018, when the EU introduces new legislation." Analysts were struggling to predict the effects on the real economy, but pessimism reigned.
"The European Commission has predicted a 3 percent GPD contraction for this year, but that is certainly too optimistic,'' Zsolt Darvas at Bruegel Institute, told SETimes.
Lee Tyrell-Hendry, an analyst at the Royal Bank of Scotland, declined to give a precise figure. 
"But our analysis point to a contraction in the order of the high single digits over the coming years," he told SETimes.
Society Générale, a French bank, predicted the Cypriot economy would loose a fifth of its size by 2017.
Many analysts welcomed the fact that risk-takers were among the losers, alongside taxpayers.
"Savers across the eurozone were already becoming picky about where to park their money," Klop said. 
"The deal on Cyprus will accelerate that process. 
Savers are becoming aware that there are good and bad banks, even in a country like Germany."
However, Cypriot analysts took a different view.
"The eurozone leaders have given the wrong signals to international investors in the eurozone," George Leventis, director of the International Security Forum in Cyprus, told SETimes. 
"Who will guarantee that they will not do the same with troubled Spanish and Italian and Greek banks?"
But a remaining issue is whether Cyprus will change its bank oversight.
"The fault lines of this battle touches upon the question of whether the Greek Cypriots will continue laundering Russian money or be a proper EU member state," Ahmet Sozen of Eastern Mediterranean University in the Turkish-occupied part of Cyprus, told SETimes.
In Greece, which was preparing to have Piraeus Bank absorb Cypriot branches, there was resignation that lenders would always get their way.
"I don't know if this deal will help or not," Demetrios Chaidaris, a butcher told SETimes, adding that he opposed the idea of a confiscation tax on deposits. 
"I work 10-12 hours a day to have money in bank," he said.
