03/10/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 03/10/05 Photos courtesy of the Montenegrin Ministry of Education
As the 2005-2006 school year gets under way in Montenegro, changes are in store.
Twenty-seven elementary schools are implementing nine-year schooling, bringing children a year earlier into organised education.
They join twenty other schools that instituted the reform a year before.
According to the country's education ministry, children have been found to benefit from being introduced to organised education at an earlier age.
"Children start earlier to satisfy their intellectual curiosity, and the curiosity of a child is both natural and enormous," the ministry said in a document outlining the changes, which are being instituted in the country's schools in five phases.
By 2008-2009, the ministry anticipates all Montenegrin schools will offer nine-year schooling.
In addition to the extra year, school curricula have been overhauled, reflecting a basic change in educational philosophy -- stressing active rather than passive learning.
Instead of emphasising rote memorisation, schools will now encourage students to develop critical thinking skills.
Other innovations include computer literacy for teachers and students, increased opportunity for studying foreign languages, and more freedom for teachers to design a part of their curriculum themselves.
For the first time in Montenegrin schools, electives are being introduced.
Students will be able to choose a number of subjects starting in 7th grade.
For example, a student might decide to take classes in word processing, modern dance, folklore or French -- to name only a few possibilities.
New, improved textbooks have been available in August 2004, and are now being used in a number of schools.
Unlike their predecessors, the new books are richly illustrated.
Music textbooks include CDs, giving opportunities for further practice and learning.
Nature workbooks provide opportunities for drawing and offer stickers to paste in.
The reforms are modeled in part on educational systems in other countries around Europe, particularly Slovenia -- a fellow former Yugoslav state which once had a curriculum similar to Montenegro's, and has since instituted a successful school reform.
Another former Yugoslav republic, Bosnia and Herzegovina, initiated nine-year schooling in 2004 as part of its bid to meet EU educational standards.
The changes are part of the government's Economic Reform Agenda for 2002-2007, which also includes such goals as including children with special needs in the system, bringing more Roma children into the country's schools, providing better instruments for measuring students' success objectively, improving secondary vocational education and training, and combating illiteracy.
Boosting computer awareness among pupils and teachers is one of the major thrusts of the government's agenda.
Ultimately, authorities hope to provide one computer per five pupils in Montenegro.
On 31 August, Education Minister Slobodan Backovic delivered 58,000 euros worth of state-of-the-art equipment -- including computers, video projectors and digital cameras -- to 27 schools that signed onto the reform this school year.
Another 35 schools are to slated to receive computers in a month's time, while 50 others will get them in 2006-2007.
To help schools use the new equipment most effectively, the ministry also plans to organise computer courses for the teachers.
In addition to equipping schools with the latest technology, the government has also invested 1.7m euros in building new school facilities, as well as renovating the existing ones.
Most of the work was done during the three-month summer vacation.
According to a 2003 report put out by the education ministry, the Montenegrin school infrastructure needs much renovation.
Most buildings date from the post-World War II period, obliging students and teachers to cope with flat, leak-prone roofs, antiquated boilers, decomposing windows and doors, inadequate electrical systems, and corroded piping.
Another serious problem is the increasing lack of space in city schools, as more and more students flock from rural to urban areas -- and especially to the capital, Podgorica.
While many schools in outlying areas have too much space and few students, city schools are crowded.
The problem in city schools is so serious that many now have to operate in three shifts in order to accommodate all the students.
Apart from the Montenegrin administration’s assistance, the reform of the educational system is being financially supported by donations from foreign governments, international institutions such as UNICEF, the Montenegro Open Society Institute, the government of Finland and others.
A substantial contribution was made by a World Bank grant intended specifically for education reform in Montenegro.
A draft agreement on financial assistance is also being negotiated between Montenegro and Hungary.
All the reforms now under way are the result of long planning, said Backovic, adding that their implementation will be closely monitored and analysed to assess whether Montenegro’s education system is on the path to greater efficiency.
A long-term investment in education is crucial, because it can have a real impact on economic development, the minister added.
