20/09/2006
Serbia's Jelena Jankovic, who beat three top-ranked players to reach the US Open semi finals two weeks ago, has made it through the first round of the China Open.
She easily defeated Lourdes Dominguez Lino of Spain 6-0, 6-1 in 42 minutes.
Jankovic, still recovering from a back strain that forced her to pull out of an event in Bali last week, said she is not feeling her best but will "see how far I can go".
Gordana Strajin, a 25-year-old economics student from Novi Sad, won the first-ever Balkan Beauty Ambassador contest, which took place in Thessaloniki.
The contest was organised by Greece's national exhibition agency Helexpo and held within the framework of the Thessaloniki International Trade Fair.
The winner is now expected to tour all the Balkan states as part of a campaign promoting humanitarian and environmental values.
The 10th IAAF World Cup in Athletics took place in Athens from 16-17 September, drawing many of the world's top athletes.
The contest featured teams representing continents (Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe and Oceania) as well as teams from the best individual countries (France, Greece, Russia, Poland and the United States).
In the final ranking, Europe's team ranked first in the men's events, followed by the United States and Africa, while in the women's ranking, the list was led by Russia, followed by Europe and the Americas.
The fifth edition of the Festival of Albanian Drama began in Debar, Macedonia.
The Debar Theatre "Kemal Ajdini" is the organiser of the event, which is financed by the Macedonian Ministry of Culture.
This year, the programme includes performances by 12 theatre troupes from Albania, Kosovo and Macedonia.
The festival continues until 22 September.
An exhibition of works by the renowned Croatian painter Oskar Hermann (1886-1974) opened in Zagreb, commemorating the artist's 120th birth anniversary and the 200th anniversary of the Jewish Municipality in the Croatian capital.
The exhibition includes 340 paintings -- from his earliest works through the so-called Munich period (1905-1910) to his last pieces in 1974.
The exhibition will be on display until 3 December.
The first International Istanbul Biennial of Photography got under way in Turkey.
The event was organised by the Istanbul Amateur Photographers' and Cinematographers' Association.
This year's theme is "City:
Chaos and Magic".
(Various sources – 13/09/06 - 20/09/06)
