29/06/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 29/06/13
Road safety throughout the region has increased over the past few years thanks to tightened enforcement of traffic laws and stronger controls by police, but accidents continue to claim lives, prompting authorities to consider further actions.
The most recent major accident came on June 23rd, when a bus carrying Romanian tourists fell off the Kolasin-Podgorica Road and into the Moraca River canyon in Montenegro.
Tamara Popovic, spokesperson of the Montenegro Police, told SETimes that 18 people were killed and 29 others were injured.
The road along Moraca canyon, the deepest in Europe at more than 1,000 metres in some places, was built 50 years ago and is one of the most dangerous routes in the Balkans. 
During the past three decades, more than 1,000 people have lost their lives in the canyon.
Ilija Janjusevic, chief of the Podgorica traffic police, said the new traffic law, which was passed in January, brought much improvement. 
The law toughened penalties against drivers who cause accidents or are caught driving drunk.
"For the last six months, only one person was killed in car crashes in Podgorica, which has not happened in the past 20 years. 
Penalties are enlarged, so now drivers can be punished by being stripped of [their] permit for six months, and also by being forced to take the driving test again. 
Also, the fine can now be 2,000 euros and 60 days in prison. 
The new law allows us to arrest drunk drivers and take them in police custody until they get sober, usually within eight hours. 
Every month, we arrest over 300 of such drivers in Podgorica," Janjusevic told SETimes.
According to the 2012-13 report from the World Economic Forum, Montenegro ranks 93rd out of 144 states in the quality of roads. 
Macedonia (108), Serbia (122), Bulgaria (129), Bosnia and Herzegovina (134) and Romania (142) trailed Montenegro, while Croatia (29) led the region.
"Financial momentum in security of traffic is very important. 
This means that the states should have a constant budget, which will be set aside each year for traffic safety, regardless of other circumstances. 
Balkan states made small progress in that area, but it is still insufficient," Milan Vujanic, professor at the Belgrade Faculty of Transport and Chairman of the Committee for Traffic Safety of Serbia, told SETimes.
"You think that European banks are giving us money to build roads and highways because they care for us? 
No. 
They want to ensure [safety of] their citizens, from Germany, Austria who are travelling in Montenegro or Croatia for vacation," he added.
Croatia borrowed 3 billion euros over the past decade to build the region's largest highway network, covering 1,500 kilometres. 
In April, the World Bank approved a 100-million-dollar credit for Serbia to repair 700 kilometres of roads. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina averages 70 million euros per year for roads, and Montenegro plans to spend 40 million euros this year.
More than 3,500 people per day die in traffic accidents around the world. 
The UN General Assembly, recognising that this problem is widespread, adopted the Declaration of Casualties in Traffic in 2010 and declared the period from 2010-2020 will be the decade of Action for Safety in Traffic. 
It is estimated that traffic safety efforts will save about 5 million lives in Europe during this period.
"Only five years ago, Montenegro had 12 killed drivers per 100,000 residents. 
Today, that number is reduced to 7.4. 
Montenegro has done much to promote traffic safety: increasing the state budget for traffic safety, new legislation, road signalisation, repair of roads, higher fines. 
However, the roads must be improved. 
You can't drive strong and modern cars on roads that are 40 years old. 
We still do not have any single metre of highway," Milenko Cabarkapa, a Podgorica-based court investigator for traffic cases, told SETimes.
Serbia has 10 driver fatalities per 100,000 residents, while in BiH it is 12 per 100,000. 
By contrast, Sweden, which is 25th on the World Economic Forum road quality ranking, has only 2 driver fatalities per 100,000 residents.
"I think that this is the final warning that the old roads are not useful anymore and that the authorities need to consider urgently to start building the highway, no matter how much it will cost. 
It's better to cost money than lives, right?" Nik Slepic, 31, an electrical engineer from Podgorica, told SETimes.
Montenegro has allocated about 45 million euros from the state budget for road maintenance this year. 
Authorities have talked about building the country's first highway for more than a decade. 
The 170-kilometre route connecting Montenegro's seacoast with Serbia's border would cost about 3 billion euros, according to some estimates.
What can be done to prevent road accidents in your country? 
Tell us in the comments.
