26/11/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 26/11/12
A successful effort to reduce corruption in Serbia would have a significant improvement in the struggling state economy, officials and NGOs agree.
The financial damage to the Serbian economy -- considered one of the worst in Europe -- is in the billions of euros, bringing the government to the brink of bankruptcy.
"The funds that would be saved if we overcame and prevented further corruption, especially in state institutions, could help the economy and improve the social situation.
In that I'm primarily referring to public procurement, where abuse is the greatest," Rasim Ljajic, deputy prime minister and minister of trade and telecommunications, told SETimes.
The faltering economy was the biggest issue in elections earlier this year, according to polls, and for good reason.
Foreign debt has grown to more than 15 billion euros, 55 percent of GDP, breaching the legal limit of 45 percent of GDP.
The dinar has lost more than 13 percent of its value against the euro.
The IMF lowered its earlier estimate of 1.5 percent growth this year to 0.5 percent, while international credit rating agencies Fitch and Standard and Poor's lowered Serbia's credit rating to BB minus.
Meanwhile, the agency that is charged with addressing corruption, the Serbian Anti-Corruption Agency Committee, is looking for a new leader after its director, Zorana Markovic, was removed in light of a corruption investigation.
Media reports say that Markovic attempted to allocate a state-owned apartment in Belgrade for herself.
She has denied the allegations.
Transparency Serbia Director Vladimir Goati said that if Serbia managed to crack down on corruption it would also benefit from the arrival of foreign investors, because the country would be safer for investment.
"Those who would come to Serbia would reduce interest rates, because in countries safe for investing rates are 2 or 3 percent, whereas we have 7 or 8 percent.
That is what distinguishes a safe from an unsafe economic environment," Goati told SETimes.
Goati believes Serbia has a long way to go in that fight.
"That is not measured in weeks or months, but years.
We will need two to three years to improve our image and assure others that the situation has changed," Goati said.
Serbian citizens are aware of how poorly they are living and know the current crisis would be far more bearable if funds were spent purposefully and if millions did not go into the pockets of those who are supposed to work for the citizens rather than against them -- politicians, representatives of all levels of authority and heads of companies.
"Given how much is being stolen, we even have a good life in Serbia.
I'm surprised there are any resources to steal from.
I'm not interested in who comes from which political party.
All those who have profited to the detriment of the people should be held accountable for it," student Irena Dosic, 22, told SETimes.
