28/06/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/06/13
Serbian analysts say that Tomislav Nikolic's achievements in the first year of his presidency include successful anti-corruption measures, resolving the Kosovo issue, building foreign relations, drawing foreign investments, reducing cabinet costs, working within the Constitutional Act and keeping pre-election promises.
"If Nikolic was not elected, this government would not have been formed, the previous one would have been in power and we'd not have anti-corruption efforts," Vuk Fatic, deputy head of the president's media department, told SETimes.
Vladimir Krulj, professor at Belgrade's Singidunum University and an advisor at Brussels' Kreab and Gavin Anderson communication consultancy, agreed.
"Nikolic unconditionally supported Aleksandar Vucic, the first deputy prime minister of Serbia, in the fight against corruption, where Vucic achieved significant and publicly known results, though still much has to be done in [criminal] investigation and judiciary, and in meeting the new EU demands to start the EU negotiations," Krulj told SETimes.
Zoran Stojiljkovic, professor at Belgrade's political science faculty and member of the anti- corruption agency, said Nikolic's real successes so far are his contribution to anti-corruption efforts, economic development, Kosovo issue and his Constitutional Act compliance.
"He broke up a formal bond between the president of the republic and the president of the Progressive Party with his [resignation from the party], limiting his powers to that of the president of Serbia, which is a remarkable novelty in the practice of Serbian presidents," Stojiljkovic told SETimes.
Nikolic strategically supports the government, and shows readiness to change some of his initiatives, showing openness to accept suggestions, even with state policy, he added.
Miljenko Dereta, Liberal Democratic Party MP and civic initiatives director, gave another viewpoint of Nikolic's party resignation.
"I'm glad that Nikolic is not the president of his political party anymore, since that would exclude him from political life.
I expect from him to stay within the bounds of the president's authority, away from politics," Dereta told SETimes.
He noted, however, that Nikolic seems to randomly hand out numerous honours, not based on verified merit, and also "he amnestied a huge number of people, apologising to them for being in prison for committed crimes, [which] is a huge damage," Dereta said.
In respect to the Kosovo issue, Nikolic created the Kosovo Resolution, which was adopted by the assembly and supported the government's negotiations including implementation of the Brussels agreement.
"His contribution to the Brussels agreement was his meeting with Atifete Jahjaga, Kosovo president, and attending the Bratislava regional leaders' summit, which Jahjaga also attended.
This is another political gesture of normalisation between Belgrade and official Pristina institutions," Krulj said.
Jelena Milic, director of the Centre for Euro-Atlantic Studies in Belgrade, said Nikolic has achieved important results, but still has much to address.
"As the supreme commander, Nikolic hasn't opened the issue of constitutional inconsistency of the National Security Council and worked to continue the democratic process of national security control, instead of political control.
He's been elected directly and has legitimacy to remind the public of issues that are not directly under his control, such as systemic reconstruction of public companies, which are currently the biggest losers," Milic said.
"One such issue is the resolution which derives from the Stabilisation Association Agreement between Serbia and the EU."
Nikolic's economic recovery efforts are linked to his foreign policy, according to his cabinet.
In the first year of his presidency he met with foreign officials from 45 countries, visited 23 cities in 19 countries, with a goal to obtain an EU negotiations date for Serbian accession and achieve peace and economic regional stability.
"[Nikolic] uses foreign relations meetings to promote Serbia and attract foreign investors," Stanislava Pak Stankovic, the head of president's cabinet for media relations, told SETimes.
According to Krulj, "Nikolic's foreign policy is important to attract new investors, but also open new markets for Serbian companies such as in the Middle East, Asia, North and Central Africa, and to deepen economic co-operation with Russia, China, former [Soviet Union], and other fast-growing economies."
Krulj said Nikolic achieved results in furthering regional relations and reconciliation, but should continue building a strong and responsible Serbia in the region.
"We have achieved significant improvements in cooperation with neighbouring countries, especially with Montenegro, Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as with neighbouring EU members Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania," he said.
"Relations with Croatia, despite inherited disputes from the past and a recent impasse, are now moving forward, so President Nikolic will attend the ceremony celebrating Croatia's accession to the EU."
Citizens also think that Nikolic is taking the right path.
"He's not as conservative as he was when he was part of the Seselj party, and that's more than OK for me.
If he continues like this, I might vote for him in the next election," Slobodan Stankovic, 39, a nurse from Belgrade, told SETimes.
In your opinion, what are areas Nikolic can better address?
Let us know what you think below.
