28/06/2013
By Kruno Kartus for Southeast European Times in Osijek -- 28/06/13
On Monday (July 1st), Croatia will join the EU and gain the opportunity to place its indigenous food products on the Union market, which has about 500 million consumers.
The freedom of movement of goods, services, people and capital are the fundamental values of the EU, allowing Croatian entrepreneurs the opportunity to provide services in any member state.
Antun Plancic, a winemaker from the Croatian island of Hvar, expects that the European public will discover Dalmatia as a new wine attraction after the accession.
"Our small varieties such as plavac mali, posip and others, as well as special wines like prošek, will get in market flowering," Plancic told SETimes.
"I believe that Croatia will have to increase the production of prosek because of demand from the EU," Plancic, one of the 27 registered producers of prosek in the country, said.
According to the Croatian Ministry of Agriculture, the country has protected 12 autochthon food products, including Istrian smoked ham, Varazdin cabbage, extra virgin olive oil from the island of Cres and Zagorje turkey.
"Croatia has rich potential to protect food products, such as cheese from the island Pag, lamb from Lika, Dalmatian bacon and many others.
Many of these products are already in the process of protection," Miroslav Kuskunovic, a spokesman for the agriculture ministry, told SETimes.
Slavonian kulen or kulin is one of the products currently in the process of being protected.
The Association of Slavonian kulen-kulin brings together hundreds of small producers from Slavonia, an agricultural region where this traditional sausage is produced from pork.
"It is important to achieve the [proper] condition that the sausage is produced from domestic Slavonian pigs.
It is the purpose of the product, because we want to support development of small rural households.
About 95 percent of kulen makes the meat, and it takes a lot of manpower.
Therefore, processing of meat produced on these farms is increasing the need for job places on peasant farms," Andrija Matic, secretary of the Association of Slavonian kulen-kulin, told SETimes.
However, the EU challenged this recipe, claiming that it distorts market competition and puts other pork producers at a disadvantage.
The protection is still pending.
After a product receives protection in the EU, any commercial misuse of the registered name is subject to sanctions.
The ministry of agriculture said that in the future, it intends to step up programmes promoting local products and provide concrete assistance to producers, particularly through the Rural Development Programme.
"It is important to point out that the Croatian manufacturer or association of manufacturers are to take the initiative and protect the product.
Then ...
county, city and municipal governments, the media and others [should] spread awareness of the benefits of protecting designations of origin, geographical indications and traditional specialties.
[This] should contribute to the competitiveness of our products in the European Union," the ministry said.
Will access to the EU market make Croatian products more popular?
Tell us what you think below.
