25/04/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 25/04/13
An EU official is asking Montenegrins to abide by the results of this month's presidential election, in which incumbent Filip Vujanovic was declared the victor by a razor-thin margin.
The request came from Catherine Ashton, the EU high representative for foreign affairs and security policy.
"I call on all political parties in Montenegro to be involved in the issue in a constructive manner and to act in accordance with legal procedures," she told reporters this week at the EU delegation's headquarters in Podgorica.
Vujanovic defeated Miodrag Lekic by about 7,000 votes in the April 7th election, winning 51.2 percent to Lekic's 48.8 percent.
The final results were published on Monday (April 22nd) by Montenegro's election commission.
The president is largely a figurehead for Montenegro's 680,000 citizens, with real power vested in the prime minister, Milo Djukanovic.
Both Djukanovic and Vujanovic are members of the Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS).
In last year's parliamentary elections, Djukanovic became prime minister for the seventh time, the longest tenure of any prime minister in the Balkans.
DPS candidates have won the presidency eight times since 1990.
Ashton's call for Montenegrins to come together is important because of the country's position in the EU accession process.
Montenegro opened negotations with the EU nearly a year ago, five years after applying for EU membership.
The country also has NATO candidate status, and government officials are hoping for Alliance membership within the next two years.
The presidential election was the country's second since it proclaimed independence from Serbia in 2006.
Several thousand supporters of Lekic protested in Podgorica on April 20th, demanding that the results of the election be annulled because of alleged fraud.
"Voters' list was again problematic, we have filed numerous complaints but again it was showed that the elections in Montenegro were not democratic and free.
[The] opposition demands that the assembly annul these elections with a special law and call new elections.
If this does not happen, the opposition will continue to protest.
We simply cannot accept this election result," Neven Gosovic, vice president of the Socialist Peoples Party (SNP), told SETimes.
Montenegro's Constitutional Court rejected Lekic's appeal.
Lekic's campaign headquarters has insisted that he won 50.5 percent and Vujanovic won 49.5 percent.
"These elections were different from the others because the difference was only 7,000 votes, but the state institutions confirmed this result and that's it," DPS MP Zoran Bosnjak told SETimes.
"The opposition can protest as much as they want to, but I think it would be better that we deal with economic issues that beset us together.
They will have their chance on next elections."
How will the controversy over the presidential election affect Montenegro's EU and NATO hopes?
Give us your opinion below.
