18/10/2006
Nicole Kidman visited Kosovo last weekend as a goodwill ambassador for the UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
She met with UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker, international diplomats, local Albanian and Serb leaders, and representatives of women's associations.
The celebrated Australian actress said she would provide "a voice" for Kosovo if needed.
UNIFEM has been involved in several projects aimed at assessing the impact of the 1998-1999 Kosovo conflict on women.
The 46th MESS international theatre festival began in Sarajevo with a performance of "Faust", directed by Haris Pasovic and performed by the Sarajevo National Theatre.
This year's festival, running simultaneously in Sarajevo and Zenica, includes 20 performances by troupes from 11 European countries.
MESS continues until the end of the month.
Croatian tennis player Ivan Ljubicic successfully defended his Vienna ATP tournament title on October 15th, defeating Fernando Gonzalez of Chile 6-3, 6-4, 7-5.
It was his third ATP title this season.
The 4th international Zagreb Film Festival kicked off on October 16th in the Croatian capital.
Ten feature movies and 14 documentaries are being screened in the main competition programme.
The festival as a whole includes 80 film titles from around the world, as well as photo exhibitions, book promotions and roundtable discussions.
The Lado ensemble, specialising in Croatian folk dances and songs, began a five-week tour in Japan.
The tour includes 25 concerts in 20 Japanese cities.
The new site of the Benaki Museum's Historic Archives Department, located at the former home of writer Penelope Delta (1874-1941), has been officially inaugurated.
An exhibition on the life and work of Delta, one of Greece's most famous female authors, marked the occasion.
Ajri Demirovski, a popular folklore singer of ethnic Turkish origin, will be acknowledged as the first honorary citizen of Bitola, Macedonia.
Demirovski, who has been living for over 50 years in Turkey, will be honoured for his contribution to Macedonian musical history, as well as for bringing together Macedonian and Turkish culture.
Filming of Serbian director Slobodan Sijan's new movie -- a comedy titled "SOS:
Save Our Souls" -- is taking place near the Bor Lake in Serbia.
The screenplay is based on Milos Radovic's theatre play with the same title and was co-written by Sijan and Radovic.
The cast includes Lazar Ristovski, Neda Arneric, Bogdan Diklic and Katarina Radivojevic.
(Various sources – 11/10/06 - 18/10/06)
