30/05/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 30/05/13
According to the 2013 Terrorism and Political Violence Map released by Aon's risk advisory group, Kosovo, Serbia, Albania, and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) are in the middle risk zone, but analysts say the higher the risk, the higher the investment return.
"The higher the risk, the higher the return on investment; it's important to be within this limit, and not a country where the risk is high and the return of the investment is low," Valdrin Lluka, chief of the Kosovo agency for business promotion, told SETimes.
"Foreign investments in recent years have also been oriented to countries where the risk of terrorism is high. 
There are specific investment cases in Iraq and Haiti. 
Though terrorist acts in Iraq are daily, major brands are still investing, especially in the hotel industry. 
Though Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the world, with no infrastructure and no educational system, US investments are daily growing there, mostly because of low business costs," Lluka said.
Ardian Arifaj, a Kosovo analyst, said the Western Balkans is no more threatened by terrorism than the rest of Europe, but he key is in investment insurance costs.
"Still, [these countries] are tinted by the former conflict and an on-going political instability, mostly in BiH, Kosovo, Serbia and Macedonia. 
This instability is reflected in insurance costs which deters foreign investors," Arifaj told SETimes, adding that fragile justice systems and widespread corruption are other factors that drive away potential investors.
Vladimir Ninkovic, a Serbian researcher at the TransConflict, partially agrees.
"Medium-high risk ratings for Serbia [represented along with Kosovo], and BiH suggests higher insurance prices for investors, which may deter investment. 
Looking at the Aon's methods, it's clear that one of the prime areas of risk in the region is with the legal and regulatory risk environment, as opposed to political violence," Ninkovic told SETimes.
Western Balkans have seen a flow of foreign investment such as Fiat and Telenor in Serbia, Telenor in Montenegro, Vodafone in Albania, and the prospects of building a gas pipeline through the Western Balkans.
"While there is no comparison of insurance prices, due to prejudices and stereotypes about the Western Balkans, it wouldn't come as a surprise if the insurance prices went up," Arifaj added.
Seb Bytyci, executive director of the Balkan policy institute, agrees. 
"The result [of the map study] is based on a regulatory environment rather than violence, which means higher insurance is not necessarily a problem in these countries," Bytyci said.
Analysts said that terrorism has not played a significant role in the Western Balkans.
"In Serbia, extreme right groups have not yet been responsible for any acts of terrorism, though their growing aggression and links with the criminal world is troublesome. 
Extreme left wing organisations in the region, meanwhile, remain too small and unpopular to cause any significant trouble," Ninkovic told SETimes.
"The threat of terrorism is not the cause of high insurance costs in the region, which can be attributed to other risk factors, such as political interference, criminality, corruption, weaknesses in the rule of law and unresolved property ownership, high barriers and low incentives for the supply," Ninkovic added.
Bytyci said terrorism is not a problem, but the regulatory environment could be.
"Foreign investment is determined by other factors, such as economic dynamism and the purchasing power of local markets," Bytyci said.
Are terrorist risks a true deterrent to foreign investments in the Balkans? 
Let us know what you think.
