30/05/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 30/05/13
The verdicts from The Hague tribunal on the former Yugoslavia should not create an atmosphere of "winners" vs "losers," analysts said.
"It is our common history that should we all be ashamed of.
But, we need to gather the strength, and to face the facts and finally start a different way to look at our future," Vehid Sehic, president of the Forum of Tuzla Citizens, an NGO which deals with war crimes and human rights, told SETimes.
"As long as we do not make such approach, we will not be able to speak objectively about the war that took place here, 20 years ago."
On Wednesday (May 29th), six Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Croat leaders were sentenced for war crimes.
The ICTY found Jadranko Prlic, Bruno Stojic, Slobodan Praljak, Milivoje Petkovic, Valentin Coric and Berislav Pusic guilty of taking part in a joint criminal enterprise led by former Croatian President Franjo Tudjman, aimed at forcibly removing non-Croats from territories under BiH's Croat control during wartime in an attempt to create a "Greater Croatia."
The Tribunal sentenced Prlic to 25 years in prison, Stojic, Praljak and Petkovic to 20 years, Coric to 16 years and Pusic to 10 years.
They were charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity, including murders, rape, sexual assault, the destruction of property and the deportation of non-Croats, mostly Bosniaks, from 1992 to 1994.
Hilmo Abaza was one of the hundreds of Muslims and Serbs who were captured in the Croatian war camp in Dretelj village, near municipal of Capljina.
"I'm not satisfied with the verdict.
Those criminals should get a lot more.
Hundreds of people were killed, raped, imprisoned, beaten ...
The BiH authorities should now accuse Croatia for genocide," Abaza told SETimes.
All six defendants held senior political or military roles from 1992 to 1994.
Croat nationalists declared Herzeg-Bosna, or the Herzeg-Bosna Croatian Community, independent from Bosnia in 1991, with the town of Mostar as its capital, but it was never recognised by any other country and ceased to exist in 1994.
Prlic was prime minister of Herzeg-Bosna, Stojic was a military chief with the Croatian Defence Council, while Praljak was the commander of the Croatian Army’s main headquarters.
The judges said that top Croatian officials were involved in the plan, and Tudjman believed ethnic cleansing was necessary to create an ethnically pure state that could be joined up to Croatia.
"The crimes were not the random acts of a few unruly soldiers," presiding Judge Jean-Claude Antonetti said.
"They were the result of a plan … to permanently remove the Muslim population of Herceg-Bosna."
The trial, which started in April 2006, was one of the longest, most complex trials at The Hague, because the crimes occurred on the whole territory of Herzegovina and lasted for almost a decade.
The written judgment spanned more than 2,500 pages and more than 250 witnesses testified.
"We are not pleased that the verdict is that Croatia was part of the joint criminal enterprise," Croatian Prime Minister Zoran Milanovic said of the judgment.
"Croatia had its mistakes in BiH, but it was also a partner and an ally," Milanovic said.
Anto Nobilo, a lawyer from Zagreb who has worked with war crime indictees in The Hague, said the verdict was expected.
"There were a lot of crimes and the conviction was expected.
When it comes to consequences, I think it will be a lot of talking about the verdict in the next few days as in all verdicts which came from Hague," Nobilo told SETimes.
"Trials in the Hague have not changed citizens' opinions in the Balkans.
While one man for one nation is a war criminal, for another nation he remains a hero, even after the verdict."
How can countries in the region move past war crimes verdicts?
Tell us what you think below.
