26/06/2013
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 26/06/13
Moldova and the EU have concluded the final round of negotiations for the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area, confirming the new government's pledge to forge ahead with European ambitions.
The free trade area aims to bring Moldova's economy closer to the EU's by providing significantly improved mutual access for European and Moldovan goods and services while ensuring an open, stable and predictable legal environment for local businesses and consumers.
The area will also improve the trade opportunities between EU and Moldova, and enhance the prosperity of both economies, according to the European Commission.
European integration is among the priorities set by the new pro-European government installed in Chisinau on May 30th under the leadership of Iurie Leanca, foreign minister in the previous administration, which was toppled in April after a no-confidence vote.
Joining the EU is not an option, but a necessity, Leanca said in an interview.
Analysts said Leanca has managed to reassure Brussels about his country's European ideal.
"[The free trade area] is an important step Moldova takes towards approaching the EU which will culminate with the sealing of the treaty in November at the Eastern Partnership in Vilnius," Cristian Ghinea, director of the Romanian Centre for European Policies, a leading Romanian think-tank, told SETimes.
"Leanca has also sent a strong signal to Brussels by putting in the position of foreign minister …the former chief-negotiator with the EU Natalia Gherman," Ghinea said.
Leanca made a two-day visit to Brussels where he met communitarian officials.
"European Commission [head] Jose Manuel Barroso has expressed the total support of the European Union for Moldova's European agenda," the prime minister said.
The country is now awaiting the European Commission's report, which will be released late next month, on the implementation of the second phase of the Action Plan for visa liberalisation in the country.
The first stage of the plan consisted of measures passed to amend the legislation, while the second phase consists in implementing the new laws.
If the report is positive, then the EU should announce the liberalisation of visas for Moldovan citizens at the Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius, Monica Macovei, Romanian Euro-lawmaker and co-president of the European Parliament delegation for Moldova, said in a speech held in the communitarian legislature.
"The Republic of Moldova is very important for the EU and it is desirable democracy and welfare irreversibly settle in this country," she said.
Most citizens support Leanca's commitment to the EU.
"One thing is clear about the Moldovan youth:
We fully support the European perspective even if we are aware we have to once in a while make economic concessions to the east," Slavic Staramet, the president of the Federation of Moldovan Students Associations in Romania, told SETimes.
"EU's warning signals sent throughout the whole political crisis in Moldova have only managed to boost even more our ambition to join the EU," he added.
Will the new prime minister be able to lead Moldova to EU accession?
Tell us what you think below.
