29/05/2013
By Linda Karadaku and Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 29/05/13
The lack of specifications of the Pristina-Belgrade agreement could cause problems with its implementation, analysts said.
Prime Ministers Hashim Thaci of Kosovo and Ivica Dacic of Serbia met last week and agreed on deadlines, actions and working groups to implement the agreement with the EU mediation.
There were no details of the deal, but a scanned copy of the plan was published by Kosovo portal Indeksonline on May 24th.
"The two sides will continue the political dialogue," it reads at the end.
Betim Musliu, a researcher at the Kosovo Law Institute, said there are various interpretations of the agreement since the details have not been made specific. 
This will make implementation difficult.
"The law amendments, introduction of the new laws, as well as amendment of the constitution will be defined after Serbia and Kosovo agree how to interpret this agreement," Musliu told SETimes.
Dacic said a joint working group will be formed and both sides will make proposals for the laws that need to be changed, with the respective deadlines for changing them.
"It is impossible to do it if the laws are not changed," Dacic said, according to B92.
But Dren Doli, a researcher for the Kosovo Group for Legal and Political Studies in Pristina, said it is not necessary for Kosovo to change any laws.
"The provisions of the agreement can be implemented from the institutions involved with no necessary amendments to the laws regulating those fields," Doli told SETimes.
Thaci said the Kosovo political scene supports the approval of this agreement and has also recognised "the facilitating role of Serbia as well, based on the responsibilities that come from the agreement."
Trying to send signals to the Serbs in the north, Thaci said: "I know it will not be easy and it cannot be achieved very soon, but the implementation will happen in a gradual way, peacefully and by will."
Kosovo Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj addressed concerns on the implementation plan. 
"The plan … is in accordance with the agreement of April 19th. 
It is not a deviation of the agreement. 
It is in accordance to the constitution and the laws of Kosovo and we hope to start the implementation of it as soon as possible," Hoxhaj told reporters.
Serbian First Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic said, however, there are uncertainties.
Vucic announced that he will discuss amendments to the plan of implementation of the Brussels agreement with several international officials. 
He said there are also amendments in the implementation plan that do not pertain to the parallel institutions in Kosovo and Metohija.
"The amendments refer to the lack of obligation of amending Pristina's laws, technical details regarding the Association of Serb Municipalities and the status part that would guarantee the survival of Serbian documents," Vucic said.
He added that Serbia insists on the matters of securing personal documents and citizenship for the Serbs, as well as on the university seal.
Leposavic Municipal Assembly Speaker Slavko Stevanovic said that the Kosovo Serbs are not familiar with the plan of implementation of the agreement.
"We advocate the implementation of the laws and constitution of the Republic of Serbia, which is why I think we have no right to take part in the elections that will be called by the Kosovo authorities," Stevanovic told SETimes.
He added that the Serbs from the north did not wish to obstruct Serbia on the road to the EU.
"We do not want to be a disruptive factor and we are aware that the Serbian government can implement the Brussels agreement without us, but our only goal is to remain part of … Serbia," Stevanovic said.
In what ways can the governments in Kosovo and Serbia make implementing the agreement easier? 
Let us know your thoughts below.
