22/11/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/11/12
Kosovo citizens are increasingly buying locally produced food, but both consumers and business experts agree steps must be taken to improve the quality of domestic products.
Kosovo Business Alliance Chairman Agim Shahini said the consumption of local products has increased 10 percent during the past decade.
The organisation started a project to promote locally produced food, with the slogan, "I consume domestic products, and you?"
Shahini said local companies sometimes do not improve the quality of their products in order to keep prices low, leaving it up to consumers to decide what to buy.
While some customers are swayed by so-called economic patriotism -- buying domestic products to support Kosovo businesses -- ultimately it is the quality of products that determines what sells.
Pristina resident Betim Rexha said he expects the quality of the local products will be raised in time.
"I try to consume local products although their quality is poorer than several other products in the market," Rexha told SETimes.
"It happened to me to buy a certain local product and throw it in the garbage because it was not eatable.
Buying local products means making a contribution to the country’s economy, but it also means that the local producers should offer quality."
Arian Zeka, executive director of the American Chamber of Commerce in Kosovo, said local companies should apply international standards of quality, which would improve the products and make it easier to sell them abroad.
"But it should not be forgotten that Kosovo producers face many difficulties, and stimulating measures are needed, including freeing them from the customs duties for the raw material, which would help them to become more competitive compared to the other producers from the rest of the region," Zeka told SETimes.
Lamir Thaci of Kosovo's Agency for Food and Veterinary, which monitors the quality of food products, agreed that increasing the amount of Kosovo products in international markets would mean improved quality.
Thaci told SETimes that a product's nutritional value, as well its appearance and package, are factors in determining quality.
"These values also dictate the power of that product in the market, in the sense of the demand from the consumers," Thaci added.
"We see different products in our markets, local and imported, of a different quality spectrum and a different price spectrum based on the quality, but always without compromising the food safety."
Selatin Kacaniku of the NGO Konsumatori (Consumer) Association said not all local products can compete with imports, but, "even among the imported products there are such that do not fulfill the standards and are even suspicious."
But Adnan Shabani, a resident of Gjilan in Eastern Kosovo, said domestic products are much lower in quality compared to the Turkish, German and Croatian products.
"The market is competition in which the best wins.
What matters to me is the quality," Shabani said.
Lena Azizi, a consumer from Pristina, agreed.
"Products are bought due to their quality, and not due to patriotism," Azizi told SETimes.
"We have to be realists and admit that our products cannot be compared with the foreign products when it comes to quality," Azizi said.
"The state should support the local producers more in order to get them to have qualitative products and take the market in their hands."
