05/12/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 05/12/05
Despite the lack of open hostilities in the Balkan region, NATO still has an important role to play in ensuring the stability of the area, according to a report presented at the NATO Parliamentary Assembly's 51st annual session.
The gathering, held in Copenhagen from 11 November to 15 November, concluded the Assembly's 50th anniversary year.
The future role and relevance of NATO and a review of the Alliance’s current missions were key issues under discussion.
Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erekat, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and NATO Parliamentary Assembly President Pierre Lellouche were among the top international officials and diplomats who addressed the event.
On 12 November and 13 November, the five Assembly committees -- Political, Defence and Security, Economics and Security, Civil Dimension of Security, and Science and Technology -- met at the Folketing, the Danish Parliament, to evaluate reports and policy texts on a number of topics, including regional issues pertaining to the Balkans.
The Subcommittee on Future Security and Defence Capabilities, headed by Vahit Erdem, presented the conclusions from its visits to the SEE region this year.
Serbia-Montenegro is critical to the stability of the region, according to the subcommittee's report.
The main stumbling block towards its partnership with NATO and the EU continues to be the issue of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), it said.
In keeping with its aspirations for membership in the NATO Partnership for Peace programme, Serbia-Montenegro has embarked on a major transformation of its military, including professionalising the army, establishing full civilian control, defining the role of Serbia- Montenegro in regional security, developing training programmes, and providing funds for participation in peacekeeping missions, the report said.
It noted Serbia-Montenegro's participation in such missions as of December 2004.
The country has contributed troops to the UN peacekeeping contingent in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, and is considering participation in missions in Haiti and Afghanistan.
At the same time, the subcommittee drew attention to corruption, lack of judicial independence and the need for economic reform as factors which hinder Serbia's progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
As for Montenegro, the main concern is its future status, though corruption is also an issue.
Addressing the situation in Kosovo, the subcommittee concluded that KFOR and its non-NATO partners have done an impressive job in keeping the peace.
Kosovo has a high potential for instability because of its continuing underlying problems, and KFOR Commander General Yves de Kermabon has described the situation as calm but potentially volatile.
On a more positive note, the report noted, the police force is being built into a professional one, and the institutions of self-governance are taking up more responsibilities.
In brief, NATO is advising that the international community redouble its efforts to alleviate the problems.
The Adriatic Charter established by Albania, Croatia and Macedonia is a promising example of regional co-operation, the subcommittee said in its report.
However, it added, NATO remains concerned about the progress of defence and interior ministry reform in Macedonia, as well as corruption and organised crime and ongoing economic challenges in the country.
Developments in Albania and Croatia were not analysed since the subcommittee was not able to visit them this year.
Although the subcommittee also did not visit Bosnia and Herzegovina this year, the report noted that NATO has been working with Bosnian officials to improve its military.
It highlighted two steps which BiH should take in order to move closer to becoming a candidate for Partnership for Peace membership:
passage and implementation of the recently endorsed reform legislation, and full co-operation with the ICTY.
In conclusion, the report stated, NATO plans to help set the Balkan region on the road to stability and prosperity, and to assist the countries in the region as they cope with problems such as organised crime, drug smuggling and other debilitating activities.
The alliance also aims to prevent the region from becoming a transit point and marshalling station for terrorist organisations seeking a "back door" into the rest of Europe.
A member of the Serbia-Montenegro delegation attending the Assembly, Aleksandar Zuric, said the Kosovo issue was the main focus of discussions concerning his country.
The relationship between Serbia and Montenegro was not seen as a potential conflict issue, Zuric said, and the report mentioned it only in regards to the referendum that is to take place in spring 2006.
The international community has no intention of taking measures to slow down or prevent the process of accession to the EU and NATO in the event of the two republics splitting after the referendum, he added.
Serbia-Montenegro's special envoy to NATO, Branislav Milinkovic, expressed hope that the country might become a full member of the Alliance in 2008.
The NATO summit is due to be held in 2008, he said, and Albania, Macedonia and Croatia are likely to be admitted at that time.
The envoy acknowledged that the Ratko Mladic case remains an obstacle.
Were it not for that, he said, Serbia-Montenegro's way should be clear, since the other steps are technical in nature and defined in the action plan adopted by the Council of Ministers of Serbia-Montenegro at the end of 2004.
Approximately 356 parliamentarians from some 40 countries attended the annual session, including delegates from all 26 NATO member countries, 15 NATO Parliamentary Assembly associate delegations and 12 other delegations with the status of parliamentary observer.
