22/04/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 22/04/13
The international drug trade continues to ply the "Balkan route," bringing narcotics through Turkey and the Balkans to Europe in a multi-billion euro illicit industry run by sophisticated organised crime groups, the European Union's law enforcement agency, Europol, found in its annual report.
"Routes through Western Balkan countries remain important for the movement of many illicit commodities into the EU. 
Heroin and cocaine pass through the Western Balkans after transiting through Turkey and Africa," the EU Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment 2013 (SOCTA), report stated.
The international drug trade feeds organised crime and human trafficking as well as terrorist groups using drug income to purchase weapons, authorities said.
"The Western Balkans are not only a transit region, but also a major source of firearms traded on the international weapons market, precursors and synthetic drugs. 
Money laundering also takes place in this region through investment in real estate and in commercial companies," the report noted.
Given its location at the crossroads of Europe and Asia, Turkey has long been a transit, source and destination country of illicit drugs.
"Turkey's borders with the EU remain vulnerable despite intense law enforcement focus. 
The country connects supplier countries to consumer markets in the member states. 
The vast majority of heroin in the EU continues to transit through Turkey and is trafficked by Turkish organised crime groups from its origin to destination markets," the report said.
Heroin is the leading drug trafficked through Turkey and the Balkans to Europe. 
The drug makes its way from Afghanistan, where 75 percent of the world's opium is produced, and is transported mainly through land borders. 
Turkey-based traffickers and diaspora communities in Europe principally control the distribution networks.
According to Europol estimates, there are 3,600 organised crime groups active in the EU, 30 percent of which are involved in drug trafficking. 
Albanian, Pakistani and Turkish origin criminal groups dominate the trafficking in heroin.
"There is considerable volume of heroin being trafficked via Turkey. 
The main beneficiaries are Kurdish and Turkish traffickers. 
[The outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party] PKK is estimated to have high volume of income from heroin trade as well," Hakan Demirbuken, an officer from United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), told SETimes.
The International Narcotics Control Strategy Report confirms this, pointing out that "in recent years, many ethnic Kurdish traffickers have expanded operations to larger cities in Turkey and other countries in Europe."
From Turkey, heroin passes through Balkan countries on its way to Europe. 
Low levels of law enforcement, lack of governance, poverty and open borders with no customs controls contribute to low levels of heroin seizures in Balkan countries compared to Turkey, Demirbuken said.
Over the past decade Turkey has boosted drug enforcement. 
Almost all land borders of the country are equipped with scanners, specially trained dogs and well-trained personnel that have yielded large seizures of drugs and forced some criminal groups to find alternative routes to reach Europe.
The International Narcotics Control Strategy Report said that the Turkish government remains committed to maintain its international drug control commitments when seizing large amounts of drugs throughout the country's borders.
Turkey's anti-drug trafficking efforts as well as competition between different organised criminal groups have led to a shift in international drug trafficking routes, officials said.
"International trade routes and the freedom of movement within the EU enable organised criminal groups to avoid law enforcement activity or circumvent competing organised criminal groups controlling a particular route. 
There has been a shift in trafficking routes across a number of commodities. 
Heroin traffickers trying to avoid Turkish groups now also traffic via East and South Africa or ship their product directly to the EU via Pakistan or the United Arab Emirates," Europol said.
Yet Turkey's Foreign Ministry opposed the conclusions of the Europol report, stating that according to the 2012 UNODC report, Turkey's efforts in seizing heroin from Afghanistan to the western Balkans are welcomed, accounting for 16 percent of global heroin seizures.
"In last decade, the heroin seizures in EU countries decreased three or four fold, while in Turkey it increased by three or four times. 
So, the picture drawn in Europol report does not reflect the reality," the ministry said in a press statement.
The EU has been increasing its funding capacity in the western Balkans and Turkey to develop integrated border management and assist the national authorities in tracking the illicit trade through their borders.
While the Europol report recognises international crime groups increasingly work across traditional ethnic-based organisations, in the Balkans, Albanian speaking organised crime groups in Kosovo and Albania are heavily involved in the international drug trade. 
The large diaspora community in Greece, Turkey, Italy and Western Europe contributes to an ethnic-based drug trafficking network that spans national boundaries.
Florian Qehaja, executive director of the Kosovar Centre for Security Studies, told SETimes Kosovo remains a drug transit country because of the significant problems it has with establishing the rule of law and a porous border.
"Criminal groups exploit the fragility of the security institutions and the poor performance of international security presences in particular in the northern part of the country, particularly the use of scarce border police presence on the Green Line border with special emphasis on the border with Serbia is a determinant factor," Qehaja said.
In Kosovo, over the first nine months of 2012, marijuana constituted the bulk of seizures (1,091.4 kg), followed by heroin (51.5 kg) and cocaine (7.2 kg), a significant increase from 2011. 
Police also seized cannabis seeds and plants, as well as 153 ecstasy tablets.
There are no comprehensive assessments of drug use in Kosovo, but the vast majority of users are estimated to be men ages 18-35, and marijuana is their drug of choice.
Qehaja said fighting narcotics smuggling requires regional engagement, but Kosovo is not part of regional efforts to combat this crime.
"The fact that the government and police [of Kosovo] are not part of regional initiatives to combat organised crime makes it more difficult on the performance of security institutions for the reason of the lack of co-operation between the Kosovo police and states of the region," he added.
Kosovo is not part of Europol or Interpol and direct communication with the two crime fighting institutions does not exist. 
Communication is through UNMIK or EULEX, which makes it difficult for Kosovo authorities to transmit data to the relevant institutions dealing with the fight on narcotics.
Romania also ranks among the transit countries of heroin trafficking and has many criminal groups involved in cocaine trafficking, according to the latest Europol report and the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drugs Addiction.
The report also points out that in Romania and Bulgaria, criminal groups benefit from expertise gathered over years of illegal activity in the Turkish drug trafficking rings and are now in the position to supply drugs either for their home markets or Europe.
But according to experts, the decline in drug consumption alongside stricter border controls with the Romania's EU accession in 2007 is a positive trend.
Romania has invested heavily in its border protection over the past years amid efforts to join the Schengen area, with all the European partners recognising the country meets all the technical criteria for being admitted in the internal borderless area. 
More than 1 billion euros from both domestic and European funds have been allotted to support all the measures necessary for joining the Schengen area.
"The drug consumption is on the wane in Romania. 
The authorities are starting to do their job and thus consumption is declining. 
This is why I think we are on the right track," Mihai Curelea, the head of the Anti-Drug Association, a NGO, told SETimes.
But Curelea said a deeper involvement of civil society, along with a more concerted inter-institutional effort, is needed to fight drug trafficking and consumption.
Given its international nature, drug experts ultimately point to the need for a co-ordinated global effort to stop drug trafficking.
"Turkey can strengthen the borders and its intelligence capacity more and invest more sources for this," Demirbuken said. 
"But, if its neighbours like Iran and Balkan countries, originating countries like Afghanistan, and destination countries in West and Central Europe do not put equal amount pressure on stopping the heroin trade, the pressure provided by Turkey will be unbalanced and will not yield much results because it will only make the traffickers to modify the route and transportation method."
Correspondents Muhamet Brajshori in Pristina and Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest contributed to this report.
What steps should regional governments take to better counter drug trafficking? 
Share your thoughts in the comment section below.
