28/05/2013
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 28/05/13
With a recent Europol report indicating that the threat from terrorism remains strong and varied in Europe, security experts and officials are urging Balkan nations to work together to strengthen their ability to respond.
In its annual report, Europol cited a sharp year-on-year rise in terrorist attacks and terrorism-related fatalities across the Union in 2012.
The number of failed, foiled or completed attacks in EU member states increased from 174 in 2011 to 219 last year, when 17 people were killed in such incidents, up from two during the previous 12-month period.
The suicide bombing at the Burgas airport in Bulgaria last July was one of the deadliest acts of terrorism in Europe in 2012.
Five Israeli tourists and their Bulgarian bus driver died, and scores of others were wounded.
The rise in extremism is an issue "of big concern," said Nikolay Radulov, assistant professor of the national and international security department at the New Bulgarian University in Sofia.
He said that Bulgaria's national anti-terrorism plan, drawn up in 2011, included measures to enhance preparedness of the interior ministry and state agency for national security and the creation of an early warning system.
But these measures have not been implemented.
"No concrete action has been taken by the services tasked with the establishment of the patterns of terrorist acts and threats, and with their detection, prevention and interception," Radulov told SETimes.
"The focus of the instrumental power of public order and security services was on areas other than terrorist threats, which explains the unobstructed execution of the bombing at the Burgas airport following some very specific warnings."
In its annual report, the state agency for national security said that the level of protection against international terrorists and extremist groups in 2012 was "high." The report acknowledged that the threat from such activities had increased, as had the intensity of counter-terrorism efforts.
Tatyana Dronzina, a professor at Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridski, expressed concern with the increase in the amount of religiously-motivated terrorism.
The Europol report said there were no religiously motivated attacks in 2011, but there were six in 2012.
"Experience shows that this type of terrorism is most difficult to monitor and tackle," Dronzina told SETimes.
"Moreover, it concerns sensitive and delicate areas, such as religious freedom and freedom of conscience."
Dronzina said the fact that some of the assailants were EU citizens shows that there are isolated groups in the Union that are far from integration and from accommodation to local life.
Radulov and Dronzina said further training of Bulgarian security officers and co-operation with partner countries is a must.
Dronzina said the region needs improved border controls, stronger control of immigrant and tourist flows, greater security for Israeli tourists in Bulgaria and must ensure good relations between religious and ethnic communities.
Radulov said it is urgent for Bulgarian authorities to review their plans for responding to terrorist threats.
"A long list of signs that preparations for a terrorist act may be under way must be drawn up and made available not only to the public order and security services, but also to citizens to ensure as wide as possible a basis for obtaining advance information," Radulov said.
He added that the Bulgarian security system should downsize the administration, which accounts for about one-third of the employees, and recruit more staff to work directly on ensuring security.
"There is also need of broad international co-operation and establishment of a single anti-terrorist centre in the Balkans, tasked with co-ordinating the fight against criminal activities," Radulov said.
Ilir Gjoni, former interior minister of Albania, said such a centre is a necessity.
"But first of all, trust between the specialised agencies of the countries in the region should be established," Gjoni told SETimes.
"The centre should also have supervision from the strategic partners, the EU and the U.S.
in order not to be only "a game" or only a Balkans centre, but to have a broader extension because terrorism itself stretches much more broadly."
Gjoni helped initiate a regional centre to fight illegal trafficking, which he said is the way terrorists move weapons and people throughout the region.
The centre was established in Vlora, Albania, in 2001 with the support of several countries, including Germany, Italy and Greece.
Hydajet Hyseni, deputy chairman of Kosovo's parliamentary commission of foreign policy, said preventing terrorism has become a preoccupation for countries in transition, especially those emerging from wars.
"The importance of the regional level of co-operation and coordination in the anti-terrorist fight cannot be excluded, but as it has been in practice so far, even the regional co-operation can be effective only within the framework of the broader European and international co-operation," Hyseni told SETimes.
"The inclusion and the integration of the entire region and each country in the system of organization, functioning and co-ordination is the best way for preventing and fighting the danger of the appearance of terrorism and extremism in the Balkans and each of its parts."
Correspondent Linda Karadaku in Pristina contributed to this report.
How can countries in southeast Europe co-operate against threats of terrorism?
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
