28/05/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 28/05/13
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) authorities are investigating the cases of weapons missing from army barracks and warehouses across the country in an effort to prevent further abuses and put the situation in order.
"Numerous irregularities were found, which involved many persons from the ministry of defence and armed forces, as well as many others. 
I expect that all the disappearances of weapons from our barracks to be illuminated after the investigation," Minister of Defence Zekerijah Osmic told SETimes.
Local media reported that the weapons were illegally sold.
"Weapons from BiH … were sold to domestic firms in Azerbaijan and Yemen, which are under UN embargo on arms imports 2010. 
The main link in the illegal chain of weapon selling is Slobodan Tesic, a man who is marked as one of the most dangerous weapon smugglers in the world and who is on a 'black list' of UN because of his business," BiH's daily newspaper Nezavisne reported.
Weekly Free Bosnia recently reported that weapons from BiH can easily be found in Syria, Libya and Somalia, and that weapon smugglers are earning millions in this business.
The numerous cases of missing weapons and ammunition sparked the probe. 
The most recent case is the disappearance of citing rockets from a warehouse in Mrkonjic Grad in April, after which two soldiers were suspended.
"We can only confirm that the rocket is missing and that the ministry of defence is carrying out an investigation," Marina Pandes, deputy of minister of defence, told reporters.
The biggest case was unveiled in 2011, when the ministry discovered that 11 tonnes of TNT was missing from the military warehouse in Sarajevo.
Dusanka Majkic, chairman of BiH's parliamentary joint committee on security and defense, said that the parliament suggested and reported several times that the issue of arms must be resolved, but without success.
"Several people [discussed] the position of the minister of defence … but none managed to resolve the issue. 
It costs the state a lot. 
Responsibility for this lies with the most responsible people in the ministry, not with the warehouse guards and soldiers," Majkic told SETimes.
She said that no official tally of the weapons is kept, but is estimated that there is about 25,000 tonnes of ordnance in the warehouses.
The ministry said there is an additional 17,000 tonnes of ordinance that has been declared as surplus, which is supposed to be destroyed.
"The good news is that the ministry finally began to list what it owns. 
It sounds incredible that defence reform was completed in 2006, and to this day we still don't know what the ministry has when it comes to weapons. 
That's why such things like disappearing weapons happen. 
After the investigation is complete, we will see whether this was an organised group that is systematically selling weapons," Denis Hadzovic, director of the Sarajevo-based NGO Centre for Security Studies, told SETimes.
Osmic said that the ministry will complete a list of all weapons in the barracks by the end of the year, with the aim of establishing a database.
"EUFOR and NATO are working with us on this issue. 
There were many irregularities. 
We had imprecise records for years, but we will solve this problem by the end of this year," Osmic added.
The BiH Prosecutors Office and the State Investigation and Protection Agency confirmed that they are running the investigation, due to the possible illegal sale of the weapons, but they did not comment.
What can be done to prevent the theft of weapons in the region? 
Tell us your thoughts below.
