25/06/2013
By Aleksandar Pavlevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 25/06/13
Balkan countries are participating in NATO's Smart Defence concept, which calls for joining resources to equip and modernise their militaries, and aids overall military co-operation and ongoing efforts to participate in peacekeeping operations, according to regional military officials.
The latest effort is investment in the Balkan Regional Approach to Air Defence through which regional countries will jointly purchase radar and other airspace monitoring equipment and connect it with the corresponding NATO system.
"[The approach] is currently the largest project and satisfies the greatest need for defence and military co-operation between the regional countries," Blagoja Markovski, president of the Balkan Security Forum, an NGO based in Skopje, told SETimes.
Markovski said that under the programme, each country contributes.
"Serbia offers its regional centre for nuclear, biological and chemical defence in Krusevac, while Macedonia offers Krivolak, one of the best military exercise polygons in the Balkans," Markovski said.
Serbia has achieved this level of involvement despite its role as observer, together with Kosovo, in the Adriatic Group, an alliance that includes six Balkan nations.
The synergy reached through Smart Defence shows it is important to include new countries in the Adriatic Group, according to Mirche Gjorgovski, chief of the Macedonian Army General Staff's public relations office.
"The increasing regional defence co-operation is definitely a factor for stability, especially considering what happened in the region in the recent past.
Co-operation is widespread in many defence areas and each has its working group.
We co-operate at the level of ministers, directors, secretaries of state.
Every six months we organise high-level meetings," Gjorgovski told SETimes.
"The Macedonian government decided to participate in the [Balkan Regional Approach to Air Defence] after we reviewed issues related to the future of the aircraft that presently are not operational," Emil Dimitirev, deputy defence minister, said.
Dimitriev said maintaining high operational capability is a priority.
"[M]odernising aircraft, defence systems, training and reaching NATO standards has allowed a compatibility level to other NATO air units," Kire Kolevski, a colonel in the Macedonian army's air wing, told SETimes.
The Croatian and Macedonian militaries work together in the NATO's ISAF mission in Afghanistan and are a part of a regional Balkan team that leads the School of Military Police.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) military experts said the economic crisis has negatively affected defence capabilities, which is why using Smart Defence is even more important.
Such joint efforts, including participation in peacekeeping missions, send a much needed positive message about the region, according to Nermina Zaimovic-Uzunovic, member of the joint defence commission of parliament.
"They create an image that presents BiH as a country devoted to peace and rule of law and legislative co-operation," Zaimovic-Jakupovic told SETimes.
"We are sharing our experience regarding military reforms in preparation for Montenegro's NATO membership, and until recently we used the services of the Montenegrin helicopter training centre.
Now the roles have changed, Montenegrin cadets are educated at the Military Academy in Skopje, and we offer the services of the new Centre for Pilots Training in Petrovec," the Macedonian defence ministry told SETimes in a statement.
SETimes correspondent Bedrana Кaletovic in Sarajevo contributed to this report.
What benefits can be reached from the Balkan countries joining defence efforts?
Share your opinions in the comments space.
