28/05/2013
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 28/05/13
In order to avert early elections that could end the country's European path by an emergence of the communists at the political helm in Moldova, the country's pro-European forces should find common political ground, analysts and officials told SETimes.
Moldovan political struggles have brought about the prospect of early elections, but analysts warn this scenario will not help.
"Early elections would be a disaster for Moldova at this point," Dan Dungaciu, director of the Romanian Academy Institute of Political Sciences and International Relations, told SETimes.
"The communists may not be able to win 50 percent of the votes, but we could witness a political premiere in Moldova, namely neither [Vlad] Filat's liberal-democrats or [Marian] Lupu's democrats will not make the communists an electoral target, thinking they may be forced to form post-elections alliances with them," Dungaciu, former advisor to Mihai Ghimpu, former interim president of Moldova, said.
"Early elections would only benefit the communists," Eugen Tomac, Romanian lawmaker representing the Romanians in the electoral constituency of Moldova, told SETimes.
"Early elections would lead to another deadlock which will serve nobody since polls show much the same political actors would come to the negotiation table," he said.
Moldova had to organise early elections in November 2010 after a series of failures to elect the new head of the country. 
The president was finally elected in March 2012 three years after the fall of the previous communist administration, but only after a group of communist lawmakers defected and the pro-European alliance managed to reach the constitutional threshold of 61 votes.
Currently, early elections seem unavoidable.
"The chances for early elections are high. 
All parties are seriously preparing for the electoral campaign. 
The real battle now under way is for the terms on which these elections will occur", Mihai Godea, a Moldovan lawmaker and president of the Democratic Action Party, told SETimes.
The political crisis removed the prospect of Moldova signing an EU association agreement in Vilnius this fall.
Still, Tomac thinks pro-European forces have the ability to keep the country's reins.
"It's true the pro-European parties did not know how to manage Moldova's last year's success and got engrossed in internal disputes, not living up to citizen expectations. 
But there are still resources for the country's EU path not to be compromised," he said, calling on the pro-European forces to come to terms.
"Moldova as a country has not missed the European train, but the government has," Godea added.
Dungaciu noted that "Moldova will have to put European interests ahead of national ones."
While the 2009 political crisis, which lasted about three years, failed to elect a president in the parliament, the new political deadlock was sparked by internal warfare in the former tripartite ruling of EU Integration Alliance.
The pro-European coalition government fell on March 8th after a non-confidence vote in the Moldovan parliament passed, initiated by the communists and supported by the democrats. 
Liberal-democrats sided with the communists and removed Marian Lupu, from the Democratic Party of Moldova, as the speaker of the parliament.
His dismissal was the final episode of a two-month internal dispute in the European Integration Alliance which saw political rivals being dismissed from high public positions.
Iurie Leanca, foreign affairs minister in Vlad Filat's liberal-democratic-led government, was entrusted with running the country's administrative affairs on April 25th, and is now holding talks to ensure a majority in the parliament.
What can Europe do to support democratic reform in Moldova? 
Let us know what you think in the comments.
