21/01/2013
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 21/01/13
Former Greece Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou will be investigated over charges of removing the names of three relatives from a list of Greeks with secret Swiss bank accounts that hasn't been checked for tax evasion, but an analyst says is likely that other politicians also are at fault.
"Papaconstantinou became the easy target, without meaning that he is innocent," Alex Sakellariou, a sociologist at Panteion University in Athens, told SETimes. 
"I can’t accept he is the one and only responsible person for the Lagarde list, but he is the only one that will pay."
The parliament agreed last week to have Papaconstantinou investigated, but lawmakers also rejected calls by opposition parties to the country's coalition government headed by New Democracy Conservative leader, Prime Minister Antonis Samaras, to also probe one of his partners, PASOK Socialist chief Evangelos Venizelos, as well as two former prime ministers, George Papandreou and Lucas Papademos.
A total of 265 of 300 lawmakers voted in favor of having a committee look into Papaconstantinou's handling of the so-called Lagarde List of 2,062 Greeks with 1.5 billion euros in accounts in the Geneva branch of HSBC. 
Only 124 voted for Venizelos to be included, while 80 voted in favor of having Papandreou added, and 63 for previous interim prime minister Papademos.
The case has riveted Greeks who are in the long recession and coping with austerity measures demanded by Greece's creditors to avoid default.
Papandreou, a sitting MP, did not speak in his defense although he earlier said he had done nothing wrong. 
Papademos sent a letter stating he didn’t even know the list existed, while Venizelos said that he was being unfairly attacked by the major opposition party Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA) and exchanged barbs with its party head Alexis Tsipras, who wanted his rival investigated.
Before that, Papaconstantinou told the parliament, "Erasing the names of my three relatives, and only these, is an attempt to incriminate me." He noted that his relatives whose names were erased have since given evidence to authorities stating their deposits were legal and taxed.
He said he was being investigated to placate growing public anger over more austerity measures being imposed by the government on the orders of the EU-IMF-ECB Troika putting up 239 billion euros in two bailouts, and fury over runaway tax evasion.
"I refused to do favors for a lot of people while I was finance minister," he said. 
"There are lots of people with whom I clashed." Critics said Samaras was keen to protect Venizelos from any investigation that could potentially undermine the government.
"It was long on theater and short on substance," Stan Draenos, former historian at the Andreas Papandreou Foundation in Athens, told SETimes of the war of words on the parliament floor.
He added: "Sheer incompetence is not the only reason for this systemic failure. 
But the way things are going … it seems unlikely that the parliamentary committee will get to the bottom of it, reinforcing public cynicism."
The list, culled from a storage disc of names stolen from the Geneva branch of HSBC by a former employee and being used to prosecute tax cheats in other countries, was given to Papaconstantinou in 2010 by former French finance minister Christine Lagarde, now head of the International Monetary Fund (IMF,) one of Greece's international lenders.
Papaconstantinou said it went missing but when current Finance Minister Yiannis Stournaras vowed to find it, Venizelos said he had a copy on a memory stick and gave it to Samaras' office. 
Venizelos said he didn't use it to vet for possible tax cheats because it was stolen data.
When Greek authorities went to Paris in December 2012 to get the original, it was found the version produced by Venizelos didn't have the names of the missing Papaconstantinou relatives.
Greek investigators said the names were apparently removed during the time the list was in the hands of former Financial Crimes Squad (SDOE) chief Yiannis Diotis, who denied tampering with it. 
He was to testify before a parliamentary committee but said he was too ill.
Venizelos accused the opposition of trying to weaken the coalition government. 
"Their goal is for the government to fall - that explains the degree of intensity against me," he said. 
"SYRIZA is unable to handle its new role and the scale of its presence in Parliament. 
Shame on you - you are out-of-control slanderers," he said.
Meanwhile, a separate judicial investigation is continuing. 
A parliamentary committee will convene this week to decide whether to determine if there’s enough evidence to suggest any criminal offenses were committed Papaconstantinou before the full body votes. 
A separate judicial investigation is continuing as well.
(Kathimerini, 18/01/13, 17/01/13, AP, 18/01/13)
