20/04/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 20/04/13
An EU-brokered accord between Kosovo and Serbia over the administration of northern Kosovo will pave the way for both countries to begin membership negotiations with the Union.
The 15-point agreement, which give Serbs in northern Kosovo their own police force and appeals court, was initialled Friday (April 19th) by Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and Serbia Prime Minister Ivaca Dacic. 
It is a remarkable step for the two countries that have been bitter enemies since before Pristina declared its independence five years ago.
"What we are seeing is a step away from the past and, for both of them, a step closer to Europe," said Catherine Ashton, the EU diplomat who mediated the talks.
The agreement allows for an association of four Serb-majority communities in northern Kosovo – Northern Mitrovica, Zvecan, Zubin Potok and Leposavic – that will administer economic development, health, education and urban planning. 
Law enforcement in the region will be integrated into the Kosovo police, but the communities will choose their own regional police commander. 
The makeup of the police in the region will also reflect the ethnic composition of the communities.
The agreement does not call on Serbia to recognise Kosovo, but it specifies that neither side will block the other from joining the EU. 
That's an important point for Serbia, which hopes to win permission next week to begin accession talks.
Analysts said the deal is good for both sides. 
The agreement that allows the region to select its own police commanders is particularly important, said Jelena Milic, director of Centre for Euro-Atlantic Studies.
"It is very important to clarify who is going to be trained and who is going to manage help in situations of natural disasters and such situations," Milic told SETimes. 
"Serbs from [the] north should be aware of the fact that the international community did such an incredible concession, as well as Kosovo and this is one, surprising good deal for Serbia."
European Commissioner for Enlargement in Brussels Stefan Fule called it a historic day for the region and the EU.
"It is crucial now that the political leadership and general public in both Serbia and Kosovo support the agreement and actively help to implement it. 
It is an opportunity that cannot be missed. 
It is in the interests of all concerned; of the people living in Kosovo, those living in Serbia and the region as a whole," he said in a statement.
While the agreement is expected to be implemented, some potential obstacles remain. 
Serbian officials said that the deal would be considered in Belgrade this week, with a formal response due on Monday.
In Kosovo, members of the Vetvendosje movement indicated they would protest the agreement.
"When a nationalist government in Belgrade … negotiates with a corrupt government in Kosovo for our future, then the result would hardly be good for Kosovo," Vetvendosje deputy leader Shpend Ahmeti told SETimes.
Text of the agreement, as received by SETimes.
1. 
There will be an Association/Community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo. 
Membership will be open to any other municipality provided the members are in agreement.
2. 
The Community/Association will be created by statute. 
Its dissolution shall only take place by a decision of the participating municipalities. 
Legal guarantees will be provided by applicable law and constitutional law (including the 2/3 majority rule).
3. 
The structures of the Association/Community will be established on the same basis as the existing statute of the Association of Kosovo municipalities e.g. 
President, Vice President, Assembly, Council.
4. 
In accordance with the competences given by the European Charter of Local Self Government and Kosovo law the participating municipalities shall be entitled to cooperate in exercising their powers through the Community/Association collectively. 
The Association/Community will have full overview of the areas of economic development, education, health, urban and rural planning.
5. 
The Association/Community will exercise other additional competences as may be delegated by the central authorities.
6. 
The Community/Association shall have a representative role to the central authorities and will have a seat in the communities’ consultative council for this purpose. 
In the pursuit of this role a monitoring function is envisaged.
7. 
There shall be one police force in Kosovo called the Kosovo Police. 
All police in northern Kosovo shall be integrated in the Kosovo Police framework. 
Salaries will be only from the KP.
8. 
Members of other Serbian security structures will be offered a place in equivalent Kosovo structures.
9. 
There shall be a Police Regional Commander for the four northern Serb majority municipalities (Northern Mitrovica, Zvecan, Zubin Potok and Leposavic). 
The Commander of this region shall be a Kosovo Serb nominated by the Ministry of Interior from a list provided by the four mayors on behalf of the Community/Association. 
The composition of the KP in the north will reflect the ethnic composition of the population of the four municipalities. 
(There will be another Regional Commander for the municipalities of Mitrovica South, Skenderaj and Vushtrri). 
The regional commander of the four northern municipalities will cooperate with other regional commanders.
10. 
The judicial authorities will be integrated and operate within the Kosovo legal framework. 
The Appellate Court in Pristina will establish a panel composed of a majority of K/S judges to deal with all Kosovo Serb majority municipalities.
11. 
A division of this Appellate Court, composed both by administrative staff and judges will sit permanently in northern Mitrovica (Mitrovica District Court). 
Each panel of the above division will be composed by a majority of K/S judges. 
Appropriate judges will sit dependent on the nature of the case involved.
12. 
Municipal elections shall be organized in the northern municipalities in 2013 with the facilitation of the OSCE in accordance with Kosovo law and international standards.
13. 
Discussions on Energy and Telecoms will be intensified by the two sides and completed by June 15.
14. 
It is agreed that neither side will block, or encourage others to block, the other side’s progress in their respective EU path.
15. 
An implementation committee will be established by the two sides, with the facilitation of the EU.
Do you think the agreement is good for Kosovo and Serbia, and why? 
Give you opinion below in our comments section.
