19/05/2006
The international rating agency Moody's has upgraded Bosnia and Herzegovina's credit rating from B3 with positive outlook to B2 with stable outlook.
It cited economic and institutional improvements, as well as the launch of Stabilisation and Association Agreement talks with the EU late last year.
At the same time, the agency warned that the large current account deficit and the failure to adopt constitutional reforms were constraining the country's rating.
Albania submitted a proposal to the state regulator for cutting electricity prices for businesses.
Under the plan, firms would see their electricity bill drop by 33 per cent.
According to Prime Minister Sali Berisha, the move is aimed at stimulating development of the business sector.
Greece's registered unemployment rate continued declining in April, posting a 10.2 per cent year-on-year drop, said Deputy Labour Minister Gerasimos Giakoumatos.
Some 459,808 people were registered as jobless in April.
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Slovenia signed an agreement on avoidance of double taxation, during a visit to Ljubljana by BiH Minister for Human Rights and Refugees Mirsad Kebo.
The accords will come into force starting on 1 January.
The European Commission okayed the tender documentation for building a second bridge over the Danube, spanning Vidin, Bulgaria and Kalafat, Romania.
The project will cost around 236m euros, out of which 226m euros will be set aside for construction activities.
The rest will go towards preliminary studies.
The bridge is being co-financed by the PHARE and ISPA programmes, the European Investment Bank, the German and French development agencies KfW and ADF, and the Bulgarian government.
The Bulgarian government and the IMF agreed to extend the current $144.1m stand-by arrangement by six months, until the end of March 2007.
According to Finance Minister Plamen Oresharski, the extension aims to maintain macroeconomic and financial stability until Bulgaria's entry in the EU.
An IMF delegation recently wrapped up its mission in Sofia, praising the government's fiscal policy but urging it to proceed with structural reforms.
Croatia's central government budget posted a deficit of 358m euros, or 1.1 per cent of GDP, for January-April 2006.
Revenues were up by 13 per cent year-on-year, while expenditure growth remained moderate, reaching only 1.6 per cent year-on-year, according to the preliminary figures.
The 2006 target is for a general government budget deficit of 3.3 per cent of GDP.
The Serbian government and the European Investment Bank signed an agreement under which Serbia will receive a 66m-euro loan for the reconstruction of more than 100 bridges and road flyovers.
The credit has a 20-year maturity and a 5-year grace period.
(Various sources – 12/05/06 - 19/05/06)
