20/04/2013
By Kruno Kartus for Southeast European Times in Osijek -- 20/04/13
The recent crackdown on an organised crime group suspected of selling drugs, hailed as as one of the biggest regional co-operation efforts to date, has made a huge cut in the Balkan drug smuggling route, officials said.
Police from Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Serbia, Macedonia and Croatia arrested 51 people on April 12th on suspicion of smuggling and illegally selling large quantities of drugs. 
Drugs and other assets were confiscated in the sting.
"The action confirms co-operation among police and judiciary in the region and good legislative framework for such actions. 
It cut the route of trafficking drugs that went from Albania via Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and further on to Europe," Zeljko Petkovic, director of Croatian Office for Combating Drug Abuse, told SETimes.
The importance of cutting this route, Petkovic said, is evident in the growing trend of trafficking synthetic drugs and their raw material from west to east. 
At the same time, the region faces growing number of marijuana and synthetic drugs addicts and a decreasing number of heroin addicts.
The joint operation was carried out with the support of the EU IPA 2010 programme and the Southeast European Law Enforcement Centre.
"The activities involved hundreds of police officers who were working simultaneously and in co-ordination in four countries. 
The arrested are suspected of organized crime, illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and other serious criminal offenses," Boris Grubjesic, a spokesman for the BiH Prosecutors Office, told SETimes.
"This action is the result of the joint efforts of prosecutors offices and police ... 
in a co-ordinated investigation which has been conducted for about half a year," Grubjesic told SETimes.
The criminal investigation, codenamed Gladius, netted 376 kilograms of skunk (a modified stronger marijuana), 523 grams of heroin, two plants of cannabis sativa, seven pistols, one rifle, 22.2 kilograms of plastic explosives, nine hand grenades, two crossbows, more than 4,000 pieces of ammunition, three laptops, several mobile phones, SIM cards and other correspondent devices, Croatian police said.
The total market value of the seized drugs is estimated to be 730,000 euros.
Most of the marijuana, about 312 kilograms, was found in Montenegro.
Initial findings of the National Police Office for Suppression of Corruption and Organised Crime and the Dubrovnik police indicated that the group of Croatian, Bosnian and Montenegrin citizens were trafficking large quantities of marijuana in the area of Albania via Montenegro and BiH to the illegal drug market in Croatia, Serbia and Western Europe.
All the suspects were transfered to Croatia, BiH, Montenegro and Serbia to face charges on criminal association for ilegal production, trafficking of drugs and other serious crimes.
The arrests came just weeks after UN Office on Drugs and Crime chief Yury Fedotov visited Sarajevo, where he held two days of meetings with BiH officials.
According to the UN agency's estimates, around 60 tonnes of heroin moves along the Balkan route from the opium fields of Afghanistan to destinations in west and central Europe. 
In 2011, authorities in BiH reported seizures of 10.2 kilograms of heroin, 444 kilograms of marijuana and almost 10 kilograms of amphetamines.
"Our goal in Southeast Europe is to work closely with states to counter transnational organised crime, corruption, money laundering, terrorism and drug abuse," Fedotov said. 
"I am very glad that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be such a strong partner for UNODC in all these areas."
Correspondents Katica Djurovic in Belgrade and Drazen Remikovic in Sarajevo contributed to this report.
Are regional governments doing enough to close down the Balkan drug route? 
Let us know your thoughts below.
