25/05/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 25/05/13
Some politicians are raising cautious warnings about the Organisation of the Islamic Countries' growing interest in Kosovo because the group's position on terrorism contradicts western values and Pristina's ambitions to join Euro-Atlantic organisations.
While official recognition on the global stage is appealing to some in Kosovo, which has not yet earned membership in the EU, NATO or the UN, the Islamic organisation's position on terrorism remains an issue.
"I do not believe that Kosovo should become a member of [the Islamic organisation]," MP Burim Ramadani, who is also a member of parliamentary commission for the supervision of Kosovo Intelligence Agency, told SETimes.
"We should be members only in organisations whose values are those that we belong to, and we belong to the Western civilization."
In a 2009 document, the organisation declared that "armed struggle, against foreign occupation, aggression, colonialism and hegemony, aimed at liberation and self-determination in accordance with the principles of international law shall not be considered a terrorist crime."
"There should be one definition for terrorism, without a selective approach and one that does not create multiple standards," said Valon Murtezaj, a Kosovo professor of conflict management and diplomacy, told SETimes.
Murtezaj said Kosovo "should not swing from the positions and principles on which it is building its statehood."
Petrit Zogaj, executive director of Kosovo Movement Fol (Speak up), told SETimes that "it is clearly known that [the Islamic organisation's] member states have basic problems with western values and democratic principles."
"[The organisation] is undoubtedly very important … and it clearly has a great influence in the East and other parts of the world," Zogaj said.
"However, the orientation, work and commitment to Kosovo's membership in the EU should not even be compared to any other organisation."
For now, 32 out of the organisation's 57 member states have recognised Kosovo.
Kosovo cannot join the Organisation of the Islamic Countries until it formalises its relations with the UN, officials said.
"We will follow our national interests in defining our very modest role in the international community, in line with the very wide and strong consensus in Kosovo to join the European Union," Kosovo deputy Foreign Minister Petrit Selimi told SETimes.
"Kosovo was, for many years, an importer of resources needed to obtain freedom, keep peace and stability and looks forward to the new stage where it will be an exporter of peace initiatives and experiences related to nation building."
Why do you think Kosovo's Euro-Atlantic path is important to its future?
Explain your thoughts in the comments below.
