18/09/2006
Albanian scientists gathered at a conference in Tirana to consider the prospects for use of alternative energy resources such as wind, hydrogen, solar, water and biomass.
The forum was organised by the Economy, Trade and Energy Ministry and the Co-PLAN Institute for Habitat development.
The goal was to draw up policies supporting the use of renewable energy.
Participants agreed that if the country efficiently uses its renewable energy resources it would no longer be dependent on electricity imports.
A two-day international conference titled "Why Invest in Science in South Eastern Europe?" opens in Ljubljana, Slovenia on 28 September.
The event is being co-organised by UNESCO and the Slovenian and Austrian governments.
A study by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) found that only three out of ten Turkish young people have a strong interest in science.
While young people are interested in hearing about scientific developments, they are unlikely to read scientific articles or participate in discussions about scientific issues, the study found.
The results were based on a survey of 1,033 people aged between 15 and 24 in 47 provinces, 97 districts and 68 towns.
The Second International Symposium of Ecologists of Montenegro will take place in the city of Kotor between 20 September and 25 September.
The event is co-organised by the Montenegrin Republican Bureau for the Environment, the Nature and Science Museum, the Sea Biology Institute and the Centre for Biodiversity.
Over 300 leading scientists and ecology experts from 30 countries are expected to participate.
The Greek government said it will implement a 450m-euro programme meant to expand broadband internet penetration to 7% of the Greek population by 2008.
Among other things, the programme would set up broadband and/or wireless networks in hundreds of municipalities, connect nearly 4,000 public institutions across the country, and boost broadband access in peripheral areas of Greece.
Three telecom operators in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) -- BH Telekom, HT Mobile Communications Mostar and Telekom Srpske -- made the Top 100 of the most successful BiH companies, in a ranking by the Sarajevo business weekly Poslovne novine.
The ranking was conducted on the basis of realised profits and revenues from exports.
The list also included the Mostar-based aluminium plant Aluminij, the power utilities Elektroprivreda BiH and Elektroprivreda RS, and the Zenica steel producer Mittal Steel.
(Various sources – 11/09/06 – 18/09/06)
