17/07/2006
Due to the large number of tourists that Bulgaria attracts to its beaches every year, the country's Geophysical Institute is planning to launch a new system for UV measuring.
The aim is to make more accurate daily forecasts of the risk levels posed by UV.
The new system will start operating in early 2007.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) police and security agencies are to receive 4m euros from the EU to help introduce Terrestrial Trunked Radio, VOIP and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy equipment.
The new technology will help improve communication and co-ordination among BiH police forces.
Bulgaria's Academy of Sciences (BAN) launched an EU-financed, 10,000-euro project for the protection of national, cultural and scientific heritage.
It involves the scanning and preservation of BAN's archive in electronic and digital forms.
Croatia will become the 20th member of the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) in 2007.
The country will be able to participate fully in EUMETSAT's decision-making process and gain full access to EUMETSAT data, services and products, while Croatian firms will be eligible to bid for contracts.
Microsoft Romania posted a 29 per cent year-on-year increase in revenues for the fiscal year 2006.
According to general manager Ovidiu Artopolescu, sales have increased over 60 times in the past ten years due to the growth of the local IT market, and the company expects to double its turnover in the next three years.
A delegation from the Turkish Computer and Programme Engineers Foundation plans to visit NASA, says Foundation chief Yilmaz Sonmez.
Talks with the US space agency will focus on possible participation by Turkish software specialists in NASA projects.
Software developer EBS Romania announced it has opened a new, second branch in Sibiu that will operate as a centre for the outsourcing/nearshore division of the company and as a development centre for Java and .NET technologies.
The company also plans to open a third branch in the Bucharest area.
(Various sources – 10/07/06 – 17/07/06)
