18/04/2013
By Selena Petrovic and Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 18/04/13
The low voter turnout in the European Parliament elections shows that Croatia needs to boost its campaign to inform citizens about EU membership, observers said.
Only 20 percent of eligible voters in Croatia took part in the April 14th election for representatives in the European Parliament. 
The centre-right Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) won six of Croatia's 12 seats; they will begin their mandates when Croatia joins the EU on July 1st.
"These are the first European elections in Croatia's history. 
[But] politicians should think about why the turnout was so low," Prime Minister Zoran Milanovic said.
Experts said the low turnout may be due to voters' lack of knowledge about EU in general, and the European Parliament in particular.
"The campaign was very weak and that is why the turnout was immemorially small," Davor Djenero, a professor at the Zagreb's Faculty of Political Sciences, told SETimes.
Authorities' efforts to inform citizens about the EU started more than a decade ago and came to encompass a series of projects and publications.
The communication strategy created by Croatia's Foreign and European Affairs Ministry includes the HALO telephone information line that citizens can call if they have questions or concerns about the EU.
Calls showed that people were mostly interested in general information about the EU, including accession negotiations, labour relations and retirement, agriculture, the economy and EU funding, the ministry told SETimes in a statement.
The ministry's strategy includes a booklet, Myths and Legends About the EU, which explains how some popular assertions -- among them that Croats will not be allowed to eat homemade sour cream and cheese -- are not entirely correct.
"But only a small number of people who are interested in political developments, and maybe one part of the young population that is aware of the fact that they will live their entire lives in the EU, are familiar with how the EU works," Branko Caratan, retired professor of political science, told SETimes.
The ministry said the campaign will grow once Croatia enters the EU. 
"Croatia will now participate in the decision-making process at the EU level, and our public needs to be involved and [informed] with regarding that," it said in a statement.
"[The campaign was executed] without emotion ... 
and without opening a serious discussion, with classical propaganda methods," Andjelko Milardovich of the Institute for European and Globalization Studies in Zagreb told SETimes.
Milardovic said the campaign showed an idealised picture of Croatia becoming a land of "milk and honey" once it enters the EU.
"The real question is not whether we will have honey, but whether we will have enough to buy milk," he said.
Senad Hujic, an organic food producer, said that he was unaware of the government's information campaign.
"I am not very much informed about all that. 
We do not have time. 
We work a lot. 
Most of us are sceptical about the EU," Hujic told SETimes.
What should the Croatian government do to increase citizen knowledge of EU membership benefits? 
We would like to see your opinions in the comments space.
