21/06/2013
By Selena Petrovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 21/06/13
EU funds that will become available to Croatia upon its July 1st accession will bring the country 11.7 billion euros from 2014-2020 and a new know-how in EU funds utilisation.
The public and private sectors are preparing to capitalise on this opportunity, while the government is taking the initial steps to make funds available for projects that coincide with European goals including employment, innovation, global climate change, education and poverty.
After the government sends completed strategic documents to the European Commission, and the commission approves them, it will disburse the funds. 
The relevant state bodies will hold open calls for proposals for projects within the priority topics.
One of the EU priorities for 2014-2020 is investing in education, skills and lifelong learning.
The Department for EU Projects and Programmes at the ministry of science, education and sports told SETimes that drafting strategic documents for investments in education has to be harmonised with the Union's strategy for Europe 2020.
Priorities include preventing students from dropping out of school, promoting equal access to education and improving the skills and qualifications of the workforce.
Croatian schools are eager to use the funds as they become available, but each school has unique needs.
Dragutin Satovic, principal of Petar Preradovic Elementary School in Zagreb, which won an award for its participation in the pre-accession international co-operation and teacher training projects, told SETimes that procedures for obtaining EU funds are complicated.
He added that it is difficult for the school's staff to find the time to devote to developing new projects.
"We would need one or two people who would work on this task only," Satovic told SETimes. 
"Our school does not have that possibility. 
In addition, one never gets the whole sum [for the proposed project]. 
The participants have to provide a part of the total sum [needed for the project]."
Satovic said his school's greatest need is "a new rooftop." The building's roof still has salonit corrugated sheets, which are potentially hazardous because they contain asbestos. 
Zagreb city authorities are removing salonit sheets from schools, but they do not have the resources to change all the roofs at once.
Daska Barovic, a piano and dance teacher at the Ana Maletic School for Contemporary Dance in Zagreb, said her institution is hoping to use funds to improve the school's interior space, making it more useful for performing arts. 
She added that the school already has obtained information on how to apply for funds.
The EU funding framework for 2014-2020 also includes objectives related to advancing research, developing innovation and technology.
Leo Pincan, deputy secretary of the Union Association of Inventors of Istrian County based in Pula, told SETimes that his organisation has participated in numerous training programmes related to obtaining European funds.
Pincan said additional funds would help with advertising and market research necessary to gauge interest in new products.
Consultants specialising in EU projects can help both public and private sector clients through the funding application process.
Miroslav Kosovic, senior adviser at Sense Consulting and founder of its EU division, said his company has teams for every stage of the process of obtaining funds.
"We are with the client every step of the way: assessing admissibility and quality of the project and of the applicant, drafting technical documentation, providing administrative support, drafting financial documentation, negotiating with the institution which announced the tender and providing full support in the course of project implementation, from beginning to the end," Kosovic said.
He added that Sense Consulting's fixed fees vary from 1,000 to 20,000 euros, depending on the complexity of the project, with additional variable fees that range from 2 to 20 percent of the project total.
Jean-Pierre Maricic, EU funds expert and lecturer, told SETimes that preparing and implementing projects without hiring an expert is an uncertain undertaking. 
Even if the project is selected, complications could ensue if the user is not familiar with procedures required during implementation.
"I would advise companies … which have no experience in project implementation to hire an expert, as this is less expensive than to have to return the money because it has not been used as stipulated," Maricic said.
How would you like to see EU funds used in Croatia? 
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
