23/05/2013
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 23/05/13
In an effort to provide more efficient and safer air navigation services, regional airspace navigation and safety companies signed a joint service provision area initiative.
Seven regional aviation organisations, with representatives from Albania, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Hungary, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, will co-operate under the auspices of the regional co-operation council.
"The co-operation … would mean the reduction of individual operating costs by sharing joint resources and capacities, and through joint applications of financial-donor institutions, primarily available through EU funds," Amna Redzepagic, an expert on infrastructure at the regional co-operation council, told SETimes.
The initiative will address security, cost-efficiency, capacity increase and environmental protection.
The co-operation will include sharing and exchange of operational knowledge and experiences, and a joint appearance before third parties in knowledge transfer and training.
"The initiative is a great idea.
Part of the national supervisory authority lacks professionals and cannot perform basic quality airspace supervision, safety and security.
It's impossible to find professionals for the task through an unemployment agency.
Instead, they are trained on the job, as the only way to achieve the needed skills and knowledge," Zoran Djuranovic, head of the aviation services department in Montenegro's civil aviation agency, told SETimes.
A number of planned projects should improve airspace navigation, including the establishment of free flow of airspace and the connection of the Skopje, Pristina, Podgorica, Sarajevo and Tirana airports using satellite navigation during take-off and landing.
"This is the first time we voluntarily agreed to work for a common future.
If there is damage in one country, solidarity will be important.
For instance, opening Kosovo airspace will benefit all other regional countries," Djuranovic said.
Regional airports are under pressure to lower costs and debts.
Every delayed minute costs airports and companies 3 million euros annually.
Flights range from 38 to 78 euros, a huge discrepancy among states.
The idea is to have new, unified flights with affordable prices.
"This initiative allows huge possibilities, and provides job opportunities on a regional level.
The effort is the result of a dire need to avoid losing time and money," Djuranovic said.
BiH airports struggle with debt, poor airport conditions, and passenger transportation losses and are looking forward to the initiative.
"Regional companies should introduce common airlines to certain destinations and personnel exchange.
It's not necessary to form a common regional company, but regional co-operation [among existing air companies] is certainly important," Omer Kulic, director of civil aviation at BiH transportation ministry, told SETimes.
Correspondent Drazen Remikovic in Banja Luka contributed to this report.
Will regional airspace co-operation help reduce cost and losses?
Tell us what you think in the comments.
