18/12/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 18/12/12
An integrated border management agreement between Serbia and Kosovo was a major factor for the EU foreign ministers' decision to assess the country's progress for starting negotiation talks next spring, Serbia Prime Minister Ivica Dacic said.
"After a long number of years, Serbia has received a very positive opinion from the EU, with a good chance of starting membership talks next spring," Dacic said after last week's meeting.
Without the agreement, which was implemented earlier this month, Dacic said, the country would have had to wait until 2014.
The agreement on the final conclusions for Serbia states that "for the purpose of the European Council's possible decision on opening negotiations with Serbia, the Council of Ministers will on the grounds of a report by the European Commission and the high representative of the EU, in spring 2013 review the progress Serbia has made in reforms and enhancement of relations with Pristina."
Negotiations between Dacic and Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci will continue in January, Catherine Ashton, EU high representative for foreign affairs, said on Monday (December 17th).
"We have an important period ahead, which will require full political unity and stability, so that we can continue down the European path while protecting our national and state interests," Dacic said.
Suzana Grubjesic, deputy prime minister for European integration, said that Serbia is "ready to start the negotiations tomorrow if necessary."
"We can say that today Serbia has been both praised and encouraged. 
Praised for what it has done, because the government has demonstrated its intention of keeping the promises it makes, and encouraged by the fact that the date for the start of membership negotiations will be set next spring, during the next presidency, which will be held by Ireland," Grubjesic told SETimes.
She said that the negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina will continue and that northern Kosovo will be an upcoming topic.
"Northern Kosovo has always been mentioned. 
When one says 'accept the reality,' it goes for northern Kosovo as well and it will certainly be a topic of the political dialogue because only that way we can reach a sustainable solution."
Predrag Simic, a professor of political science at the University of Belgrade, said that Serbia has remained on the European road, but added that the road sometimes uncertain.
"The EU welcomes the moves made by the new government regarding Kosovo, but the very fact that this is a new government was cause for caution," Simic told SETimes.
He said that the longer the European integration process takes, the more control the Union will have over Serbia if the results of negotiations with Kosovo are not satisfactory.
"We will see how things will develop in both Kosovo and Serbia," added Simic.
Although the draft conclusions of the EU foreign ministers' session noted next spring for the beginning of talks, a specific date was dropped due to Germany's opposition.
Germany stressed that Serbia's progress in "the visible and durable improvement of relations with Pristina," must be tangible.
