22/05/2013
By Cornelis van Zweeden for Southeast European Times in Dubrovnik -- 22/05/13
Doctors and scholars are calling for more funding and awareness campaigns to defeat the aggressive Asian tiger mosquito that has invaded Europe and the Balkans, and is linked to the spread of several diseases including the West Nile virus, dengue and Chikungunya fever.
"It is [one of the] most capable vectors of dangerous diseases in the world,'' Enrih Merdic, a biology professor at Osijek University, told SETimes.
The insect has become a plague in many Balkan countries with established populations in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Greece and Montenegro.
According to the European Environmental Agency, the tiger mosquito, or Aedes albopictus, is responsible for the spread of dengue fever in La Reunion, Italy and France, Dr Ljiljana Radic, specialist of infectious diseases at Dubrovnik hospital, told SETimes.
"Isolating dengue-infected humans is difficult," Radic said.
"Up to 80 percent of all dengue infections are asymptomatic.
The incubation period is normally four to seven days.
One day before the symptoms manifest themselves, a patient can infect the mosquito."
The mosquito, named for the black and white stripes on its body, arrived in Dubrovnik in 2005, and has since spread along the entire 5,000 kilometres of the Croatian coast.
"We were surprised to find it on the islands,'' Enrih Merdic, a biology professor at Osijek University, told SETimes.
"It turned out the tiger mosquito is a high-class insect.
It travels by yacht.''
The tiger mosquito is also a far bigger nuisance than the "home -mosquito," as Merdic calls the endemic species.
"It is active during the day."
The tiger mosquito has adapted to colder climates.
"It produces resistant eggs that are capable of surviving cold winters," Radic said.
"We now have round-the-clock mosquitos," Toni Gitko, a researcher on the insect in Split, told SETimes.
"During the day the tiger mosquito is active, at night others are."
Ever since this Asian mosquito settled in South Croatia, Domagoj Dedo, who works for the Gruda Veterinarian Ambulance, has waged war against it.
"Last year a child was diagnosed with rabies after being bitten by the mosquito,'' Gruda told SETimes.
"Before, three people on Peljesac peninsula contracted dengue.
Research showed that in their village, Podobuce, 16 others also carried the virus.
They were lucky not to develop the disease."
Dedo distributes BTI-pills from door to door.
The tablets contain dormant bacteria that will kill mosquito larvae in standing water.
He also sprays.
"But small villages often do not have the money to spend on anti-mosquito campaigns," Dedo said.
Even high-income tourist towns struggle to divert enough funds into the war on mosquitos, he said.
Dubrovnik, a town of 50,000 inhabitants, will spend 65,000 euros on fighting the tiger mosquito this year, Doris Alavija, town hall spokesperson, told SETimes.
But the amount only covers one treatment of Dimilin granules, which also kill the larvae in stagnant water, and two fumigation campaigns, she said.
The only way to stop its advent is to eliminate breeding sites.
Spraying "only helps the moment you do it," Merdic said.
That's why specialists believe that an awareness campaign will be most effective.
Gitko was involved in an awareness campaign on local radio and television.
"The problem we have in Split is similar to the one Rome has," he said.
"Even without rain, large cities are full of water.
There are too many gardens."
"We can only hope for a dry summer," Merdic said.
What can the government should do to stop the tiger mosquito in Croatia?
Share your thoughts in comments.
