17/04/2013
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 17/04/13
Bulgaria could play a more active and visible role in NATO, the EU's Common Security and Defence Policy and in regional military co-operation, according to Todor Tagarev, Bulgarian interim defence minister.
To achieve its vision for a more prominent role in the international and regional arena, Bulgaria would combine effects of different instruments and mechanisms, Tagarev said, including "education and training projects under NATO's Smart Defence Initiative, opportunities offered by the joint facilities with the US on our soil, NATO's investments in security infrastructure, and the Centre for Research, Development and Improvement of NATO's Capabilities in Crisis Management and Disaster Response."
"Last, but not least, is the idea that the headquarters of the Southeastern Europe Brigade be stationed here permanently," Tagarev added.
The advantages and disadvantages of having a permanent or a rotational headquarters for the seven-nation organisation were discussed at the force's present command centre in Greece last year.
The Bulgarian Defence Ministry told SETimes that a decision will be made ahead of the end of the current four-year rotation cycle in 2015.
"The decision on the location of the [Southeastern Europe Brigade headquarters] will be based on a political agreement among the countries participating," the ministry said.
The Southeastern Europe Brigade was formally activated in Plovdiv, Bulgaria, on August 31st 1999 by Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Italy, Macedonia, Romania and Turkey.
Its establishment was in accordance with the Agreement on Multinational Peace Force South-Eastern Europe, signed by the defence ministers of participating nations in Skopje 11 months earlier.
Five other countries, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Slovenia, Ukraine, and the US, have observer status.
The idea to establish the Southeastern Europe Brigade came from a Bulgarian proposal for the creation of two separate joint battalions, one with Greece, the other with Turkey, Solomon Passy, the president of the Atlantic Club of Bulgaria and former foreign minister, told SETimes.
"What happened eventually was that instead of having two separate battalions or a joint Bulgarian-Greek-Turkish one, a coalition of countries from the region emerged, which started working together for the good of the region and the world," he said.
"I hope that this format will have a much brighter future, and play a much more important role in the context of the future common European policy."
Romania is also one of the main regional actors in enhancing military co-operation, Ion Mocioalca, head of the Romanian defence committee, said.
Both countries also support NATO's commitment to keep its door open to other hopeful members from the region.
Ahead of their 2004 entry, Bulgaria and Romania carried out serious reforms to bring their defence sectors in line with the standards within the pact.
In Bulgaria's case, there was a significant cutback of the national armed forces.
"Practice has shown that given the [low] level of funding, it is sometimes better to scale down the army to enhance its efficiency and combat preparedness," Tagarev said in a recent interview with Sofia-based Capital weekly.
The reforms had other objectives, including improving the armed forces' mobility, flexibility and capabilities for participation in joint operations with those of partner countries, Mocioalca said.
"Romania's participation in the anti-missile shield gives it the opportunity to strengthen co-operation with countries in the region, such as Poland, but also consolidates Romania's profile as a security promoter in Southeast Europe," he added.
Correspondent Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest contributed to this report.
Could the relocation of the Southeastern Europe Brigade headquarters to Bulgaria improve the political climate in the region?
Tell us what you think.
