17/12/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 17/12/12
Balkan countries are intensifying their efforts to stem domestic violence amid continuing abuse of women, according to experts.
Serbia announced it will ratify the Council of Europe's Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence. 
The convention obliges state institutions to keep precise records of all cases of violence against women.
"It will mark the beginning of harmonisation of our legislation with standards in the field," Nebojsa Stefanovic, Serbia's parliamentary speaker, told SETimes.
This year, 28 women have fallen victim to domestic violence in Serbia, half of them to partners and current or ex-husbands, while 204 women have died in Croatia as a result of domestic violence since 2001. 
A quarter of women in Montenegro claim they suffer physical abuse by their husbands and partners.
The Montenegro government is forming special teams at welfare centres to ensure social services identify and respond efficiently to domestic violence.
Serbia will follow that approach, according to Brankica Jankovic, state secretary in the social affairs ministry.
"Employees at welfare centres must be more sensitive to domestic violence, recognise it and react in the appropriate manner. 
That is why we will particularly work on educating those personnel," Jankovic told SETimes.
Civil society representatives, however, said that existing legal regulations should be more rigorously implemented.
"The government should analyse the existing legal regulations and see how it can ensure more efficient prevention of violence and protection of victims," Vesna Stanojevic, head of the Counseling Service against Domestic Violence, told SETimes.
Stanojevic noted the current practice of restraining orders in the country.
"If the violator approaches a victim with a restraining order, the police do not react, rather they send the case for retrial, which takes a long time and is painful for the victim," Stanojevic said.
"The fight against domestic violence should be handled by all institutions and state services, rather than solely by the police. 
It is necessary to work on prevention," Vladimir Bozovic, state secretary at Serbia's interior ministry, told SETimes.
Bozovic said the Serbian police filed close to 3,000 criminal reports on violence against women this year.
NGOs throughout the region are organising awareness raising campaigns to emphasise prevention.
Croatia organised its 3rd Live a Life without Violence campaign in elementary and high schools this year to reach students and address the issue early on.
Similarly, NGOs throughout the region organised 16 Days of Activism campaigns on November 25th, the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, and on December 10th, Human Rights Day.
NGO representatives agree society must better divide tasks to become more effective and avoid the existing duplication of work.
"It is not enough to punish the violators; the protection of victims requires a different approach by the professionals working with the victims of domestic violence, as well as by the institutions and the public," Petrusic told SETimes.
