17/12/2012
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/12/12
A Transparency International report released this month shows that Kosovo is slipping in the battle against corruption, yielding far less progress than other regional countries.
Because of weak functioning of institutions in charge of law and order, and the influence of politicians on them, the country has stagnated in executing laws, especially those aiming to fight corruption, the report said.
Merita Mustafa, programme manager at the Kosovo Democratic Institute/Transparency International, told SETimes the government should increase its political will to tackle corruption and strengthen institutions dealing with the rule of law.
"Despite ongoing promises and pledges from the government to fight corruption, intentions remain only statements," she said.
One of the main challenges hindering progress, she said, is that the authority on corruption has been distributed to so many executive bodies.
"Whenever a [corruption] case involves a high profile politician it is transferred to EULEX," Mustafa said.
But EULEX said their efforts in Kosovo are yielding results: 33 verdicts involving 55 people, of whom 37 were found guilty, were finalised under EULEX authority.
"Hundreds of ongoing investigations, over 300 verdicts in criminal and civil cases, 23,000 solved conflict-related property claims, and over 300 human remains of missing persons returned to their families, attest to the Mission's effectiveness," Bardha Azari, EULEX public information officer, told SETimes.
"The figure shows that, in less than four years, with about 24 judges and less than 20 prosecutors, EULEX completed about 180 cases, which is not a small number," Azari said.
She mentioned the sentencing of Kacanik Mayor Xhabir Zharku and former Kosovo assembly speaker Nexhat Daci as the most efficient EULEX cases.
The mission has sent 20 government-related persons to trial, of which 13 were found guilty.
Azari noted that EULEX continues to challenge Kosovo's culture of impunity by investigating and prosecuting ministers, politicians, and senior officials, former wartime commanders, prominent businessmen and members of the secret service.
In November the government adopted a new 2013-2017 anti-corruption strategy for progressive and sustainable corruption reduction. 
However, a general consensus prevails in Kosovo that the country has an appropriate legal base and mechanisms to battle corruption, but lacks action.
But local prosecutors said they are investigating a wide range of officials.
Aleksander Lumezi, Pristina prosecution district chief, said that around 40 former and current officials are under investigation.
"Any officials, regardless of being a minister, MP, local official or other, suspected of criminal activity, will be indicted and sentenced," Lumezi told daily Kosova sot.
