16/06/2006
Credit Agricole of France launched a friendly offer for the Greek bank Emporiki, in which it already holds an 8.9 per cent stake.
The French institution said it would pay 3.1 billion euros for 100 per cent of Emporiki, buying out the government's 40 per cent stake as well as that owned by other shareholders.
It cited rising demand for financial services in Greece, as well as the favourable market position of Emporiki, the fourth largest bank in the Balkan country in terms of assets.
An IMF mission, led by Dimitri Demekas, is in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) for a 10-day review of the economic situation in the country.
The mission opened with a meeting between Demekas and BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic in Sarajevo on 14 June.
The IMF official warned against uncontrolled spending of excess revenues from indirect taxes and said the money should be saved for the implementation of crucial reforms.
Some 140.3m euros are needed for the reconstruction of Bulgaria's roads after the floods in 2005 and 2006, announced the head of the roads agency, Vesselin Georgiev.
He warned that the agency's budget, set at 122m euros this year, is insufficient, even with an planned additional allocation of 4.4m euros.
Serbia's railway company Zeljeznice Srbije and the Cyprus-registered Trigranit Development Corporation signed a framework agreement on the construction of a new central railway station in Belgrade.
Under the deal, the Cypriot investor would fund and implement the building works, evaluated between 150m euros and 200m euros, while in exchange it would receive 180,000 square metres of land intended for shops, offices, restaurants and residential buildings.
The Macedonian government announced the names of the short-listed bidders in the privatisation tender for the Negotino thermal power station.
Austria's EVN, which recently acquired the Macedonian power distribution enterprise ESM Distribucja, was selected as the preferred buyer.
The list also includes a consortium between the Canadian firm Hatch and Bulgaria's Financial Engineering, Russia's RAO and another Austrian company, Verbund.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) external trade deficit expanded by 303.4m euros in May, bringing the external trade gap to 1.09 billion euros in January-May 2006, according to the latest official data.
On an annual basis, however, the foreign trade deficit for January-May dropped 15.1 per cent, due to stronger growth of exports.
(Various sources – 09/06/06 – 16/06/06)
