19/06/2013
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 19/06/13
Macedonia's draft media law continues to fuel debate after twice undergoing changes in the wake of numerous objections from journalists and international experts who said the legislation stymies media freedom in the country.
The law proposes to regulate the rights of journalists, editors and broadcasters and the licensing of radio and television broadcasting and other media outlets. 
It also establishes a regulatory agency for print, broadcast and online media, which will have sweeping powers to enforce the law's controversial limitations on media freedom.
While censorship is banned by the constitution, Article 4 of the draft law has raised concerns among journalists.
It states: "Press freedom can be limited when and if it is necessary to protect national security, territorial integrity or public order and peace, riot and criminal offences, protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, prevent the disclosure of confidential information or for maintaining the authority and independence of the judiciary."
After a meeting last week with EU Commissioner for Enlargement Stefan Fule, Information Society Minister Ivo Ivanoski told the Macedonian Information Agency that Fule welcomed the transparency of the process. 
The next step will be another version of the law and further opportunity for public comment.
"Both associations of journalists from Macedonia were present at these hearings, and I can promise that we will do another round of similar negotiations to get quality legislation, which will be welcomed by the EU," Ivanoski said.
International experts say the law should be shorter and clearer because it gives little opportunity for civil society to participate in important decisions.
The Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) have released statements critical of the law. 
OSCE's 17-page analysis objected to the requirement that print and electronic publications must register with the government, saying that such a provision "may have a chilling effect on freedom of the media."
At a public debate, the Association of Journalists of Macedonia delivered an analysis from British lawyer Peter Norlander, whose specialty is regulation in the media sector.
Norlander said the law goes beyond the scope of the European Commission's directive for audiovisual media. 
He said it is not permissible to establish a single regulatory regime for print, online and broadcast media, as proposed by the legislation.
"If we see which institutions are to nominate the members of the agency, it is clear that there is a risk that political interests can easily control this body," Norlander wrote.
Biljana Petkovska, of the Macedonian Institute for Media, told SETimes that her organisation is concerned about how the law would impact media freedom.
"[Macedonian Institute for Media] has more objections mainly focused on excessive influence by the government over key bodies and mechanisms which should be independent, with influence over election of the majority of the members of those bodies," Petkovska said.
The group disagrees with the current definition of a journalist, saying that it "is irrational and outdated, and limits the freedom in the profession."
Saso Mitanoski, president of the Association of Private Media of the Republic of Macedonia, told SETimes that one of the main criticisms of the new law is the way it places electronic media and internet portals under the same restrictions.
"[Article 4] is very broad and very generally treats the terms 'protection of morals and reputation,' which can further be used for government influence on journalists, editorial staff, and therefore the media," Mitanoski said. 
"As an association we propose to specify exactly what would be implied by this Article. 
... 
If possible, we suggest to avoid or preferably dispose of such wording."
Snezana Trpevska, a professor of media law at the School of Journalism and Public Relations, told SETimes that the law should only address audiovisual media, harmonising with Europe's Audiovisual Media Services Directive, which applies only to television.
"The inclusion of online media in the law is really causing concern and fear that it could limit freedom of expression, regardless of the fact that it only speaks of 'notification' or minimum commitments of these media," Trpevska said.
