16/04/2013
By Biljana Lajmanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 16/04/13
The new draft law on media and audio-visual services in Macedonia promotes professional and ethical standards, and freedom of expression, as well as improve media competition, according to Macedonian Minister for Information Society and Public Administration Ivo Ivanovski.
"This law regulates the right of the journalist to proclaim his/her stance, refuse an assignment, protects the author's reputation, protects information source," Ivanovski said when introducing the draft law.
But journalists said they were not involved in the process that defines the new regulation, and demonstrated their protest by leaving the public debate session that was to launch the new law last week.
Journalists said that the debate over the new media law needs to be prolonged from three to five months, giving them enough time to analyse the proposal. 
At the moment they are suggesting a number of changes to the draft.
"This law will set the course of Macedonian media for the future, and if there's political will, then there's an opportunity to solve some acute problems that Macedonian journalists face," Naser Selmani, president of the association of journalists of Macedonia, told SETimes.
"But we must be careful with the scope of the law, especially when regulating print and internet media, since there's no unified European rule in this area," Selmani added.
The union of journalists and media workers claims that the proposed draft law has some unclear provisions on the journalists' rights.
"The very definition of a journalist in this law is outlandish -- a journalist is a person with a permanent or temporary work agreement, or works as a freelancer," Tamara Chausidis, the union's president, told SETimes.
According to her, the trap lies in the fact that every similar European law leaves out a clear definition of a freelance journalist.
"A freelancer is not an unemployed journalist, he/she is a self-employed journalist. 
In this law, written without prior consultation with the union, the status of freelancers is not defined. 
In practice, you end up fooling the journalists that they'll be able to work as freelancers. 
Since their status is not defined, in practice they are unemployed journalists," Chausidis said.
The ministry said during the draft law preparation they invited the journalists and observers to give their opinions, proposals and changes to the draft.
"All relevant media representatives were invited to the discussions: media, NGOs, journalist associations, audio-visual authors, regulatory bodies, state institutions, so their voices are heard, to form a clear view of the situation in the media, and prepare a quality new law," Ivanovski said.
The new law on media and audio-visual services in Macedonia will replace the current broadcast law, widening its scope; in addition to regulating television and radio, the new law will also regulate print and online media.
Proposed legal provisions will set up a new regulatory body, a media agency to replace the current broadcast council, and increase the authorities regulating the media.
Most countries in the region and Europe have laws that regulate the media sector, but the provisions differ. 
In Serbia, the new public information and media law is also in its draft phase. 
Macedonian authorities said that they prepared the new media regulations according to the Croatian example.
Will stricter regulation allow more media freedom in the region? 
Let us know what you think below.
