16/04/2013
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 16/04/13
The Movement for a Common Vision, an NGO that aims to lead the discussion on promoting interethnic tolerance in the country, saw a membership of 200 within three weeks of its creation.
Macedonians and minority Albanians, Roma, Turks and Bosniaks all joined the group that was formed by Jani Gorgi and Fatim Kryeziu.
"The idea ...
is to suggest to young people in Macedonia to live without the pressures, threats or manipulations by certain political parties which [promote] hatred based on ethnicity.
None of us chose which ethnicity to belong to," Kryeziu told SETmes.
Kryeziu and Gorgi said the NGO supports Macedonia Euro-Atlantic orientation, and will strive to explain global and local trends, organise debates and break ethnically-based prejudices.
"We support the idea that people's most powerful weapon is knowledge and meaningful talk.
There are a few problematic issues we plan to focus on, but above all we will give a special attention in spreading and urging our positive spirit among the youth," Kryeziu said.
Kryeziu likened the existing ethnic problems, especially between Albanians and Macedonians, to a time bomb.
"[R]adical groups exist everywhere, but as a society we have an obligation to isolate them in order to eliminate their influence in the life of young pople," Kryeziu said.
Gorgi, who recently moved to Skopje, said the stakes are high and the time has come to prove intolerance is neither smart nor practical.
"[If not], we will never function as we should as a nation and as a democratic and European state," Gorgi told SETimes.
The NGO will seek financial support from local and international donors.
"This organisation may become an important bridge between people confrontated by political party nationalisms," Fadil Lepaja, director of the Centre for Balkan Studies in Skopje, told SETimes.
Many welcomed the movement, but caution that the organization is in danger of having a marginal impact if the root causes of the ethnic tensions are not addressed.
"Macedonians have certainly shown they want dialogue and co-existence, but have viewed talk about tolerance as a way to sugarcoat the Albanian parties inspired violence and electoral nationalism, as we witnessed in the past months.
They are fearful there is more sinister political play at work aiming to federalise Macedonia," Aleksandra Simonovic, secretary for SEMAK, a Bitola-based NGO promoting social-economic cohesion, told SETimes.
"The new NGO … should ask how their approach can be successful when few, if any, have showed specific, visible results," Aleksandar Cvetkovski, ethnologist and president of AGTIS, an NGO for civil tolerance and co-operation in Prilep, told SETimes.
Correspondent Klaudija Lutovska in Bitola contributed to this report.
How will the Movement for a Common Vision make significant steps ahead in promoting unity in Macedonia and improveng Albania-Macedonia relations?
Share your views in the comments space.
