16/04/2013
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/04/13
According to the European Commission's Innovation Union Scoreboard, Serbia has advanced the most in investments in science and technology in relation to the EU member states and the region.
The country has increased budget allocations for science by 22 percent, which is more than any other country in Europe.
"If we take into consideration that Serbia started investing in innovation in 2011, then this is a success," Ministry of Science, Education and Technological Development spokesman Dragica Gavrilovic, told SETimes.
"With a help of state budget, which last year allocated 1.37 percent GDP for innovation, and various EU projects, Serbia is trying to find its place on the regional and global innovation market."
Despite financial support from EU, most of the other Balkan countries showed poor performance in financing innovation projects, according to the scoreboard, which monitors innovation trends across the EU member states, as well as Croatia, Iceland, Macedonia, Norway, Serbia, Switzerland and Turkey.
The Innovation Union Scoreboard ranked most of the countries in the region as "moderate" and "modest," indicating below average performance.
According to the report, Serbia's relative strengths are in finance and support of innovators, relative weaknesses are in intellectual assets.
"High growth [in Serbia] is achieved in research in public sector, co-operation of small- and medium-sized enterprises and foreign revenues based on the licenses and patents," Ljiljana Kundakovic, the director of the Innovation Fund, told SETimes.
"However, a sharp drop has been noticed in the expenses in research and development in business, as well as export of services that demand specific skills.
Business conditions are very low."
According to the ministry, Serbia needs to work to create a friendly business environment for innovation.
"In order to increase our scope of innovation, [we must] invest in innovation but also provide conditions for work and good education for our experts," Dusan Vujovic, a professor at the faculty for economy, finances and administration at a private university in Belgrade, told SETimes.
"Without this, Serbia and other countries in the region cannot do much on the international market."
According to the European Commission' report, the best ranked country in the region after Serbia is Cyprus, although its main weakness is finance and support.
Croatia and Greece are with Serbia in the group of moderate innovators, while Turkey and Macedonia are modest innovators.
Bulgaria and Romania are among the bottom countries on the list relating to innovation finance and performances.
Last year, only 0.48 percent of Romania's budget was transferred to the innovation sector.
But, despite lack of funding, Romanian inventors showed high innovation performance.
According to ARCA, a non-profit organisation that spearheads the Romanian Space Programme for 2012 to 2025, conditions for innovations are poor but it does not stop innovators from being successful.
"Despite the current situation regarding reduced budgets for research, we are able, on a personal level, to achieve performance," ARCA President Dumitru Popescu told SETmes.
"We managed already to launch two rockets and we are preparing to launch the third in the fall."
In Turkey, according to the data of Turkish Statistical Institute, the share allocated for research and development and innovation has increased from 2002 to 2012, equalling almost 8 billion dollars a year.
However, this picture is not promising for a country that hopes to rank among the top 10 innovative countries globally by 2023.
Mete Cakmakci, secretary-general of the Technology Development Foundation of Turkey, a public-private partnership managing various technology and innovation programmes, said that although the amount and the scope of the public support programmes have been increasing since 2004, the performance of the country is not sufficient at all.
"If Turkey wants to reach a sustainable global competitiveness regarding [research and development], it should increase the scope and the volume of the relevant innovative activities and obtain a high number of license and patent revenues, which still remains one of the deficiencies in Turkey's case," Cakmakci told SETimes.
The EU continues support innovations in the Balkans.
In co-operation with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the European Investment Bank, the union has provided 41 million euros to the countries in the region.
"Venture Initiative in the Balkan Europe is a project that gathers 20 partners from 12 countries," Kudankovic said.
"This is the first such initiative that covers whole region.
We want to support national investors, small- and medium-sized companies in their developments on European markets."
Correspondents Menekse Tokyay in Istanbul and Gabriel Petrescu in Bucharest contributed to this report.
How big is your county's potential in innovation and what could be the most successful fields to invest in?
Tell us what you think by commenting below.
