19/06/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 19/06/13
The families of war crime victims and human rights NGOs in Montenegro said a court decision upholding the acquittal of nine former policemen accused of detaining and deporting Bosnian refugees in 1992 is the "denial of justice for victims of this war crime."
"The court rejected the appeals [against the acquittals] as unfounded and confirmed the first instance verdict," the court said in a statement on June 3rd.
Jasenka Perovic, president of the association representing the families of the deported, said the verdict shows no willingness to clear things up.
"This case has turned into one big parody," Perovic told SETimes.
"The decision of the Appellate Court is an attack on the rule of law," Tea Gorjanc Prelevic, executive director of Human Rights Action NGO from Podgorica, told SETimes.
In November 2012, the superior court in Podgorica acquitted the nine policemen who were charged with the unlawful arrest and deportation of nearly 80 Bosniak and Serb refugees from Montenegro to Republika Srpska in May 1992. 
Following the deportations, most of the deported were killed, and none of their remains have been found.
Zdravko Begovic, the lawyer for Bozidar Stojovic, one of the accused policemen, said the court upheld the defence's thesis.
"With all due respect to those unfortunate people who have been deported and the pain of their families, I think the court made the only possible right decision," Begovic told SETimes. 
"There was simply no evidence that these people done that."
The victims' families "were morally killed" with this verdict, Perovic said, but stressed that they will continue to seek justice.
"I believe that we will find a way to solve this from some other angle, with some other courts," Perovic said. 
"There is no adequate will and maturity of the Montenegrin judiciary to deal with such matters."
Since this was a second instance verdict, according to the Montenegrin justice system, the prosecutor can now only file a complaint about the protection of legality to the Supreme Court. 
However, the Prosecutor's Office didn't respond to SETimes' request on whether they will do that.
"We expect the State Prosecutor's Office to file a motion for the protection of legality to the Supreme Court, and that this court will ensure the rule of law in this case," Gorjanc Prelevic said.
Amnesty International mentioned war crime verdicts in its May report on human rights violations in Montenegro.
"In some cases, court proceedings were not fully in line with international standards, and verdicts were inconsistent with international law," the report said.
Out of the three other ongoing war crime trials in Montenegro, only one has resulted in a first-instance conviction so far.
Former soldiers Ivo Gojnic, Spiro Lucic, Ivo Menzalin and Boro Gligic were sentenced to 12 years in prison for war crimes against prisoners in 1991 and 1992.
The appeals court overturned the verdict in 2012 and the case is currently being retried at the Podgorica superior court.
