21/05/2013
By Ana Lovakovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 21/05/13
In order for positive changes to occur in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the international community must become more involved, High Representative in BiH Valentin Inzko said.
Addressing the UN Security Council last week, Inzko said that officials who want change must be supported, and those who seek to reopen past wounds must be ignored.
However, he reiterated his continuing hope that the negative political trend of recent years can be brought to an end and that in six months it will be possible to brief the UN on progress in the country.
"I know that they can do much better," Incko said, "and I call on them from this distinguished forum to show courage."
Inzko said that Republica Srpska (RS) is more functional and efficient than the Federation of BiH, but he emphasised concern over the nationalistic rhetoric by RS President Milorad Dodik.
Dodik, a proponent of independence for the Serb entity of the country, recently said that BiH has no future and no chance to survive as a country.
"Even if we gave [the state] everything they are asking for and transferred competences onto Sarajevo, things would not get better. 
What would be the consequence? 
An exodus," Dodik said last month.
Inzko noted that while other countries in the region are moving forward to a promising future within Euro-Atlantic institutions, BiH leaders have continued to fail their citizens and to fall short of the expectations of the international community.
As a result, the country has fallen further behind its neighbours.
Nothing can be achieved without consolidating the rule of law, Inzko said, citing "numerous cases in which political leaders, parties and institutions sidestep, ignore or in some cases directly violate requirements set out in constitutions and laws for the sake of political expediency."
Officials in the state were critical of Inzko's report.
"If there is a failure … the OHR is definitely part of the failure," RS Prime Minister Zeljka Cvijanovic said.
Mirsad Djapo, Social Democratic Party of BiH vice president, expected the report to be more specific on the politicians that are holding back the Euro-Atlantic process.
"I expected him to talk about the parties that want to retain power in the Federation, although they do not have a parliamentary majority. 
The High Representative in this section should be more specific," Djapo said.
Veso Vegar, a spokesman for HDZ 1990, said the report missed the central issue. 
"There are leaders in BiH who do not act responsibly, but that's not the crux of the problem. 
The [issue is] the Dayton Agreement and the structure that it established."
Some analysts also urge the international community to take action.
Adnan Huskić, a political analyst and lecturer at the Sarajevo School of Science and Technology, said the current situation does not benefit anyone, and politicians will not to be the agent of positive change in the country.
"Only now are we beginning to feel the real consequences and of the incompetent people who are involved in politics. 
The reason is that we … do not have an active international community," Huskic told SETimes.
In July, when Croatia joins the EU, there may be more international involvement, he said. 
Because of BiH's border with Croatia, it will behove the community to stem any "state of chaos in the neighbourhood."
But not everyone agrees that this is an international problem to solve.
Djordje Tomić, a professor at the University in Banja Luka, said the international community is satisfied with the present security situation in BiH, and the political issues in the country are not their problem.
"Realistically, we can expect the international community to support the status quo. 
Brussels, however, does not provide much motivation to politicians and citizens for change," Tomic told SETimes.
What can the international community do to help Bosnia and Herzegovina get on track for Euro-Atlantic accession? 
Post you thoughts below.
