14/08/2006

Albania's five largest commercial banks have installed special software to help detect money laundering. 
It allows suspicious transactions to be verified in real time, thus reducing delays in the investigation of suspicious accounts. 
The finance ministry says it expects the software to be installed in all the country's banks by the end of the year.
***
Bulgaria's IT sector saw the largest salary increases in the country -- an average of 20 per cent -- during 2005, according to a survey conducted by AIMS Human Capital. 
In some cases, wages went up 90 per cent. 
The survey concluded that IT was Bulgaria's most dynamic market segment.
***
DSL and cable high-speed connections are used by some 34 per cent of Romanian, 20 per cent of Croatian and 15 per cent of Turkish Internet users, according to a regional survey by the European Commission. 
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, meanwhile, only 8 per cent of users have such connection. 
The survey concluded that the quality of Internet services depends on liberalisation of the domestic telecom market, with Romania's fully opened market contributing significantly to the wider use of high-speed connections there.
***
Prominent Serbian geneticist Miodrag Stojkovic has unveiled plans to open a new clinic for in-vitro fertilisation and a centre for stem cell research and regenerative medicine in Belgrade. 
He said the institution could start operating as early as September, once permission is received from Serbian authorities. 
The Italian pharmaceutical company Sintofarm is a partner in the project, and will invest 3m euros in equipment.
***
Symantec, Sophos, ESET and Trend Micro accounted for half of all anti-virus software sales in Croatia in 2005, according to data from IDC Adriatics. 
In all, the value of the IT security solutions market in Croatia was 13m euros last year, according to the analysis. 
Meanwhile, the Croatian anti-virus software company F-Secure announced it has developed a special programme for mobile telephones. 
The firm hopes to gain a larger share of the domestic market, as some 208,000 Croatians access the Internet through their mobile phones.
***
The Bulgarian Ministry of State Administration announced on 7 August that public administration would purchase 12,000 new Microsoft licenses. 
Apart from this, the administration needs 2,000 licenses for MS Windows Server Standard, it said.
(Various sources – 04/08/06 – 11/08/06)
