14/12/2012
By Harriet Salem for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 14/12/12
At 5 a.m.
on a dark morning, activists dressed in black gather in an apartment and talk quietly.
Some smoke, others sip strong regional coffee as they make preparations to travel from Belgrade to Vukovar to honor the 264 victims killed there by Serb-sponsored forces in October 1991.
Based on the core concepts of antimilitarism, antifascism and feminism, Women in Black, an international civil rights movement, was founded in 1988 when Israeli women protested against Israel's occupation of Palestinian lands.
The Belgrade chapter was established in 1991 in opposition to civil rights abuses by Slobodan Milosevic's regime.
During the conflicts in the 1990s, activists gathered every Wednesday in Belgrade's Republik Square to hold vigils.
They supported the cause of conscientious objectors and organised humanitarian aid for refugees.
In 1995, while war still raged, they publically recognised the Srebrenica massacre of thousands of Bosniak men and boys by Serbian military.
Now the war is over, but their work is far from finished.
Today, Women in Black are key actors in the tenuous process of reconciliation in a region where centuries of conflict have created deep-rooted nationalist sentiment.
"We address the victims, express our solidarity and empathy," said Stasa Zajović, founder of the Belgrade chapter and a 2005 nominee for the Nobel Peace Prize.
The group not only commemorates victims of the war, but lobbies the government and supports families attending special trials in Belgrade.
"We call it an ethic of care," she told SETimes.
The Serbian government's ongoing denial of the war with Croatia and of war crimes, "is the elephant in the room of all Serbian citizens," long-time activist Gordana Subotica told SETimes.
"The context has changed, but the movement has not.
We are still on the streets.
We still cross borders to stand in solidarity with those declared as enemies."
In two decades of activism, Women in Black have held in excess of 500 peaceful actions and commemorations using their signature technique;
silently holding placards whilst dressed in black.
Yet their protests have consistently invoked fierce anger in opponents.
"In the height of Milosevic's regime I feared for my life, there was so much paranoia and hatred, they were terrible times," Zajović said.
Recent decisions by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) have done little to quell the tide of rising nationalism in Serbia.
In the past two weeks, the Hague-based court acquitted former Prime Minister of Kosovo Ramush Haradinaj, and two Croatian generals, Mladen Markac and Ante Gotovina, of war crimes against Serbs during the breakup of Yugoslavia.
The decisions were greeted with celebrations in the streets Pristina and Zagreb and outrage in Belgrade.
The recently elected Serbian Prime Minister Ivica Dacic, former spokesman to Milosevic, claimed the ICTY had "spat in the face of Serbian victims and made clear there is no international law and justice."
"We absolutely condemn these rulings, they are very dangerous for the climate in Serbia," Zajović said.
"The consequences for the process of reconciliation in the region are serious and catastrophic."
This year, Women in Black were unable to hold their usual candlelight vigil for the Vukovar victims in Belgrade due to concerns for participants' safety.
"Our commemoration of the Vukovar massacre are now just seen as supporting Croatia," Zajović said.
"The Haradinaj acquittal is a direct harm not only to Serb victims, but also Albanians, since it is well known he was also involved in crimes against his own people."
In an increasingly tense climate, the role of Women in Black remains vital.
"As Serbian citizens we have responsibility to not repeat the mainstream policy of nationalism," Zajović said.
"To address our institutions;
to investigate the crimes committed;
there is a lot that has been covered up by the state that has been forgotten."
