13/04/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Struga -- 13/04/13
Macedonia NGO Aureola and Albania's Association of Women with Social Needs are joining forces to develop tourism in Lake Ohrid. 
By increasing the number of tourists, the two countries hope to form stronger cultural ties between residents on both sides of the lake's borders.
"We want to improve the image of the region, help create a strategic vision for economic and social development, improve the economy and cross-border co-operation," Bajana Cheveli, president of the Durres-based Association of Women with Social Needs, told SETimes.
Nurie Zhaku, project co-ordinator, said that Macedonia and Albania will jointly promote Lake Ohrid at well-known European fairs.
"Our top priority is to advertise at tourism fairs in London and Munich. 
We have much to offer and only few people abroad know about it," Zhaku told SETimes.
Ruhije Sulla, president of Aureola NGO, told SETimes that better promotion and more tourists will also boost local economies.
"Here, tourism lasts only two months, a short time for Lake Ohrid residents to live from tourism income. 
The region needs tourism for several months out of the year, that will impact the [both countries] economies and local economies. 
Only good infrastructure is missing, which must be improved," Sulla said.
The NGOs also aim to improve relations between Macedonian and Albanian women through handicrafts and specialties.
A restaurant with national dishes will open in Kalista, Macedonia, where tourists will be offered local specialties.
Vlado Sukloski, an Ohrid tourist worker, agrees that Albania and Macedonia should raise the level of tourism co-operation.
"A good sign of a positive direction is that there are a growing number of Macedonians who vacation in Albania, and Albanians who go there. 
The more Albania opens up, co-operation interest is higher," Sukloski told SETimes.
Sukloski said that the local governments of cities on both sides of the border should join to promote the lake in foreign markets.
Albanian tour operators, representatives of the Albanian Tourism Association, and Albanian media journalists recently visited Ohrid and Struga to familiarise themselves with tourist offers in Macedonia.
How will co-operation initiatives further tourism in the region? 
Tell us your thoughts in the comments.
