13/12/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 13/12/12
The Greek government said it has succeeded in getting investors, boosted by its own banks, to agree to sell back enough of their holdings in Greek bonds to write down the country's debt by 20 billion euros, a condition needed to unblock 34.4 billion euros in loans from international lenders.
Greece said it has agreements to buy back 31.5 billion euros at a discount of more than 60 percent -- meeting the 30 billion-euro goal required by the EU-IMF-ECB Troika. 
They asked the country's lenders for additional funding to complete the buyback beause they had to offer a higher-than-expected price, raising Greece's costs by 1.29 billion euros.
Eurozone finance ministers were expected to meet on Thursday (December 13th) to decide on the release of the first series of loans in the second bailout of 130 billion euros. 
Germany and France called the Greece buy-back deal ''satisfactory'' even though it will cost more than expected.
Finance Minister Yiannis Stournaras told Greek banks and investors it was their "patriotic duty" to comply with requests to sell back the debt, and the government said it would shield them from prospective lawsuits by shareholders who didn't want to take losses.
Andreas Koutras, director of the London office of In Touch Capital Markets, said the plan "will help [Greece] in the immediate reduction of debt, but the 20 billion euros extinguishable from the debt is not payable until 20 years from now. 
It does very little for the serviceability of the debt."
The agreement comes in the wake of a 13.5 billion-euro spending cut and tax increase plan the government is set to implement, which has triggered social unrest.
Prime Minister Antonis Samaras tried to convince sceptical Greeks that without the coming series of loans, to be stretched out through early in 2013, there wouldn't be enough money to pay workers or pensioners.
But of the 34.4 billion euros, about 23.8 billion euros will go to recapitalising the country's banks that are struggling. 
Another 10.6 billion will go to reduce the country's primary deficit and pay back bills.
The Troika said the bond buyback was essential to meet a reconfigured goal to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio to 124 percent by 2020, down from the current 175 percent.
But risks remain. 
The government bonds that Greek banks hold pay a high rate of interest. 
Agreeing to sell them back at a lesser rate means the banks will give up future profit, which could increase the chance they will need more assistance, some analysts said.
"The whole process is kind of strange," Aggelos Tsakanikas, head of research for the Athens-based Foundation for Economic and Industrial Research, told SETimes. 
"If you participate now you get profits, but you also improve Greece's chances of making it at the end, so actually you are losing future higher profits," he said.
