12/04/2013
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 12/04/13
With the European Commission scheduled to release a progress report on Macedonia on Tuesday (April 16th), EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fule visited Skopje to call upon all political parties to formally commit to EU integration.
Fule said the process should not be held hostage by the political discord of the last few months, and officials and experts expect this week's report to be positive.
The opposition, led by the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM), conditioned the process by demanding that a commission be formed to investigate the events that occurred in the Macedonian parliament on December 24th. 
After being ejected from the parliament that day, SDSM members began a boycott that lasted more than two months and threatened to derail local elections that were held March 24th. 
Journalists also were removed from the parliament building on December 24th.
Fule brokered an agreement between the ruling parties and the opposition on March 1st to form such a commission.
"Significant work has been completed and progress has been reached on important questions, but we agreed there is more to be done," Fule said last week in Skopje. 
"Regarding the implementation of the March 1st agreement which solved the political crisis, the politicians created the crisis and have the responsibility to overcome it by implementing this agreement, which has not been done, at least not in full. 
Be responsible, this is your state."
Former Macedonian ambassador Risto Nikovski said Fule's tough tone is necessary, given the disruptive actions of some politicians.
"Fule's efforts to help Macedonia on the path to EU are highly valued. 
There still are politicians in Macedonia who are trying to damage the democratic processes and the EU sees that clearly. 
On March 1, Fule had to come to Macedonia to persuade some parties that their boycott and overall 'stall everything' strategy is damaging to Macedonia, but then they accepted all terms due to Fule's engagement. 
Perhaps it is bad for Macedonia's image, but these pressures from the EU to absorb the destructive politics are welcome," Nikovski told SETimes.
Four members have been named to the commission to investigate the December 24th events: Ilija Dimovski and Blagorodna Dulic from the majority VMRO-DPMNE and professors Renata Deskovska and Lubomir Frchkovki from SDSM. 
The commission's president has not been appointed.
Once the commission begins work, Nasser Selmani, president of the Association of Journalists of Macedonia, said its first task should be to determine why journalists were removed from the parliamentary gallery.
"Freedom of information is the most important thing for democracy, and therefore there is need to determine the responsibility for those who obstructed the work of the reporters and journalists on December 24th," he said.
Macedonia is trying to show it has made progress on various democratic, economic and judicial reforms in advance of the European Commission's report. 
Nano Ruzin, a FON University professor and former Macedonian ambassador to NATO, said it is understandable that EU representatives are disappointed that the December 24th inquiry has not been organised more quickly.
"In the parliament circulated a maxim for 20 years: If you want to marginalise any affair, scandal or problem, then create a commission of inquiry. 
Such a tendency demonstrated the leadership in this country, who believe that the foreign diplomats would accept such game. 
After numerous manipulations of their confidence on various issues, this time the Macedonian authorities are faced with people who do not allow the general promise not to be fulfilled," Ruzin said.
Tanja Karakamiseve, professor of political systems at the Law Faculty in Skopje, told SETimes that the opposition's stance is "non-constructive ... 
which often de-focuses things." She added that Fule is sending the message that both the government and opposition must focus on the EU integration process.
"If, to this message, we add Fule's statement about the positive aspects of the government's work in every accession area, where he praised the reforms according to the goals of the accession dialogue, then he indirectly stated which side demonstrated a non-constructive approach and is putting the brakes on the reforms."
What's your opinion on Macedonia's path to integration? 
Join the debate in the comments section below.
