14/06/2006

Thirty-two teams from Sofia schools are competing in the "Children's World Cup", dedicated to the 2006 Word Cup tournament in Germany. 
The event, held from 9-18 June, has been organised by the municipality of Sofia and the German Embassy. 
Each of the 32 teams represents one of the teams now playing in the World Cup finals.
***
Macedonia's National Opera and Ballet Theatre performed for the first time on an Albanian stage, presenting "Madame Butterfly" by Giacomo Puccini on 8 June in Tirana. 
Japan's Toshio Yanagisawa was the conductor. 
The event was hailed as a major step towards increased co-operation between cultural institutions in the two countries.
***
Over 60 writers from 26 countries are taking part in the 8th World Writers' Meeting, under way at the National Palace of Culture in Sofia from 12-16 June. 
Participants include American poet William Meredith and his Russian colleague, Yevgeny Yevtushenko. 
The forum is co-organised by the Bulgarian Writers' Association and the Orpheus and Slavyani foundations, and sponsored by Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov.
***
The 17th edition of the World Festival of Animated Film, Animafest, is under way in Zagreb from 11-17 June. 
This year, the festival's Lifetime Achievement Award goes to a legend in the art of cartooning, Russia's Fyodor Khirtuk. 
The American 2006 Award for Outstanding Achievement in Animation Theory goes to American cartoonist and writer John Canemaker.
***
Turkish musician Omer Faruk Tekbilek began a tour in Spain on 7 June with a performance at the 6th Madrid Festival. 
He is expected to continue with concerts in Ferroz, Barcelona, Zaragoza, Valencia, Cadiz and Granada in the coming weeks. 
The 55-year old multi-instrumentalist has won a number of Turkish and foreign music awards for his unique mixing of percussion with traditional Anatolian instruments such as the ney, zurna, baglama and oud.
***
The 12th edition of the Feast of Lime Trees literary event was held in Skopje on 9 June. 
Co-organised by the Macedonian Writers' Association and Skopje Municipality, it drew together some 30 poets from the country. 
The domestic award for achievement in poetry went to Jovan Strezovski, while the international one went to Slovenia's Ales Steger.
***
A retrospective exhibition of the Montenegrin artist Aljo Smailagic opened on 10 June at the Modern Gallery in Budva. 
The event honoured the 50th anniversary of Smailagic's creative career. 
He has had over 24 solo exhibitions and over 250 collective ones in Montenegro, the former Yugoslavia and abroad.
***
The 29th edition of the international art colony "USLUS-Vranovac" was held on 11-13 June in Vrnjacka Banja, Serbia. 
This year, the programme included a workshop of Serbian amateur naïve artists -- the first of its kind in the country.
(Various sources – 07/06/06 – 14/06/06)
