15/06/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/06/13
Recent efforts affirming minority rights in Kosovo and Montenegro are signalling the steady development of relations between the two countries, while assuring the status of yet-to-be recognised minorities.
A two-day Kosovo-Montenegro friendship forum was held in early June, organised by the Association of Montenegrins of Kosovo, and supported by two respective foreign ministries and ministries of culture in Pristina and Podgorica.
Representatives of the Albanian community in Montenegro and the Montenegrin community in Kosovo discussed diplomatic co-operation, trade and culture.
"Ethnic Montenegrin community and Montenegrin diaspora are a kind of a bridge between Kosovo and Montenegro, something we have proven several times since our foundation.
Crowning that is the exchange of the charge d'affaires between Montenegro and Kosovo, which will soon be followed by the exchange of ambassadors," Slobodan Vujicic, the president of the Association of Montenegrins of Kosovo, told SETimes.
According to the association there are between 14,000 and 15,000 Montenegrins in Kosovo, out of 27,028 before the war.
More than 5,000 are displaced in Montenegro and, according to the UN Refugee Agency, around 8,300 in Serbia.
They mainly live in the border areas along with Albania and Kosovo.
Montenegrins, however, are not yet recognised in the Kosovo constitution.
"Since our association was founded, and we sent an official demand for the recognition of our legal and constitutional position and representation in the Kosovo assembly, our position improved in many ways, as were our rights, which will be the same as all other minorities in Kosovo," Vujicic said.
"Guarantees and frequent messages from senior Kosovo officials, including the prime minister, show that [Montenegro minority rights will be levelled with other minorities in Kosovo]," he added.
In May, Selimi affirmed that Kosovo and Montenegro will expand co-operation in the context of European standards.
"Albanians in Montenegro are bridges of connection, but in economy, infrastructure, and political co-operation, there is space for a deeper co-operation," Selimi said.
However, Kosovo's opposition Vetevendosje Movement said the rights of Albanians in Montenegro are often violated.
Xhelal Svecla, Vetevendosje's foreign relations secretary, said that the violations include the lack of political and territorial autonomy on the local level, property returns to the former owners, lack of educational opportunities and not recording and recognising Albanian cultural heritage.
"The [government] should raise their voice to oppose violations and affirm wherever they go the rights of Albanians in Montenegro," Svecla told SETimes.
Genci Nimanbegu, president of the Albanian Forca party in Montenegro, thinks that authorities should do more to improve the position of the Albanian minority in Montenegro.
"In the last 20 years serious steps have been made to improve the minorities' position in Montenegro.
Yet, the Albanian minority position is complex;
the state still needs to introduce laws in defining the position of minorities, like it is in the EU.
NGO's have done a lot, but the current economic situation and lack of funds makes that work difficult," Nimanbegu told SETimes.
Montenegro has several Albanian political parties, with four Albanian representatives in the parliament, out of a total of 81.
"We are still quite politically disunited and perhaps this is the reason why some issues of Albanians in Montenegro have not yet been resolved.
...Everyone should have an opportunity to prove themselves in politics.
That's what democracy is all about," Nimanbegu added.
Djon Ivanaj, an Albanian agricultural worker from Ulcinj, Montenegro, said that times have changed since the 1990s when discrimination against Albanians was widespread.
"Luckily, that time has passed, and now we are living like every other resident of Montenegro.
Economic situation is hard, a crisis does not consider one's nationality, so I guess nobody anymore looks at one's nationality, but only how to survive the next month," Ivanaj told SETimes.
Correspondent Drazen Remikovic in Podgorica contributed to this report.
What can the Montenegro and Kosovo governments do to improve minority rights?
Let us know below.
