15/03/2006
(Various sources – 08/03/06 – 15/03/06)
The world premiere of Bosnian director Nenad Djuric's movie "Nebo iznad krajolika" ("Skies above the Landskape") will take place on 16 March in Sofia, as part of the 10th Sofia International Film Festival.
The film is included in the International Competition programme of the festival, which began on 9 March and will last until 19 March.
Shooting of the new movie "Armin" by Croatian director Ognjen Svilicic started at the Holiday Hotel in Zagreb last week.
It is expected to continue later in Bosanska Krupa, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and finish at the end of April.
The film tells the story of a father and a son who arrive in Croatia from a small BiH village, seeking to audition for a German movie production dedicated to the conflict in BiH.
Romanian Culture Minister Adrian Iorgulescu announced last week that the government has secured 250m euros in financing from international institutions for the restoration of cultural buildings across the country.
The list includes the National Opera building in Bucharest, as well as the unfinished Romanian National Library.
The OSCE Mission to Macedonia donated translation equipment to the Cucer Sandevo municipality, under a project aimed at promoting interethnic dialogue.
The equipment will be used during sessions of the municipal council conducted in Macedonian, Serbian and Albanian, as well as for support of local NGO's activities and public debates.
An exhibition of works by the Bulgarian sculptor Hristo Mihailov opened at the Cultural Information Centre in Skopje on 14 March.
Mihailov's art features sculptures and mosaics made with semiprecious stones.
The exhibition will continue until 21 March.
An exhibition of works by the young Rijeka artist Sanja Ipsic-Randic opened at the European House in Zagreb on 14 March.
It presents 11 paintings from her cycle "Oceanus".
An exhibition by the Macedonian-born artist Evgenija Demnievska, who has been living and working in Paris since 1981, was launched at the Haos Gallery in Belgrade, on 14 March.
Titled "Man, Space and Symbol", the exhibition was organised in co-operation with the French Culture Centre in Belgrade.
