11/09/2006
Scientists from across the globe will gather in Bulgaria from Wednesday (13 September) through Friday for an annual conference on artificial intelligence. 
AIMSA 2006, organised by the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, will be held at the seaside resort of St. 
Constantine. 
Some 25 papers have been selected, out of 80 submitted. 
The theme this year is "Artificial Intelligence: People and the Web". 
Bulgaria has hosted the conference since 1984.
***
PC design tools producer Autodesk and its authorised distributor in Romania, A&C international, launched a campaign to promote the legal use of software. 
According to the companies, approximately 90 per cent of Autodesk software used in Romania is illegal. 
In 2005, Romania reported a piracy rate of 72 per cent, with losses amounting to some 87m euros.
***
EU Commissioner for Science and Research Janez Potocnik is calling for greater involvement by Turkish companies and industry in EU technology projects. 
Potocnik made his first official visit to Turkey from 6-8 September. 
He participated in two conferences co-organised by the Turkish Scientific and Technological Research Council. 
The commissioner next left for Romania, where he will hold talks with senior officials.
***
A Romanian team -- consisting of high school students Mircea Pasoi, Codrut Grosu, Tiberiu Lucian Florea and Adrian Vlad -- won two gold, one silver and one bronze medal at this year's edition of the International Olympiad in Informatics, held in Yucatan, Mexico. 
The Romanians also did well at last year's contest in Poland, where they won two silver and two bronze medals.
***
The London-based organisations Child Advocacy International and Lions Club donated new baby incubators worth 70,000 euros to the Paediatric Clinic in Paprikovac, Republika Srpska (RS). 
The donation was delivered to the clinic on 5 September at a ceremony attended by RS Minister of Health and Social Protection Ranko Skrbic. 
He said the government has approved some 664,000 euros for highly sophisticated equipment and technology for the Paprikovac neonatology centre.
***
The Macedonian internet provider On.net announced it will start to provide fixed-line telephony services in 2007. 
The company will sign an interconnection agreement with Macedonian Telecom, which previously had a monopoly on landline services. 
On.net also envisions establishing a broadband internet wireless network in the country.
(Various sources – 04/09/06 – 11/09/06)
