16/05/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 16/05/13
Children in Turkey and the Balkans are living healthier and happier lives thanks to improvements in health services and civil society engagement.
That's one conclusion from a report published earlier this month by the international NGO Save the Children. 
The group assessed maternal health, education, child mortality and income in 176 countries to paint a general picture of children's rights in the world. 
The 10 worst countries to be a mother are all in sub-Saharan Africa, while Finland is the best, according to the report.
Turkey ranked 60th on the index, with the report crediting Ankara for progress in children's health.
"Turkey, an upper middle-income country, has reduced newborn mortality by 69 percent since 1990. 
The transformation of Turkey's health system over the past decade has been comprehensive, with reforms aimed at mothers and newborns playing a central role," the report states.
About 15 children of all 1,000 children born in Turkey die before their fifth birthday. 
Three of 1,000 die on their first day.
Lilia Jelamschi, chief of the Health and Nutrition Section at the Turkey branch of the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), also praised Turkey's progress.
"Turkey's Under-5 mortality rate [as of] 2009 was reduced by 76 percent over 1990 levels," she told SETimes.
Romania weighed in at 61st place on Save the Children's world rankings, behind Bulgaria, Serbia, Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina and ahead of Albania and Moldova, with an infant mortality rate of three per 1,000 births. 
Romania has the highest infant mortality rate among EU countries.
Ana Maita, founder and president of the Romanian civil society group Mothers for Mothers, told SETimes adherence to international standards would help Romania improve its record on children's health.
"The reasons for this sad situation are clear: poor health education, lack of access to maternity healthcare services and the failure of healthcare authorities to implement basic World Health Organisation recommendations regarding pregnancy, birth and breastfeeding," Maita said.
International and local organisations have informed the Romanian authorities about simple, cost-effective and efficient strategies to improve maternity care. 
Their recommendations include subsidised prenatal courses, professional empowerment of midwifery, and promotion of normal birth and breastfeeding, according to Maita.
"The authorities have until now failed to integrate these strategies in national healthcare policies because of political instability and the medical establishment's resistance to change," Maita told SETimes.
Macedonia came in at 40th of 176 countries in the report, an improvement of two ranks compared to last year.
"This shows that the conditions for pregnant women and mothers, as well as the system for monitoring the extremely vulnerable groups is satisfying and improving," Denis Al Khalili, president of the Lulka NGO, which provides women with education during pregnancy and childbirth, told SETimes.
"Measures to protect pregnant women and mothers during their employment, activities to promote gender equality, together with measures of health authorities for renovation, equipping and training of staff in the segment of gynaecological-obstetric, paediatric, and intensive neonatal care have resulted in improved conditions, timely and high quality care for mothers before and after delivery and proper care of her baby."
Serbia placed at the 36th on Save the Children's rankings, with an infant mortality rate of 7.1 per 1,000 live births.
"Serbia has the system for mortality prevention but it should be improved through additional education means for home visiting service workers as well as for those who work within the services for social work," Sasa Stefanovic, a co-ordinator at the For Children civil society group, told SETimes.
Stefanovic added that home-based health services and greater healthcare provision in poor neighbourhoods would enable further progress.
"When it comes to protection of children, there are five prior areas and purposes: reduce poverty, increase the quality of health protection, provide all children with a quality education, protect them from violence, and reduce the cost of treatment," he said.
Save the Children also highlighted the importance of reducing income inequality for children's health.
"At the heart of the newborn survival problem is the widening gap between the health of the world's rich and poor. 
Virtually all (98 percent) newborn deaths occur in developing countries, and within many of these countries, babies born to the poorest families have a much higher risk," the report states.
Severine Jacomy-Vite, chief of the Child Protection Section at UNICEF Turkey, said empowerment and equality lie at the core of any long-term solution.
"What may need to be done further is to empower all girls from a young age and give them equal access to quality services and information so that they will be in a position to make the right decisions for themselves and their baby when they become mothers," Jacomy-Vité told SETimes.
Correspondents Marina Stojanovska in Skopje, Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest and Ivana Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report.
What do you think can be done to improve respect for children's rights? 
Share your ideas in the comments area.
