13/06/2013
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 13/06/13
Due to the lack of progress in implementing the Sejdic-Finci verdict, the EU Parliament has sent a warning to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The country is at risk of losing its Stabilisation and Association Agreement and European Council membership, the parliament said. 
The move would set the country even further back in its EU bid progress, where it is trailing other regional countries.
"Bosnia and Herzegovina is unfortunately still lagging behind other countries in the region. 
To change this, we must see much stronger commitment and willingness of political elites to join forces on a clear vision of the country's overall direction," Doris Pack, German MP and special rapporteur for BiH, said.
"This is a powerful political message to BiH politicians," Jelko Kacin, rapporteur in the European Parliament for the Western Balkans, told SETimes.
At issue is BiH's refusal to implement the 2010 European Court of Human Rights verdict in the cases of Finci and Sejdic vs BiH that gives more rights to the country's ethnic minorities.
Pack recommended suspending EU funds for BiH that amount to 108 million euros this year, but the European Parliament refused.
"The suspension would serve as a clear warning to politicians. 
They have made a serious problem, as they did not do anything," Pack said.
"To lose [EU] funds would mean considerably lowering the capital flow into the country. 
These resources are mostly used by NGOs, which advocate legal corrections; improve quality of life, advocate co-existence, demining, advancement of educational, health and social systems," Inga Oruc, from the Zenica-based Horizons NGO, said.
But officials said sanctions will not help things.
"The suggestion to punish BiH shows lack of understanding at the core of the problem in the country. 
Punishing BiH and its citizens will not result in any radical measures for the country," BiH foreign Affairs Minister Zlatko Lagumdzija said.
Citizens think that Pack's proposal to suspend EU funds would have been the ultimate warning for politicians.
"What else needs to happen in our country for our leaders to understand the hopelessness in which we live? 
The citizens wallow in poverty as they spend time in their small political games, and concrete effects of their political engagement are nowhere to be seen," Rajko Krivokapic, from Olovo near Sarajevo, told SETimes.
How can the EU enforce its message to politicians in BiH? 
Let us know what you think below.
