09/01/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 09/01/13
Civil society in Kosovo is raising the issue of unfair employment practices in public administration. 
The government is the biggest employer in Kosovo. 
Nearly 23 percent in a country of 1.7 million -- which faces near 50 percent unemployment -- are public administration employees.
UNDP conducted a study which revealed that 83 percent of Kosovo citizens believe public sector employment is obtained by means other than merit -- a 16 percent increase from 2011.
The study found that the majority of Kosovars believe family connections, bribes, party allegiance and friends are the most important factors in obtaining a job.
"Nepotism is common everywhere in Kosovo, not only in public administration. 
The phenomenon has become normal, therefore society has begun accepting it. 
But it nevertheless constitutes a flagrant violation of human rights," to Behxhet Shala, executive director of the Council for Defending Human Rights and Freedoms in Kosovo, a leading human rights organisation, told SETimes.
"The calls to fill positions are only a formality since somebody already works in the positions or persons are already selected to fill them -- in 85 to 90 percent of the cases," Shala said.
Clientelism in Kosovo politics is the root cause of nepotism, according to Avni Bytyci, executive director of the Pristina-based NGO Initiative for Progress.
"People who collect votes or money for the party are rewarded with public positions. 
And it definitely has a direct impact on the performance of the administration in Kosovo," Bytyci told SETimes.
Bytyci suggested that one way to deal with the nepotism would be to increase employment opportunities in the private sector.
"The administration should be separated from politics. 
Gradually, by opening new jobs, reduced to the number that is standard for the number of residents," Bytyci said.
Failing such a measure, nepotism will continue to discourage qualified individuals from applying as well as educated individuals abroad from returning, he added. 
Law graduate Aferdita Osmani said the government did not respond to her applications.
"I really have no trust anymore to apply for a job because even my valuable degree and work experience in Kosovo and abroad does not matter unless somebody pulls for you or you bribe them," Osmani told SETimes.
Shala called on the government to respond to the complaints his organisation has received regarding violations of the rules on job announcements.
"Legally, it may take years to sort out. 
Even persons who have initiated complaints claiming damages give up, do not attempt again, as this resembles a kind of a Don Quixote war," Shala said.
