15/05/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/05/13
The Serbian Orthodox Church is facing criticism after some of its representatives took part in a protest against the recent agreement reached by Serbia and Kosovo in Brussels, and made what analysts and officials are calling "threats against the state."
Serbs from Northern Kosovo, who do not accept the recent agreement, organised a protest in Belgrade at Republic Square on May 10th under the motto "We are staying in Serbia."
More than 3,000 protesters gathered as the rally was led by Democratic Party of Serbia and Radical Party officials. 
Among the speakers at the rally were northern Kosovo municipality political representatives and Serbian Orthodox Church dignitaries Metropolitan Amfilohije Radovic and retired Bishop Atanasije.
"Prime Minister [Ivica] Dacic is saying that he is in favor of realistic policy and worldly Serbia, rather than a heavenly one. 
Unfortunately, Djindjic spoke in the same way, and look how he ended up. 
Let God be the judge," Atanasije told the crowd, referring to assassinated Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
Amfilohije, who received his title at a time when former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic needed church support for his wars, held a prayer at the protest for the repose for the government and parliament of Serbia.
The performances of the two church representatives drew criticism.
"Everything that happened on Friday in Belgrade, especially the participation of church representatives, I can't describe with any other word than scandal. 
Metropolitante Amfilohije was saying prayer for the repose to the government and parliament, [a prayer] only said for those who are dead and during their requiem. 
This is direct threat to government and the highest legislature body, which is unprecedented," Mirko Djordjevic, sociologist of religion and member of the Republika magazine's editorial board, told SETimes.
Patriarch Irinej has tried to distance the church from the incidents.
"Metropolitan Amfilohije asked to serve moleban in the temple and I agreed. 
Everything else that was done outside the temple is his personal affair and his personal stance. 
Neither myself, neither the Synod, nor the church, stand behind that," Patriarch Irinej told Tanjug on Friday.
The patriarch added that Atanasije didn't have his permission to take the stage in Belgrade.
Dacic called the statements inappropriate, and said the church should not be making open threats towards the state.
"Nobody has the right to threaten others and to behave as if they live in the time of the Inquisition," he said.
Danica Radisavljevic, a Serbian language professor from Pozarevac, was also dismayed by the situation.
"I can't believe that people who serve to God and represent the church can have such attitude. 
They should spread faith, hope, peace and love among all people ... 
But, what they do? 
They help people to become worse for themselves and for the whole world," Danica told SETimes.
Suncica Trajkovic, a housewife from Vranje, agreed.
"Amfilohije prays for the repose of parliament while some of parliament members are sitting in front of him … I'm confused and do not know any more what to think and in what to believe," Suncica told SETimes.
Representatives of the True Serbian Orthodox Church, a parallel Serbian Orthodox Church, said the incident shows that the state and church are in conflict.
"This is an attempt to attract people for their own purposes and simple fight with the current authorities who do not want to hide shameful details about the church," Uros Mančić-Ctec Uros, a representative of the parallel church, told SETimes.
What role should religious leaders take in public policy? 
Let us know your thoughts in the comments.
