10/03/2006
(Various sources – 03/03/06 - 10/03/06)
The project to build a trans-Balkan pipeline could be jeopardised if the Albanian government moves to change the route over the country's territory, Albanian-Macedonian-Bulgarian Oil Pipeline Corporation president Ted Ferguson warned. 
Prime Minister Sali Berisha and his cabinet have said they want to use a port other than Vlora for the pipeline, arguing that it would be better to turn Vlora into a destination for tourists rather than an industrial centre.
***
The ongoing problem with delayed entity budgets in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is closer to being resolved. 
On 7 March, the Federation of BiH Parliament adopted a 581m-euro budget, while the Republika Srpska government adopted a 532m-euro budget. 
The RS budget now awaits final approval from the entity's legislature.
***
The international rating agency Moody's has assigned foreign currency and local currency issuer ratings of A2 to the city of Athens. 
The outlook is stable. 
The agency said the decision was due to the Greek capital's dynamic local economy and revenue collection improvements.
***
Croatian Finance Minister Ivan Suker said the government is considering the option of writing off claims against about 200 companies in which the state is a majority shareholder. 
He said the overall liabilities of these enterprises total around 615m euros and, due to their extreme indebtedness, their sale is impossible for the time being. 
To make them more attractive for privatisation, the companies' debt towards the state would be written off.
***
Hungary's OTP Bank announced the completion of the acquisition procedure for Serbia's Niska Banka. 
OTP paid a price of 14.21m euros for a 90 per cent stake in the Serbian financial institution. 
The Hungarian investor is participating in the bidding tenders for other two local banks -- Zepter Banka and Vojvodjanska Banka.
***
Macedonia's industrial output rose by 1.8 per cent year-on-year in January 2006, according to the latest official data. 
Compared to December 2005, however, industrial production registered a 31.7 per cent decline, attributed to lower output in the processing industry.
