10/04/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/04/13
Kosovo recently became one of 37 countries in the world -- and the only one in the Balkans -- to enter a global partnership in the fight against organised crime, weapons trafficking and terrorism.
The government will receive free access to eTrace, an internet-based system used to track illegal firearms. 
The application allows for the analysis of firearms trace data that can assist in identifying trafficking patterns, and geographic profiling for criminal hot spots and possible sources of illegal firearms.
Mentor Vrajolli, an analyst at the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, said the programme "may help Kosovo rule of law institutions to take a more prominent role in combating and preventing organised crime on the regional level," since smuggling is a regional problem and Kosovo will become the only country in the Balkans with such an arrangement.
Kosovo is working through several crucial international relations processes, including attempts to fulfil conditions on visa liberalisation and on-going negotiations with Serbia.
Vrajolli said Kosovo needs to make steady progress in order to join the European integration process, and he added that the amount of illegal firearms believed to exist in the country may damage the country's European aspirations.
A 2012 report by the Kosovo Forum for Security said 17,142 weapons were confiscated in Kosovo between 2000 and 2011. 
According to a 2011 UN Development Programme report, there are more than 330,000 illegal weapons in Kosovo.
"The strengthening of rule of law in Kosovo contributes to narrowing the roots of organised crime in the region, which makes it easier for the rule of law institutions from other countries to track these phenomena," Vrajolli added.
Kosovo's police force told SETimes the arrangement will help make the country more secure.
"This memorandum will for sure help Kosovo police to raise its capacities in finding the illegal weapons and fighting organized crime," the police said in a written statement. 
"It will increase the safety of the citizens of Kosovo and will help in increasing regional security."
As part of the agreement, Kosovo and 35 other nations will work in co-operation with the US Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agency, a division of the US Justice Department that fights violent crime.
Taulant Hodaj, president of the Initiative Group Alpbach Kosovo, an associate member of European Forum Alpbach, told SETimes that the arrangement has a positive impact on Kosovo as a state.
"This agreement serves Kosovo to have access in different programs that intend to fight transport of illegal weapons," Hodaj said.
Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi said the agreement will increase regional security and "is especially important in the international fight against terrorism."
Kosovo citizens welcomed the news, saying illegal weapons represent a legitimate danger.
Rron Dema, a student in Pristina, said several recent incidents in which weapons were used have caused concern.
"I wish that the agreement will enable finding and discovering all the illegal weapons because that will make our society safer," Dema told SETimes.
Ajshe Kelmendi, who works at a store in the Pristina suburb of Fushe Kosove, said the number of illegal weapons in the hands of the citizens is best shown by the number of incidents during the summer and at weddings, where quite a number of people suffer injuries from uncontrolled celebratory weapons fire.
"I hope that the government and especially Kosovo police take the confiscation of the illegal weapons very seriously, and I wish that this new system is successful," Kelmendi told SETimes.
What other initiatives will help to reduce illegal weapons in the region? 
Let us know your thoughts in the comment section.
