14/05/2013
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 14/05/13
Election experts said that a coalition government of some sort will likely be formed in Bulgaria in the coming weeks, but they did not expect it to remain in power for a full four-year mandate.
The reason for their skepticism was the inconclusive vote in the Balkan nation's early parliamentary elections on Sunday (May 12th), in which the former ruling centre-right party GERB received the largest number of votes, but failed to secure a majority to rule on its own.
According to preliminary results, released by the Central Electoral Committee on Monday morning, the party of former Prime Minister Boyko Borisov won nearly 31 percent of the vote, entitling it to 98 of 240 seats in Bulgaria's national assembly.
The Coalition for Bulgaria, led by the main opposition Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), came out second with 27 percent, winning 86 seats. 
Two other parties -- the mainly ethnic Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) and the ultra-nationalist party Ataka (Attack) -- also passed the 4 percent threshold for entry into parliament, gaining 33 and 23 seats, respectively.
GERB election head Tsvetan Tsvetanov did not exclude his party forming again a minority government, just as it did after the July 2009 parliamentary elections. 
It would need to be supported by a simple majority in parliament to be appointed.
The leaders of the other three parties that will be represented in Bulgaria's 42nd National Assembly, Sergey Stanishev of the BSP, Lyutvi Mestan of the MRF and Volen Siderov of Ataka, have all said that they will not support such a cabinet, however.
"A minority coalition is out of the question," Stanishev, who also chairs the Party of European Socialists, said at a news conference Monday. 
"A government of national salvation, made up of experts, is the only rescue for Bulgaria," he added, stressing also that "the last thing this country needs is a political crisis."
Sociologist Yuriy Aslanov, a member of the executive board of the Sofia-based Institute for Social Integration, predicted that an agreement on forming a government will be reached.
"But that's not the big question. 
The big question is whether that would be a stable and a strong government, and whether it would be able to rely on a stable parliamentary support," he told SETimes on Monday.
"The combinations for building such a majority are limited, on theory, to parties that have very little in common, whose relations have often been complicated in the past and some of which have mutually exclusive ideas."
The best idea probably was for the parties that will be represented in the next assembly, or part of them, to seek an agreement on some sort of a provisional government "to calm the social climate" in the country for the time-being, Aslanov said.
Aside from being the poorest member of the EU, the level of unemployment in Bulgaria has been rising in recent years and currently stands at 12.5 percent. 
Economic growth has also been slow. 
Last week, the European Commission decreased its previous forecast of 1.4 percent economic growth in the Balkan nation in 2013, down to 0.9 percent.
Nearly 25 percent of the voters who cast their ballots in Sunday's poll supported parties and coalitions that failed to pass the 4 percent threshold. 
Turnout was about 51 percent.
Sofia-based political scientist Dimitar Avramov said he is confident that a new government will be formed in the coming weeks and the tension will thus ease.
"There are two options," he told SETimes on Monday. 
"It will either be a two-party majority government, or some cabinet of national priorities with a life-span of about one year, or more. 
I think passions will calm down within days and the conventional expectations and will to prevent any negative scenario from materialising will prevail."
What is the greatest challenge for Bulgaria's next government? 
Make your opinions known in the space below.
