09/04/2013
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 09/04/13
Citizens in the Serb-dominated portions of Northern Kosovo are closely following negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina and Serbia's rejection of terms put forward by the EU in exchange for starting accession talks.
"We do not want Kosovo license plates, Kosovo identity cards and a border with central Serbia. 
We do not want to pay taxes to Kosovo institutions. 
We will fight against this by all democratic means," Slavica Radulovic, a resident of Mitrovica, told SETimes.
Although the EU brokered talks for days between Belgrade and Pristina to reach a settlement, the Serbian government decided on Monday to reject a proposal to relinquish control of the area in exchange for the start of its EU membership negotiations.
In a statement, the cabinet on Monday said that the proposal "would not guarantee the human rights, survival and security to Serbs in Kosovo." The government will seek a resumption of talks to be mediated by the EU.
Kosovo officials expressed disappointment that Belgrade rejected the plan.
"The proposals made by the EU were serving peace," Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's government said in a statement. 
"Europeanisation and stability in the region would mark the beginning of the conclusion of a historical conflict in the region."
A chief concern centers on whether an association of Serb municipalities in Kosovo's north -- a region of about 70,000 people and 1,200 square kilometres -- should have executive jurisdiction. 
Pristina opposes such a plan.
If Kosovo institutions are established in the north, it will lead to a mass exodus of Serbs, Radulovic said. 
"But we believe that the international community and Serbia will not allow it."
The Serbs' distrust of Kosovo's institutions is a substantial problem, and it is crucial that Serbs in Kosovo have the perception of security, said Oliver Ivanovic, Serbia's former state secretary for Kosovo and Metohija, who now heads the civic initiative Serbia, Democracy, Justice operating in Mitrovica.
"Be they in the south or north of Kosovo, the most important thing for the Serbs is safety. 
The economic situation is also important, but there can be no economic improvement without the safety of human lives," Ivanovic told SETimes.
Ivanovic explained the Serbian government wants the Serbs to be included in Kosovo but also to maintain strong ties with Belgrade.
"That is not so bad, if there is unity. 
Only if the stance of the Serbian leadership is united is there a chance to implement the agreements," Ivanovic said. 
But the Kosovo Serbs made it clear they will not agree to the proposed association of Serb municipalities if it does not have any authority.
If so, the Serbs will seek protection of international organisations, according to Krstimir Pantic, deputy director of Serbian government's Office for Kosovo and Metohija.
"Just as Pristina, in its declaration of independence, cited the right of the people to decide on their own, so will we proclaim an assembly of our municipalities and, if necessary, seek the protection of that right from the International Court of Justice," Pantic told SETimes.
Municipalities' representatives officially asked the international community to refrain from involving itself, but also requested that international entities prevent Pristina from using violence in the north and in other Serb-populated regions in Kosovo.
"We expect that the international security forces in Kosovo and Metohija to refrain from unilateral moves and prevent in a timely manner any attempt by the so-called Pristina authorities at jeopardising peace and security in the north of Kosovo and Metohija and in other Serb-populated regions through violent actions," said a statement adopted last week in a joint municipalities' session.
Representatives of the municipality assemblies of Leposavic, Zvecan, Zubin Potok and Mitrovica participated in the session.
The representatives are demanding that UNMIK replaces EULEX and the Russian KFOR contingent returns to Serb regions of Kosovo.
