08/04/2013
By Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 08/04/13
Faced with the prospect that Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) could lose its status as an EU member candidate, the country's leading political parties struck a verbal agreement allowing citizens to seek election to the tripartite presidency regardless of nationality.
The BiH constitution prohibits candidates who are not among the three "constituent peoples" -- Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs -- a provision that has hindered the country's European integration.
The new dialogue concerning BiH's EU accession process is planned for April 11th in Mostar, presided over by EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Füle. 
At that time, the verbal agreement will be formally shaped.
Jakob Finci, a Bosnian Jew, and Dervo Sejdic, a Bosnian Roma, successfully petitioned the European Court for Human Rights to have the law changed. 
But political resistance and upheaval in BiH have prevented action.
Finci said a dialogue mediated by EU officials in Brussels provided a basis for solving the problem.
"The agreement is still in verbal form. 
However, if it becomes final and successful, we will have elections in October of 2014," Finci told SETimes.
Political party leaders have tried in vain to move forward, and many are claiming they have supported change since the beginning of negotiations.
Zekerijah Smajic, a university lecturer and EU integration expert, told local media that the EU is losing patience with BiH politicians.
"Every compromise is good, but this is a fruit of most intense pressure from Brussels, which has been lacking for many years. 
This makes it clear that the EU is losing patience," Smajic said.
The EU's delegation in BiH denies it has pressed for a resolution, saying the EU's position is that of middleman to implement the European Court for Human Rights' ruling in the Sejdic-Finci case.
"I think that the local politicians have realised what the suspension from the European Council would mean had this ruling not been solved," Finci said. 
"It would automatically bring to an end of cooperation with the World Bank, IMF and European Bank for renewal and development."
The Party of Democratic Action (SDA) remains concerned Bosniak Muslims will be further marginalised in the political process by Croats, Serbs and members of other ethnic groups.
"We don't have papers about this agreement, so we can make conclusions based on what we find out from the media only. 
However, this kind of solution could result in us having a new discrimination and new reasons for appeals like Sejdic-Finci," said SDA's Bakir Izetbegovic, the Bosniak member of the BiH presidency.
The Congress of Bosniak Diaspora said a compromise on constitutional changes helps those who want to continue the destruction of BiH and its people, especially Bosniaks.
"This is not an agreement, this is an obvious continuation of aggression during peacetime, but with other methods and means. 
Instead of enforcing the judgment of Sejdic-Finic, this agreement will make an opposite effect," the group said in a statement, adding that minorities will still be unprotected.
Adin Janhic, a lawyer and political analyst, said SDA has accused the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and the Union for a Better Future (SBB) of creating preconditions for the establishment of a Croat entity within the Federation of BiH.
He said the claim of discrimination against Bosniaks, "is just a story for SDA, which serves for political purposes, preparing for the next election."
"[SDA's] desire is that Republika Srpska would have 10 [cantons], as the Federation of BiH does, but it would just be a more complicated electoral system in the country," Jahic said.
Do you think minority candidates should be eligible for the BiH presidency? 
Give your opinion in the comments below.
