11/06/2013
By Ana Lovaković and Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 11/06/13
Protests that blockaded thousands of people inside parliament in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) last week convinced politicians to take immediate action and are a firm indication that citizens are demanding results from their leaders, according to an analyst.
"For smart people it is a clear sign that the BiH citizens are tired of the role of hostages of political games and are willing to change," Jusuf Ziga, a sociology professor at the Writers Faculty of Political Science at the University of Sarajevo.
The protests began June 6th over the government's inability to provide identification cards with unique 13-digit identification numbers to infants. 
A law that required the identification numbers expired in February, leaving thousands of infants undocumented.
The demonstrations were triggered by the case of 3-month-old Belmina Ibrišević, who was prevented from travelling to Germany to obtain a stem cell transplant because her parents were unable to get her a passport.
Although Belmina's parents eventually gained a passport, protesters took up the cause in Sarajevo.
"We want to have basic human rights to our children and finally to show to politicians they are not almighty. 
They have to do [a] job and justify the high salaries they have thanks to our money," protester Nela Dimitrijević, an actress and mother from Sarajevo, told SETimes.
"Why should my child become hostage of incompetent politicians in this country? 
For politicians we are just numbers during the election, but now we are not important even as a numbers. 
Every child born from February to today does not exist in BiH," Edita Grgic, a mother of an infant daughter, told SETimes.
BiH Foreign Affairs Minister Zlatko Lagumdzija expressed support for protesters' peaceful demonstrations. 
He told reporters in Sarajevo that he believes the protests are a reflection of dissatisfaction of government in general and encouraged the BiH Council of Ministers to address the identification number issue.
The controversy is the latest for the inefficient BiH government hierarchy that has been criticized by the Sarajevo-based Centre for Civil Initatives as the most expensive public administration in Europe, comprising of 13 governments that employ 180 ministers, 600 MPs and spends 500,000 euros per hour. 
Even after borrowing from the IMF, the government struggles to pay even its own administrative expenses and salaries and has little money to provide basic services.
About 3,000 people surrounded the parliament building on June 5th, keeping as many as 1,500 people inside from leaving and forcing the parliament to agree to a 6-month temporary solution for the identification card issue.
But despite the reprieve, protests have continued as demonstrators demand a new permanent law that will give newborns identification papers.
In Republika Srpska (RS), officials blamed politics for the uprising.
"It is clear that this is not a protest of the citizens, but political move orchestrated by other parties in the parliament," Aleksandra Pandurević, a SDS Party MP, said.
On the other hand, politicians from the Federation of BiH (FBiH) asked citizens to have patience.
"We understand those who protest, but please do not go out into the street. 
Let citizens be patient until October 2014, and then they can go to the polls," said Bakir Izetbegović, a member of the presidency of BiH.
Do you agree with the demonstrators? 
Tell us your thoughts below.
