08/04/2013
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 08/04/13
The convictions by a Greek court of five people tied to the Revolutionary Struggle group that claimed responsibility for a spate of bombings in Greece indicates that the government is taking a tougher stand against terrorists and anarchists, experts said.
Nikos Maziotis, his wife Panagiota Roupa and Costas Gournas were sentenced to 25 years in prison, while two others received prison terms of 7½ years.
The court acquitted three others.
"The government wants to show it will be very tough on anyone involved in terrorist activities as they want to prevent more [attacks] from taking place," John Nomikos, anti-terrorist analyst who heads the Athens-based Research Institute for European and American Studies, told SETimes.
Revolutionary Struggle, which emerged in 2003, claimed responsibility for several bomb attacks in Athens, including against the Athens Stock Exchange, and for a massive bomb outside Citibank offices which failed to explode.
The group was active from 2003 through 2009 and did not kill anyone in its attacks, but it seriously wounded a riot policeman in 2009.
Nomikos said the government for too long took a lenient stand against violent extremism.
"Now it wants to make sure the punishment is tough to deter other groups," he said.
The government is taking action after two more bombing incidents.
Police discovered a bomb in an empty Metro car prior to detonating last year, while earlier in the year a bomb exploded in Athens' largest shopping mall on a Sunday morning prior to movie theaters opening for business.
Authorities subsequently arrested four young men in February for a string of robberies, but the men were suspected of having ties to terrorist groups.
The convictions are good news, although two major Revolutionary Struggle figures are still at large, said Ioannis Michaletos, analyst at the Institute for Security and Defense Analysis in Athens.
"Although dozens of arrests were made over the past few years, no co-ordinators, controllers or trainers of these networks have been arrested," Michaletos told SETimes.
A series of arrests in 2011 crippled the operations of another group, Consiracy of Fire Nuclei (SPF), but members of the group also remain at large.
Western intelligence said the SPF has led co-ordinated attacks against the Greek government.
It claimed responsibility for a November 2010 parcel bombing campaign that targeted international leaders and institutions outside Greece.
In 2010, then-Public Order Minister Michalis Chrysochoidis was targeted with a letter bomb which was opened by an assistant, killing him.
The minister had been the driving force in the pursuit of terrorist groups, including the arrest of six members of Revolutionary Struggle.
In March, two more groups popped up, the Informal Anarchist Federation-International Revolutionary Front and Intact Revolutionary Cell, which together said they were responsible for a gas canister bomb attack on a courier service that caused damage but no injuries.
The groups issued a proclamation on the Internet expressing solidarity with jailed members of Conspiracy of the Cells of Fire and threatened to target police and judges.
"All the creeps, cops, judges and prison guards that have hurt or insulted our comrades should know that they will not be forgotten.
One night they will receive one of our unwelcome visits, with bullets, bombs, brass knuckles," the statement said.
Terrorism will not be squashed soon, which is why rapid prosecutions are important, said George Tzogopoulos, a research fellow at the Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy in Athens.
"The government should be tougher because these kinds of actions can not play a role in a democratic society like Greece.
The main message is that Greece is prepared to deal with these kinds of terrorist actions," Tzogopoulos told SETimes.
What other actions can the Greek government take to counter domestic terrorist organisations?
Share your thoughts with us in the comments.
