08/09/2006
Macedonian mobile phone operator Mobimak announced it has officially become part of the international firm T-Mobile, which has a worldwide user base of 90 million.
The Macedonian firm is being rebranded as T-Mobile Macedonia.
Eleven companies so far have indicated preliminary interest in joining the privatisation tender for Republika Srpska's (RS) telco Telekom Srpske, according to the RS Privatisation Directorate.
The firms are Telekom Srbije (Serbia), Sistema Telecom (Russia), Telekom Austria (Austria), Telenor (Norway), Magyar Telekom (Hungary), Elisa (Finland), Novator (Island), France Telecom (France), Orascom (Egypt), Valiva (Switzerland), and PlanetSky (Cyprus).
The deadline for submitting bids is 4 October.
Greece's government said it will further trim its 38.7 per cent stake in the state telco OTE.
Economy and Finance Minister Giorgos Alogoskoufis says a joint interdepartment commission has endorsed plans to seek a strategic investor for OTE.
Press reports suggested a stake of around 18 per cent could be sold.
Trade unions and the opposition Socialists have vowed to fight such a move.
An IMF mission led by Mark Griffiths arrived in Macedonia on 6 September for talks with the new government on its economic programme.
In an initial statement for the press, Griffith said his first impressions were good and that he believes the Fund would build a strong partnership with the new cabinet.
The Albanian government announced on 4 September that it sealed a 20.7m-euro contract with the British company MedOil PLC.
Under the deal, exploration work will be conducted in the region between Karaburun Peninsula and Saranda in the Ionian Sea and the Durres region in the Adriatic Sea.
The Council of Europe Development Bank approved on a 45.2m-euro loan for support of Croatia's healthcare sector.
The credit will go towards financing 50 per cent of the costs of a project to modernise of healthcare institutions.
The government will cover the remainder using funds from the budget.
The number of jobless in Croatia declined by 6.9 per cent year-on-year to 271,051 in August 2006, according to official data.
Compared to the previous month, however, the number of unemployed people rose slightly, by 0.1 per cent.
Most of the new unemployed came from the retail and processing sectors, as well as the hotels and restaurant industries.
(Various sources – 01/09/06 – 08/09/06)
