06/11/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 06/11/12
In an effort to maintain good neighbourly relations, Montenegro President Filip Vujanovic called on regional leaders to attend a summit in Budva by the end of this year.
Vujanovic's initiative to host the political dialogue between the presidents of Serbia, Kosovo, Albania and Macedonia could become a model for resolving regional problematic issues between neighbouring states, experts said.
Aleksandar Popov, director of the Center for Regionalisation, a Novi Sad-based NGO dealing with regional co-operation, said that Vujanovic's invitation is a chance for a continued dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo.
"Such a meeting would surely be a follow up to those talks in Brussels, when prime ministers Ivica Dacic and Hashim Thaci met, and a good way of addressing future issues and possible problems which the two neighbouring states have -- meet on neutral grounds to discuss the problems in a relaxed atmosphere," Popov told SETimes.
Kosovo's officials said they will accept Vujanovic's invitation, and expressed hope that the Serbian president will do the same.
"Atifete Jahjaga, president of Kosovo, is ready to meet anywhere, anytime, and with any official for the interests of the state and the people of Kosovo, based on Kosovo's constitution and laws.
We hope that the president of Serbia, [Tomislav] Nikolic, as we said when he was elected, will find the courage and strength to do what his predecessors have not -- establish good and peaceful relations with Kosovo, so that our two independent countries can embark on the EU path," Arber Vllahiu, chief of Jahjaga's cabinet, told SETimes.
Nikolic's office did not respond to SETimes when asked if the president will accept Vujanovic's invitation.
Srdjan Vukadinovic, professor of sociology at the University of Montenegro, said that Vujanovic's initiative is a positive one, but that the problem between Kosovo and Serbia is too big to be solved by a single country.
"This is a good initiative, no doubt.
But I don't think that Nikolic will accept the invitation, and without him there is no progress on this issue.
I think that Brussels or Washington would be good places to address the Serbia, Kosovo relations," Vukadinovic told SETimes.
Earlier summits of regional presidents were held in Valona, Prizren and Ohrid.
Serbia has so far boycotted the meetings because of Kosovo's participation.
Last week's meeting between Dacic, Thaci and EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton marked the beginning of high-level political dialogue, and an important step for Belgrade's path to EU accession.
One of the EU conditions for Serbia is the normalisation of relations with Kosovo.
