10/06/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 10/06/13
In an effort to increase the Roma involvement in Macedonia's health care system and society, the Skopje-based Centre for Institutional Development and the Roma Educational Fund in Budapest are collaborating to prepare Roma high school students for medical colleges in Macedonia.
This year, 30 Roma students will start medical studies.
There is a shortage of ethnic Roma medical staff in Macedonia, though the minority group has great need for health care.
"Through this project we aim to increase the number of Roma students' applications at medical colleges in Macedonia," Sime Manchevski, from the centre for Institutional Development, told SETimes.
He said that they will continue to follow up on the students' progress in the project and help them find a job upon graduation.
"Our goal is to have medical students work at our medical institutions, because the number of Roma doctors is too low. 
It's good this project is long-term, because even though we are trying to increase the number of Roma in state institutions, it's still a small number. 
To see results [of the project] a few years are needed," Manchevski said.
Roma can apply for a scholarship from the Budapest-based Roma educational fund, which will make their education more financially accessible.
Dzengiz Berisa, an activist at SOS, a Roma NGO for multicultural affirmation, said that the Roma are more willing to continue their education and help their community.
"We want to raise the awareness among young Roma of the need for their education, but also the need of attending a university and medical schools in particular. 
Through the realisation of such projects, we'll allow young Roma to be a model for other Roma wish to get an education," Berisa told SETimes.
"Roma want to promote themselves as good people, and help to develop our society. 
My goal is to go to college, graduate, and then help the Roma community," Pervine Ismail, from the Shuto Orizari municipality, told SETimes.
"I want to study at the medical college in Skopje. 
I want to be a doctor, help people. 
We don't have enough educated people," Erol Luko, a medical high school student from Gostivar, said.
Arjeta Tahiri, also a high school student from Gostivar, intends to attend the medical faculty after graduation from high school, with plans to specialise in neurosurgery.
"More young Roma are deciding to educate themselves because they can offer this society a lot," she said.
Ajcel Mehmet, national co-ordinator for the medical scholarship programme, said that according to official data, only four Roma medics work in Macedonia's health care institutions.
"All others who completed medical college are involved in some activities, but don't work in the public hospitals. 
In 2010 when we started with this project, the number of students was minimal, but now the situation is better. 
Our aim in the future is to help these people find a job and help the society," Mehmet told SETimes.
The same project has been implemented in Romania, Bulgaria, and Serbia, as these countries also have a low number of Roma doctors and students.
Emina Shemo, member of the Democratic Forces of Roma party, said that for years there have been efforts to improve Roma education in Macedonia.
"The ministry of education helps Roma children in middle and high school through scholarships. 
But more should be done for [their] education, as a high number of them are still on the streets," Shemo told SETimes.
Is your country doing well in integrating Roma into society? 
Let us know by leaving a comment.
