10/06/2013
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Time in Skopje -- 10/06/13
With a goal of enhancing democracy and the EU integration processes across the Western Balkans, Belgrade-based NGO Astra, in co-operation with regional partners, is implementing the Balkans ACT Now project.
Civil society networks in areas of human rights and the rule of law from Serbia, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia have come together as a part of the project, which is funded by the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance and Civil Society Facility.
The partners held a conference on May 23rd and 24th, officially introducing the start of the activities in the region.
"We just completed the initial phase of the project and finalised the strategy and implementation plan for the next 18 months. 
Strategy implementation starts [this month]," Marija Andjelkovic, director of Astra NGO, told SETimes.
A memorandum of co-operation was signed between NGO Astra and Serbia's public prosecutor. 
Macedonia and BiH NGOs are part of a monitoring team implementing strategies in combating human trafficking.
"Because human trafficking is organised crime affecting all countries, the answer must be equally organised and based on international co-operation. 
This reflects the importance of joint efforts of Serbia, Macedonia, Croatia, BiH, the Netherlands, and France within the Balkans ACT Now project," Andjelkovic said.
"An analysis of the situation in participating countries shows that the laws are good but are not implemented, or there's a lack of their application. 
Greater attention is needed in victim protection and harmonisation with EU standards," Marjan Wijers, human rights consultant and an anti-trafficking activist at the Netherlands Helsinki Committee, told SETimes.
Each civil society organisation partnering in the project has prior experience with human trafficking in their countries. 
These organisations provide direct assistance to victims, providing education, prevention, public awareness, research and reporting.
"NGOs can greatly help the victims by monitoring the proper implementation of laws, especially those relating to the treatment and rights of victims. 
They also monitor the impact of laws on the protection of victims and other affected groups, such as migrants and sex workers. 
They can provide feedback to government institutions and recommendations for improvement, based on daily experience in the field. 
States can benefit from the experience and knowledge gained by NGOs," Wijers said.
The project will be implemented and harmonised according to legal anti-trafficking policy for Western Balkans, in line with the EU standards and values.
"As with other NGOs in the project, the Balkan ACT Now works closely with the BiH authorities on the suppression of these problems. 
This co-operation has continually improved through information exchange," Elma Zahirovic, BiH project co-ordinator, told SETimes.
"Most importantly is that this project will not end in 2014, but continue to serve as a framework for further work to end human trafficking in our society," Andjelkovic said.
Do you think that human trafficking is an important problem in the region? 
Why? 
Please share your opinions below.
