06/11/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic, Muhamet Brajshori and Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Belgrade, Pristina and Skopje -- 06/11/12
Several Middle Eastern airlines have established direct flights to the Balkans in a move that experts said is going to facilitate both travel and trade, as well as improve the region's relations with the Middle Eastern countries.
Fly Dubai, Qatar Airways and Air Arabia have launched direct flights from Doha, Dubai and Sharjah to Skopje, Belgrade, Zagreb and Pristina.
"They offer numerous benefits.
First, the possibility for our not-so-small diaspora in the United Arab Emirates to fly [home] directly, but also people in Australia can fly directly to Dubai and then to Belgrade," Katarina Andric Milosavljevic, public adviser at Serbia's Civil Aviation Directorate, told SETimes.
Nikola Manasijevic, a retired pharmacist in Vladichin Han in Serbia, said his son and his family live in the Emirates, but they found it very inconvenient to change two or more flights en route to home while travelling with children and carrying work-related materials.
"It was also complicated for me and my wife since we are elderly and not in the best health.
The direct Belgrade-Dubai flight made things much easier," Manasijevic told SETimes.
Since December 2011, only Fly Dubai had established one direct Belgrade-Dubai flight that ran weekly.
The airline established two direct flights to Skopje last month, and will add another one by year end.
It caters to the large Macedonian diaspora in Australia, as well as to many Macedonians serving in various capacities in NATO's ISAF mission in Afghanistan.
"People can now travel inexpensively with one stop [to Macedonia]," Svetlana Unkovska, sales manager at the Savana Tourist Agency in Skopje, told SETimes.
"My brother and mother who live in Australia have been coming to Macedonia only on rare occasions because of the expensive airfare, bad connections and the number of transfers.
Now, I am expecting them this month thanks to the inexpensive Fly Dubai flights," Sanja Ristevska, a Skopje resident, told SETimes.
The previously expensive airfares -- up to 1,500 euros -- and poor connections have previously prevented Macedonians from travelling readily to the Middle East.
Dubai is the third largest destination for flights originating in Pristina, according to Dritan Gjonbalaj, general director of Kosovo's civil aviation authority.
"Signing the Kosovo-UAE co-operation agreement enabled launching the first direct flight to the Middle Eastern country," Gjonbalaj told SETimes.
There is enormous interest in working in the Middle East and having direct connections is very important, according to Jovanka Dragicevic, owner of the Agava employment agency in Novi Sad.
"More direct lines with the Middle East should be established as soon as possible.
Also, airfares should be more competitive, so all people, businessmen and workers, who need to go there can afford them," Dragicevic told SETimes.
In response to the continuing increase in demand, Qatar Airways said it will establish three weekly flights between Belgrade and Doha on November 20th, while Air Arabia will launch one direct flight from Pristina to Sharjah on November 22nd.
