08/06/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 08/06/13
Macedonia and Albania's joint efforts against organised crime have reached another level with the opening of a common centre for police co-operation.
The centre, which is located at Kafasan, a frequent border crossing between Macedonia and Albania, is the first of its kind in the region.
Police officers from both countries will work side-by-side, exchanging information to help intercept criminal groups that use the Balkans for illegal activities.
Macedonian Interior Minister Gordana Jankulovska said that the new centre will also provide better co-ordination between the police and border service.
"With the opening of the joint contact centre we are sending a message of improved co-operation, the flow of passengers and vehicles, and intensified communication between our two countries.
This will ease off the work of police," Jankulovska told reporters.
Albania Interior Minister Flamur Noka said that Macedonia and Albania will jointly continue activities against organised crime.
"This is a result of the political will in both countries battling all types of crimes, smuggling;
we want to make our border crossings safe," Noka told the media.
The common contact police centre is first of its kind in the region and should be an example of co-operation for other countries, he said.
"In police co-operation with Macedonia, we are a great example for all in the region.
This centre we will provide our police structures more opportunity for co-operation and action, and harmonise all the activities and actions," Noka said.
Pavle Trajanov, former Macedonian minister for interior, said the joint contact centre is a positive step forward in the region.
"How the fight against crime will evolve depends on the political will of governments, the ruling parties.
It's good that throughout this centre there will be an opportunity to maintain communication on a higher level, since there's more chance for the fight against crime," Trajanov told SETimes.
Macedonian and Albanian border services have been jointly patrolling the border on both sides twice a month.
"Macedonian and Albanian police, for two years, have had mixed border patrols with which we control the border region.
We go to their territory and they come to the Macedonian side, and that functions great.
It gives results and we also exchange information and data," Shain Abduloski, a policemen at the border crossing Dzepiste Trebiste, told SETimes.
Do you think that the common police centre will be effective?
Let us know what you think below.
