09/06/2006
Speaking after talks with Macedonian authorities, IMF representatives said the economic situation in the country has begun to pick up.
"There was a long period when Macedonia had a low economic growth, but in the last few years the growth reached 4 per cent and even more, the inflation is under control, the state reserves have been increased and structural reforms have started," said Juha Hakkonen, adviser to the director of the IMF European sector, at a press conference on 5 June.
The Paris-based leisure and hotel group Accor said it plans to invest about 300m euros to build 50 new hotels in Turkey by 2015.
The hotels will be situated in big cities in western Turkey, which attract the bulk of foreign tourists, but some would be allocated to southeast regions such as Gaziantep and Sanliurfa, both on the Syrian border.
Hewlett-Packard inaugurated its new global support centre in Sofia.
The centre will employ over 1,000 young Bulgarians -- mostly computer and information specialists.
It will serve clients from Europe, the Near East and Africa.
Serbia will officially approach the Paris Club creditors with a request for a $1 billion debt writeoff, Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic announced during his official visit to Greece.
If the request is granted, the revenues would be used to complete construction of the highway from Nis to the Bulgarian and Macedonian borders, he said.
The Bulgarian company Jorset Holding was the sole bidder for the Skopje-based aluminum producer Alimina.
The investor reportedly offered to pay 12.3m euros for the bankrupt factory.
The government is to decide on the bid in a few days.
The Greek construction firm Aktor said it has signed a co-operation agreement with Russia's Gazprom for the construction of a pipeline that will carry Russian oil from Bourgas, on Bulgaria's Black Sea coast, to the port of Alexandroupolis, on the Aegean coast.
The budget of the project totals 1 billion euros.
(Various sources – 02/06/06 – 09/06/06)
