11/05/2013
By Erl Murati for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 11/05/13
Industrial and intellectual property protection in Albania will boost the country's economy and attract investors, experts say.
Business and consumer defenders said that the recent EU aid will help Albania develop its technical abilities to investigate and prosecute industrial and intellectual property fraud cases and improve a public awareness on the issue.
"An effective system of protection of intellectual property rights and their implementation stimulates investments and economic growth," EU Ambassador in Tirana Ettore Sequi said.
"Therefore this must be enforced in Albanian internal agenda."
"The financial assistance of the European Union is very valuable for us," Safet Sula, Albania's patent and trademark director, told SETimes.
His organisation unites 10,000 Albanians and more than 50,000 international brands.
With the EU aid, "now we are equipped with computers for the administration.
We have also printed thousands of flyers to sensitise businesses and consumers on the importance of differentiating between original and fake goods," Sula said.
According to Albania's Consumer Association, markets in the country are full of counterfeit products, mainly imported from Turkey and China.
"We registered 45 complaints from citizens on brand-related issues in the first four months of this year," Islam Cani, the head of Albanian Consumer Association, told SETimes.
"It is still a big problem, company counterfeiting, lack of labels on grocery products and medicaments.
There are even cases when new labels are put on expired products so they can be traded in the market."
Sula said that soon the country will have a market control inspectorate, but "if the brand owner is not engaged to protect his rights, there cannot be justice in the industrial and intellectual property."
"Business owners and consumers should realise that… industrial and intellectual property is the same as every other property and must be protected," Sula said.
In 2007, after signing Stabilisation and Association Agreement, Albania made efforts to protect industrial property on the EU levels.
With new legislation changes, intellectual property theft is punished up to two years in prison.
However, no one has been sentenced for stealing industrial or intellectual property to date.
"The war against piracy and counterfeiting continues and Albania is making attempts to stop importing counterfeited products," Albania's Customs General Director Flamur Gjymishka told SETimes.
During the last two years, the customs authority has seized and destroyed about 10,000 counterfeited products, he said.
Have you encountered counterfeit goods?
What else should be done to combat the problem?
Add your opinion to the comment area.
