11/05/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic and Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 11/05/13
Faced with a huge number of people who need help in resolving their housing situation, Serbia and Kosovo authorities are launching initiatives to provide apartments to their vulnerable populations.
Serbia's law on social housing maintains that the state should help families, who due to social, economic or other reasons, cannot obtain a flat by regular market conditions.
"The right for resolving housing needs in accordance with this law [pertains to] individuals without a flat, or individuals without a flat under adequate standards as well as individuals who can't ensure flat for themselves from their own income," Branislava Zarkovic, the president of the Housing Development Centre for Socially Vulnerable Groups, told SETimes.
She said that data from of some local governments show that the number of people needing housing is almost 10 percent greater than the supply of homes.
Recently, Belgrade held an open competition for 176 new apartments in Kamendin, a settlement for social living in Belgrade. 
More than 1,200 applications were submitted.
"[Around] 587 families remain 'below the line' at this competition … but [all of them can apply for] each new competition. 
This problem is not possible to resolve in total, since 30 percent of families apply for the first time," Zoran Kostic, Belgrade City Council member and the president of the commission for flat assigning, told SETimes.
"Since 2008, we had held five competitions and 626 families have been moved," he said.
Among the new Kamendin residents are 105 people with physical disabilities and 31 Roma families, who were displaced from a slum. 
They will pay 18 euros a month for rent.
Igor Talipovic, 35, and his family are moving into one of the Kamendin apartments. 
They applied three times before being selected.
"Our flat … is much better than the container (a barrack in collective settlement) we were living in before … but I worry how we are going to pay bills since we do not have permanent jobs and here we have to pay a lot of utilities … I hope that our future will be much better since now we have much better living conditions, which is significant step ahead," Talipovic told SETimes.
He said 20 families from his former container settlement are still waiting for social housing.
Zarkovic said that the state actively trying to manage this issue.
"Serbia took loans from Europe Council Development Bank to build 1,700 social flats in 10 municipalities and cities. 
Also, in the frame of the regional housing programme for refugees … international donors and regional states' governments have ensured 16,700 housing solutions for refugees who found their home in Serbia," Zarkovic told SETimes.
According to Kostic, the city of Belgrade is going to proceed in building social housing, as well as flats for refugees and internally displaced persons.
Authorities in Pristina are dealing with the same problem.
In 2012, the local municipality government provided 50 apartments to war veterans, invalids and martyr's families, and it is in the final phase of constructing a new building to host 100 vulnerable families.
"This is the biggest step that any municipality or institution in the country has made towards resolving housing issues for certain categories, primarily for the categories of families living in hard social conditions," Asdren Osaj, a spokesman for Pristina Municipality, told SETimes.
Hajrije Desku, a widowed mother of three, was hoping to get one of the apartments in 2012, but she was not chosen.
"I was once told that the committee had decided to provide an apartment for my family, but it never became a reality. 
All I got is a pledge that [this year] there will be a serious consideration for my position," Desku told SETimes.
What else should be done to ease housing problems? 
Offer your suggestions in the comment section below.
