06/04/2013
By Ana Lovakovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 06/04/2013
Organic production is becoming a popular agricultural activity in the Balkans.
However, experts say that an unpolluted environment and vast arable land remain "unused advantages" of Balkan countries, and the region needs to unite efforts to improve organic production on local markets and raise trade of organic products in the EU.
"In the countries of the region organic production is not even 1 percent [of the food market], and can be much more," Boban Ilić, secretary general of Standing Working Group from Regional Rural Development, told SETimes.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), 47 percent of cultivable land is not processed [and] organic production does not cover even 0.1 percent, but this picture should be changed, Sejad Herceg, president of Organic Producers in BiH, told SETimes.
"Unfortunately, authorities in BiH did not recognise the need and importance of organic production.
We are the only country without law on organic production, even though we are obliged to have it in our way to [the] European Union," Herceg told SETimes.
"BiH’s 180 organic producers mostly produce plants for medical use, some of them fruits and vegetables, but there is huge potential for honey and forest fruits production and processing."
Macedonia’s 580 organic producers also are trying to find a way to European market.
"It is necessary to know what and how to manufacture, develop capacity, and to find markets that [make] it pay off," Goran Angelovski, organic producer and president of Organic Producers Federation in Macedonia, told SETimes.
"We’ve been lucky to be recognised by people outside Macedonia, in Canada, Europe and US so we can sell our products there."
With 1,700 producers and about 33,000 hectares of land under organic production, Croatia shows the best results in the region, including legislation that is fully harmonised with the EU.
The country plans to increase its organic production from 3 to 8 percent by 2016.
"Inclusion in EU will likely bring better benefits," Tomislav Petrovic, head of ecological and integrated farming in the Croatian agriculture ministry, told SETimes.
"For the organic production last year we gave over 8 million euros stimulation.
Big producers are looking for a great possibility for export, but small [producers] can be placed on the domestic market."
Turning producers from conventional to organic production is not an easy job, because people need to realise that they can produce more and better than in conventional production, Ilić said.
"Our products are 20 percent more expensive due to costlier the process of production, but it is important that there is a demand and that the market lacks organic products.
Although the goal is production of healthy food, we all think about the commercial value since these products have higher prices [on the market]," Ilić said.
"It’s still lack of sufficient knowledge of consumers about the benefits of organic products," Ilić said.
"[The] region can be profiled in a large market, greater specialisation and focus on a few products, and it is essential consolidation of production in order to meet growing demand."
Offiicals founded the Balkan Organic Network (BON) in 2011 to co-ordinate and solve common problems with growing organic foods.
BON has been involved in regional exchanges of products and services that will provide insight into market needs, Ilić said.
Members are to work on joint planning of production, branding, packaging and marketing of eco products.
In order to improve the trade of organic products in the EU and the region and strengthen the network of organic producers in Southeast Europe, 17 food producers from nine Balkan countries met in Sarajevo last month.
"Our goal is to promote and harmonise production, following the EU standards," Herceg said.
A study by the International Fund for Agricultural Development found that "organic agriculture can prove particularly effective in bringing redistribution of resources in areas where the labour force is underemployed.
This can help contribute to rural stability especially in underdeveloped countries."
What do you think should be done to increase consumers’ knowledge in the region about healthy food?
Share your thoughts by commenting below.
