06/04/2013
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 06/04/13
In an effort to develop rural areas and boost economic prosperity, the Macedonian government is subsidising new businesses.
Financial support will comprise 50 percent of start-up costs for businesses in rural areas in the country. 
About 4 million euros have been allocated for the project from the 2013 state budget.
With these funds more than 1,000 small businesses could open, officials believe.
"The opening of new jobs and development of business and entrepreneurial spirit and private initiative is a strategic commitment of the government ... 
Serious attention is paid to the rural development policy and economic recovery and strengthening of the Macedonian villages," Alexander Gjorgjiev, a government spokesman, said.
The measure is also expected to increase jobs in rural areas. 
Mostly due to lack of jobs, young people are increasingly moving from villages to cities.
"Until now I worked at home as hairdresser, usually with my mother’s close friends. 
But now I plan to apply, and if the government grants me money I will open a hair studio. 
Earlier [my friend and I] were thinking both to move in Bitola, to start working for someone else, but it is very difficult because the market is small and the demand is also low. 
I hope this will turn out well," Anica Pejcinovska, a hairdresser from the Novaci municipality, told SETimes.
Her cousin, Jove Pejcinovski, told SETimes he will open a car wash.
"Two years after finishing high school, I am still looking for job. 
I will try this, if they give me funds, and part my investment, I'll be able to open a car wash along with my little brother. 
I hope I will receive the money."
Six years ago, the government subsidised agriculture ventures in the Pelagonia region. 
The action led to a 30 percent increase in arable land in Macedonia's breadbasket, reversed rural-to-urban migration and has more than doubled the country's agricultural imports.
"The subsidies helped farmers stay on the land and secure existence for their families with increasing profits thanks to exports," Veljo Tantarov, president of the Union of Agriculturalists of Macedonia, told SETimes.
"Six years ago, under a different government, the subsidies amounted to 5 million euros. 
Today they total 135 million euros," he said.
Novaci Mayor Lazar Kotevski told SETimes he supports the business initiative, and said he is encouraging the village's residents to compete for the subsidies.
"This will revitalise our community, young people will be employed and also there will be more activities so there will be no need to go to Bitola to buy something or to get a service."
Why do you believe it's important for government to subsidise businesses? 
Make a comment below.
