08/08/2006
The latest round of negotiations on Kosovo resumed Monday (7 August) in Vienna between delegations from Belgrade and Pristina.
The focus this round is on decentralisation and minority rights.
Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah kicked off a three-day visit to Turkey on Tuesday (8 August).
He is to meet with President Ahmet Necdet Sezer and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Hungarian Foreign Minister Kinga Goncz said the stability of the Western Balkans is of huge importance to her country, during visits to Serbia and Montenegro on Thursday (3 August).
In Belgrade, Goncz assured officials that Budapest favours a compromise solution to the Kosovo status issue, in which there "would be no winners and losers".
A team from the office of the UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari visited Belgrade on Wednesday (2 August) and met with representatives of the Serbian negotiating team.
They focused on issues related to the protection of cultural and religious heritage in Kosovo.
Albania's Sali Berisha, Bosnia and Herzegovina's Adnan Terzic and Croatia's Ivo Sanader attended a meeting of prime ministers from the region held in Salzburg on Tuesday (1 August).
Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schuessel said the gathering was very constructive and focused on issues related to regional stability and co-operation.
US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Clint Williamson visited Sarajevo on Tuesday (1 August) and urged increased regional co-operation to resolve the cases of Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, as well as the development of domestic capacities to process war crimes cases.
Meeting with Presidency Chairman Sulejman Tihic, Williamson stressed that Washington would like to see remaining cases in the region closed as soon as possible.
EU Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs Franco Frattini, on a two-day visit to Romania last week, praised the concrete measures undertaken in areas most critical to Romania's EU accession.
Frattini said the country is on the right track in terms of implementing judicial and security reforms required for EU entry on 1 January.
(Various sources 02/08/06 - 08/08/06)
