07/06/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/06/13
Serbia has made improvements in fostering communication between the numerous nationalities in the country, and experts believe more gains can be expected.
Close to 17 percent of Serbia's population of 7.2 million are non-Serbs belonging to 20 different nationalities; the Hungarians, who number 300,000, are the most numerous minority, followed by Bosniaks and Roma.
The improvement in relations can be attributed to several factors, according to Nebojsa Marjanovic, president of the Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians in the Belgrade Community Council.
"The absence of national war in a close environment which included ethnic tensions; the NGO sector's activism which significantly changed the relationship [between] nations; interaction among citizens; and the EU integration process ... 
in which multi-ethnicity and multiculturalism are important parts, are among those elements which produced the change," Marjanovic told SETimes.
The council is organising gatherings with national and religious communities and government officials to promote inter-ethnic dialogue and increase familiarity with Hungarian culture.
Inter-ethnic dialogue can improve by using standard mechanisms, a legal framework to sanction those who promote hate crimes and through education, according to Aleksandar Gaon, vice president of Belgrade's Jewish community.
"The number of those who were sentenced for such crimes is really small. 
But the educational system is lacking in various ways. 
For example, there is no possibility for Jewish children to learn about their religion, even rabbis' children. 
[Teaching of] the Holocaust should be submitted in two lessons or 90 minutes … But, these [things] can be changed and significantly contribute to better inter-ethnic and inter-religious communication here," he told SETimes.
Belgrade Ombudsman Dusanka Gacesa said that during the last six years, only two claims were made about discrimination based on nationality, and in both cases, she said, "it was proved that there was no such discrimination."
Gaon said the Internet also contributes to leveling the playing field.
"You can easily find online a list of Jews in Serbia in a negative context on blogs, columns, forums ... 
but [also an] opposite one which denies the negative details and explains facts," he said.
Amid the projects supporting minority traditions is "Fall in Love with Novi Pazar," sponsored by the Bosniak-majority town of Novi Pazar and the programme of the European Partnership with Municipalities, EU Progress.
"This project is showing Novi Pazar as a place of harmony in diversity, a place where several nations and religions live together, which could be a good example for all and develop even better relations among nations on the state level," Sadetin Mujezinovic, a member of the Novi Pazar city council, told SETimes.
According to Aleksandar Milutinovic, senior member of the ruling Serbian Progressive Party, progress is most noticeable in Belgrade where 15,000 Albanians live in Serbia's capital of 2 million.
Idre Seferi, 29, from Pec in Kosovo who lives in Belgrade, said he has not experienced day-to-day problems in contacts with Serbs or other nationalities. 
But Seferi said he suspects his Albanian name could have been a problem with officials when trying to schedule an interview for media he works.
"Politicians should be open to talk with minorities as an integral part of society, to be engaged with their issues and to promote their participation in political life in order to manage the issue of multiculturalism which is common throughout the Balkans," Seferi told SETimes.
What kinds of initiatives can foster inter-ethnic dialogue in your country? 
Tell us in the comments below.
