06/06/2013
By Kruno Kartus and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Osjek and Belgrade -- 06/06/13
The participation by 37 major Croatian companies at the 80th International Agricultural Fair in Novi Sad, Serbia, has injected a new impetus in the economic and political relations between the two countries.
"The performance of Croatia as a partner has opened new avenues for co-operation, and it was certainly a good start for close co-operation in numerous spheres, from economics to politics and culture," Jelena Marinkovic, executive director of the fair's integrated marketing communications, told SETimes.
Marinkovic said Croatia is a significant partner for Serbia, a relationship enhanced by decades-old co-operation in the former Yugoslavia and the lack of language barrier, and interaction at the fair can improve conditions for Serbian companies to enter the Croatian market.
"[T]he fact that this year Croatia will join the EU has great importance for Serbia's economy, because our western neighbour will open the door to the European family in the best possible way," Marinkovic added.
To emphasise the importance of agriculture to economic growth, Serbian Prime Minister Ivica Dacic and Croatian Agriculture Minister Tihomir Jakovina opened the fair, accompanied by business delegations and chambers of commerce from both countries.
''Agriculture is a big chance for Serbia because our country is Europe's green garden, and we have to take advantage of it.
Developing agriculture will develop the whole economy,'' Dacic said.
Dacic said the agriculture and food processing industries make up about 20 percent of Serbia's GDP, and trade between Serbia and Croatia in products from these sectors amounted to 175 million euros in 2012.
Serbia's and Croatia's agriculture ministers, Goran Knezevic and Tihomir Jakovina, as well as managers of the leading companies in Serbia and Croatia participated in a business forum at the fair that focused on specific ways to boost co-operation in the two industries within the context of Croatia's EU accession next month.
Croatia's EU entry will change the region, but it poses a challenge, according to Ljerka Puljic, executive vice president of Croatia's giant agricultural firm Agrokor.
"In such circumstances, it is easier for bigger companies like Agrokor which produce in multiple markets," Puljic said.
This year and next year will be difficult for the countries, regardless of Croatia EU accession, according to officials from the Croatian Chamber of Economy.
"Therefore co-operation in the region is a necessary prerequisite for the prosperity of us all," Tena Djakovic of the Croatian Chamber of Economy told SETimes.
Serbian Agriculture Ministry officials said obtaining support from Croatia to more easily harmonise legislation with that of the EU is particularly important.
"The partnership at this fair is evidence of the great co-operation between the agriculture ministries," the ministry told SETimes in a statement.
"Agriculture does not recognise flags nor borders, but it is based on co-operation and fair competition.
Our ministry is ready to support any initiative towards improvement of relations with the Republic of Croatia and it continues excellent cooperation with the Croatian ministry."
What benefits will come from increased agriculture co-operation between Serbia and Croatia?
Let us know your thoughts below.
