05/11/2012
By Ana Lovakovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 02/11/12
After years of financial struggles, museums and other cultural institutions of national importance in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) may be forced to close.
The BiH National Museum in Sarajevo closed its door to the public in January. 
The Historic Museum of BiH and the National Gallery reopened, but their future is uncertain, as is the future of several other national cultural institutions, due to lack of funding.
Adnan Busuladzic, director of the National Museum, told SETimes that all institutions threatened with closure are so because of the politics, rather than legal and financial problems.
"When there's no one responsible for funding, it is impossible that one institution survives 17 years. 
We are, as the other six cultural institutions are, victims of national politics and political divisions," Busuladzic said.
He said the important museums and cultural institutions in the world do not stay open without state funding and various projects.
"We received the last funds from the state budget and the council of ministers in 2010. 
We got 435,000 euros instead of 715,000 euros we need to maintain such a massive institution. 
Due to political dissent in the BiH parliament, nobody claims responsibility for us; 65 workers did not receive a salary for over a year, and the bills have piled up. 
We had to sue the state, and now the court will decide," he said.
After the 1990s armed conflict and the 1995 signing of the Dayton Agreement, care, upkeep and maintenance of BiH cultural institutions was transferred to BiH entities, cantons, and municipalities.
The civil affairs ministry was assigned the responsibility over the institutions of state-level importance.
Until now, however, the state and entities, cantons and municipalities refuse the responsibility of funding, or any permanent financing of institutions entrusted to their care.
The National Museum in Sarajevo is officially closed to the public, and functions at a minimum -- it is professionally monitored, with supervision of its valuable collections.
The shuttering of cultural institutions started with the closure of the National Gallery in Sarajevo in September 2011, followed by the closure of the Historical Museum of BiH.
Both institutions reopened, but their future is still uncertain, so is the future of other national institutions -- the Cinematheque, Museum of Literature and Art Theater, as well as the National and University Library and Library of the Blind and Poor of Sight in Sarajevo.
The closure of the National Museum provoked resentment among the general public and intellectual circles in BiH.
"Those close to political leaders and the budget can find the money, while those who are not so or do not belong to any political party must look for funding elsewhere. 
Are we going to turn galleries and museums into a few shopping malls? 
I think all of this is an attack on the BiH state. 
When you want to destroy a society, first destroy its cultural institutions," Amra Zahirovic, a Sarajevo teacher, told SETimes.
Tim Clancy, a consultant for sustainable development who has lived in BiH since 1992, said it is hard to find the funds to maintain the quality and diversity of a national museum, or any cultural institution.
"All great museums in which I have ever been, whether in New York or Cairo, are represented by a certain level of tasty and creative commercialism," Clancy told Radio Sarajevo.
Cultural institutions in other regional countries are also facing tough times due to lack of funding.
The National Museum and Museum of Modern Art in Serbia have been closed for years. 
Cultural workers are fighting for sustenance through diverse projects, or via commercial initiatives.
Average budget financing in most of regional countries for culture is 0.8 to 1.2 percent of the annual budget -- 2.28 euros per capita in BiH, 15.50 euros per capita in Serbia, 32 euros in Greece and 33 euros in Bulgaria -- a recent report from the Cultural Contact Point Serbia said.
BiH cultural institutions find the only way of survival via one of the projects offered by the EU, such as the Culture Programme 2007-2013. 
It invites annual applications for funds earmarked for projects in performing arts, music, cultural heritage, visual arts, literature and translation. 
The EU program budget amounts to 408 million euros.
