04/12/2012
By Ana Lovaković for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 04/12/12
High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina Valentin Inzko's latest report to the UN Security Council painted a dreary picture of the country's political landscape and called upon the international community to convince BiH political leaders to resolve their differences.
Inzko's report, delivered November 17th, said the ruling political parties need to show greater desire and ability to tackle BiH's economic and social problems before the country can begin the next phase of EU or NATO accession.
Inzko said the parties have engaged in an endless series of power struggles at all levels of government. 
He warned the country is in a serious political crisis, pointing to the actions of Republika Srpska politicians, including President Milorad Dodik, who "openly and publicly advocate the breakup of Bosnia and Herzegovina."
"The international community must not tolerate such challenges, and we must ensure that we have both the will and ability to stop them," Inzko said. 
"We must express more clearly than ever what is expected of political leaders and what will not be tolerated. 
They must stop their divisive behaviour and finally start leading the way to the country's full reintegration in the interests of all its citizens."
Zijad Bećirović, director of International Institute for Middle East and Balkan Studies in Ljubljana, Slovenia, said it will be difficult to find a political solution.
"Any hope that Milorad Dodik is going to make progress in BiH is a classic political utopia, because Dodik is a person who advocated and implemented Radovan Karadzic's policies and the proclamation of Republica Srpska as a state on the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina," Bećirović told SETimes.
"An effective solution will be if NATO accepts BiH as a full member via a fast track [procedure], and following that, find a solution that will be better than the existing Dayton Agreement. 
BiH's future prospects are certainly in NATO and the EU."
Srećko Latal, Crisis Group's Balkan analyst, told SETimes the situation in BiH is so serious that without international involvement any division of country is not possible in a peaceful manner.
"What finally needs to be done is to define what really is a violation of the Dayton constitution," Latal said. 
"According to that, the international comunity has an obligation to correct mistakes in the Dayton constitution and install instruments to correct them."
Inzko delivered an equally negative report last year, but there was little reaction internationally. 
Analysts said this is a clear message that the international community wants BiH politicians to find their own solutions.
But some, including Slavo Kukic, a politician and professor at the Faculty of Economics of the University of Mostar, called upon the international community for help. 
He warns that without such assistance, no one can predict the future of BiH.
"If the international comunity doesn't use authority given by the Dayton Agreement in Bosnia, negative trends will continue, with the possibility of different scenarios for the foreseeable future," Kukic said.
Bećirović said that with the political leadership in a tailspin, the international community should organize a conference on BiH.
"The current negotiations are conducted on the establishment of a new parliamentary majority [and] will only deepen and prolong the crisis in Bosnia," Bećirović said.
