06/10/2006
A new auto electronics plant is being built by US-based Johnson Controls in the free economic zone of Bunardzik, near Skopje.
Production is expected to begin within one year, with 150 jobs created in the initial phase.
The start of construction was formally inaugurated on October 5th at a ceremony attended by Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski and Johnson Controls CEO John Barth.
The IMF board of directors approved the third and final review of Croatia's standby arrangement.
IMF representative Athanasios Vamvakidis said the country registered considerable progress in the period since the $141.3m accord was sealed in 2004.
He praised the fiscal stability achieved and the efforts by authorities to strengthen financial sector supervision.
Four companies submitted bids in the tender for building a second Bulgarian-Romanian bridge over the Danube.
The candidates are:
a consortium consisting of Bouygues (France), Transstroy Varna (Bulgaria) and Rizzani (Italy);
FCC Construccion (Spain);
a consortium of Alpine Mayreder (Austria) and Eiffel (France);
and a consortium of Vinci (France), Glavbolgarstroy and Moststroy (Bulgaria).
Bosnia and Herzegovina's Aluminij Mostar signed a 7.9m-euro contract with Switzerland's Glencore International.
The Swiss firm will supply equipment for the modernisation of the BiH aluminium manufacturer.
Greece's EFG Eurobank reached an agreement to acquire a 74.26% stake in DZI Bank, Bulgaria's 11th largest, for 157.76m euros.
EFG Eurobank will buy shares from both majority and small shareholders in the Bulgarian financial institution.
The Greek bank already owns another Bulgarian bank, Post Bank, and plans to merge them.
The EBRD said it acquired a 25% stake in Macedonia's TTK Bank, as part of efforts to restructure and develop the financial institution.
EBRD's entry as a shareholder was realised via a capital increase worth 3.7m euros.
A local textile company, Teteks, is the majority shareholder in TTK Bank.
(Various sources – 29/09/06 - 06/10/06)
