13/09/2004
By Marta Muco for Southeast European Times – 13/09/04
Is the privatisation process still one of the most important elements of economic reform in Southeast European (SEE) countries? 
Some conclusions appear in a study by the EBRD, "Spotlight on Southeastern Europe", which has recently been published in book form. 
Emerging from regimes where private property was not the centre of business, most of the countries in the region have viewed privatisation as an important pillar of the drive to adopt a market economy during the last 12 years.
The benefits of embarking on dynamic privatisation are well-documented by economic literature and by the experiences of developing countries around the world. 
Privatisation is widely believed to foster a better use of economies of scale and increased efficiency. 
Furthermore, it attracts fresh capital and an advanced market type of management, accompanied by proper skills. 
At the same time, it is potentially a major source of government revenues and a good way to channel foreign direct investments to the region. 
Viewing the private sector as the main engine for future growth in SEE countries, privatisation could be considered:
…a success story
Although in its early stages, privatisation may have exacerbated the unemployment situation -- triggering massive layoffs from overstaffed state-owned enterprises -- the long-run benefits have been significant, with an increased rate of the private sector share in GDP, as indicated by EBRD data at the chart below. 
Comparing the levels of private sector share in GDP in 1995 and 2003, five countries in the region seem to be at or above 60 per cent.
Croatia announced plans in February 2004 to sell minority stakes in 823 companies in one year. 
The state also announced its intention to close down the privatisation body in three months and to transfer all remaining state assets to the central administration.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia-Montenegro, which embarked on the privatisation process later, are about midway through it. 
They are moving quickly to complete small-scale privatisation. 
For example, all state dairies in Serbia were to be privatised by June 2004; most have now been sold or have reached agreement with investors.
In almost all the countries, the privatisation of land -- where applicable -- was the first to start and the first to be completed, followed by that of houses, retail shops and small services. 
This could be considered a successful phase. 
The EBRD reform index, ranging from 1 to 4, gives high marks for small scale privatisation: virtually all the countries achieved between 4- and 4+. 
BiH and Serbia-Montenegro each scored a 3 because they started later.
Privatisation methods in SEE countries have a direct impact on the efforts towards better enterprise restructuring and increased efficiency. 
A variety of methods were used by countries in the area. 
Albania, Croatia, Macedonia and Romania have chosen management/employee buyouts as a primary method, while BiH and Serbia-Montenegro have mainly used vouchers. 
Direct sales have been the favoured method in Bulgaria. 
In Kosovo, still unresolved nation-building problems and the extensive reform of institutions have made 99-year leases the privatisation method of choice for socially owned enterprises.
Foreign participation is another important feature of privatisation. 
There are many success stories here. 
For instance, Croatia's largest pharmaceutical company, Pliva, sold its Danish subsidiary Pliva Pharma Nordic to United Nordic Pharma, owned by the Icelandic group Pharmaco.
Meanwhile, a consortium consisting of ABN AMRO Capital, Citigroup Investments and several private equity funds has acquired a 40 per cent stake in Mobiltel, Bulgaria's largest mobile phone operator, for a record 1.2 billion euros. 
The remaining majority stake is the property of three private Austrian investors. 
In February 2004, the Bulgarian Telecommunications Company was sold to Viva Ventures, a subsidiary of the US equity fund Advent International. 
Also worth noting is the acquisition, by British-based brewer SABMiller, of an 81.1 per cent controlling share in the Romanian brewing company Aurora.
Meanwhile, with the sale of Albania's largest bank to an Austrian buyer, Tirana has taken an important step in its attempts to privatise strategic sectors of the economy. 
In December 2003, the Savings Bank of Albania was sold to Raiffeisen Zentralbank Osterreich AG for nearly 102m euros.
In August, LNM Holdings, the world's second-largest steel producer, bought a 51 per cent stake in BiH's leading steelworks, BH Steel.
… with some constraints
Although generally a success, the speed of privatisation has varied throughout the region. 
While most of these countries have achieved considerable progress during the past decade, others are in the early stages. 
The chart below indicates privatisation revenues from 2000 to 2003 have fallen for Albania, BiH, Croatia, and Macedonia, but have climbed significantly for latecomer Serbia-Montenegro.
The EBRD study notes that Central European and Baltic states have a 15 per cent higher private sector share in GDP (averaging 77 and 62 per cent respectively) than SEE countries, indicating a potential for further growth of the private sector in the region.
Problems have developed in terms of selling larger assets. 
The so-called strategic sectors, which include energy, telecommunication and banking, are still seeking important international investors and high-profile private companies. 
State property in these areas typically represents big but not quite efficient entities with a significant share in the domestic markets. 
Some have struggled to restructure, focusing on management in particular, in order to boost productivity and market value. 
This, however, can slow the pace of activities and makes them more subject to political debate.
Corruption and lack of transparency are among the major problems and constraints that have accompanied the privatisation process in SEE countries. 
Cases in which the privatisation results have been reversed or become the subject of public debate have occurred in all countries. 
These practices have been under scrutiny not only in the transition countries in the region but also in more advanced economies. 
The European Commission, for example, has opened an investigation into the restructuring and privatisation of Olympic Airways and has warned Greece that its national carrier may face liquidation unless the relevant EU laws are strictly observed.
At the same time, structural changes caused by privatisation often have resulted in social problems for laid-off workers, triggering protests and strikes.
…with room for improvement
What remains to be done in terms of future privatisation efforts in the region? 
Apart from strengthening the private sector and boosting countries’ economic growth through increased efficiency, privatisation improves governance practices. 
In an environment where the market economy is still young and not fully efficient, and where markets are distorted and far from attaining equilibrium, further privatisation efforts could improve the accountability of governments and public control of government finances.
With the exception of public utilities, little has remained in state hands in most countries in the region. 
This strengthens the idea that the future growth of SEE economies will rely on the development of the existing private sector and on new businesses that will be created. 
The development of the private sector depends significantly on how newly-privatised entities are restructured, as well as on improvement of governance and market institutions, strengthening competitiveness, and the behaviour of firms in the market.
In this process SEE countries have received strong support from key international financial institutions, which are encouraging the countries to strengthen their private sector. 
The EBRD, IFC, World Bank, European Investment Bank and others have been supporting privatisation with direct investments, or by offering loans for further restructuring.
