03/11/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 03/11/12
Human rights advocates and educators in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) reiterated their commitment to end school segregation after a local court in Travnik dismissed a lawsuit that aimed to eliminate the practice.
Legal Aid Network, a Sarajevo-based NGO, filed a suit against the system of "two schools under one roof," in which Bosniak and Croat children are taught in separate classes. 
The court ruled on October 24th that the organisation was not relevant to file such a suit.
"This all leads to further separation and a growing generation who do not know anything about one another," Emir Prcanovic, director of Legal Aid Network, told SETimes. 
"Officials don't have an answer to the question of why different nations are mixed in the police, judiciary, administration and other segments of society and must not be mixed in schools. 
Instead of preparing children for living together and honoring other persons, politicians separate them from the start. 
It is tragic."
According to the education ministry, there are 52 schools in BiH that are segregated by nationality, mostly in the Federation of BiH (FBiH). 
Sead Hrustic, director of a divided secondary school in Vitez, testified during the hearing in Travnik.
"I said in the trial the same thing which I will say to you: If someone asked me, I would immediately abolish segregation," Hrustic told SETimes. 
"However, the reality is different. 
Authorities split the schools during the war, and we thought that it was a temporary solution. 
As a director I can't do very much to solve this thing, because these are matters of high politics, but I appeal once again to authorities to solve it, so that the children can go to school together."
Aleksandra Pandurevic, president of the BiH Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights, the Rights of Children, Youth, Immigration, Refugees, Asylum and Ethics, criticised the Travnik verdict.
"It is unthinkable that the Ombudsman [of BiH] didn't react to these things," Pandurevic told SETimes. 
"EU has specifically asked for years for BiH to overcome this thing. 
... 
Does anyone wonder what these kids will become as humans if we teach them to separate from other nationalities and to seek happiness only in their national camps? 
The responsibility for this situation lies solely in the politicians."
In May, a Mostar court ruled the two-schools-under-one-roof system in Stolac and Capljina violates Bosnian laws against discrimination and ordered schools there to establish mixed classrooms by September. 
Education officials instead said the school would be integrated in two years.
Mary Ann Henessey, head of the Council of Europe Office in BiH, told SETimes that desegrating the schools requires commitment at multiple levels.
"Politicians cannot solve this alone," Henessey said. 
"However, elected officials, civil servants, government ministers have to do their part, and it is past time for it to be done in a clear and unambiguous way."
The FBiH Ministry of Education released a document this year offering recommendations for eliminating school segregation, which contains steps for schools to follow.
"With preparation of this document, we have shown that there is a method and a model for the removal of such phenomenom in BiH," Damir Masic, minister of education for FBiH, told SETimes. 
"What concerns us is that the courts treat this problem in different ways. 
I hope that the side which files the lawsuit will complain on this court decision and that [a] higher level of judiciary shall review such verdict."
BiH is not the only country in the region where schools are segregated. 
In the Croatian town of Vukovar, Serb and Croat children are taught in separate schools.
In many areas of Macedonia where Albanians and Macedonians live together, including the towns of Gostivar, Kumanovo and Debar, ethnic segregation of schools is almost complete.
In multhi-ethnic areas of Kosovo, such as Rabovac, Serb children are separated form Albanian children. 
They go to same school but use differnet entrances and have different classwork.
