03/04/2013
By Harriet Salem for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/04/13
Dine on fresh seafood on the Croatian or Montenegrin coastline. 
Sip strong Turkish kafa accompanied by sticky sweet baklava in Sarajevo's picturesque old town. 
Hike in the national park surrounding Lake Ohrid in Macedonia. 
Drink homebrewed rakija and dance until sunrise in Belgrade's boat clubs. 
These are a few tourist tips for the Balkans.
Ten years ago the region was largely inaccessible, still reeling from a series of brutal conflicts. 
However, a new generation of local entrepreneurs realised the opportunities of previously undiscovered, culturally and naturally rich landscapes. 
And as they work together, they are taking steps toward regional reconciliation.
Today, with more than 30 UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation world heritage sites and several Lonely Planet top listings, the region has been reinvented as a tourist hotspot.
"Three Black Catz opened in 2004. 
It was the first hostel in Belgrade after the wars," business owner Mladen Milenkovic told SETimes. 
"Back then the Balkans had a bad image, people were scared, but slowly tourists started coming. 
Now the secret is out. 
Backpackers have discovered this is a friendly and affordable corner of the world."
Rapid tourism growth has helped bolster the region's faltering economies. 
According to 2012 statistics from the World Tourism and Travel Council, tourism accounts for significant portions of GDP in Croatia (27.7 percent), Albania (22 percent) and Montenegro (17.3 percent).
However, tourism-related businesses face an increasingly saturated market, and many are seeking to increase their competitive edge by building business relations with neighbouring countries.
Balkans Best Hostels is one example. 
Established in 2006, the network began with collaboration between businesses in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia, but grew to include Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia, Bulgaria and Albania as well as Hungary and Romania -- key transit routes in and out of the Balkans.
Haris Pamuk, owner of Haris Youth Hostel in Sarajevo, was a founding member of the network.
"I started my hostel by accident in 2003, I was only 15," he told SETimes. 
"My family home was destroyed by nine grenades during the war. 
For the renovations we borrowed money. 
Turning our home into a hostel was necessary to meet obligations to the bank."
Jovana Lemez joined in 2010 after opening City Smile in Banja Luka, administrative capital of Republika Srpska.
"I've lived here since 1995," Lemez said. 
"My family were displaced twice. 
First from Sarajevo to Bihac in the countryside, and when fighting spread further we moved here."
Once divided by war, these business owners now work together.
"We've held conferences in Zagreb, Split, Belgrade and Sarajevo," said Djordje Milojevic, administrative manager of Balkans Best Hostels, and owner of Star Hostel in Belgrade. 
"We make good recommendations because we have been to these places, we have learned about them, and met all these wonderful people."
This year the network is piloting a cross-border passport cover scheme. 
Guests collect flag stickers from countries they visit to access promotional offers.
"One day we hope to offer a bus transporting guests between cities and countries," Pamuk said.
Other businesses have also begun offering package tours to ease tourists' travel in the region.
Balkan Road Trip, a family-run company, began in 2003 offering cruises on the Croatian coast. 
In 2010, working with local providers, they launched tours across the region including, Slovenia, Macedonia, Albania and Greece.
This year Aleksander Senicic, director of Serbia's National Association of Tourist Agencies, announced plans to develop a Southeast Europe Association including Serbia, BiH, Montenegro, Macedonia, Croatia and Albania. 
Their aim is to work together to attract more tourists and increase the number of days they spend in the region.
While initially motivated by financial gain, such collaborations often result in genuine reconciliation.
"It is unbelievable to see people from these countries working together. 
But in this industry you cannot do it alone, you must make a network," Pamuk said.
Lemez said Kosovo remains unrepresented in Balkans Best Hostels due to its underdeveloped tourist industry.
"If Kosovo hostels want to join, why not? 
We want to reach every corner of the Balkans," she said. 
"For us there are no borders between people in the region."
Will you travel to a Balkan country for vacation this summer? 
Tell us where and why in the comments.
