03/04/2013
By Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/04/13
Despite a slowdown in refugee returns, the Kosovo government said it is working to help those who were displaced in coming home.
Kosovo's bad economy, the absence of housing assistance projects and, at times, threats of violence, have all been factors in preventing returns.
But, according to Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, the government will continue to offer financial support for initiatives for the return and reintegration of the minorities.
Thaci told the UN Security Council on March 22nd that building houses is a clear example of continuous efforts to shelter the returnees and ensure descent living conditions, to be followed by employment, health care and education.
The government built and fixed 76 houses in 2013 for the returnees throughout Kosovo and finalised 21 infrastructure projects.
Since 2000, more than 24,000 minorities returned voluntarily, according to Jo Hegenauer, the UN Refugee Agency's Pristina mission chief.
"There are an estimated 17,600 individuals internally displaced within Kosovo.
Creating conditions conducive for all interested displaced persons to return to Kosovo is very important," Hegenauer told SETimes.
UNHCR offices in the region have identified additional 3,000 minorities who want to return, and hope more will show interest.
However, the UNHCR noted the lack of availabile land for displaced people is another obstacle, since many refugees made their living by working the land and keeping animals.
"Municipalities should do more to allocate land for those who are displaced and willing to return to Kosovo," Hegenauer said.
Rade Kitanovic, a 45-year-old Serb and farmer, returned to his native village of Silovo.
"I have a nice and comfortable apartment in Vranje [in Serbia] and I went to live there in 1999 when Serbian army and police left Kosovo.
But I could not live there.
I did not have a job and nor a possibility to find one," Kitanovic told SETimes.
Kitanovic said he also could not do without his land, farming and husbandry.
"I spent a year of my life and almost my entire savings only to realise I had to go back to my village," he said.
"Now, I am back in Silovo, producing fruits, vegetables, milk, cheese ...
and selling them at the market to both Serbs and Albanians."
Despite the difficulties, the government's efforts to assist returnees continue.
A meeting between Kosovo Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi and Montenegro Labour Minister Predrag Boskovic on March 19th was the latest effort to advance returns.
More than 10,000 Serbs, Roma, Egyptians and Montenegrins from Kosovo who are displaced in Montenegro do not have personal documents from either country.
The ministers agreed they will have to be supplied personal documents in order to return to Kosovo.
Montenegro authorities will prepare lists of all who claim Kosovo citizenship for the country to verify them.
"After that, a collective return will be organised for them in order to have them registered," Boskovic said.
Correspondent Ivana Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report.
What else can Pristina do to encourage the return of refugees to the country?
Tell us in a comment below.
