07/05/2013
By Biljana Lajmanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/05/13
Experts said a new communication system established by Balkan countries will allow them to better manage risks and foster the exchange of timely information on any threat to milk and food safety.
At a meeting earlier this month in Sarajevo, the countries also agreed that Zagreb's Institute for Public Health will serve as a reference institution to perform requisite food-quality tests.
"Croatia already had a reference laboratory which meets the highest EU standards, so it will now be a regional reference laboratory for milk analysis," Mirko Sarovic, foreign trade and economic relations minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), told SETimes.
Regional countries also agreed on a basis for controls of aflatoxin levels in animal feed as well as milk that will follow existing parameters defined by EU regulations. 
Finally, they agreed to establish a regional expert group consisting of persons appointed with a specific mandate to discuss issues related to mycotoxin levels.
Officials said the co-operation is particularly important in light of losses caused by the decline in milk purchases, which began at the end of last year when the public learned of the high alfatoxin levels in milk and animal feed.
Milk sales in Serbia and BiH decreased by more than 30 percent. 
Twelve milk farms in Serbia ceased production altogether and Belgrade estimated the country's loss at between 100 and 125 million euros. 
In BiH, milk producers lost an average of 2,000 euros daily.
"Every day, a single dairy returned about 10,000 litres of milk to the producers. 
Many of them disposed of the milk and some sold it on the local street market," Suad Selimovic, a member of the Agriculture and Food Industry Association, told SETimes.
The situation is improving, however, as consumers are gradually increasing purchases, according to Nada Lecic, owner of a dairy products shop in Belgrade.
"The first few weeks after the affair started, sales were at a minimum, but not anymore. 
Today, people buy as much milk as they did prior to the aflatoxin affair," Lecic told SETimes.
Officials agree that stricter, timely milk quality control on national and regional levels are paramount to maintaining a healthy milk supply.
"Stricter control of raw milk and [animal] feed is a priority. 
We plan to share experiences, advice and opinions with other countries in the region to prevent similar problems in the future," Dejan Kranjajoc, state secretary at Serbia's Agriculture Ministry, told SETimes.
High levels of aflatoxin were registered only in imported milk in Macedonia, but the country also joined the regional effort to ensure safety.
"We have established these measures for regional co-operation, not only for aflatoxins. 
This will help us react faster in future and prevent other similar crises in food production," Tanja Mihajlovska of the Macedonian Agriculture Ministry, told SETimes.
The latest aflatoxin scare caused no damage to Macedonian milk production. 
Producers in the country even benefited from the situation since their milk was confirmed to be safe, it was in demand.
Nevertheless, prevention measures are needed, according to Andrija Sekulovski, president of the Macedonian Federation of Farmers.
"If we have a system in place where we will not need to wait three months for analysis, we will not have these kinds of problems," Sekulovski told SETimes.
SETimes correspondents Katica Djurovic in Belgrade, Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo, Kruno Kartus in Osjek and Menekse Tokay in Istanbul contributed to this article.
What other measures can the Balkan countries undertake to ensure milk and animal feed safety? 
Offer your suggestions in the comments section below.
