03/05/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 03/05/13
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Presidency Chairman Nebojsa Radmanovic said that the Republika Srpska (RS) could have the right to secede from BiH, but politicians and analysts said the entity needs to focus on helping to solve ongoing issues in the whole country.
In an interview with Anadolu news agency, Radmanovic said that Bosnian Serbs always desired independence, which caused sharp reactions, mostly within the Bosniak political block.
Ramiz Salkic, vice president of the RS parliament, said that the entity's secession is not realistic and would be destructive for BiH.
"I think it's unnecessary to create tension, because this is a country for all its peoples.
The official policy should start solving long-standing troubling issues for our citizens, [including the] difficult economic situation and unemployment," Salkic told SETimes.
Radmanovic said that according to the existing declaration of the RS national assembly on independence, recalling the 2008 RS resolution, which condemns Kosovo's independence, but states that if half of the UN member countries recognize Kosovo, the international community will have changed its system, and RS will also consider its right to separate.
Radmanovic's party colleagues support his statement.
"Radmanovic's position is a reflection of the real situation, and that [RS independence] is possible in the future.
The story has grounding in the present state of political relations in the Balkans.
The ruling Alliance of Independent Democrats (SNSD) hasn't discussed independence, but there is a declaration on it, and it's legally constituted," Zeljko Mirjanic, SNSD president, told SETimes.
The idea of an independent RS, a state of Serbs in BiH, was originally a Serb Democratic Party idea and a political motto of former Bosnia Serb leader and war crimes indictee Radovan Karadzic.
Since, SNSD has increased the independence rhetoric in the past few years, especially in the heat of election campaigns.
"[RS Prime Minister] Milorad Dodik and his party in recent years legitimise the story of the disintegration of BiH, and it is worrying because it may lead to the destabilisation of the country ...
The international community shouldn't stand aside and have to deal with these statements because it is a guarantor of the Dayton Agreement," Slavo Kukic, a political analyst and professor at the University of Mostar, told SETimes.
Citizens differ on their opinions about RS independence, but all agree that such a move would be followed by more political instability.
"Independence would be good for us in the RS, but I don't think the Western countries would agree to that.
So, it would cause political instability, maybe in the whole region, but after all, we would have an independent republic.
Long term, I think it's worth it," Drago Krupalija, from Prijedor, told SETimes.
Others disagree.
"The consequences of such an act would be unthinkable.
Just remember what happened two decades ago here.
Is there anything else I need to say?
People should understand that the wars are over and nothing can change current boundaries.
Let's focus on our common future instead," Hamid Filandra, from Sarajevo, told SETimes.
How should Bosnia and Herzegovina respond to suggestions of independence for Republika Srpska?
Tell us what you think.
