04/06/2013
By Klaudjia Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 04/06/13
During the recent World Day for Cultural Diversity held in Macedonia, civil society took a closer look at the multi-ethnic co-existence, tolerance and respect of mutual values in the country and the region.
Nils Muiznieks, a commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe which published a report on Macedonia, said that in terms of inter-ethnic relations, much has been done in the area of fair representation in the last decade, but politics and party circles have limited the effects of this progress.
"In a richly diverse country like Macedonia, the inter-ethnic relations are complex and existing divisions can't be solved superficially, all public and political actors of the country should be mindful that their legacy will depend on their specific contribution to building an integrated society," Muiznieks said.
Saso Klekovski, director of Macedonian Centre for International Co-operation, agreed.
"Ethnic divisions are stronger than social, political and ideological ones.
This is abused by political parties, who according to the citizens have the most negative impact on inter-ethnic relations," he told SETimes.
Shuip Marku, project co-ordinator at the Centre for Sustainable Development in Debar, said that politics reduce the role of civil society.
"Currently, the civil sector is in the pliers of policy, between the opposition and the government.
It's difficult to be neutral, because you get attacks from one side and the other," Marku said.
The council's report noted that Macedonia has a legal framework that is non-discriminatory, and that the national structure for human rights, including the Ombudsman and the Commission for Protection against Discrimination, are active in the country.
However, according to a recent Amnesty International report, relations between the Macedonians and Albanians have deteriorated.
The report notes ethnic riots, assassinations, lack media freedom of expression and large numbers of Roma and Albanians leaving the country, which jeopardises the country's visa libertisation.
"Transformation to a multi-ethnic civil state is the first step that will overcome ethnic barriers.
Young people must act through intercultural dialogue that will take us from traditions, restraints, and will strengthen co-operation," Aleksandar Cvetkovski, president of association for citizen tolerance and co-operation from Prilep, told SETimes.
Ilija Aceski, sociology professor at Skopje State University, refers to separation between Macedonians and Albanians and their demographic dominance in certain areas.
"Ethnic divisions are a result of a long concentration of citizens from one ethnic grouping to a certain area.
It's ethnic segregation at the national level and regional level," Aceski said.
In 2012, the Support Centre for Interethnic Disputes was formed as part of the Institute for Sociological, Political and Juridical Research, to help communities facilitate disputes and resolve conflicts.
The centre co-operates with institutions, organisations and individuals who can contribute to constructive resolution of disputes on the local level.
The centre offers direct assistance in facilitating, monitoring of relief and media communication.
Its indirect assistance is offered through consultation, facilitators and online support.
What other civil society efforts can be done to avoid interethnic divisions, tolerance and mutual respect among ethnic communities in Balkan societies.
Let us know below.
