04/06/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 04/06/13
A new textile facility in Bileca near Trebinje in south Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), and three additional facilities that officials announced will be opened soon, are raising hopes for economic revival in some of the economically hardest hit areas in the country.
Mileva Berak, together with 300 colleagues, obtained a job at the new factory two weeks ago, said she is overjoyed to have found employment.
"This job brought back my hope and faith in a better future for me and my children. 
I have a lot of experience in this field, and many of my former colleagues are now working here," Berak told SETimes.
Berak said she has been in textile manufacturer for 20 years but the last textile factory she worked for in Trebinje closed down several years ago leaving hundreds, mostly women, jobless.
The Republika Srpska (RS) government said opening the Bileca plant is the first phase in the strategic project to develop the BiH entity's textile industry.
"I am very satisfied so many people will be employed and the government will continue working on implementing this and other development projects in Herzegovina," Prime Minister Zeljka Cvijanovic said at the opening ceremony on May 17th.
The Nikola Tesla enterprise, founded by the RS government, owns the Bileca factory. 
The enterprise bought collapsed textile plant buildings in four cities in Herzegovina and said it is set to invest 10 million euros in textile manufacturing.
Nikola Tesla officials said the Bileca factory plans to hire 2,500 workers by 2014 and it has buyers for textile products in Germany for the next five years. 
The clothes produced in the new textile factories are mostly women's garments, shirts, dresses and leather clothing, but also include some men's items.
Milutin Mastilovic, one of the Bileca factory managers who also headed the factory's commission to select workers, said the interest in obtaining employment there was huge.
"More than 700 people applied for a job vacancy in Trebinje, where a new factory will be opened at the end of this year. 
These are mostly workers with experience given there was a textile factory in Trebinje but it closed down several years ago. 
We did not have problems choosing our human resources," Mastilovic told SETimes.
Unemployment in BiH exceeded 44 percent last year, the second-highest unemployment rate in Europe after Kosovo.
The Bileca municipality government helped the textile facility project get off the ground and will continue to support all similar projects to revive the economy, according to the municipality's head Miljan Aleksic.
"Our local government provided the road infrastructure, water, electricity and all utilities. 
The city is practically revived in the past several days. 
Today you can see on the people's faces they are seeing ahead, have obligations and are interested in [achieving] something," Aleksic told SETimes.
Aleksic said the planned hiring of 200 additional workers for the Bileca textile factory next month means a lot for the hard-hit town.
"People have been leaving small towns in search of employment, and these new developments certainly make people change their minds and stay," Aleksic said.
Experts said they are hopeful creating new jobs can revive the textile industry and provide the basis for Herzegovina's economic development.
"The workers' wages will not be particularly high, but will definitely have a positive impact on household budgets. 
This is a positive move that may contribute to the development of the whole region," Goran Radivojac, economics professor at Banja Luka University, told SETimes.
"Only time will tell whether the authorities are willing to continue job creation or will stop at this," Radivojac added.
What other industries could help to revive the economy in the region? 
Share your opinions in the comments space.
