02/04/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 02/04/13
The 15-year-old son of Phaedon Karydakis was fatally struck by a car running a red light while the young student was trying to cross a busy Athens boulevard on his way back from school in 2009.
The driver fled the scene only to be arrested hours later.
The tragedy of young Solon motivated his father to spearhead a campaign and fundraising effort that eventually led to the construction of a state-of-the-art pedestrian bridge over the roadway.
He has since moved on to advocate for road safety and tougher penalties for drivers.
Road safety remains a major issue across the Balkans and Turkey as authorities take steps to reduce fatalities and accidents.
In some countries across the region fatalities and accidents are dropping in line with the European trend.
Recent road safety data from the European Commission showed during 2012 road fatalities across the EU decreased by 9 percent from 2011, meaning 3,000 lives were saved.
Although 75 people still die per day when travelling by Europe's roads, the numbers are the lowest since recording began.
At the EU level, initiatives to further decrease serious traffic crashes include stricter criteria for young drivers to acquire a license for high-powered motorcycles and the cross-border implementation since November 2012 of fines and sanctions for serious driving offenses, such as drunk driving and reckless speeding.
The countries with the lowest number of road fatalities are the UK, Sweden, the Netherlands and Denmark, with approximately 30 deaths per million inhabitants.
Romania came in second worst after Lithuania with 96 deaths per million inhabitants and has made no improvement over the past decade.
Indeed, Romania hasn't made much progress over the past half century with deaths per million in 1965 standing at 98.
Observers say there are many reasons for the number.
"First, Romania doesn't have a road safety national strategy even if there's been an inter-ministerial council founded with this view ever since 1995," Stefan Racasan, the president of the Association of Victims of Traffic Accidents, told SETimes.
Such a strategy, he said, should see concerted efforts by central and local authorities with a view to reduce the number of victims in road accidents.
He set as an example Serbia, where such a strategy was passed in 2010 and by October 2012 the number of fatalities on the roads had decreased by 46 percent.
"Secondly, even if the traffic code stipulates there should be one hour of traffic education per week in schools, nothing of this kind is done due to lack of resources.
And education is above sanctions when we talk about traffic safety," Racasan said.
A third cause is the poor state of road infrastructure in the country, he added.
According to the same EC statistics, in Greece road fatalities dropped 4 percent annually between 2000 and 2010 and by 10 percent in 2012 compared to 2011.
Although there has been an improvement on a year-to-year basis, the eyebrow-raising figure of 40,000 people killed in road accidents in Greece since 1990 remains disconcerting.
Greece ranked fourth in the EU in terms of traffic deaths, posting 92 fatalities per million inhabitants.
In Greece, according to a press release by the National Society of Traffic Engineers in early March, the biggest causes of traffic-related crashes are speeding, not wearing a seat belt or helmet by motorcycle riders, drinking and driving, using a cellphone while driving and aggressive driving.
The data was compiled by the Hellenic Statistical Authority and the European Emergency Response Centre.
In published statements on behalf of SOS Traffic Accidents, an NGO, Phaedon Karydakis called for alternative sentencing for drivers involved in serious or even fatal traffic collisions, citing a similar initiative in Italy.
Turkey, with almost 80 million inhabitants and 17 million registered vehicles on the road, last year had 153,555 major traffic crashes in which 3,757 people died and 268,102 others were injured.
"In the last 30 years, approximately 160,000 people died due to traffic accidents in our country.
This figure is five times more than the casualties by terror incidents," Interior Minister Muammer Guler noted during the meeting on traffic safety held by the National Police Department last month.
The number of traffic accidents in Turkey decreased, however, by 2 percent last year compared to 2011.
Over the past couple of years, Turkey has been boosting traffic safety by increasing traffic fines and penalties, increasing police controls, and developing a computerised system to prevent bribes and tolerance for certain levels of alcohol or excessive speed.
The government plans to implement an action plan and strategy on traffic safety in order to reduce the number of road fatalities by 50 percent by 2020 placing special emphasis on wearing seatbelts and speeding.
Guler said that even if the government were to take no other action, if 100 percent of motorists used seatbelts the number of fatalities would drop by 50 percent.
Turkey has also made some progress in the last years to ingrain a culture of road safety and to reinforce the concept of obeying rules.
In June 2010, it started the Road Safety Project, co-ordinated by World Health Organisation, focusing on managing speed and promoting the wearing of seatbelts.
From 2011 to 2012, the controls on mobile phone use when driving, alcohol testing, and the use of protective headgear for the motorcycle users increased.
In 2012, nearly 10 million liras were collected through traffic penalties.
"The increase in traffic control may have impact over the decrease in road accidents.
To ensure social ownership of the rules, it is necessary to follow up with implementation," professor Hilal Ozcebe from the Ankara-based Hacettepe University's Traffic and Road Safety Education, Research and Implementation Centre told SETimes.
"This also creates the impression that the law enforcers are taking traffic rules seriously and requires from the greater society that they obey them," she added.
As a fairly conservative Muslim country, only 5 percent of road traffic deaths in Turkey involve alcohol compared to 25 percent in the EU.
Ahmet Utlu, founder of Degistirebiliriz (We Can Change) Road Safety Platform, said that drinking and driving is not a large factor in Turkey.
"The root causes of the traffic accidents in Turkey are 98 percent the human mistakes where drivers do not necessarily take individual precautions vis-à-vis imminent risks," Utlu told SETimes.
Utlu said that although the traffic control systems and infrastructure in Turkey has been improving this doesn't translate into a change in risk perception by drivers.
Ozcebe said urban areas need better road infrastructure to reduce accidents, but a large part of reducing accidents and fatalities will come from changing drivers' behavior and educating people.
SETimes correspondents H.K.
Tzanis in Athens and Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest contributed to this report.
What steps should be taken to reduce traffic fatalities?
Share your thoughts below.
