07/08/2006

The number of households in Bulgaria that regularly use the Internet has tripled in the past year, according to a report from the State Agency for Information Technology. 
It forecast that 30 per cent of Bulgarians over the age of 15 would have joined the ranks of Internet users by the end of this year. 
At the same time, computer literacy remains low, with 56 per cent of those polled saying they could not use the Internet without help from friends and colleagues. 
The report also found that few Bulgarian businesses use the web to promote their products and services.
***
PC sales in Croatia increased by 4.3 per cent year-on-year in the second quarter of the year to some 51.035 units, according to IDC Adriatics. 
Overall sales of desktop computers continued to dominate the market, accounting for 64 per cent of the total, while the market share for laptops was 32.6 per cent. 
Laptop sales registered the highest growth -- 20.3 per cent.
***
Montenegro's Telekom Crne Gore has launched a summer campaign aimed at increasing the number of broadband Internet users in the country. 
New subscribers to the ADSL service will pay no switch-on fee, while monthly fees are being cut by an average of 30 per cent. 
The campaign will continue until 15 September.
***
Air Bites Bulgaria has begun a campaign to acquire small Bulgarian ISPs. 
It has already purchased a local operator, Bali Studio, which serves part of Sofia. 
The company -- whose parent firm also owns ISPs in Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Spain and Ukraine -- says it plans to cover all of Sofia as well as the Black Sea city of Varna by the end of 2007.
***
The winners of the 2006 TUBITAK awards -- considered one of the most prestigious science and technology prizes in Turkey -- were announced last week. 
Ekmel Ozbay (Bilkent University) and Niyazi Serdar Sariciftci (Johannes Kepler University) won the general science award, while Ergin Atalar (Bilkent University) and Adil Denizli (Hacettepe University) won in the engineering category. 
Professor Erol Cerasi from Israel's Hebrew University received the health sciences award. 
The late Turkish scientist Muhiddin Erel was also honoured.
***
Bucharest's Emergency Plastic Surgery Hospital will be modernised under a 1.3m-euro project. 
The renovation will be co-financed by the city municipality and the World Bank and should be completed by the end of 2008. 
The hospital will be receiving new equipment, especially for the mobile emergency units.
(Various sources – 31/07/06 – 07/08/06)
