02/04/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/04/13
The new anti-corruption plan unveiled by Serbia's Justice Ministry obligates state authorities and other institutions to take a "zero tolerance" approach, and will formulate goals to halt corrupt activities in politics, public finance, privitisation, the judiciary, police, spatial planning and construction, health care and media.
Milan Antonijevic, director of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, told SETimes that while eliminating all corruption is impossible for any state, the creation of a comprehensive strategy was an important step for Serbia's government.
"This document is well done and it has the potential to grow into a widespread anti-corruption fight," Antonijevic said. 
"When the priorities are declared, the government must stand behind them."
Justice Minister Nikola Selakovic said all state bodies must be prepared to implement new anti-corruption provisions. 
He added that Serbia must not delay action, since it is has had a significant corruption problem. 
According to Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index for 2012, Serbia is at 80th place out of 176 countries.
"It must be stopped, and the government has showed in last eight months, through its systematic approach, through institutional strengthening, that the state is ready to get in the fight against corruption. 
These efforts are returning citizens' confidence in institutions, which we have been lacking," Selakovic said.
Serbia previously had an anti-corruption strategy devised in 2005 that established legal and institutional frameworks, but there was little public awareness of it and there were no arrests or sentences as a result.
The new strategy has been widely publicised and follows high-profile anti-corruption efforts, including the December arrest of businessman Miroslav Miskovic on fraud charges and the arrest of Razvojna Banka Jojvodine management for suspicious loans to political parties.
Sladjana Taseva, a legal advisor with Human Dynamics Public Sector Consulting, who participated in developing the new strategy, told SETimes that public awareness and involvement are crucial.
"There are numerous relevant subjects active in this strategy development and they are strongly connected with it and feel it as part of themselves and it is an important part of the strategy's implementation," Taseva said.
William Infante, UN resident co-ordinator for Serbia, said the international community has supported the development of the new strategy, which he said is based on government will and commitment at the highest levels.
"We have a good strategy which develops the right policy positions: zero tolerance, application of rule of law… These are great principles. 
It's got three pillars: enforcement, prevention and public awareness and education. 
This is what we want to see," Infante told SETimes.
He added that 95 percent of the strategy has been agreed upon by a 22-member working group. 
The remaining 5 percent will involve the ongoing process of strengthening and refining the strategy.
"The government is extraordinarily committed to this process, and I am very happy to see this coalition of ministries, agencies and other actors who came together to produce something good," Infante said.
"Even before the strategy is adopted, the government has moved down this path and we've seen it bringing results. 
We've seen the risks significantly reduced in a lot of the systems: the ministry of defence, the ministry of justice, the ministry of health. 
… This is going to be a long process and the effort against corruption will never end," he added.
Selakovic told SETimes that it is important for Serbia to show its citizens and the international community that the nation is committed to transparency.
"The most important thing is to prove that Serbia is a state where the system of responsibility exists if someone breaks the rule of law, never mind who he or she is," Salakovic said. 
"Justice is blind and doesn't see someone's name or surname, relatives, business or political connections, and that anyone who breaks the rule of law must be responsible for it. 
The system of responsibility is the key."
How does the new strategy in Serbia compare to the actions in your country to fight corruption? 
Tell us by making a comment below.
