01/04/2013
By Safet Kabashaj and Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Zagreb -- 01/04/13
For the second time in less than two years, Kosovo lost a daily newspaper when the Express stopped printing.
The 8-year-old publication now is now exclusively available online.
Although many newspapers across the Balkans and around the world have moved from printed publication to the internet, it is crucial for news websites to maintain high journalistic standards to provide a forum that provides accurate reporting and media freedom, analysts said.
Through maintained credibility, media in the region serves as a source of accountability against corruption and a means of furthering freedom of speech.
"Printed media have a future, but they will need a lot of money and a good economic plan for survival," Zdenko Duka, president of the Croatian Journalists' Society and an editor with Croatian daily Novi List, told SETimes.
"On the other hand, online journalism is lowering ethical criteria, and I think that online media should respect all ethical codes that are represented in traditional media."
Nehat Islami, the head of Press Council Kosovo, told SETimes that all of the country's print media outlets have signed a code of conduct and that Express will continue to follow it as an online outlet.
"I strongly believe that they will stick to journalistic principles even as an online media, and will respect the Council's code of conduct and media ethics," Islami said.
The question of credibility is important, as some websites in the region do not reveal their ownership and have republished stories from other outlets without proper permission or attribution.
Evliana Berani, a university professor and owner of the Info Globi online news agency, told SETimes there are websites with low professional standards, but ultimately news outlets are vulnerable to the identities they create for themselves.
"The media scene will be filtrated by the public," she said.
Express editor Shpend Limoni said the decision to cease printing was a strategic move due to technological developments and financial difficulties.
Limoni said research showed that 17 percent of the population in Kosovo obtains information from the internet, while only 2 percent from newspapers.
He added that sustaining a print edition is a financial headache.
"All dailies in Kosovo sell only 12,000 copies a day, while advertising, which is the main financial income for a newspaper, is getting lower every day," Limoni told SETimes.
Fifteen months ago another Kosovo newspaper, Infopress, ceased operations.
Duka said the sale of printed media in Croatia dropped by 10 to 15 percent in 2012.
Last year, the 72-year-old Croatian daily Vjesnik stopped printing due to financial problems.
After a couple months as an online publication, Vjesnik ceased operations.
The same thing happened with weekly Nacional, which last printed in July 2012.
The owners tried to maintain an online edition, but the 17-year-old magazine went out of business with millions of euros of debt.
Several newspapers in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) also stopped publishing in the past two years, including the dailies Fokus from Banja Luka and San from Sarajevo.
In both BiH and Croatia, journalists were laid off without severance pay or any other workers' benefits.
Tatjana Duronjic, professor of information science at the Faculty of Political Science in Banja Luka, said the future of newspaper companies is on the internet.
"Increasing trend of distinguishing print weeklies, dailies and their transfer to the online edition confirms the hypothesis that the future of journalism is in online editions," Duronjic told SETimes.
"The audience is bigger on the internet, the space is larger.
In a time when the financial situation has affected all spheres of society it's cheaper to have the online production than the hard copy."
Editors of online media emphasise that there is a significant difference in the number of readers between print and online media.
Limoni said the Express website has up to 100,000 visitors on a daily basis.
"It's much easier to inform myself via internet than in some newsstand," Dajan Grubnic, 23, a sociology student form Zagreb, told SETimes.
"I have a wider choice of newspapers, much more information and an easier way to list the news."
However, Engjell Blakaj, 56, a passionate newspaper reader from Pristina, said online editions cannot replace traditional hard copy newspapers.
"Not because of the lack of information, but because of lack of patience from readers to stick to an article or story amid so much access to information in the internet," Blakaj told SETimes.
"Online editions are producing readers with a surface knowledge and attention to the issues, thus the young generation, generally, is less informed than my generation," Blakaj added.
"Because of the internet they've become dependent, not eager to memorise things, developments and organise a logical connection between them."
How will news organisations maintain their impact as they transition from print to online?
Tell us what you think below.
