04/08/2006
The Greek government accepted Credit Agricole's offer to buy the state's 40 per cent share in Emporiki Bank.
Economy Minister George Alogoskoufis called on the parliamentary opposition and trade unions, which have been objecting to the privatisation, to take into account the "beneficial consequences for the bank's development prospects and the Greek economy generally." Credit Agricole, the sole candidate in the tender, raised its offer to 3.3 billion euros, up from the original 3.1 billion euros.
The IMF board of directors completed the third review of Bulgaria's $146m stand-by arrangement.
In a statement, the board said Sofia follows a prudent fiscal policy, credit restriction measures are adequate, and structural reforms aimed at improving competitiveness have continued.
The IMF approved Turkey's letter of intent under the third and fourth reviews of a three-year, stand-by arrangement worth nearly $10 billion, thus enabling the immediate disbursement of $1.9 billion.
While welcoming the government's reform measures, the Fund warned against a recent rise of inflation and urged authorities to continue tightening monetary and fiscal discipline and regain investor confidence.
Albania's GDP grew by over 5 per cent year-on-year in the first half of 2006, according to data presented by Finance Minister Ridvan Bode on 1 August.
The inflation rate stood at 2.4 per cent in the same period.
Compared to the first half of 2005, general budget revenues were 13 per cent higher.
The EBRD is loaning Bosnia and Herzegovina 12m euros for development of the country's air traffic management system.
The credit has maturity of 15 years and a 3-year grace period.
Funds will go towards the purchase of new equipment and training of air traffic controllers.
Standard & Poor's affirmed Zagreb's BBB rating on long-term debt with a stable outlook.
A press release from the agency said the city's budgetary performance is consistently strong, with a high surplus in 2002-2005, and debt is low and decreasing.
Factors that constrain the rating are financial rigidity and limited debt raising capacity due to state control.
Fitch Ratings affirmed Bucharest City Hall's BBB- rating for long-term credits in domestic and foreign currency, with a stable outlook.
The rating for short-term credits is F3.
The agency said it took into account financial support and control by central authorities, the dynamic economy of the city, and indices over the national average.
The city's financial flexibility remains low, it said.
(Various sources – 28/07/06 – 04/08/06)
