01/05/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 01/05/13
In an effort to boost the country's infrastructure, the Macedonian government has earmarked 4.5 million euros for municipalities to use for projects, including construction of water supply, drainage and sewerage systems, local streets and roads, youth and children's centres, retirement homes, sports facilities and cultural centres.
In order to receive funding, municipalities can apply for the funds, which are intended to cover 100 percent of each project's costs.
"We cannot say that all this problem will be solved overnight, but we believe that this problem will be solved gradually. 
This programme is a good opportunity for all communities … because the state will be covering the whole amount of the costs for the projects," Alexandar Gjorgjie, a government spokesman, told SETimes.
According to Debarca Mayor Igor Trajkovski, the main problem for citizens in his municipality is that some homes have no water or sewer services.
"We intend to apply for the infrastructure project [funds]. 
The government decision will help us … and part of the problems for local residents will be over. 
Road infrastructure [is also a problem], but the priority will be solving the problem of water supply," Trajkovski told SETimes.
The fate is shared by many smaller and rural communities. 
Vasilevo Mayor Vanco Stojanov told SETimes that good infrastructure will prevent the migration of residents from his eastern Macedonian municipality to other states or bigger cities.
"We have a great need for infrastructure works, and that is why the state assistance will be important for all rural municipalities. 
Each municipality will individually determine their priorities on [what] will contribute to … better living conditions," Stojanov said.
The improvement of infrastructure would also contribute to the development of the local economy.
"In Vasilevo, [there is] an industrial zone in which several industrial facilities operate, such as companies from Greece, and there is interest from other domestic and foreign companies. 
By improving the infrastructure around the industrial zone, we will contribute to the development of the local economy and to increase the economic capacity of municipalities and will help to the farmers for selling their products because most of the companies here are with activity of purchase and processing of agricultural products," Stojanov said.
Zoran Vitanov, former deputy economy minister, told SETimes that the government should raise the amount of funding for infrastructure improvements.
"If you do not invest in infrastructure, the interior of the country will fail because there is poor infrastructure, especially in eastern Macedonia. 
This move of the state is good, but you need to invest more money in infrastructure in underdeveloped areas," Vitanov said.
Municipalities need to use this money for the construction of water networks and transport infrastructure.
"These are essential preconditions for people to remain living in those areas. 
When people stay there, you will begin to develop those areas to draw investment," Vitanov said.
Some municipalities are setting aside money from their own budgets to undertake infrastructure projects.
Local authorities in Ohrid started repairing damaged roads in the city with municipal money. 
To repair the road leading to the border crossing with Albania, the municipality will seek money from the state.
"There will not remain a single settlement in the town and villages where the streets and roads will not be repaired," Ohrid Mayor Nikola Bakracheski said.
In the Bogovica village in Struga where 600 people lived, there are now only 200 residents. 
Due to lack of water, residents left the village to go to the city. 
For several years the drinking water has been supplied by special tanks from the city.
Citizens are optimistic about the plans.
"The roads …are in poor condition. 
Struga is a tourist town and, therefore, I think that the improvement of road infrastructure will increase the number of tourists," Vasko Angeloski resident of Struga, told SETimes.
What else can the government do to improve infrastructure in municipalities? 
Let us know in the comment section.
