01/05/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 01/05/13
EU representatives and citizens in the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) village of Budak are urging Republika Srpska (RS) authorities and the Serbian Orthodox Church to stop construction on a church that will sit next to a recently excavated mass grave, and close to the Potocari cemetery and memorial to the Srebrenica victims.
Mary Ann Hennessey, head of the BiH Council of Europe office, said that RS authorities are not doing themselves any favour by encouraging the building of the church.
"Now is the time for the Serb Orthodox Church to demonstrate its capacity for empathy and remove the church from Budak, recognising that it is a source of pain, fear and resentment for all those who have or will bury loved ones in Potocari, and those who honour the memory of those victims of genocide," Hennessey told SETimes.
Construction started in 2012, and took place until the Budak municipality stopped it due to the lack of a building permit. 
In March 2013, the RS ministry of spatial planning annulled the municipality's decision and issued permission to continue building the church.
Relatives of Bosniak victims claim the church is being built for political purposes. 
Residents of the nearby Budak village urged authorities to stop the building without success.
"When the church construction became public, the locals, all 160 houses, signed a petition for help from all relevant authorities in the country, embassies in BiH, religious communities ... 
The RS authorities cancelled all our efforts; we sued them at a competent court, but the building of the church is still under way, though we didn't get an official response from the court," Sehida Abdurahmanovic, a resident of the Budak village, told SETimes.
But RS authorities said there is nothing controversial in the construction of the church.
"The land on which the church is built belongs to a Serb, and he decided to build the church. 
Our intention is not to provoke anyone; everything is legal. 
Such reaction from the Bosniak community shows just how unequal the position of us Serbs in Srebrenica is in relation to other ethnic groups," Radomir Pavlovic, president of Srebrenica municipal parliament, told SETimes.
"I don't know why someone should object to a single religious object. 
Churches and mosques should be holy places. 
My house is 1 kilometre away from the new church. 
But the mosque is also a half a kilometre away from my house, and I don't mind it at all. 
Why should the mosque bother me? 
Some people need to understand that the war is over," Mara Rankic, a local resident from nearby Oparci village, near Budak, told SETimes.
Islamic leaders refused to comment, but said they want a peaceful solution to the situation.
"The presence of a church where there is no Serb population is pointless, just a provocation. 
We ask that the RS government relocate the church where it will serve its purpose," Nura Begovic, from the Mothers of Srebrenica association, told SETimes.
Correspondent Bedrana Kaletovic in Srebrenica contributed to this report.
In what way should the controversy over the building of the Serbian Orthodox church in Srebrenica be resolved? 
Let us know what you think.
