31/01/2012
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 31/01/12
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has become a popular destination for shoppers throughout the region, because lower tax makes the cost of goods less than in neighbouring states.
"We can often get double for our money in BiH than in Croatia," says Mirjana Bosic, who lives near Osijek in northern Croatia.
"Cigarettes, even those made in Croatia, are cheaper in BiH.
On the way back [to Croatia] we fill up the gas tank, and our shopping is definitely worthwhile."
Prices are lower because BiH has a lower value added tax (VAT) rate than its neighbours -- 17% on all purchase products and items.
Croatia's VAT is 23%, while Serbia's is 18% and Montenegro's are 17%.
Croatia's VAT will increase to 25% in March.
Macedonia has a VAT of 18% for items other than medical goods and computer equipment, and Moldova's VAT is 20%.
The VAT is a tax on profit on a product -- the difference between what an item costs to manufacture and the price for which it is sold.
Collections occur every time a business in the supply chain purchases or produces a product and resells it.
"The VAT system in BiH, compared to the EU member states, is far more efficient.
A universal, a reasonable rate, leaves less room for VAT fraud.
If varying VAT rates were implemented, for various products, consumer choice could be threatened," the BiH Indirect Taxation Authority says a November 2011 study.
"The shopping basket will be lighter and more costly since every rise in VAT inevitably raises prices.
Even in the current conditions of low purchasing power, the new price raise will be an additional blow to the citizens' purchasing power," Kresimir Sever from the Independent Croatian Syndicate, told SETimes.
With a rise in food prices and other groceries in Croatia, and the coming raise in VAT on all purchase items, Croatians take regular shopping trips to neighbouring BiH.
"There used to be a time when we bought our food in Hungary.
With two to three monthly shopping trips we would save around 40% or more than in Croatia," Bosic said.
After VAT increased in Hungary to 25%, the Bosic family started shopping in BiH.
The city of Bijeljina, in Republika Srpska (RS), close to the border with Serbia, receives a large number of shoppers with licence plates from Serbia.
"For buying cigarettes, alcohol and coffee, they don't get a return on VAT, but for all other goods they do, our customers know, and so we have many Serbs spending money in our stores," Zdravko Djuric, the director of Bijeljina retail store Fis, told SETimes.
