01/06/2013
By Aleksandar Pavlevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 01/06/13
The recent arrests of organised groups of smugglers attempting to move cigarettes, marijuana and people across state borders have highlighted the need for intensified co-operation among customs services and police agencies in the Balkans.
Earlier this month, two dozen people suspected of human trafficking and smuggling cigarettes were arrested on both sides of the Macedonia-Serbia border in a joint action between agencies from both countries. 
Customs officials and police emphasised that collaboration is crucial in combating this type of crime.
"Co-operation with other countries is a very important factor for the customs administration," Vanco Kargov, director of customs in Macedonia, told SETimes. 
"Such co-operation, from security point of view, allows more effective control of the border, but not to the detriment of the free flow of passengers and goods, and it results in successful detection of any form of illegal cross-border activities, including the most severe forms of cross-border crime."
Valentin Pepeljugovski, a Skopje lawyer who is an expert on intellectual property issues, said the nature of organised smuggling operations makes sharing information between countries an important part of the work for customs officials.
"Mostly the sources of production of counterfeit goods are the same. 
The importers are the same and, respectively, their owners. 
They migrate from one country to another country depending on where is the weakest control," Pepeljugovski told SETimes.
Kargov said co-operation with other countries is carried out by co-ordinating and organising international operations aimed at controlling imports, exports and transit of hazardous goods.
"In order to promote co-operation with domestic and international institutions, the customs administration plans to propose amendments to the existing law on customs measures to protect intellectual property rights," Kargov said, adding that Macedonia is intensifying the implementation of the World Customs Organisation's guidelines for protected trademarks.
Countries across the Balkans have been taking steps to reduce the amount of traffic through unofficial border crossings. 
Such crossings are the main conduit for smuggling tobacco and other goods, a practice that may be difficult to stop.
"It will exist even in the future," Trajce Arsov, a lawyer from Skopje, said of smuggling through unofficial crossings. 
"At every border crossing there are so-called wild crossings, of which the border guards are aware. 
But they serve for 'controlled' smuggling with large bribes to officials."
Early this year, two Macedonians with Bulgarian passports were stopped at the Skopje airport trying to smuggle 3,000 packs of cigarettes onto a plane bound for London. 
Both smugglers admitted they intended to take the cigarettes to the UK, where a carton of cigarettes can be sold for as much as 90 euros.
According to the police administration of Vranje in southern Serbia, 6,000 illegal migrants from Afghanistan, the Middle East, and North Africa were arrested last year as they travelled through Macedonia and Serbia in attempts to reach EU nations.
Authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) collaborated with others in the region last month to arrest persons involved in international drug trafficking channels that span Albania, Serbia, Croatia and BiH.
The BiH Ministry of Security told SETimes that joint actions between countries are important for ensuring safety and preventing abuse of national boundaries.
"The result is reflected in the significantly lower level of illegal migration, smuggling of people, as well as increase of total security in BiH and the region as a whole," the ministry told SETimes.
A decade ago, BiH was ranked among the least-effective nations in implementing the standards of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act, an international framework for protecting victims of human trafficking. 
Since then, BiH authorities and NGOs have made the country fully compliant with the act standards.
SETimes correspondent Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo contributed to this report.
What steps should be taken to reduce cross-border smuggling? 
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
