01/06/2013
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 01/06/13
Jointly utilising the region's economic potential and attracting possible investors is the way to economic growth in the Balkans, according to regional participants and foreign investors attending the 2013 Sarajevo Business Forum.
The forum, in its third year, drew 1,300 investors from Europe, Africa, Asia and the US in mid-May, making it the biggest regional economic event to date.
Forum organisers said the goal of this year's gathering was to strengthen regional economic ties, interdependence and harmonious co-existence, but also to revive dialogue with world business leaders and statesmen and present them with economic opportunities.
"The gathering of investors at this and similar regional meetings is of enormous importance.
The region is an upcoming destination for investments from both the east and the west.
It is in the phase of speeding development, especially concerning roads infrastructure," BiH Prime Minister Nermin Niksic told SETimes.
Niksic said having such a large number of engaged potential investors is an opportunity for all regional countries to profit.
"That begins by changing [the region's] image and by establishing a strategy aiming to position the region on the world map of investments," Amer Bukvic, the forum organiser, said.
Consequently, the proposed projects encourage improving business co-operation, especially joint approaches in foreign markets, leaving the vestiges of recent political developments in the past.
"Governments should make efforts to remove administrative obstacles for investments.
That is one of the ways to achieve economic advances of this country and the region," Bakir Izetbegovic, a member of the BiH cabinet, told SETimes.
Investors showed the greatest interest and opportunities in agriculture, energy, textiles, construction and tourism.
In BiH, the wood processing industry is showing a particular promise, together with the metallurgy and the food industries, and all three are making more profit than in Croatia and Serbia.
"BiH is more efficient than its neighbours, and we achieve greater profit per employee, and our firms create over 70 percent of revenue by exporting," Fuad Strika, president of the Association for Business Consulting in BiH, told SETimes.
"Our food processing industry exports grew by 60 percent in the past two years.
This sector employs a huge number of people together with the agricultural sector, and presents significant development potential for BiH's overall economy," Fikret Hadzic, professor at the Economics Faculty in Sarajevo, told SETimes.
But like other regional countries that also have significant resources to offer investors, BiH lacks the means to produce, as well as markets for, its new products.
Without a joint approach or support from third markets, regional countries can do little to successfully compete on their own, experts said.
How else can Balkan countries work jointly to attract investments?
Share your suggestions in the comments space.
