30/01/2012
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 30/01/12
Kosovo and Serbia are renewing efforts to implement the Cadastral Records Agreement concluded last September in Brussels amid concerns in Pristina that disputes in the process will uncover among people who obtained land illegally.
The agreement stipulates that property records removed by Belgrade authorities to Serbia in 1999 will be copied by EULEX, certified, and delivered to the Kosovo authorities.
"The return of the copies will show which municipality land has become private and will enable us to understand who and when transformed them into public property," Pristina Mayor Isa Mustafa told daily Koha Ditore.
He expressed concern about the risk of disputes among individuals, regardless of whether the alleged abuses took place before or after Kosovo became independent.
Kosovo head negotiator Edita Tahiri, however, said implementation will fill the existing vacuum in Kosovo's cadastral database and help solve disputes rather than cause problems.
"It precisely helps Pristina and other municipalities come closer to the truth about which property is public and which private, so that individuals may address contested property," Tahiri said.
The office of Serbian negotiator Borko Stefanovic told SETimes the implementation helps Belgrade participate and have a say for the first time since 1999 in Kosovo court cases regarding property.
"This agreement enables Serbia to have an active role in the process of resolving disputable cases of property rights and facilitating our citizens to have a much bigger chance of having their property returned," it said.
Kosovo officials dealing with property issues are also concerned about likely disputes in absence of original documents, Pristina municipality surveyor Agim Matova told SETimes.
Some citizens go to Serbia and pay significant sums of money to obtain original documents but are never sure if they received a false document, he said.
But Kosovo Cadastral Agency head Murat Meha said another problem involves property parcels sold informally, or registered only in written form.
The return of cadastral records will allow citizens to answer claims they were unable to respond to due to lack of original documents, he said.
The greatest anxiety however, concerns construction in Pristina that may not be backed up by documentation, he added.
The cases when particular records in Serbia do not match the ones in Kosovo will be transferred to an adjudication mechanism in Kosovo, which will make a final determination on which record is correct.
A commission consisting of international and Kosovo property experts will act as the first instance in the adjudication mechanism.
The Kosovo Supreme Court will act as the second instance.
A Kosovo-EULEX-Serbia team is currently working to resume copying the cadastral records.
"The Kosovo technical group saw the cadastral documents for the first time this January which Serbia is gathering to start the scanning process," Pristina co-ordinator Gazmir Raci told SETimes.
At the meeting, the Serbian team submitted a list of documents belonging to the Suva Reka municipality, a pilot programme about how Serbia intends to proceed further.
Stefanovic's office said Serbia sees "no obstacles since the government adopted a decree regarding this matter and our teams are ready to take an active role in this process".
Raci characterised Serbia's approach as being more co-operative in 2012.
