29/07/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Gjakova -- 29/07/11
Gjakova, a municipality in western Kosovo, is one of the oldest towns known for its beautiful Ottoman-style Carshia, a stone built market with small wooden shops. 
Traditional Gjakova houses of the Carshia that have been turned into restaurants serve local, traditional food. 
The Ereniku River cuts through the town with the Carshia on its banks. 
But there's more to such an idyllic view of the town.
Gjakova Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities, popularly known as the RAE community, live in the neighbourhood known as the Colony, home to about 800 people. 
Many collect trash from the entire town.
Children in the Colony grow up amid poverty, squalor and lack of opportunities, with no schooling, medical care, or future prospects. 
Most start begging on the streets or work in town.
Armend Behluli, a member of the Roma community, is one of the few fortunate ones. 
He works in the municipality. 
He says there are about 7,735 Egyptians, 650 Roma and 270 Ashkali in the area..
"About 130 families, mostly Egyptian, live on Ali Ibra Street, known as the Colony, in the town suburbs, a different area," Behluli told SETimes.
He adds that the municipality is building about 130 houses in the area and that this segment of the community has relatively good living conditions. 
Many run small businesses: door and window making, working as auto mechanics, with metals, or as tailors or hairdressers.
"The rural area is under very difficult economic conditions, living in extreme poverty for lack of employment," he says.
The Roma representative admits there is an acute need for employment, education and health care.
"They have very low representation in the institutions, especially in public and private companies," he says.
Behluli, however, explains that today it is safer and more tolerance is shown towards the RAE communities than 11 years ago, immediately after the 1990's conflict. 
But much needs to be done "consider[ing] the big demands of these communities, with employment as most challenging."
Gjakova municipality officials confirm the allocation of about four hectares of land and the start of building about 130 houses for the RAE community.
"The first phase of building 29 houses is finalising, expecting 29 families to settle in the new houses this July," Gjakova Mayor Pal Lekaj, told SETimes.
He confirms that five houses for the displaced and returning RAE families from Montenegro were built last year, and ten houses will be built this year for the displaced RAE community.
Local authorities report that 604 Roma, 316 Ashkali and 614 Egyptian children attend elementary school.
There is a drastic drop in numbers when it comes to secondary school. 
Only 31 Roma, 16 Ashkali and 45 Egyptian teenagers attend. 
Their numbers are even lower at post secondary studies. 
There are only 25 RAE students from the area at Pristina University.
Authorities, however, say there are only seven children [from the community] begging in the streets.
"The Task Force -- composed of municipal authorities, Kosovo police and representatives of the communities and NGOs -- is working to solve the problem," Lekaj assured SETimes.
