25/09/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 25/09/06
The long-ignored Black Sea region will become soon relevant for the security of Western societies. 
With Romania and Bulgaria hoping to join the EU next year, around 500km of Black Sea coastline will soon become part of the bloc's new eastern border. 
Moreover, in recent years, Romania has been ringing the alarm bell about threats arising from a number of frozen conflicts in the region: Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh.
"The Black Sea region has become an area for trafficking in people, in drugs and weapons," President Basescu has warned. 
It is a strategic region, connecting Southeast Europe with the energy-rich Transcaucasus, and also one that brings important security challenges.
Although the Black Sea is slated to become the EU's new eastern maritime frontier, the Union appears less than fully cognizant of this fact, acknowledges former British Ambassador to Romania Quinton Quayle. 
"It is a region which we neglect at our peril," he said recently, adding that "around 80% of the heroin on the streets of London is trafficked through the Black Sea region".
Together with its NATO allies, as well as other key states such as Russia and Ukraine, Romania has taken on the mission of building confidence and enhancing security in the region. 
Last year, Romania assumed the rotating presidency of BLACKSEAFOR, the Black Sea Naval Co-operation Task Group. 
Moreover, the country is now in the process of restructuring its navy with an eye to creating a "multi-role force" – that is, one able to handle different types of missions using a relatively small number of means and personnel.
"A force able to carry on a large range of missions is a deterrent factor. 
The 'show the flag' concept works here, too," says Petru Hanganu, a Romanian Navy commander. 
The Navy’s strongest assets are two frigates, the King Ferdinand and Queen Mary, purchased from Great Britain in 2003.
"We had and still have some equipment manufactured in the east, which was not interoperable with NATO," Hanganu says, explaining the reason for the acquisition. 
"These two frigates are interoperable with NATO forces since they previously served a NATO power. 
You have to go alongside your allies with a credible and interoperable force."
In 2005, the King Ferdinand joined for two months the NATO Operation Active Endeavour in the Mediterranean Sea. 
The Queen Mary will follow suit later this year. 
By modernising these two frigates, which were built in the 80s, the Romanian Navy will be ready to act in all three environments -- underwater, on the surface and in the air. 
The frigates are described as ready for "antisubmarine combat, air defense, electronic surveillance, sea and land artillery defense as well as humanitarian and search and rescue missions".
Within a year, both frigates will have their own helicopter on board. 
Eight navy officers have already graduated from the flight training courses and are ready to pilot the helicopters.
Romanian Navy officers speak also with pride about their combat divers unit. 
During a recent multinational exercise, the Romanian divers were certified as part of NATO's rapid reaction forces.
The process of modernisation and acquisition of new capabilities – which also includes the purchase of four new corvettes -- is very expensive. 
Nevertheless, say navy officials, the investment is worth it.
"We have to take into account our NATO country commitments but also the general situation in the region," Hanganu says. 
"The frozen conflicts could influence the general situation -- Transnistria, for example, is just around the corner. 
Here is a NATO and EU frontier and it is our assumed mission to strengthen this border."
These days, naval officers have another reason to be proud. 
The new Romanian Army Chief of Staff, Rear Admiral Gheorghe Marin, comes from the navy. 
The ceremony to invest him took place on 13 September. 
During the ceremony, Marin said that his new position is "a sign of recognition" of the naval forces' efforts to implement programmes and modernise this arm of the military.
