28/07/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/07/11
At the heart of this week's border crisis in northern Kosovo is what local Serbs call "wild trade", in which goods entering from Serbia are not subjected to any checks or controls.
"Smuggling has become the most profitable business for many Serbs in the northern part of Kosovo," a former Mitrovica fertilizer store owner, Ljubisa Gavrilovic, told SETimes.
"They transport goods from Serbia, sell them without any tax and become rich."
He added that his business eventually failed because he could not withstand competition from smugglers.
Two years ago, he decided to move to Belgrade.
Even as the flow of black market goods continues across the border, the Serbian government has taken a hard line on legal imports from Kosovo.
Because of its official policy of not recognising Kosovo as a state, it refuses to let in anything bearing a Kosovo customs stamp.
In response, officials in Pristina imposed a trade embargo last week on all Serbian products and attempted to enforce it at the northern border crossings.
Armed hostilities then broke out.
Belgrade has been sharply critical of the move.
According to Serbia's Minister for Kosovo, Goran Bodganovic, it shows that "Pristina is not keen to resolve open and contentious questions through dialogue and compromise."
"The embargo is against all Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) rules," Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic told SETimes.
"Pristina has attempted to unilaterally change the international treaty, but this is possible only if all countries who are signatories agree."
Economist Misa Brkic agrees.
"CEFTA can not be violated by political decisions and this way the Kosovo government sends a bad message that agreements signed by UNMIK on their behalf are not important to them," he said.
The UN mission signed the trade pact on behalf of Kosovo in 2006.
Data suggests a highly lopsided balance of trade.
Between 2005 and 2010, legal exports from Serbia to Kosovo have increased threefold, from 91m to 270m euros, according to figures from Serbia's Chamber of Commerce.
By contrast, imports from Kosovo rose slightly, from 2.4m to 2.7m euros in the same period.
During the first six months of 2011, Serbia exported goods to Kosovo worth 140m euros, an increase of 15% over the same period last year.
Imports from Kosovo, however, fell by 13.5%.
Financial damage from the interruption of trade could be high for Serbia and the region, experts say.
"Hundreds of millions of euros is big money for us.
Kosovo introduced a 10% duty on BiH imports so BiH will feel losses.
But Kosovo is losing money too;
this does not bode well for anybody," said the president of the Serbian Chamber of Commerce, Milivoje Miletic.
The official numbers, he added, do not reflect the robust 'grey trade' in goods such as cigarettes, fuel, medicines, food, cement and other products.
The most important goods exported by Serbia to Kosovo include heavy oil, crude oil, electricity, wheat, corn, flour, food products, diesel fuel, and roofing tiles.
Exports from Kosovo to Serbia include lead, pipes for oil and gas pipelines, electricity, marmalades, fruit purée and pastes.
Meanwhile, both the Serbian government and the pro-nationalist opposition -- the latter is dominant in northern Kosovo -- support Kosovo Serb resistance against Pristina's efforts to impose its authority.
According to some analysts, Belgrade's stance could have a cost.
"It reduces Serbia's rating in Brussels because the EU expects a different approach from Belgrade than what was shown," political analyst Dusan Janjic told SETimes.
"Serbia's position is significantly worsened in the current talks with Kosovo, as well as the possibility to gain EU-candidate member status, which directly depends on the progress in the dialogue with Kosovo."
