31/08/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 31/08/11
Turkey's Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu arrived in BiH on Monday (August 29th), making BiH the second country on a Balkan tour that includes Kosovo and Romania.
Speaking to journalists, Davutoglu was quick to point out he felt at home, which is why he chose to spend the Muslim holiday of Eid ul-Fitr in BiH.
He wasted no time in delivering a key message to all in BiH to move forcefully and form a state government.
"BiH is not an exception in the world when it comes to not forming governments after elections. 
But it is a specific country which cannot afford otherwise because it loses a lot," Davutoglu said.
He explained that politicians should not view the government and opposition as winners and losers. 
Instead, they should think of a functional solution to enable BiH's Euro-Atlantic integration as soon as possible.
"Absent a government, all important processes in a country are delayed. 
In BiH's case, that is NATO membership. 
Although Turkey advocates for BiH not to make a single step backward concerning this issue, forming a government is still your job," Davutoglu said.
Another reason why forming a functional government is of vital importance, he argued, is economic development. 
"This country has a potential to develop economically, but it needs political stability and far-reaching vision from those who lead it," he said.
BiH's political leaders told Davutoglu during individual meetings they are willing to engage in dialogue to overcome the stalemate. 
Such encouraging statements notwithstanding, High Representative Valentin Inzko urged caution.
"This visit will certainly have a positive effect, but we cannot expect miracles," Inzko said.
Davutoglu used the opportunity while giving a lecture at the American University in BiH to present Turkey's vision for the Balkans, which he described as the centre, not the periphery, of Europe.
"The problems of the past should be looked at with a new vision. 
The countries' territorial integrity and sovereignty must be respected and this is the basis for peace in the Balkans. 
Our country knows Kosovo and BiH well and our principles for both are the same. 
Dialogue is the solution for all problems and the borders will become a non-issue once we all find ourselves in the EU."
For all of his achievements, Tuzla University also awarded Davutoglu an honourable Doctor of Sciences degree.
"Professor Davutoglu has given a special contribution to the development of good neighbourly relations in the Western Balkans, the Caucasus and the Middle East, as well as to the strengthening of good relations, collaboration and East-West understanding," Tuzla University Dean Enver Halilovic said.
Professor and former BiH Federation president Ejup Ganic summed up the importance of Davutoglu's visit: "Professor Davutoglu is a very powerful diplomat whose visit should be well used by BiH if it wants [to do] good for itself and its people."
