03/07/2006
A joint effort by Bulgarian and Italian scientists has led to a new vaccine against HIV. 
It is scheduled for testing in Cameroon this autumn and -- if results are positive -- will be used to vaccinate African children. 
BulBio-National Centre for Infectious Diseases, a partner in the scientific project, has also received authorisation from the WHO to supply diphtheria, tetanus, and tetanic toxoid vaccines to UNICEF immunisation programmes. 
UNICEF has also been using a Bulgarian anti-tuberculosis vaccine for 15 years now.
***
Serbian scientist Vesna Mirkovic, together with a colleague at Chevron Technology Ventures, William Spencer Wheat, received this year's Outstanding Inventors Award, given by the Houston Intellectual Property Law Association. 
The two were honoured for their work in developing and commercialising practical hydrogen applications.
***
Doctors in Bosnia and Herzegovina announced that they have successfully transplanted the liver and kidneys of a clinically dead person, a first for the country. 
The transplant team involved 50 members, including Croatian colleagues.
***
The UNDP announced last week that Kosovo will become a member of the regional organisation Local Government Information Network (LOGIN). 
Local officials will thus gain online access to the far-reaching network of Central and Eastern Europe government documents, in exchange for a minimum of 250 documents related to local governance in Kosovo, which will be added to the LOGIN database.
***
Google Developing Markets opened an office in Turkey to facilitate access to the company's local products and services. 
With 16.5 million Internet users, Turkey has had one of the highest Internet penetration rates in the world for the last three years, said Google director Dennis Woodside.
***
A pilot project on the use of renewable energy resources -- wind and solar generators -- is being prepared in the Macedonian Municipality of Kocani. 
The necessary equipment for the 35,000-euro project is being supplied by Ukraine.
(Various sources – 26/06/06 – 03/07/06)
