30/11/2011
Analysis by Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 30/11/11
Organised crime in the Balkans is a relatively new phenomenon, evolving during the wars on the Peninsula in the late 20th century. 
Economic blockades and weak post-war provided a favourable environment for criminal gangs, according to Assistant Professor Vera Stojarova of the Czech Republic's Masaryk University in Brno.
"Although less notorious than Russian or Chinese organised crime, the Balkan region may currently be depicted as one of the most important epicentres of organised crime -- a transnational and global phenomenon," Stojarova wrote in a journal article.
Stojarova told SETimes that the level of interethnic organised crime in the Balkans is high.
"Organised crime groups have a common interest in making a profit, so overcoming ethnic differences is no problem for them," she said. 
"There is [no role that ethnicity plays in this co-operation]. 
Serbs are able to co-operate with Albanians or Croats, etc."
Albanian Deputy Interior Minister Avenir Peka agrees that organised crime does not recognise ethnicity. 
As a sophisticated form of criminal activity, it has developed and adapted itself to criminals' new needs in order to circumvent the law.
"The wars in the former Yugoslavia not only did not stop the co-operation and co-ordination of the criminal activity in the region, but in fact, the armed conflicts between the nations have served as inciters of this activity," Peka told SETimes.
Ivo Kotevski, spokesperson for the Interior Ministry of Macedonia, cited further examples of transnational organised crime, and the international efforts to bring criminals to justice.
"In [recent] years, we are trying much better to prevent transnational crime [through] much better co-operation with Kosovo, Albania, Bulgaria, Serbia, [and] Turkey," Kotevski told SETimes. 
"Organised crime recognises only profit -- no border, no ethnicity."
Hajzer Salihu, director of the Department for Drafting, Implementation and Monitoring of Policies in the Kosovo Interior Ministry, said criminals that Kosovo has been investigating come from different ethnicities and even different countries.
Most cases of these cases involve weapons and drugs smuggling and human trafficking, Salihu told SETimes, and the perpetrators have been Albanian, Serbian, Bosnian, Montenegrin, Turk, Hungarian, Austrian and Ukrainian.
Ivica Toncev, an adviser to Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic, said that in order to fight this crime, the state also doesn't differentiate between ethnic groups.
"For the state, it doesn't matter whether the group consists of a certain minority nationality or Serbian [alone]. 
The fight against crime is the same -- for national and multinational groups, there is no difference," Toncev told SETimes.
Albanian Deputy Interior Minister Avenir Peka said that a new approach is being considered to tackle the phenomena in the region and across the EU. 
This approach terms the target "organised crime groups from the Western Balkans" and does not differentiate between national origins, making it easier to collaborate internationally.
But Stojarova had another suggestion.
"The best way is to divide political elites and organised crime groups and force the state to fight with them -- not to live in symbiosis with them," she says.
Ivana Jovanovic in Serbia contributed to this feature.
