27/07/2011
By Ovgu Ulucay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 27/07/11
Banu Guven, a 14-year news correspondent of NTV, resigned this month over what she views as excessive censorship -- and self-censorship -- in the Turkish media.
Guven's announcement reverberated through the media world as she wrote on Twitter, "There is no field left at NTV that will allow me to continue to do my job in the way I have until now.
As a natural result, our roads have parted."
Guven's programme, "Arti", was called off earlier than usual after she resigned, creating speculation that it was related to NTV's refusal to allow Kurdish independent MP Leyla Zana on her last episode.
After her resignation, Guven published an open letter to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on her personal website, berating government censorship and pressure on the media, which has led to a culture of self-censorship by her and her colleagues.
"'Now let's not talk with that person', 'We shall not put this news to the first page,' 'Let's not make it big news,' 'We better not ask the question which may not be liked' are the sentences that have been heard most recently," Guven says in her letter.
Media organs are often tied to influential business groups and political parties, which are able to apply both direct and indirect pressure on management and journalists.
Direct government censorship on the media and internet has received the greatest attention, though it is the silent, rising tide of self-censorship -- whether because of fear of arrest or impact on career prospects – that can be equally restrictive of media freedom.
"Beyond believing, I know that self-censorship exists," Aysenur Arslan, host of CNN Turk programme "Medya Mahallesi", tells SETimes.
"It does not have to be censorship;
self-censorship has the same function where there is anxiety and chaos."
"Many journalists, columnists and owners of media institutions admit it when I ask in my programme 'Medya Mahallesi' whether they self-censor themselves or are being exposed to intervention from their inner circles," Arslan adds.
However, Marmara University Communications Department Professor Selma Ulus questions whether self-censorship is anything new in Turkey, arguing that since the 1980s, self-censorship has limited journalists in Turkey and the world.
"We are witnessing the transformation of journalism where it is affected from the change in the media structure:
journalists who are placed into positions with big transfers write what their bosses want or create trivial topics," Ulus says.
In her letter, Guven mentions an incident to Erdogan that she thinks marks a breaking point in the self-confidence of journalists -- something that leads to self-censorship.
Fielding questions after a 2004 train accident in Pamukova, Erdogan was asked whether the Minister of Transportation would resign.
His sharp response:
"Which newspaper are you working for?"
Guven calls on Erdogan to take action:
"If you do not feel responsible for this dark portrait that we [reporters] are in, at least it would be a good start, which might give concrete results for you to investigate why such a perception appeared, where mistakes have been made and to discuss these findings with media owners and administrations that you are in contact with."
However, Arslan believes Guven's case is only part of a general problem and doesn't think the letter will lead to any positive developments.
For her part, Ulus agrees, saying that Guven will ultimately end up at another news channel.
"Under these conditions, Guven's letter will be forgotten," she concludes.
