30/08/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 30/08/11
Romanian President Traian Basescu pleaded last week in favour of a stronger Europe, capable of facing growing competition. 
"The globalisation process is showing us how small we are compared to the capital, the markets," Basescu said to young Romanians living in the diaspora.
"It is proven governments can be defeated by markets. 
The global system will sweep anything which lacks force because the capital is no longer in the possession of states. 
This is why I said it is necessary, in two or three years, to create the United States of Europe," he added.
In an interview with B1 TV, Basescu elaborated.
"We have to settle the expenses by 2020 according to some lines that we have to observe. 
If not, the country gets penalised. 
And that implies ceding sovereignty, whether we like it or not. 
The VAT will be set somewhere in Brussels … but we will have to swallow this pill for Europe to become viable in front of globalisation," he said. 
The main challenge is the way politicians will sell this bold project, he underlined.
"Politicians will have to convince peoples that the United States of Europe will not affect their personality, identity and culture. 
They will have to take this decision in two or three years. 
Beyond that point, if Europe doesn't proceed to fiscal unification in the meantime, it may be too late because the implementation takes time," Basescu concluded.
Earlier this month, in the context of financial turbulence in the eurozone, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy proposed a European common economic government to streamline efforts to surmount such crises in the future.
This trans-border executive would hold meetings twice a year and be run by a president with a two-and-a-half year term. 
Current EU President Herman van Rompuy has been proposed for the first term.
Some analysts are sceptical about the project and say it is detrimental to Romania. 
"A unique economic government will take care of Germany and France's interests more than the other countries'," Ovidiu Marincea, deputy chief-editor of the Romanian newspaper Adevarul, told SETimes.
"Why? 
Because Germany wants a common currency which can help it export in the EU countries at a fixed rate to avoid monetary fluctuations and situations in which sovereign countries depreciate their currency to enhance their competitiveness. 
Such a common government in the EU would introduce Eurobonds at a single interest rate for all the EU member states, which would again help Germany," he added.
"In Romania, for instance, removing the customs has enhanced the importance of the monetary instruments, especially the exchange rate which, after the [national currency] depreciated, helped our exports. 
The fixed rates would remove this last instrument of protectionism," Marincea argued.
Florin Ciornei, head of the political department of the newspaper Evenimentul Zilei, sees pros and cons.
"The United States of Europe project is meant as a continuation of the EU and will lead to a consolidation of the member states' integration, especially in the economic and fiscal areas. 
But this is not the only direction. 
The need for common reactions, coherent and swift among the European states, has been recently felt in regard to the situation in Libya," he told SETimes.
Concerning Romania, Bucharest may have to take some hard decisions if the project is implemented.
"Unification of taxes in Europe is certainly a disadvantage for Romania if this means an increase of these taxes. 
For instance, if the 16% flat tax is replaced by a unique 20-25%, then Romania may not be that appealing to foreign investors anymore," Ciornei said.
"Anyway, this unique government will have as much force, as much sovereignty, as the member states are willing to cede," he said.
