05/05/2006
Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergei Stanishev told Greek media Thursday (4 May) that the government remains committed to the Burgas-Alexandroupolis pipeline construction project, despite the unexpected collapse a few days ago of a consortium of Bulgarian firms participating in the project.
Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis told reporters she has received assurances from Bulgaria that the project will go ahead as planned.
A new Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro went into effect on 1 May.
It aims to increase bilateral trade, remove trade barriers, and create the conditions for competition and more investments.
The FTA also provides mechanisms for protection of national industries in specific circumstances.
The Romanian Economy Ministry presented the privatisation strategy for the chemical producer Oltchim Ramnicu Valcea.
The future buyer would take over Oltchim's debts to the budget -- totaling some 75m euros -- as well as be obliged to complete overdue payments on external loans.
Turkey's State Council approved a deal on the acquisition of Telsim, the second largest mobile phone operator in the country, by Vodafone.
The UK-based firm won a privatisation tender for Telsim last December, offering a price of $4.55 billion.
The leading Croatian retail concern Agrokor Grupa reported on 2 May a net consolidated profit of 103.6m euros for 2005.
Agrokor Grupa's net profits rose fourfold year-on-year.
The World Bank approved last week a $15m loan for a land registration project in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
The credit has a 40-year maturity and a 10-year grace period.
The project is aimed at supporting the country's cadastre and land registration reform, removing current investment barriers and developing a transparent land market.
Macedonia's state-owned railway opened an auction for the sale of 200 old carriages, under a government plan for restructuring the company.
According to company head Milco Smilevski, receipts from the tender would be used for modernisation of the railway carriage park.
A new digital system for radio and TV signal transmission of the state-run Macedonian Radio Diffusion company was implemented last week, marking the completion of the first phase of a project to modernise the media sector.
The Norwegian government provided 591,556 euros for this stage, worth a total of 700,000 euros.
The project is expected to result in an almost triple expansion of the Macedonian public diffusion network by 2008.
The Montenegrin government budget posted a small deficit of 2m euros in the first quarter of this year, according to official data.
The amount was significantly lower than the 47.8m-euro deficit that had been projected, a fact that the government attributes to reduced spending.
(Various sources – 28/04/06 – 05/05/06)
