04/09/2006
Trimble, one of world's leading providers of advanced positioning solutions, announced that it would supply the necessary Virtual Reference Station software and equipment for the building of nationwide GPS network in Serbia.
The network will allow for GPS positioning for a variety of applications including surveying, urban planning, construction, environmental monitoring, resource and territory management and disaster prevention and relief.
It would be first such network in Southeast Europe.
A conference on European Technology Platforms, organised by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) and the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges of Turkey (TOBB), will take place on 7 September in Ankara.
EU Science and Research Commissioner Janez Potocnik is expected to address the forum, which will bring together private sector, ministries, public institutions, universities and research centres as well as many international guests with the aim of introducing the public to science and research activities in Turkey.
Two Bucharest students -- Andrei Iftimie from the Faculty of Electronics and Telecommunication, and Razvan Orlando Matei from the Mathematics-Informatics Faculty -- are the inventors of an "all-inclusive" phone that was presented Sunday (27 August) at the informatics camp Forum IT held in Izvorul Muresului.
The device replaces the remote control, the TV receiver and can record.
Foreign companies reportedly have approached the two students to acquire the concept.
The 7th Balkan's Scientific Conference on Human Genetics kicked off on Thursday (31 August) in Skopje.
The three-day summit was organised by the Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology with the Macedonian Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Macedonian Association of Human Genetics.
USAID, in co-operation with NGO CHF Montenegro and International Relief and Development, has launched project "Montenegro Connect", which envisions the establishment of a wireless network in Montenegro.
The wireless connection will be available for use in elementary and secondary schools, hospitals and other public institutions.
The project's goal is to increase computer literacy, primarily among the younger population.
(Various Sources -- 28/08/06 - 04/09/06)
