29/08/2011
By Zeljana Grubisic for Southeast European Times in Sibenik -- 29/08/11
Croatian coach Neven Spahija is a well-known name in European basketball. 
Before taking the helm of Turkey's Fenerbahce Ulker, he worked with Latvia's BV Lietuvos rytas, Tel Aviv's Maccabi and Valencia Basketball Club, among others.
Spahija sat down with SETimes correspondent Zeljana Grubisic in his native Croatia to discuss the upcoming 2011 European Basketball Championship, the 2011-12 Euroleague season, his team and his expectations.
SETimes: The 2011 European Basketball Championship begins on Wednesday (August 31st). 
Who is the favourite?
Neven Spahija: It is hard for me to say who the favourite is, as there are many countries as potential candidates for medals, competition is quite short, about 17 days, and something unpredictable can happen.
There is, however, a group of countries in basketball that represent the elite. 
Above all, there are Spain, France, and Russia -- a medal winner in the recent European Championship. 
In any case, it's a group of countries that could surprise us, among which is Croatia.
SETimes: What are Turkey's chances?
Spahija: Turkish representation is exceptionally strong. 
Right now they are European vice-champions, but there has been a problem for years now, in that when there is a competition out of Turkey, they have never succeeded in winning. 
Will they succeed now and break that barrier? 
I don't know, but I think that the Turkish team is not one of the favourites.
SETimes: What is the future of Fenerbahce Ulker, considering that they are already champions in Turkey?
Spahija: I'm very happy with my team. 
Unlike last year, when we won both trophies -- the Cup and the Championship -- we are now more competitive; we have a deep bench, and are the youngest and the most talented team in Turkey.
SETimes: What is team chemistry like this season?
Spahija: Great, just as they were last year. 
I think that team chemistry is one of the most important preconditions for a successful team. 
Fenerbahce Ulker has it, and will continue to have it while I'm their coach.
SETimes: Fenerbahce Chairman Aziz Yildirim is currently in jail [as a result of an investigation into match fixing]. 
In what way has this situation impacted Fenerbahce Ulker?
Spahija: Yes, that is a big loss for the club and for me personally. 
It's even bigger since I signed a contract with him, giving me a chance to lead such a big club, and [he] was my support last year. 
For me, personally, that's a big handicap, and as far I can see, for the entire club.
SETimes: Will such a situation impact projected goals?
Spahija: It should not, because what happened to Yildirim is another motivation for us to become better and stronger than last year. 
We really hope it will not have any consequences.
SETimes: Is the roster complete?
Spahija: Yes. 
We completed the roster a week after the league ended. 
Fenerbahce Ulker closed its roster. 
We did not respond to promptings of NBA players who came for two or three months until the close of the lockout, we did not agree. 
All our players are signed up for one or more years.
SETimes: What has been your experience with Fenerbahce Ulker so far?
Spahija: My experience with Fenerbahce has been great. 
I'm delighted with the club, the city, the players, and my goal is to stay as long as I can.
