29/08/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 29/08/11
Serbia's arrest and extradition of the remaining two ICTY indictees, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, raised confidence that the country would obtain EU candidate status by the end of the year.
Officials hoped to also obtain an exact date for the launch of EU membership talks.
Last week's visit by German Chancellor Angela Merkel, however, has dimmed those expectations.
During her August 22nd trip, Merkel asked the Serbian government to shut down its institutions in Kosovo, which continue to operate in parallel to those of the administration in Pristina.
Belgrade sees its institutions as legitimate and funds them from the state budget.
The structures in question include local self-government, schools and health care institutions.
In comments to the Tanjug news agency on August 25th, President Boris Tadic said his country is committed to joining the bloc, but not at the expense of its interests in Kosovo.
"Serbia will not abandon its people in Kosovo and Metohija.
Serbia will also not give up on EU integration," Tadic said.
"If the Serbian or European political public demands that Serbia should choose one, my answer will be that Serbia will not give up on any of its legitimate interests."
He added that the Serbian institutions in Kosovo are legitimate, that many Serbs earned a living through them and that it was not "natural" to shut down schools and health care institutions.
Recent events may lead to a deterioration of relations between Brussels and Belgrade, and Serbia's path to the EU may be frozen, according to analysts.
Faculty of Political Sciences professor Predrag Simic said the latest events could conspicuously downgrade Serbia's relations with the EU, after several years of association.
"Serbia now has to carefully analyse its moves.
The question of how to continue down the road to the EU while also preserving interests in Kosovo is the million dollar question," Simic told SETimes.
Belgrade analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic also believes the Serbian government will have difficulty making major concessions on Kosovo, because it is facing elections next spring at the latest.
"In its current form, the Serbian government lacks the capacity for a drastic change of policy, because it was elected with the message 'Both the EU and Kosovo'," Stankovic told SETimes.
Serbia faces the risk of being left without both Kosovo and the EU, because Brussels is setting conditions that are not easy to meet, he added.
Tadic's statement also caused a stir among Serbian political parties.
Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic announced he would resign if Belgrade did not become an EU candidate by the end of the year, adding that the authorities had implemented all necessary reforms.
The Liberal Democratic Party, which fervently advocates European integration, warned the government it "has no right" to miss the chance of obtaining EU candidate status.
On the other hand, the opposition Serbian Progressive Party said that parliament must urgently debate the dilemma facing Belgrade.
By announcing the possibility of Serbia not becoming an EU candidate, Tadic had "signed a capitulation of the policy he has been leading over the last few years", the party said.
