29/11/2011
By Linda Karadaku and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 29/11/11
KFOR undertook operation "Freedom of Movement" on Monday (November 28th), removing a Serbian road barricade in the village of Jagnjenica, on the Mitrovica-Zubin Potok road. 
In the ensuing clashes, 40 Serbs and 25 KFOR soldiers were wounded, including the battalion commander in charge of removing the barricade.
Dr. 
Borivoje Jaksic, director of the Health Centre in Zubin Potok, tells SETimes that "injuries of the head and chest are prevailing" and "KFOR troops opened fire on doctors," injuring two who were struck by rubber bullets.
"The [Serbian] protestors could not be called peaceful demonstrators at all, but violent and criminal," KFOR said.
The clashes began when KFOR removed the road barricade at 9am while using tear gas and water cannons to disperse a gathering crowd of Serbs intent on defending it.
"The protestors opened small arms fire on KFOR troops and two soldiers were wounded. 
The violence by the protestors is still ongoing," a KFOR spokesperson said. 
Later, KFOR explained that explosive devices and Molotov cocktails were used.
Another clash took place at 11am after KFOR accused the Serbs of wounding a soldier in the arm. 
KFOR used tear gas and stun grenades to disperse the crowd, amid crackling gunfire.
Sporadic clashes continued throughout the day and KFOR repeatedly used a megaphone to urge the Serbs to disperse.
The last clash took place at 5pm when the Serbs set fire to a truck loaded with logs, which had served as a roadway obstacle, prompting new rounds of tear gas and rubber bullets from KFOR.
Since then, the situation has calmed but remains tense.
In the evening, a large group of Serbs gathered at Jagnjenica around a camp fire on the Mitrovica-Zubin Potok road. 
All Serbian northern Kosovo municipality presidents as well as Serbia's Ministry for Kosovo Secretary Oliver Ivanovic joined the crowd at the barricades.
KFOR troops remained at their positions, using big lights to observe the crowd overnight.
Mitrovica and Zubin Potok municipality presidents Krstimir Pantic and Slavisha Ristic told the KFOR commanding officer that they will be unable to control the crowd or bear any responsibility for possible incidents that may ensue if KFOR fails to return to its original position.
Ristic announced that residents will peacefully protest as long as necessary and that KFOR will determine how long that will be. 
He characterised KFORˈs operation as "unnecessary, since the Serbs at the barricades already allow them free passage", Belgrade based B92 quoted Ristic as saying.
KFOR spokesperson Frank Martin told SETimes that a KFOR commander held talks with local Serb representatives but could not confirm any result from those talks. 
"The operation is fully in line with the framework of KFORˈs mission, which includes the use of all means available in a life threatening situation."
Serbian President Boris Tadic urged authorities to put an urgent end to conflicts between KFOR and residents of Jagnjenica, adding that the lives of Serbian citizens and members of international institutions need to be preserved in every possible way.
Tadic stressed any escalation puts Serbia's national interests in question and delays the possibility of reaching a compromise and sustainable solution for Kosovo.
"KFOR and EULEX are bound by international pacts to contribute to resolving the situation by their actions, and political leaders of Serbs need to prevent extremists from jeopardising the personal safety of their compatriots and international representatives in Kosovo," Tadic said.
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic went a step further, saying that he couldn't believe "someone thought of removing the barricades by force when the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina has been restored."
The Kosovo government condemned the armed attacks against KFOR and said it is determined to establish and support the rule of law throughout the country.
President Atifete Jahjaga asked Serbiaˈs institutions "to retreat from being involved and supporting the criminal structures in the three municipalities in the north of Kosovo". 
Jahjaga invited Serbs living there to remove the road blocks and participate in institutions "having a broad autonomy of competency ... 
guaranteed [under the] Ahtisaari Package".
The latest clashes took place one day before the UN Security Council plans to discuss the situation in Kosovo. 
Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj will participate in that session.
Kosovo and Serbia are poised to restart the dialogue on technical issues, including the integrated management of borders. 
Kosovo delegation chief Edita Tahiri left on Monday for Brussels to participate in the eighth round of talks.
Kosovo political analyst Belul Beqaj told SETimes that he does not believe the Belgrade-Pristina agreements reached before can be implemented.
"This will last by all chances until the future elections in Serbia when relations between the government and the opposition, but also their formal and practical position towards the dialogue, will be clarified and the dialogue will see its final epilogue, regardless of who assumes power in Belgrade," Beqaj predicted.
