04/07/2006
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling held a meeting with the EU justice and enlargement commissioners, Franco Frattini and Olli Rehn, in Brussels on 26 June.
Schwarz-Schilling lobbied for relaxation of the EU visa regime for citizens of BiH.
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis and his Finnish counterpart, Matti Vanhanen, met in Helsinki on 26 June to discuss the EU prospects of Turkey, the Western Balkan countries, and the Cyprus issue.
Finland assumed the rotating EU presidency on 1 July.
Albania's President Alfred Moisiu met with his Kosovo counterpart, Fatmir Sejdiu, in Tirana on 27 June.
Sejdiu stressed that Kosovo's chief priority -- after resolving the status issue -- is integration into Euro-Atlantic structures.
He added that Kosovo Albanians must live in peace with Serbs in the province.
Serbian President Boris Tadic visited Croatia on 27 June and held talks with counterpart Stipe Mesic on strengthening bilateral ties.
The Serbian leader then travelled to Macedonia and met with President Branko Crvenkovski on 28 June.
They agreed that Macedonia and Serbia must enhance collaboration and back each other on the road to EU integration.
Tadic then moved on to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 29 June and met with BiH Presidency Chairman Sulejman Tihic.
Only with stability and progress can Western Balkan countries achieve their Euro-Atlantic integration goals, Tadic said.
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Chairman Sulejman Tihic met with Organisation of the Islamic Conference Secretary General Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu on 26 June in Sarajevo.
The two discussed the country's possible OIC membership.
The economy ministers of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia and representatives of the Stability Pact for Southeast Europe (SEE) met in Vienna on 27 June and adopted a regional framework for investments in SEE.
It will serve as the basis for preparing and implementing national policies related to investment, and demonstrates the countries' readiness and commitment to boost competitiveness and foreign investment in the region.
Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer visited Russia on 28 June to discuss boosting bilateral economic ties.
Talks focused on ways to bolster trade and ideas for building a new oil pipeline that would help cut tanker traffic across the crowded Bosporus Straits.
(Various sources -- 26/06/06-04/07/06)
