26/07/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 26/07/11
Meeting in Belgrade this month, the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly adopted a resolution Serbia had submitted on combating human organs trafficking.
The move, issued on July 10th, gives a green light to begin an investigation into the issue of human organs trafficking allegedly committed during the armed conflicts on the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1999, including Kosovo.
The OSCE assembly called for full co-operation with UNMIK, EULEX and the relevant national institutions to secure all information, facts and documents regarding such crimes in Kosovo.
Serbia submitted the resolution in late June based on the report of the Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty, which claims that such crimes occurred in Kosovo during the 1999 armed conflict there.
"Human organs trade is one of the most heinous forms of crime, especially when carried out against unarmed civilians in a conflict-affected area," Serbian delegation head to the OSCE assembly Suzana Grubjesic said.
Grubjesic said in all previous cases involving war crimes charges in the Balkans, the investigations were conducted under the UN Security Council mandate, and said the same standard should be applied in this case.
But the OSCE assembly did not accept UN oversight of the future investigation, and recommended it be conducted under the control of EULEX and UNMIK.
"The big powers are stopping the investigation of the human organs trade," responded Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic.
He expressed hope that what he called a blockade will be overcome and progress achieved in the weeks ahead. 
"If not, it would be exceptionally hard to resist the impression that regarding human organs trade in Kosovo, there is something that for some reason should not see the light of day," he told the daily Blic.
Grubjesic explained that EULEX has no right to investigate outside Kosovo, and absent a UN Security Council mandate, other states like Albania may not allow investigations on its territory.
"The UN Security Council is crucial to the investigation's success and only it can compel the co-operation of those countries, like Albania, who do not want it," Grubjesic told SETimes.
It is doubtful that the Security Council would demand an investigation in Kosovo even if the OSCE adopted such a resolution, international law expert Vojin Dimitrijevic told SETimes.
"The UN deals with the most dramatic issues in the world, and not with what happened during some conflict," he said.
Dmitrijevic also pointed out that another open question is which court would prosecute potential perpetrators. 
"It will likely turn into another Balkan episode in which everyone accuses everyone else because everything here is viewed through the prism of national belonging," he said.
After the OSCE vote on the resolution, German representative Uta Zapf said she regrets accepting the US delegation's proposal and for voting to give EULEX and UNMIK a mandate in the investigation.
"I now consider the UN Security Council would be better to lead [the effort],"Zapf said.
EULEX is now working on forming an investigative group to deal with Marty's report.
"The group will be separated from the Kosovo authorities to show it will conduct an objective investigation. 
It will work mainly in Brussels because of those who are anxious that we may be inclined to the Kosovo side," EULEX Deputy Chief of Mission Andy Sparks said.
