26/07/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 26/07/11
Croatia's ruling coalition decided to hold parliamentary elections on December 4th, Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor announced earlier this month, after weeks of public pressure.
The elections all but coincide with Croatia formalising its EU membership status on December 9th.
The country will sign the treaty during Poland's turn at the helm of the rotating EU presidency.
Croatian President Ivo Josipovic issued a statement saying he is ''generally OK with the proposed date of the elections''.
Regardless of the election results, during the treaty signing, Kosor will be provoking reactions from both the opposition and coalition partners.
''If there is a person who should be credited for all the EU work done, it should be Kosor.
It is fair that she sign the treaty,'' Croatian Peasants Party (HSS) leader Josip Friscic said after a joint meeting of the ruling coalition.
''Small interests are being put above the national ones,'' Radimir Cacic, the leader of the opposition Croatian People's Party (HNS), a member of the Kukuriku opposition coalition, disagrees.
The country's media claim that two main topics and discourses will dominate the elections campaign.
The ruling Croatian Democratic party (HDZ) will try to convince the voters it should continue to lead the country because of the achievements in fighting corruption, respect for the rule of law and EU accession;
but the opposition will attempt to show that all such efforts have been made disingenuously.
''In the course of the entire campaign we will be hearing only about EU business and fighting corruption, but there are other issues that the politicians should focus on, such as unemployment and the economic disaster,'' Anja Masic, a Zagreb housewife told SETimes.
Other parties with different campaign goals will also join the race.
The right wing Croatian Right's Party (HSP) hopes for enough time to persuade voters to reject EU membership, according to party leader Danijel Srb.
As of yet, the government has not released details about a referendum on accession, which must be held within a month after the treaty signing.
EU issues will certainly prevail in the coming campaign in Croatia, though not everyone is backing the accession.
In fact, polls show a nearly equal split over the matter.
A very practical matter of making three trips to the polls in a matter of days or weeks arises.
''I don't think that the people will really like to go voting so many times during the winter.
It might influence the outcome,'' Vladimir Anic, a retired salesman, told SETimes.
