29/09/2011
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 29/09/11
Macedonia has obtained a 107m euro sovereign loan from the EBRD to modernise the portion of Europe's north-south transportation Corridor 10 that runs through its territory.
The loan will be used to co-finance the construction of a new 28km segment of the highway between the towns of Demir Kapija and Smokvica in the country's southeast.
It will also finance construction and modernisation of toll stations as well as installation of equipment for electronic toll collections.
"By building the 28km-long corridor stretch, Macedonia secures a highway for its most important transportation route," Deputy Prime Minister Zoran Stavrevski told the press after signing deal. 
Completion of the corridor offers an "extraordinary opportunity to increase the competitiveness of Macedonian companies," he added.
The construction of the highway is vital for the Macedonian economy as well as for regional integration as a whole, officials say.
"Corridor 10 is a key regional transport link and the EBRD has been supporting its modernisation with investments in both rail and road in Hungary, Croatia, Serbia and Macedonia, worth a total of 854m euro," EBRD Transport Director Sue Barrett said.
Besides constructing the highway strip, the Corridor 10 project in Macedonia includes building two tunnels, 1,250 and 1,300 meters in length, respectively, six bridges, five overpasses, seven underpasses, and two highway crossings.
Refurbishing and modernisation of toll stations will begin in mid-2012, while the entire highway will be completed by 2016.
"As part of the agreement ... 
part of the funds are planned for refurbishing and modernisation of five permanent toll stations and construction of four new toll stations at Tabanovce, Negotino, Demir Kapija and Gevgelija," Agency for State Roads Director Natasha Valkanovska told SETimes.
She said the government has already begun the process of selecting a consultant for completing the tender documentation. 
The tender for selection of a construction company is expected to be announced by the end of 2011, she said.
Domestic companies can participate in the tender for constructing the highway segment, but only as part of a consortium, according to the publicly announced rules.
The government hopes development of the highway will spur investors interested in building hotels and other tourist-related structures along the route.
"This year, we are tasked to realise the activities to place road signs to mark the tourist places along Corridor 10. 
Last year, we completed the marking of the 'wine roads' in Macedonia," said Zoran Nikolovski, head of the Economy Ministry's tourism department.
The loan conditions include a 15-year repayment term, three-year grace period and an interest rate of 2.7%. 
Government officials describe the arrangement as highly favourable.
"The financial package for this project is completed with the signing of the agreement with the EBRD, through which [the needed] 107m euro are secured," Valkanovska said.
Macedonia has obtained an additional 45m euros from the EU as IPA grants, she said. 
The European Investment Bank lent another 130m euros, while the government secured six million from Macedonia's state budget.
