28/09/2011
By Igor Jovanovic, Ivana Jovanovic and Muhamet Brajshori in Belgrade and Mitrovica -- 28/09/11
The situation in northern Kosovo remained highly charged on Wednesday (September 28th), one day after four KFOR peacekeepers and at least 16 local Serb protesters were injured in clashes at the Jarinje border crossing.
Meanwhile, the latest round of EU-mediated talks between Belgrade and Pristina has been cancelled.
Accounts of precisely what happened on Tuesday differ, with Serbs accusing KFOR of firing on unarmed civilians, and the international peacekeepers saying they had come under attack.
"There must be an investigation and those who ordered this act must bear the consequences," said veteran Serb political leader Oliver Ivanovic. 
"For me, as a human, it will be enough to know that KFOR and NATO conduct an investigation the same way as it would do any other army, Serbian as well. 
Shooting into the crowd is something that is absolutely inappropriate."
But Ralph Adametz, a NATO spokesman, said Serbs assaulted the peacekeepers, who were attempting to remove a barricade. 
Protesters, he said, drove a vehicle at KFOR soldiers, injuring one.
"During the incident an attempt was made to seize the soldier's weapon and after a verbal warning, a KFOR soldier fired a shot injuring the civilian attempting to steal the weapon," he said. 
"A number of pipe bombs were thrown at the KFOR personnel causing minor injuries."
"We are deeply convinced that the majority of the population wants peace and stability and that such actions, whether by individuals or groups, are a serious threat to the safety of residents in that area," he said, adding that the peacekeepers will act as authorised.
KFOR has a mandate to keep the peace and has clearly warned protestors that soldiers may shoot if they come under attack, Security Studies Professor Avdullah Hasani said from Pristina.
"KFOR's mandate is clear: to create a safe and peaceful environment, and nobody should blame KFOR for removing the barricades or stopping protesters," he told SETimes. 
"Months ago, Jarinje and Brnjak were declared Special Military Areas, where KFOR has the right to shoot if they are being threatened or attacked."
Fatlum Sadiku, a political commentator in Pristina, said the latest incidents demonstrate the need to negotiate directly with Serbs in northern Kosovo, without relying on Belgrade as an intermediary.
"All say that Belgrade is the key for the north, and the partner to talk. 
But recent events showed that Belgrade cannot control as they want the northern leaders, as they are mainly from the Serbian opposition. 
Kosovo and the international community need to have a separate dialogue with them and without Belgrade," he told SETimes.
Without a political settlement, tensions will remain high, he said.
"If all sides do not agree on a political solution, based on the Athisaari proposal -- which gives a very high level of autonomy for the north -- my fear is that violence will continue," he said.
Meanwhile, the EU's rule of law mission has attracted criticism from Albanians and Serbs alike, though for different reasons.
"EULEX is not fulfilling its mandate to impose rule of law. 
They know who leads the criminal groups in the north, but do not make any attempt to arrest them," Hasani said.
Ivanovic said EULEX is "mission confused" and has failed to build a rapport with local people.
"KFOR gets tasks which otherwise it should not have. 
At the point when the EULEX disappeared as a factor of security in the region, KFOR tries to compensate for this vacuum," he said.
He accused NATO member states that support Kosovo independence of using the peacekeepers to impose rule by Pristina.
"Serbs do not want that," he told SETimes. 
"They will not live in an independent Kosovo; they live in Serbia." Any solution, he said, "has to come from negotiations and without violence".
