02/06/2006

Bulgaria's National Electricity Company (NEC) has pushed up the construction deadline for the second nuclear power station at Belene by two years, the economy and energy ministry announced. 
The future contractor will now be required to build and put into operation the plant's first unit in six years after the agreement is signed, instead of eight as originally planned. 
The term for the sceond reactor will be eight years instead of ten. 
Two short-listed candidates, Czech-based Skoda Alliance and Russia's Atomstroyexport, are currently negotiating with the government. 
The NEC is expected to select the final contractor by the end of June.
***
The Austrian food concern Agrana says it plans to build a sugar factory in Brcko, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
The 30m-euro investment project will be conducted through a joint venture with the BiH-Austrian holding company SCO Studen. 
The future factory is expected to have an annual production capacity of 150,000 tonnes.
***
Republika Srpska's (RS) industrial output fell 1.4 per cent year-on-year in April, following a 17.2 per cent expansion in March, according to the latest official data. 
Manufacturing production dropped 11 per cent year-on-year in April, after having risen 27.1 per cent year-on-year in March.
***
The next round of Serbia's talks with the WTO on eventual membership in the organisation will take place on 7-9 June, International Economic Relations Minister Milan Parivodic announced. 
He said the independence of Montenegro will not affect the pace of negotiations, as the two republics were already functioning as separate economic entities. 
Accession talks should be completed in 2-3 years, he added.
***
Croatia's external trade deficit rose 773m euros in April, for a total of 2.76 billion euros in the first months of this year, according to official statistics. 
In April, exports dropped 8.7 per cent year-on-year to 582m euros, while imports increased by 3.2 per cent year-on-year to 1.355 billion euros. 
The dip in exports was mainly in consumer goods manufacturing.
***
The Albanian government opened a tender for construction of a 30km road from Kalimash, Albania to the Morina border crossing in Kosovo. 
Loans from the EBRD and the European Investment Bank will be used to finance the 56.9m-euro project, which is part of a wider initiative for connecting the Albanian Adriatic port of Durres with Morina.
***
Austria's Hypo Alpe Adria Bank announced it will enter the Macedonian market and open a leasing venture this September. 
Investments for the first year are estimated between 50m euros and 100m euros. 
The project will be part of Hypo Alpe Adria's overall expansion plans for the region.
***
Turkey's foreign trade gap widened by 50 per cent year-on-year to $5.2 billion in April, according to provisional figures provided by the Turkish statistical institute. 
Exports dropped last month by 6.1 per cent year-on-year to $5.8 billion, while imports rose 14.2 per cent year-on-year to $11 billion.
(Various sources – 26/05/06 – 02/06/06)
