26/08/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Altinozu, Hatay -- 26/08/11
Muaz Zarzuri stares at the wall of the little market in Sarilar, Turkey, speaking quietly but firmly.
"I will not go back," he says. 
"Not until the conflict has ended."
Zarzuri explains that he left his home and job in a bakery towards the end of July and has been in Turkey for about a month. 
When asked what happened to the bakery and his village, the 34-year-old shakes his head.
"Destroyed," he responds, failing to elaborate.
Zarzuri is one of the many thousands of Syrians who have fled the violence and oppression at home to take refuge on the Turkish side of the shared 800km border. 
The refugees are being housed in makeshift tent camps in various border villages in the southern Turkish province of Hatay.
Here in Sarilar, a small town populated by a sizeable Orthodox Christian community, about 1,000 Syrians are living in tents behind a large fenced-off area on the edge of town, identifiable by the Turkish Red Crescent banner hanging outside.
The camp is equipped with beds, a large living room with a television, and necessities that are supplied by the Red Crescent as well as international and local donors.
Rules seem to vary from camp to camp. 
At a larger camp further west along the border, people say, the Syrian refugees aren't allowed to leave the premises. 
In Sarilar, however, Zarzuri says acquiring a pass is as simple as asking for one, though they are generally let out only in groups.
Men and women leave the camp daily to visit the markets down the road and are to return by a certain hour.
Emin Mizikacioglu, the owner of the market, says the refugees, particularly the women, are easily identifiable to local residents by their more conservative religious clothing.
"They wear headscarves and long sleeves, even in this weather," he explains. 
"Women here don't dress like that."
Though Mizikacioglu does much of his business in Turkish, his native language is Arabic, which he uses to communicate with the Syrians. 
The refugees themselves rarely speak any Turkish. 
Mizikacioglu says the village has adjusted to their unanticipated presence without issue.
"There aren't any problems here," he explains. 
"They come, they buy their things, and they return to the camp."
Even at the camp itself, there is a surprising lack of tension. 
Turkish police officers sit at a small table just behind the gate, drinking tea and talking amongst themselves.
Though journalists are not allowed in the camp without special permission from the governor's office, the police do not take issue with photography or speaking to the refugees once they exit the camp.
Zarzuri says he has no material complaints about the camp or his life in Turkey.
"They give us everything we need," he says.
The calm here belies the chaos on the other side of the border, where increasing violence by the Assad government has heightened international calls for his resignation.
Though Turkey was slower than many other countries to criticise its neighbour, recent statements by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu show a hardening of the country's position in response to the Syrian crackdown.
And while Zarzuri puts forth a brave face, he confesses that many of the refugees are anxious and that they miss home and family members left behind.
"The women and children, of course they're afraid," he says, pausing. 
"These are people who have seen children lying in pools of blood."
Asked about his hopes for the future, Zarzuri's first thoughts are a return to normalcy.
"Let the houses and shops be built again; let our villages come back to life," he says.
