26/08/2011
(Belfast Telegraph, Makfax - 26/08/11;
AP, AFP, DPA, ANA-MPA, eKathimerini, MIA, Makfax, Nine O'clock, Darik Radio - 25/08/11;
MIA, Makfax, B92 - 24/08/11)
Firefighters in several Balkan countries were still trying to tame wildfires early Friday (August 26th) amid a stifling heat wave.
With a number of blazes burning out of control across the country for a second day, Greece declared a state of emergency Thursday and asked the EU to help it deal with the calamity by sending six aircraft.
The situation was said to be worst near the town of Lefkimi, in the northeastern Evros prefecture, near the country's border with Turkey, where a large wildfire broke out on Wednesday.
According to the Athens News Agency (ANA-MPA), the 47 firefighting vehicles, two water dropping helicopters and four firefighting airplanes that have been deployed to the area have been trying to extinguish the blaze on eight fronts.
But with strong winds fanning the flames, the fire continued to rage Thursday.
Greek officials said that roughly 2,500 hectares of forests and farmland have already been scorched, but that there was no risk of the blaze spreading to residential areas for the time being.
However, with winds expected to remain high and temperatures expected to rise, the civil protection authorities have reportedly begun preparing evacuation plans.
In the Montenegrin capital Podgorica, where the temperature rose to 41 degrees Celsius on Thursday, Zoran Begovic, the deputy interior minister in charge of emergency situations, said numerous wildfires were burning across most of the country.
Meanwhile, the labour and social welfare ministry recommended that workers be allowed to log shorter hours at times of excessive heat, saying employers could also consider moving the process towards evening hours, where possible.
An "orange" heat warning was also issued by authorities in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia, where officials advised residents to stay indoors and away from direct sunlight, if possible, as well as to drink plenty of water.
"People are collapsing and falling in the streets," Serbian emergency clinic doctor Zeljko Bacevic said.
Meanwhile, warning that temperatures would remain very high for at least another day, the Macedonian government recommended on Thursday that pregnant women and employees older than 60 be exempt from work and that construction work be suspended during the hottest hours.
In Macedonia, where 219 large blazes have been reported since the beginning of July, the government introduced a temporary nationwide ban on entry into forests and mountains, and related activities on Wednesday, in a bid to cut the risk of new wildfires.
Only workers of companies involved in logging will be allowed access to forests, under the restrictions, which will remain in force until September 3rd.
