22/07/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 22/07/11
Amid prolonged criticism for failing to attract and absorb EU funds, the Romanian government decided to create a new ministry that will solely oversee Union money.
"[Such a practice] has paid off in other European states, especially among those which joined EU during the last stages, for instance in Poland.
The model should be well studied and applied in Romania," daily Adevarul editor Ion Ionita told SETimes.
Commentators say the new ministry idea was initiated under EU pressure given Brussels' worries -- at a critical time in the eurozone -- that economically-challenged Romania, itself facing severe crisis, is missing out on billions available to grow the economy.
"The incapacity to use free money is suggestive of a malfunctioning system which wastes European taxpayers' money.
There are voices in the EU who warn to either re-channel the money or [establish] a new philosophy on the use of EU funds," Ionita said.
The 2007-13 EU budget slates 20 billion euros for Romania, but Bucharest has attracted only 10% of that sum, according to Romanian government data.
A letter sent by European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso in late June, however, indicates that the 10% figure is an exaggeration.
"The Commission remains very much concerned with regard to the very low financial absorption of structural and cohesion funds in Romania, which has only reached 3%, barely improving the earlier 2% pointed out in my previous letter," Barroso said.
The cohesion funds are intended to level the EU's economic playing field for the recently admitted member states.
In Poland, 1% of the country's economic growth last year came as a result of EU funds.
Stung by the criticism, the government made the letter available only after the Romanian media threatened to sue for limiting its access to public information.
A commonly held view is that the ministry should be a simplified structure with the initiative to draw funds.
Excessive bureaucracy and corruption are most often cited as the biggest inhibitors of attracting and absorbing EU funds.
"When you have bureaucracy you also have corruption," Ionita said.
Contributing to corruption are local officials who often recommend their relatives' companies as consultants.
These exist to swallow huge commissions without producing specific results, Ziare.com economic editor Paul Barbu told SETimes.
"This is why the National Bank has repeatedly suggested it is better that we have large projects instead of the 40,000 small ones under way, which are far from being concluded," Barbu said.
More EU funds mean more small and medium enterprises, which in turn will generate more jobs and increase production.
"Increased production means a better internal consumption and, more importantly, more exports, which now are the engine of the Romanian economy," Barbu said.
Still, many doubt the potential impact of a new ministry will be felt any time soon.
"[It] is hard to create the ministry because it needs parliament's approval.
Since the ruling coalition is so fragile, I doubt it will ask the MPs to have a say on a law that changes the government structure," Ionita said.
Regional Development Minister Elena Udrea underlined recently that there is no term set for creating the institution.
