22/07/2011
(BBC, Reuters, AFP, AP, Wall Street Journal, Kathimerini, Aljazeera, Voice of America, LA Times, ANA-MPA - 21/07/11)
Eurozone members agreed at an emergency meeting in Brussels late Thursday (July 21st) to double international aid to debt-ridden Greece, giving the country another 109-billion euros to overcome its financial woes.
Private creditors will also contribute to the new package, which comes on top of a 110-billion euro bailout Athens received from the EU and IMF last year.
The fresh loan will be granted by eurozone members and the IMF, and will come under relieved terms.
Its maturity and the maturity of all future loans has been extended to 15 to 30 years, with a grace period of ten years, from the current 7.5 years.
The interest rate has also been brought down from 4.5% and 5.8% to 3.5%, which is lower than market rates.
Eurozone leaders also agreed to substantially extend the maturities of the existing Greek facility and vowed to support the country until it is able to return to the financial markets.
The private "financial sector has indicated its willingness to support Greece on a voluntary basis through a menu of options further strengthening overall sustainability," the leaders said in a joint statement after Thursday's meeting.
On top of the 37 billion euros net contribution they will make, they will also take part in a debt buy-back programme that will secure an additional 12.6 billion euros, bringing the total to 50 billion euros.
For 2011-2019, the total net contribution of the private sector involvement is estimated at 106 billion euros, the statement added, pointing out that this bondholder programme will be limited to only Greece as an "exceptional and unique solution".
During the ten-hour talks, leaders also agreed to strengthen and enhance the powers of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to allow it to intervene more quickly and provide loans to a non-bailout country and prevent the need for such measures before the worst has happened.
Experts commented that the fresh powers given to the facility would effectively turn it into a European Monetary Fund.
"This threat had to be contained," EU President Herman van Rompuy said after the meeting, referring to the growing risk of other countries in the eurozone sharing Greece's fate.
"We have shown that we will not waver in the defence of our monetary union and our common currency."
Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou seemed relieved after the talks.
"We now have a programme and a package of decisions which create ...
a sustainable debt management for Greece," he said, pointing out the fresh aid would help cover his country's needs until 2020.
"This, in the end, of course will mean not only the funding of a programme but it will also mean the lightening of the burden on the Greek people," he added.
The fresh aid came despite fears of how credit rating agencies would view it.
Although they have not issued their stance on the package yet, experts suggested they may consider it a tacit admittance of what has been described as "selective default".
European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet, however, told reporters late Thursday he "would not prejudge" such a development.
