22/07/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/07/11
Pristina imposed measures of reciprocity against Serbia and BiH for their refusal to recognise "Republic of Kosovo" customs stamps which prevented exports from Kosovo.
The decision bans all products coming from Serbia and annuls the recognition of Serbian customs and tax stamps. 
Regarding BiH products, Pristina imposed a 10% customs duty.
"According to the CEFTA agreement, every country has the right to impose those measures when a country does the same to your products," RIINVEST Institute Executive Director Alumir Abdixhiku told SETimes.
Abdixhiku explained that Kosovo has had the capacity to implement the measures but so far lacked the political will.
The EU immediately expressed concern and said that only dialogue -- not unilateral action -- can resolve the problem.
"It would be better to give the Serbia-Kosovo dialogue a chance in early September before implementing a ban," EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton's spokesperson Maja Kocijancic told Reuters.
In Belgrade, the response to Pristina's policy also was unusually strong. 
President Boris Tadic called it "immoral, absurd and contrary to the basic European values".
Tadic added that the one-sided act could not have been undertaken without "some kind of international sponsorship".
Serbia's position towards products from Kosovo will not change explained State Secretary of the Serbian Ministry for Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic, who cautioned that Pristina is in violation of the foundation of their talks.
"One unilateral move can jeopardise the validity of agreements which have been reached so far," Ivanovic told Reuters.
The decision takes effect immediately, according to Kosovo Trade Minister Mimoza Kusari-Lila, noting that all products bearing Serbian customs stamps will be turned back. 
She asked EULEX to officially assist Kosovo Police and Customs in northern Kosovo.
Kosovo border and customs authorities returned over 20 trucks Thursday (July 21st), while long lines of trucks are forming at the Merdare crossing because they are not allowed to enter.
Some commentators argue the measure was necessary because Kosovo businesses were unequal in regional trade, which made their products more expensive and less competitive, blunting business growth and economic development.
Now, according to Abdixhiku, the political situation allows Kosovo and Serbia to feel equal in imposing trade embargoes on one another.
Pristina and Belgrade were expected to reach an agreement on customs stamps this week, but the lack of compromise led EU Mediator Robert Cooper to cancel the meeting.
"[T]his is an attempt by the Kosovo government to create a more level playing field in the negotiations," Executive Director of the Balkan Policy Institute-IPOL Seb Bytyci told SETimes.
He said, however, it would have made more sense to impose the measures in 2008, after Serbia started disrupting the free movement of goods, or before the Kosovo-Serbia talks began.
Economists say the first effect of Pristina's move will be temporary price hikes in domestic markets until businesses find alternatives to the Serbian products.
Bytyci predicts there will be an increase of smuggling from Serbia due to the lack of control in the northern border. 
"The north remains a black hole when it comes to Kosovo's economy," he said.
Pristina has been preparing for the new trade regime since May, when it announced the possibility of introducing the measures. 
Artan Hajdari, a seller in Pristina, told SETimes that they have been stockpiling products to keep prices stable for the time being.
Serbia exports 270m euros worth of goods while BiH exports a total of 80m euros a year to Kosovo.
