20/01/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 20/01/12
Yll Rugova and his business partners have high hopes that their fledging fast food business will flourish in Kosovo, with the assistance of government efforts intended to put a dent in Europe's highest unemployment rate.
Their company, Qytetari Anonim, packages locally-grown food as fast-food products with catchy names like the "Chuck Norris" sandwich. 
While the company has seen some early success, Rugova and his partners plan to seek government assistance to help Qytetari Anonim expand and prosper.
"Many think that Kosovo is a difficult country to open a business, but we don't think so. 
In our experience, in Kosovo it is very easy to come up with new ideas and open a business because there is openness to new things, changes," Rugova told SETimes.
While ideas may be plentiful, resources are scant. 
The unemployment rate hovers at 43%. 
Kosovo also boasts the youngest workforce in the region, with the average age of 26.
Officials hope to give entrepreneurs more opportunities with new programmes through the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI). 
Dozens of potential entrepreneurs participated in an employment fair organised last month, and about 400 students have attended a monthly business internship through a government programme, Arta Istrefi, an adviser to the minister at MTI told SETimes.
"Some of the reforms, so far, have simplified the process for business registration, the removal of registration for beginners in business," Istrefi said. 
"The required municipality work permit has a shorter deadline for registration of a business in three days, which can be done at 22 registration centres, a 'one stop shop' in all municipalities. 
These and other reforms aim to help in opening Kosovo businesses."
Istrefi said the government offers financial and professional assistance to small and medium-sized businesses.
"Some of the benefits provided by the support agency are business financing plans up to 10,000 euros, providing business training through the Training Voucher Scheme, compensation and financing of new ideas, administrative support to new businesses, and others. 
Besides these benefits, the strategy of the agency, approved last July, seeks promotion of the entrepreneurship and support of original businesses," Istrefi said.
Valon Cerkezi of Obilic said finding work or starting a new business is challenging in Kosovo. 
Despite a computer engineering degree, he could not find a job and eventually took assistance from his parents and an organisation to launch a small business in computer services.
"After graduation it was difficult to find a job, and I thought then it would be best to open my own business. 
Despite low capital, I succeeded in creating an image for my business, and now I work with four other computer engineers repairing computers, offering services to institutions and individuals," Cerkezi told SETimes.
Rugova, a former designer, also has high hopes for success. 
He met his partners at university, where for two years they planned on opening a business. 
They got an idea when they saw fast food was not packed and sold in the shops, and thought it to be an innovative way to serve the food.
"Our future plans are to expand our products and place in the market, but also promote our brands. 
Not just through classic marketing, but we think of supporting young peoples' projects, young talents, but also promote our brands and the company," Rugova said.
He explains that he and his business partners want to create a new brand of fast food in Kosovo, including a beef sausage, tomato and cheese sandwich named after the US movie star.
"We'd first like to take the Chuck Norris sandwich because everyone knows who Chuck Norris is, and then come up with some interesting names," Rugova says.
He and his friends did not apply for government assistance, but the three partners opened the business with their own funds. 
In the future, however, they plan to apply for assistance because the market has accepted their product and they need more funds to meet demand.
"Our basic idea was to create something new but acceptable to the consumers. 
We want our products to be accepted. 
We thought to create our products with everything from Kosovo, but not all local products have the quality to satisfy our consumers," Rugova said.
