20/01/2012
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/01/12
Serbian businesses and residents owe the government more than 2 billion euros in back taxes, but the government has been unable to collect the money needed to fill a budget gap this year.
The tax administration office made public a list of the 100 biggest tax debtors on January 7th.
The report shows that since 2003, the Serbian state budget is owed more than 2 billion euros in taxes, State Secretary at the Serbian Ministry of Finance Miodrag Djidic told SETimes.
The government has a budget gap of 1.13 billion euros, or 140 billion dinars, but may never be able collect the back taxes from the majority of companies.
"The state cannot charge the debt from the enterprises that are bankrupt, in the process of privatisation, restructuring, or rescheduling," Zoran Jovanovic, the tax administration office PR told SETimes.
He says the main reason for some companies not paying taxes is Serbia's poor financial condition.
In the last ten years many companies went bankrupt or were privatized -- only 30% of Serbia's biggest tax delinquents are active companies.
"The active companies, however, which still work and do not pay taxes, will have to be penalised.
Tax administration office pressed 9,000 misdemeanour charges and 1,700 criminal charges so far," Jovanovic said.
The biggest tax bill is owed by Beobanka, a bank that was declared bankrupt in 2002.
It owes 24 billion dinars, or 228.5 million euros.
The government is taking a stronger stance with tax delinquents.
A new law allows the tax administration office to publish names of the biggest tax debtors on a monthly basis.
And beginning in June, Serbian banks will not allow citizens to collect wages if they have not paid taxes and mandatory social insurance.
Officials in the Ministry of Finance expect this policy to improve the tax system in Serbia and meet the state budget.
"The policy of tolerating someone's debt and punishing others sends a clear message to the citizens that the state is selective towards certain groups of citizens and companies," Verica Barac, the head of the Anticorruption Council of Serbia told SETimes.
According to Djidic, it is difficult to collect money from all tax debtors because of the global economic crisis that hit the enterprises in Serbia.
Barac rejects the argument that the state has limited recourse to collect back taxes because of privatisation and bankruptcy regulations.
"The state is the main actor that sets up the regulations and is responsible for lack of these regulations," she adds.
According to Barac, the list of 100 tax debtors reflects the corruption level in Serbia.
"Unlike some developed countries, Serbia has no culture of paying taxes and supporting the state," Barac added.
Only 70% of Serbian taxes are voluntarily paid, while the rest is generated from the government's tax collection efforts.
In contrast, a 2011 World Bank on global taxpaying practices considers Sweden as one of the world's best tax systems, in which 98% of tax is voluntarily paid.
Among Serbia's timely taxpayers is the Kusovac family from Belgrade, which runs a furniture manufacturing company.
Dejan Kusovac, who has owned the company for 30 years, said it is not fair that they pay taxes, while others do not.
"Although there were periods when our family business didn't run well, we always paid taxes on time," Kusovac told SETimes.
