20/01/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 20/01/12
Driven to despair by the economic crisis, Maria Orphanos said she had to start taking pills for depression. 
And until pharmacists, angered by the failure of the government to pay them 330m euros in subsidies decided to accept state insurance after refusing for nearly two weeks, she had to pay 40 euros a month out of her own pocket. 
Luckily -- for now -- she's only had to do it once.
"I have to take anti-depressants because that's what they brought us to," she said, pointing a finger at a series of governments that have driven Greece to the edge of bankruptcy and are making deep cuts in the nationalised healthcare system. 
"I blame the state," she told SETimes as she left a pharmacy owned by Fotini Dimitropoulou, located in a working-class suburb of Athens since 1984.
Dimitropoulou went along with pharmacist union plans to stop taking government insurance. 
"I have to put the money out myself to buy supplies," she told SETimes. 
She said she hasn't been paid for two years and is owed more than 200,000 euros. 
When she first told people she wouldn't take public insurance, she said they understood because they also feel victimised by the government.
Pia Koukouvinou, a pharmacist whose father and grandfather ran the business, said she couldn't afford to wait for insurance before the settlement. 
She had to tell most customers to pay upfront, although she said she gave credit to regulars who've come to the shop as long as 40 years and needed critical drugs. 
"But I can't do that for everyone," she told SETimes. 
While she said most understood, some did not. 
"They say, 'I pay my taxes and insurance and I want my medicine.' We agree, but we must have our money," she said.
They still don't, but are satisfied the government has promised to set up a timetable for repayment and reverse a decision that would have lowered their guaranteed profit margins by 15%. 
Pharmacists will now take most state insurance, except for one fund.
But the brouhaha has created only a temporary truce as the government has made similar promises before and pharmacists wait to see if it will pay up this time. 
The trouble came as public health doctors claimed the health system is collapsing under the weight of the country's disappearing economy, a crisis created by generations of overspending.
It led Greece to require a bailout of 109 billion euros in rescue loans from the EU-IMF-ECB troika, and to hope for a second rescue of at least 130 billion more.
Dimitris Varnavas, head of the Federation of Hospital Doctors' Unions, said the health system is deteriorating dangerously because the government can't pay for supplies and equipment and has made deep spending cuts in healthcare.
"The situation is dramatic. 
Big units are closing, even intensive care units. 
The memorandum is acting as a killer," he told SETimes, referring to the terms with the troika which requires deep cuts in state spending.
He said he had just come back from a meeting of hospital administrators who complained they had fewer and cheaper equipment and goods. 
"The material we have is bad quality that puts the patients' lives at risk. 
The final cost is bigger than that of getting good quality equipment. 
The crisis has surpassed the limits of a financial crisis. 
It has become a humanistic crisis," he said.
Kathimerini quotes him as saying the Neurosurgery Department at the University Hospital of Alexandroupolis in northeastern Greece had closed because only one staff member was left. 
In addition, a newly-formed psychiatric unit for teenagers at the Sismanogleio Hospital in Athens, the only department of its kind in Greece, is down to two doctors because the state can't pay for more.
Doctors say many people have simply stopped seeking medical care because they can't pay even for their share of drugs.
"There's no way of knowing how many people have passed away from poverty," Dr. 
Elias Sioras, union president at Evangelismos Hospital, one of Athens' best, told The New York Times in December. 
He said the budget is being cut 50%, while national healthcare has been cut 13% the last two years.
Most public hospitals require patients to bring toilet paper, and doctors report shortages of essential items, including syringes. 
Broken computers aren't fixed, operations are being put off and nurses handle four times as many patients. 
Pharmacists say they can't get access to drugs from long-time suppliers fearful they won't get paid because they often aren't for months or years.
And it wasn't just a lack of subsidies that drove pharmacists to push a government that has notoriously taken money out of workers' salaries and failed to support its Socialist-style system of healthcare, but also a critical lack of life-saving drugs, and, sometimes, even aspirin.
There are about 12,000 pharmacies in Greece, ubiquitous sights on nearly every street corner, in a profession the government licenses and controls, right down to operating hours and price and profit regulations, one of the reasons the troika said the country is having a crisis.
According to Bloomberg, the Panhellenic Association of Pharmacists reported shortages of almost half the country's 500 most-used medicines and said even when they're available, pharmacists still have to pay – sometimes as much as 5,000 euros for a month's supply of cancer drugs. 
That means the customers have to wait too.
It's a complicated problem for what is supposed to be a simple system. 
Customers with public insurance present prescriptions and pay about 25% of the cost, while the pharmacist submits bills to the government for the balance. 
And then they wait.
Koukouvinou suggests the real problem is with pharmaceutical companies and doctors that she says conspire to keep high-price brand names being prescribed, and not generics. 
The companies, she said, "will give a doctor five euros for every bit of medicine he writes", which she said drives up the cost to the government for subsidies and created a self-defeating dilemma.
In an article in the British health journal The Lancet in October of 2011, author Martin McKee, a professor of European Public Health at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said a "Greek tragedy" is brewing: less access to medical care in Greece, putting patients at risk. 
Greece's Ministry of Health thinks the depiction is overblown.
"It would be unrealistic to deny that there are many difficulties regarding all public services due to the financial crisis," Nicolaos Polyzos, secretary general of the ministry wrote on its website in response.
"However, this cannot justify characterising the current picture of [the] health sector in Greece as a 'tragedy,'" he added.
Unless, of course, as Koukouvinou notes, you need a life-saving drug and can't afford to pay for it, because she can't afford it.
