25/08/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 25/08/11
Deputy Prime Minister for EU Integration Bozidar Djelic's revealation about Kosovo and Serbia's EU candidacy in the daily Blic caused a political storm.
Djelic said that the Serbian authorities were aware last December that they would have to find a solution for dealing with Kosovo's customs seals, administrative border crossings and the Kosovo officials' participation in regional meetings.
"These topics are in the action plan for acquiring a [EU] candidate status," Djelic said.
The opposition Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) said it is now clear that by claiming Kosovo and the EU integration are separate processes, Djelic deceived the Serbian public for years.
"That bold-faced lie is now gone, but instead of Djelic taking responsibility for the total collapse of the 'Kosovo as well as the EU' policy, he now pretends he was telling the truth all these years," DSS spokesperson Petar Petkovic told SETimes.
Because of disagreements in the state policy regarding Kosovo, DSS President Vojislav Kostunica dissolved the Serbian government of which he was a prime minister in 2008.
Kostunica opposed the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU because he said it would require establishing good neighbourly relations with independent Kosovo.
"Now Djelic says that is precisely the condition for receiving candidate status, although he previously argued we are wrong," Petkovic said.
Representatives of the Serbian Progressive Party (SPP), the country's strongest opposition party, say the dilemma "Kosovo or the EU" is in the air, and it is a matter of time when it will be given to Serbia to choose one or the other.
"Serbia's politicians can not give up Kosovo nor Serbia's EU integration," SPP President Tomislav Nikolic told SETimes.
After German Chancellor Angela Merkel's visit to Serbia earlier this week, Kostunica said it is now clear that Kosovo is the "price" of Serbia's entry in the EU.
He said Serbia must "calmly and soberly announce that it will not pay with its territory to enter the EU".
Nikolic said that the citizens of Serbia are the ones to resolve the dilemma through a referendum.
"Kosovo is part of Serbia under the constitution, but our parliament has also adopted a decision that Serbia will do everything to become an EU member.
Consequently, only the citizens can decide on this," he said.
Serbs provide varied responses to whether they consider Kosovo as part of Serbia to be more important than Serbia becoming an EU member.
"Of course, Kosovo is more important to us.
If we give it up, we will enter the EU without Sandzak and Vojvodina [as well]," Belgrade retiree Miroslav Trifunovic said, summing up a frequnetly expressed view.
Still many others point out a double standard that suggests an international conspiracy against Serbia.
"The world tolerates the Albanians stealing part of Serbian state territory, but when the north of Kosovo wants to remain Serbian, then that same world says the borders can not be redrawn," Belgarde dentist Bratislav Stratimirovic told SETimes.
Belgrade University Professor Nikola Samardzic argues the EU and the international community are not setting any new conditions for Belgrade regarding Kosovo.
Moreover, he claims that Belgrade is violating the commitments it has already accepted, because by signing the CEFTA agreement, Kosovo is recognised as an equal economic partner with the same rights as all other members in the region.
"The role of state is not to exercise its late political whims, but to achieve good relations with its neighbours and to be at the service of the citizens.
In this case, it means to respect the CEFTA agreement and facilitate the smooth export and import with Kosovo," Samardzic told SETimes.
