30/01/2007
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul attended a conference in Paris on Thursday (January 25th) that focused on international aid for Lebanon.
More than 40 countries and international organisations participated in the one-day meeting.
Gul met with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice on the sidelines of the conference to discuss the situation in Iraq.
The foreign minister of Cyprus, George Lillikas, arrived on Monday (January 29th) for a two-day visit to Bulgaria.
His agenda included meetings with counterpart Ivaylo Kalfin and Deputy Parliament Speaker Lyuben Kornezov.
Greek Defence Minister Evangelos Meimarakis left on Sunday (January 28th) for an official visit to Egypt, where he met with counterpart Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi.
Talks focused on defence, technical and military co-operation between the two countries.
Bosnia and Herzegovina High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling arrived on Monday (January 29th) for a two-day visit to Washington.
The talks with US officials are in advance of a Peace Implementation Council in February, during which a decision on the future of the Office of the High Representative will be made.
A Bulgarian economic delegation, led by Economy and Energy Minister Rumen Ovcharov, departed on Sunday (January 28th) for an official three-day visit to Kuwait.
The trip is part of the ministry's plans to expand economic ties with the Persian Gulf countries.
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Chairman Nebojsa Radmanovic and Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski agreed on Thursday (January 25th) that their countries enjoy solid relations, but should intensify economic and trade co-operation.
Radmanovic was on a two-day formal visit to Macedonia.
Polish President Lech Kaczynski expressed his country's support for Turkey's EU bid, during a meeting with counterpart Ahmet Necdet Sezer in Ankara on Tuesday (January 23rd).
Kaczynski said Turkey's membership would strengthen the EU in military and economic terms.
Kaczynski and Sezer also sealed a protocol for bilateral political co-operation.
(Various sources -- 23/01/07-30/01/07)
