25/08/2011
(Emg.rs, AFP - 24/08/11;
Reuters, AFP, DPA, AKI, News24.com, Croatian Times, Xinhuanet, B92, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, ANA-MPA - 23/08/11)
The green flag and other symbols of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's more than 41-year-old regime have been removed from scores of Libyan embassies and consular services around the world in response to the rebel forces' advancement into Tripoli this week.
Hundreds of kilometres and a sea away from home, Libyan nationals hoisted the flag adopted by the rebel National Transitional Council (NTC) in Benghazi at their country's diplomatic mission in Belgrade on Tuesday (August 23rd).
On Monday, groups of anti-Gaddafi protestors stormed the Libyan embassies in the capitals of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Greece and Turkey and raised the new green, black and red tricolor with a crescent and a star in place of the green one.
Portraits of the dictator and copies of his "Green Book" were torn to pieces or burnt.
Similar scenes played out in Sofia in late July, about four weeks after Bulgaria, along with Croatia, recognised the NTC as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people on June 28th.
Turkey cut diplomatic relations with the Tripoli regime in May, but did not fully recognise the NTC until early July.
The battle for Tripoli raged on Thursday, with pockets of pro-Gaddafi resistance in some neighbourhoods.
The rebels have claimed near full control of the city, but there is no trace of the dictator, whose whereabouts remained unknown, giving rise to various speculations.
Meanwhile Tuesday, Greece became the sixth Balkan country, after Turkey, Bulgaria, Croatia, Albania and Montenegro to recognise the NTC as the legal representative of the Libyan people.
Since the start of the popular uprising against the Gaddafi regime in February, the number of countries to have done so has grown to more than 30, including most EU member states, the US, Australia, Canada, Japan and a host of Arab nations.
Announcing the Greek government's decision, Foreign Minister Stavros Lambrinidis said the international community would continue efforts to restore stability in the North African country and the wider region, "always with respect for the sovereignty of Libya and the will of the Libyan people".
On Monday, Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov said that the Libyan dictator will be held accountable.
"We, Bulgarians, know very well Gaddafi's full disregard of other people's life, including of the life of his own nation's children," the Bulgarian leader noted on Monday.
"That is why we are calling upon the National Transitional Council and the allied forces to boost their efforts in order not to allow the regime to drown Tripoli in blood."
Borisov also pledged that his country will continue, together with its allies, "to provide support to the Libyan people so that the consequences of the conflict can be overcome" as quickly as possible.
In a separate statement Monday, the Bulgarian foreign ministry joined international calls for the Libyan leader to step down immediately.
"We urge Gaddafi to surrender, so that the fighting may end and a peaceful political dialogue among all participants in Libyan society may begin," the ministry's spokeswoman, Vesela Cherneva, said.
Former Croatian President Stipe Mesic said on Tuesday that the Libyan leader was ready to quit in the event NATO ends its air campaign.
"I can confirm that Colonel Gaddafi is ready to retreat completely from political and public life ...
but on the condition that the NATO airstrikes cease," he said, citing a personal message he had received from the Libyan leader last week.
