21/07/2011
(Xinhua, Trend, Albpress - 20/07/11;
EurActiv, European Commission website - 19/07/11)
The OSCE on Wednesday (July 20th) joined the EU in calling for the Albanian government and the opposition to return to the dialogue table and make efforts to move ahead with necessary reforms.
The call came from OSCE Chairperson in Office and Lithuanian Foreign Minister Audronius Azubalis in Vilnius a couple of days after he met with the top diplomats of Kazakhstan, Ireland and EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton in Brussels to discuss co-operation between the organisation and the EU.
"The continued controversy over the appeals process following the May 8th local elections has highlighted the need for further electoral reforms," Azubalis said, urging "the government and the opposition parties to overcome the polarisation and pervasive mistrust and end the political stalemate."
The fresh controversy in a country engulfed in political disputes since the general elections in June 2009 came after a tight race between incumbent Tirana mayor and leader of the main opposition Socialist Party (SP) Edi Rama and the ruling Democratic Party's candidate Lulzim Basha.
Rama, who had been mayor for 11 years, initially appeared to have eked out a ten-vote victory in the race.
That result, however, was overturned following a Central Election Commission decision to count ballots that voters had placed in the wrong boxes.
When those votes were included, it was Basha who held the lead, by 81 votes.
The reversal spurred a fresh parliamentary boycott by the opposition.
According to experts, in order to overcome the crisis Albania must overhaul its electoral legislation.
There is no reference in the Electoral Code to what should be done with ballots cast in the wrong boxes.
While in previous elections these ballots were not counted, they were taken into consideration this time.
The EU, which has repeatedly noted the political impasse hampers Albania's aspirations to join the bloc, also urged electoral system reforms.
On Tuesday, Ashton and EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele issued a joint statement.
"The Council of the EU on June 20th stressed that shortcomings in the legal framework and electoral process will need to be addressed in a comprehensive, effective and consensual manner through a thorough electoral reform, in line with all recommendations of the OSCE/ODIHR."
"The elections in Tirana were not good as they demonstrated beyond doubt that the electoral framework needs to be reformed," they said, urging "political forces in Albania to overcome the political stalemate and return to a level of political dialogue that would allow the proper functioning of key democratic institutions, notably the parliament."
According to Ashton and Fuele, "to achieve progress on the EU integration path, electoral and constitutional reforms, reforms of the parliamentary rules and procedures as well as other key reforms are essential and urgent." They vowed the EU's readiness to offer assistance in this process.
