29/12/2006
Albania and Turkey sealed a bilateral Free Trade Agreement (FTA) during a visit by Turkish Foreign Trade Minister Kursat Tuzmen to Tirana.
Under the deal, customs duties will be removed fully for Albanian industrial products being exported to Turkey, while customs duties on certain industrial goods imported from Turkey to Albania will be gradually lifted over a five-year period.
The deal also provides for mutual quotas for agricultural products, which would be subject to duty-free trade between the two countries.
The FTA will enter force immediately after being ratified by the Albanian and Turkish parliaments.
The Federation of BiH's (FBiH) antitrust body announced that it has approved the takeover of fuel retailer Energopetrol by a consortium consisting of INA (Croatia) and Mol (Hungary).
The consortium is acquiring 67% of shares of Energopetrol though a capital increase.
The FBiH government will retain a 22% share, while 11% will continue to be owned by small shareholders.
Romania has cancelled the planned privatisation of 69.9% of the Romanian Savings Bank, due to dissatisfaction with the terms offered by the candidate buyers, Hungary's OTP and National Bank of Greece.
According to Finance Minister Sebastian Vladescu, the cabinet will seek to restructure the bank over the next two years before attempting a new sale.
The National Bank of Macedonia's council endorsed the monetary policy for 2007, projecting inflation of 3%.
The rate is nearly unchanged from this year's average of 3.2%.
It also called for a 21% annual increase in bank credits for the private sector.
Serbia's Central Bank (NBS) announced a less restrictive monetary policy for 2007, citing success this year in containing inflation.
According to NBS Governor Radovan Jelasic, inflation stood at 6.5%, lower than the projected 9.3%.
For next year, the objective will be to keep it between 4% and 8%, he said.
Turkey and Georgia reportedly are on the verge of finalising talks on a bilateral deal on the supply of Turkish natural gas.
Georgia reportedly plans to buy an estimated 800,000 cubic metres of natural gas -- representing almost half of its needs -- from Turkey.
(Various sources – 22/12/06-29/12/07)
