23/11/2011
By Igor Jovanovic and Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 23/11/11
The delegations representing Belgrade and Pristina struck an agreement Monday (November 21st) on the mutual recognition of university diplomas.
The EU, which facilitated the talks, confirmed that following the agreement reached in principle on July 2nd, "the two parties agreed that the European University Association will be asked to certify diplomas issued by universities of each party for use by the other in connection with further education and/or public employment."
Dukagjin Pupovci, director of Kosovo Education Centre, does not believe Kosovo will benefit much from this agreement, but Presevo Valley and other Serbian citizens who studied in Kosovo, will.
"However, it depends on the Serb side:
how serious it is on that and if they will accept the diplomas after they are verified from the European University Association," Pupovci told SETimes.
The sides meeting in Brussels have other items on the agenda including Pristina's presentation in regional assemblies, the civil registry, and integrated border management at the crossings between Kosovo and Serbia.
These technical negotiations were suspended on September 27th after clashes between Serbs and KFOR soldiers at the Jarinje crossing in northern Kosovo.
Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs then announced the presence of Kosovo customs officers at the northern crossings was unacceptable and local Serbs set up barricades at the crossings in protest.
In the meantime, the dialogue with Pristina became a condition for Belgrade to obtain EU candidate status on December 9th -- when the EU Council is to make a decision on the matter.
After the talks in Brussels, the head of Belgrade's team, Borislav Stefanovic, said his delegation had done what it could to achieve agreement, but did not know whether it would be enough to greenlight Serbia's EU candidacy.
"In any case, it's up to us to do everything, not because of any deadlines or the candidacy, but rather because those problems have been present for a long time and have to be solved, and because we have an acute, burning crisis in the north of Kosovo and Metohija," Stefanovic said.
He added that no other solutions had been achieved because Pristina insisted that they reflect the statehood of Kosovo, which Serbia cannot stomach.
The head of Kosovo's delegation, Edita Tahiri, seemed to acknowledge as much, telling local media that deep conceptual differences remain between Pristina and Belgrade.
Stefanovic put it this way:
"I can say we've closed this round with a concrete agreement, which was no simple feat, and it turned out to be true that we haven't accepted anything that had been pompously announced by Pristina as the recognition of a state border."
Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences professor Predrag Simic told SETimes that the problems in Kosovo were very complicated and that the tight deadline involved poses an additional constraint.
"On the one hand, the EU Council session and the decision on Belgrade's candidacy is approaching, and on the other so is the general election in Serbia.
Working on a tight schedule creates risks for both the negotiators and the relations between Belgrade and Pristina," Simic said.
But the opposition in Serbia is using the talks to accuse authorities of acknowledging Kosovo's independence for the sake of their positions before European officials.
"If we get the candidacy, it will mean nothing to the economic and other development of the country.
If we don't get it, again it is nothing.
The final result of the talks is Serbia giving up on Kosovo and Metohija," says Democratic Party of Serbia Vice-President Slobodan Samardzic.
