24/08/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 24/08/11
Rohtraut Skatche-Depich, director of Deco-Metal (DCM), the parent company of Albanian Chrome (ACR), says she blames union representatives for the work stoppage, saying they have "their own agendas".
On Tuesday (August 22nd), the miners and the company reached an agreement, and the almost month-long strike came to an end.
DCM took control of the mine.
Skatche-Depich spoke with SETimes about the strike and Albania's chrome reserves.
SETimes :
Why the interest in Albanian chrome?
It is because of its rich reserves, the increasing price in the European markets, or because Albania offers very good conditions for foreign investments?
Rohtraut Skatche-Depich:
Well, it's probably a mixture.
Let me tell you that our company did business with Albanian chrome 20 years ago.
We are a company specialised in chrome and magnite, and we purchased chrome from Albania in the old days.
What I am trying to say is that we were aware of Albanian chrome as a source, we were aware of the quality, and our company specialised in marketing and mining chrome.
We already have a chrome mine in South Africa, we are even bringing South African chrome to Albania;
we are blending this chrome, smelting it in the Elbasan plant and producing a very good, high value final product.
We have our own smelter in Elbasan, a processing plant, a ferrochrome processing plant with three furnaces in which we have invested a considerable amount of money.
In total, the DCM invested 32m euros in Albanian chrome [since 2007].
SETimes :
So it seems you have important business interests in Albania?
Skatche-Depich:
Yes, we do, we do.
We have been in the chrome business for over 50 years.
We are doing chrome business not only in Albania, but also in South Africa and other regions of the world, so we are very specialised in the product.
SETimes :
How much do you produce per year?
Skatche-Depich:
We are producing about 3,000 tonnes of ferrochrome per month, which is used in the steel industry.
The ferrochrome that we are producing in Elbasan, we are exporting to the United States, to very big companies, like US Steel, Nuclear Steel and UCOR.
These are the biggest.
SETimes :
So, you are saying that Albanian chrome that you are producing in Albania is worth exporting to different countries?
Skatche-Depich:
Yes.
Canada, Germany ...
exporting it all over really.
SETimes :
Why do you have problems in the Bulqiza mine?
You have been blaming the union leaders for the situation.
Skatche-Depich:
In my mind, this is very irresponsible, negative behaviour [by the Union representatives], damaging the workers there, their families, and even the interests of their country [when] Albania is trying to attract foreign investments to it.
SETimes :
How important is Bulqiza mine for the region?
Skatche-Depich:
Bulqiza mine is very important for Albania and especially for this region.
Of course, to us it is important because it has rich minerals, it does have good miners, it does have qualified, well-trained technicians.
I have great respect for the work that has been done there ...
and I feel an obligation to develop the mine and the region there.
