24/08/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/08/11
German Chancellor Angela Merkel arrived in Serbia on Tuesday (August 23rd) amid 35 degree Celsius temperatures, and her message to President Boris Tadic did nothing to stem the heat.
During the meetings, Merkel linked the continuation of Serbia's European integration with Kosovo. 
That was the last message Serbian officials wanted to hear, as they were certain that European integration and Kosovo were two separate processes.
Merkel's message was different: Germany wants Serbia in the EU, but to that end, apart from reforms in the country, progress must be made in the dialog with Pristina, EULEX should be enabled to operate in the entire territory of Kosovo and Serbia's "parallel structures" in Kosovo should be abolished.
"Germany had recognised Kosovo, while Serbia has not. 
That is the situation in which progress needs to be made," Merkel said. 
She did not, however, demand that Belgrade formally recognise Pristina's independence.
Belgrade does not see those structures as parallel, rather as its own state bodies that operate in Kosovo, the independence of which Belgrade refuses to acknowledge.
Merkel also said that resolving the matter of Kosovo is a long process, but stressed that it must be immediately clear to Belgrade what is expected from it on the path to the EU. 
"That is why it is better to resolve difficult issues today, instead of leaving them for tomorrow," she said.
Tadic did not react to allegations of "parallel structures" but said that Serbia has its principles and "has no illusion" that it could bring conflict into the EU.
"Serbia has its principles in resolving conflicts and we want to find a very practical way with our German friends to preserve the dignity of all peoples in the region," Tadic said. 
He promised that Serbia would continue the dialog with Pristina authorities.
Professor at Belgrade's Faculty of Political Sciences Predrag Simic said that Merkel's message is that Serbian authorities should accept the Ahtisaari plan for Kosovo.
"Belgrade will have to accept the implementation of the Ahtisaari plan, and the price of its refusal to do so will be the blocking of EU integration," Simic told SETimes.
Serbia dismissed the Ahtisaari plan, because the country's allies in the UN Security Council -- Russia and China -- blocked its adoption in the UN. 
The plan envisions the independence of Kosovo, with a certain level of autonomy for the Serb community. 
Belgrade has supported the Serbs in northern Kosovo, where Pristina's institutions are not operative.
"The potential abolition of these institutions would be very bad for the Serbian community in Kosovo, but also for the interests of Serbia in the province," Kosovo Compromise Project Director Aleksandar Mitic told SETimes.
Pristina officials lauded Merkel's messages. 
Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci said Belgrade had received "clear and just messages".
But analysts suggest that Merkel's visit had a deeper dimension.
Simic said it was the first by the leader of a G7 member since the declaration of Serbia's independence from its union with Montenegro in 2006. 
"That importance is all the greater, because Germany is probably the most stable economy and the backbone of the entire eurozone at a time of deep economic crisis," Simic said.
Since 2000, Germany has invested 1.27 billion euros in Serbia. 
Last year Serbia exported goods worth 760m euros to Germany, while German exports to Serbia totalled 1.3 billion euros.
