19/07/2011
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 19/07/11
Barely anyone in Macedonia is concerned with inter-ethnic relations ten years after the signing of the Framework Agreement in Ohrid, according to research by the Macedonian Centre for International Co-operation.
The agreement ended the 2001 conflict and has since been credited for the increased number of Albanians employed in state institutions and attending higher education, as well as dual-language signs -- in Macedonian and Albanian -- at certain locations.
"Things improved significantly but now the standard of living is a problem. 
More attention should be paid to the economy because that's what citizens are concerned with the most," Medzit Dautovski told SETimes.
Dautovski owns a gold shop in Skopje's Old Bazaar, where Albanians, Macedonians, Turks, and others have traditionally interacted.
"In 2001, life in the Bazaar died down, people were afraid to come here ... 
Now the Bazaar has livened up, cafes and stores opened," Borko Gavrilovski, an ethnic Macedonian who owns a fur shop at the Bazaar, told SETimes.
Gavrilovski said that many things, such as the dual-language signs, seemed impossible ten years ago, but "now we see it as normal and good that it is that way."
Under the agreement, Macedonia also changed the preamble of its constitution and passed laws to improve inter-ethnic relations and ethnic minority communities' welfare. 
The laws regulate the use of the communities' languages and flags, legalised Tetovo University and amnestied the Albanian insurgents.
The more important laws are passed by using the "Badinter rule", which grants Albanians the right to veto issues concerning culture, religion, language and education.
Moreover, the Macedonian government agreed to a new territorial re-organisation of the municipalities that grouped Albanians in certain areas into a majority.
"The first four years we were under the impression that the spirit of such an internationally-guaranteed agreement was welcome by all. 
As time passed, the political elites, regardless of whether Macedonian or Albanian, behaved nonchalantly towards the document's principles,'' Albanian-language daily Koha editor Besim Ilijazi told SETimes.
Ilijazi still praised the achievements -- the percent of Albanians represented in the administration and higher education, the official use of Albanian language and decentralisaton.
Many Macedonians, however, say the agreement was forced on them with serious consequences to their very existence.
"The change in the preamble of the constitution downgraded the Macedonians to an 'ethnic community' in their own state, after which the UN-sponsored talks concerning the differences about our name morphed into negotiations to change it," journalist Mirka Velinovska said.
A weakness of the agreement, codified in the constitution, is the 20% quota for Albanians in all social areas and institutions, Vancho Shehtanski of the political party TMRO told SETimes.
The set up has shown that fulfilling the quantitative requirement most often comes at the expense of quality, inhibiting social progress, he said.
Shehtanski explained that through the Framework Agreement, the Macedonian people have partly lost their sovereignty.
"If Macedonia, an EU member candidate, was made to implement such an agreement, the same should be done on the basis of reciprocity in our neighbouring countries, full-fledged EU and NATO members, with large Macedonian minorities," he said.
