22/12/2011
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 22/12/11
After Andreas Papandreou formed his PASOK socialist party 30 years ago, he catapulted into the prime minister's seat with promises of unprecedented social benefits and a vow to restore the integrity and dramatically increase the pensions of senior citizens, whom he called "the proud elderly". 
He created centres where they could socialise over free coffee and newspapers, and live out their twilight years with company and in grace.
They embraced him, but the flip side of Papandreou's largesse came with a hidden price tag that threatens to bring down the economy. 
It forced his son, former Prime Minister George Papandreou, to cut salaries, raise taxes, layoff of tens of thousands of workers, slash pensions and dismantle many of the country's social services to stave off bankruptcy to satisfy international lenders.
Now, the elderly come to the centres wondering how they'll make ends meet.
"It's a matter of survival. 
We can't buy gifts for our children, or for ourselves," Georgia Kokkini, 67, sighed as she sat with friends at the Open Centre for Elderly Protection in the western Athens neighbourhood of Peristeri, where they gathered for a Christmas party.
There were carols, but the celebration was muted for many. 
"When prices go up and your benefits go down, what can you do? 
We can't keep up," Kokkini told SETimes. 
She said her husband's pension had been reduced 500 euros and now they carefully decide what to buy at the market.
Greek pensioners, who've seen their benefits cut by 10% or more, are bracing for another projected 15% cut on January 1st as the country struggles to survive economically under the weight of a 353 billion-euro debt, 10% deficit and 17.7% unemployment rate.
The austerity measures have created a deep recession and the implosion of the vaunted welfare state that Andreas Papandreou created, and set off 18 months of protests, strikes and riots that drove his son from office in favour of a temporary coalition government. 
It is getting along on a series of 109 billion euros in rescue loans, and negotiating a second bailout of 130 billion euros more to stave off default. 
To do that, the burden has fallen on workers, the poor and the elderly.
"The wave of spending cuts that drives the social insurance system to the brink of collapse and Greek society to extreme poverty, is not the way (out of the debt crisis)," Nikos Hatzopoulos, president of IKA Employees Federation, the largest state-run health and pension fund in Greece, told the Associated Press.
The elderly are not alone, as Greece is cutting benefits for the disabled, the blind, recovering organ-transplant patients, autistic children, and paraplegics in need of physiotherapy. 
It has also taken to taxing workers to pay benefits for the unemployed. 
A desperate Greece has tried almost everything except going after tax evaders who cost the country more than $60 billion in lost revenues.
It has changed the law to raise women's retirement age to 65 to match that of men, and cut benefits across the board.
That has coincided with a wave of tax hikes that have especially slammed the elderly as many own their homes and were hit with a big property tax surcharge stuck into their electric bills. 
Home ownership is all that's keeping many Greeks, especially the old, from going under.
"They axed my pension," an angry Theodoros Karabelas, 73, told SETimes about a government he said he no longer trusts. 
He said his pension has been cut to 800 euros, still more than the average wage, but that he feels a sense of injustice that the country's political elite and rich have exempted themselves from sacrifice.
The elderly gather at the centre to share stories of tough times, but some say they are used to it, having lived through World War II, the Nazi occupation, the civil war that followed, and the 1967-74 repressive right wing junta of military colonels.
Olga Spyropoulou, 81, said she remembers being a little girl in a village in western Greece. 
"We had one onion to share among four girls, and with an empty shoe polish container we grilled it and ate it. 
We've been through real days of hunger and I hope my grandchildren don't come to that," she told SETimes.
Konstandina Papadaki, 22, a worker at the centre, said the elderly come to her, some near tears with worry. 
"They have cut down on many things and there's a lot of rage and despair," she told SETimes. 
"Everyone feels desperate," she said. 
But as they near the end of their lives they are more anxious about the generations who haven't been inured to hard times. 
"They are saying, 'What are the young going to do?'", with the unemployment rate at more than 45% for those under 24.
The elderly won't be able to tell Papadaki their troubles anymore. 
Her contract was not renewed by the government.
