18/01/2012
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 18/01/12
Serbia and Kosovo have begun the long process of copying vital statistics into Kosovo's hands, the first step towards providing Kosovo citizens with important legal documents, including birth, marriage and death records.
The transfer occurred as part of the Civil Registry Books Agreement with Serbia that EULEX concluded last July.
On December 20th, EULEX deputy head Andy Sparkes handed over the first certified copy of the civil registry books for the village of Janjevo, 12km southeast of Pristina, to Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Edita Tahiri.
The registry was signed on December 6th in Serbia during the fifth meeting chaired by EULEX of respective groups for implementing the agreement.
It is particularly important to Kosovo because it uses certificates in the civil registry to clarify property ownership titles and inheritance rights for its citizens.
"Serbia is prepared to fully implement the Civil Registry Agreement and it has already demonstrated this preparedness through actual activities on this issue," the office of the Serbian head negotiator Borko Stefanovic told SETimes.
Tahiri characterised the handing over of the first documents to Kosovo as a useful step to enrich existing data.
"We consider this to be only an interim phase, an interim measure until the period [when] we will return original books, as they do not belong to Serbia but to the Republic of Kosovo," she said.
In reality, the books are scanned by EULEX and Serbian authorities -- a process overseen by Pristina -- and once the copies are certified, they are handed over by EULEX to the Kosovo authorities.
There are also technical challenges that are slowing down the implementation process.
Serbia and Kosovo use different software for civil registry books, which are digitalised in both countries.
As the parties decided to use the Kosovo software system, Serbian IT officials visited Pristina last month to familiarise themselves with it.
"The book is scanned with the Kosovo model and adopted to Kosovo data bases, which enables us to certify all books which are in Serbia;
it will be immediately available for use," said Tahiri.
Kosovo Co-ordinator for book registry implementation Arjeta Rexhaj told SETimes that Kosovo expects the process to be implemented in one place, which means that books distributed in several Serbian cities will be gathered at one spot.
"Serbia is showing signs of accepting this proposal, which will speed up the process," said Rexhaj.
The certification of first registry book followed a series of trilateral meetings mostly held in Serbia.
After a decision was made to scan the Janjevo registry books, Lipjan municipality officials went to Serbia to determine whether the books are original and valid.
"The books are the same;
my calligraphy is there, except the damage some books have suffered at the lack of proper care," Janjevo registrar Ilaz Gashi told SETimes.
Kosovo officials have targeted December of this year as the period to complete the implementation agreement.
As to the determination of the parties to advance that implementation, Rexhaj said "the process will go ahead despite the seatbacks."
Stefanovic's office, however, said it is hard to predict the end of the process.
"This concerns much more the technical aspects of the agreement than the political ones.
Serbia will try to have the process move as quickly as possible from its side," it said.
