18/01/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 18/01/12
Kosovo and Montenegro are planning to sign a series of agreements in the fields of economy, infrastructure, investments and tourism in an effort to improve regional co-operation.
Kosovo Minister of Foreign Affairs Enver Hoxhaj visited Podgorica last week to discuss the plans.
"Regional infrastructure projects, such as a railway and a highway, are to advance relations between countries and make the European perspective of the region more certain," Montenegrin Prime Minister Igor Luksic said after the talks.
Hoxhaj said ties between the two countries, as well as with Macedonia, are a key to boosting the regional countries' economies.
Macedonian Parliament Speaker Trajko Velanjovski visited Pristina on January 10th, where he said the two countries' relationship is positive.
The Macedonian parliament recently adopted two agreements with Kosovo -- a declaration recommending Kosovo be recognised and a ratification on border demarcation with Kosovo.
"This is a sign of the intensive co-operation between our two countries. 
I am pleased to say that procedures for ratifying agreements and treaties between the countries in the field of security, justice, economy and finances have been intensified," Veljanofski said during his visit.
Kosovo analysts say it is important that in the first weeks of 2012 Kosovo and its neighbours keep high level contacts, but they are worried over future challenges the countries will face.
Although the demarcation agreement has been ratified with Macedonia, Montenegro has not yet done so.
Pristina Centre for Conflict Studies head Abdullah Hasani told SETimes that Kosovo will create a demarcation border in 2012, which, according to him, should not disturb the relations between Kosovo and Macedonia.
"I would like to see an example with Macedonia in which both countries create the demarcation without problems. 
But in Montenegro, I fear that some groups might use this [demarcation] process for their own political reasons," Hasani said.
He added that the demarcation process with Montenegro is also more challenging due to ethnic issues.
"We have seen that the inclusion of Montenegrins in Kosovo's constitution and the rights of Albanians in Montenegro has been on the agenda of senior leadership for a while, and Hoxaj's statement shows that," Hasani said.
"The example with Macedonia should be considered -- where Albanians are more numerous than in Montenegro, and where ethnic issues did not become an obstacle to resolving open issues."
Fatlum Sadiku, a freelance Kosovo commentator for different newspapers, told SETimes that co-operation between Kosovo, Macedonia and Montenegro should intensify.
"Cross border co-operation, which exists for decades due to cultural, economic and family ties should be the focus of the [three] governments."
Sadiku says practical matters that make daily life easier need to be addressed.
"The creation of a free trade zone across the border would attract more investments and develop the economy. 
Many that live in the areas around the border leave [due to the lack of employment, economic development] in search of a better life," Alber Gashi, a researcher at the European and Turkey Policy Institute in Pristina told SETimes.
The EU funds allocated for cross border co-operation should be put to better use, he said.
"Such projects aim to prepare border areas to be level with the economies of their countries when they join the EU, but right now I don't see such projects as having a long-term impact on the population living in border areas," says Gashi.
