22/12/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/12/11
Kosovo looks to the new year hoping to begin talks on a free trade agreement with the EU.
But even implementing the preferential trade measures already established for all Western Balkan countries has proven to be a struggle.
Kosovar products cannot be exported to EU countries without being subject to customs fees or quantity restrictions.
To implement the preferential measures a series of steps need to be taken, Ministry of Trade and Industry press aide Bajram Shala told SETimes.
"Trade preferences to Kosovo by the European Parliament were adopted on November 24th and also by the EU Council, which means that trade preferences towards Kosovo were approved.
However, according to European decision-making procedures, it is required to formally sign the Regulation by European Parliament and then [be] published in the Official Gazette," explained Shala, adding that the preferential measures are crucial to the economy.
"They allow the export of Kosovo products to the European market duty free;
that stimulates exports."
Despite the absence of these measures, however, Kosovo has boosted its trade with EU countries.
"For the last ten months of 2011, exports to the EU from Kosovo have grown 11% compared to the same period in 2010.
Expressed in terms of foreign exports to the EU, it increased by 11.7m euros," Shala said.
Artan Berisha of Drtia 2000 Export told SETimes that customs duties definitely affected the amount of trade his company managed.
"Of course we faced a negative impact because we needed to decrease the trade exchange due to the fees imposed on our goods.
We hope that soon we can begin with full capacity to export to the EU," said Berisha.
He says that they maintained low levels of trade to the EU so as not to lose the markets there.
"European Union countries are challenging and dynamic markets.
If you lose it, you will have a hard time regaining it."
He explained that for the trade he did with the EU, his company would recoup what it paid in customs fees.
"We were told that based on the agreement reached, all companies that have lost from the lack of these measures [will have] the funds returned retroactively, but we have no confirmation yet on what form and when this will happen," Berisha said.
Ardita Krasniqi is an owner of Kosova Heimat Produkte in Munich, Germany.
She imports food products from Kosovo to sell in her shop.
"A huge Kosovo diaspora [community] lives in Munich and I thought opening a business with Kosovo products would be good, to have a piece of the country abroad.
We imported food products from Kosovo from companies and farms, and it went quite well," Krasniqi said.
She noted that the lack of preferential measures affected prices.
"We continued to get the same products during the whole year as every time, but this year we needed to increase the price because they had to pay taxes on the customs, and this frustrated our customers," Krasniqi said.
Economist Liridona Konushefci told SETimes that companies in Kosovo racked up losses due to the measures.
"It took time to get the measures because of political differences among the EU members on Kosovo.
According to a Kosovo Economic Chamber report, more than 60% of the companies cancelled or decreased exports to the EU, and for a small economy like Kosovo this means a lot," said Konushefci.
She said that in long term Kosovo requires more.
"Kosovo needs to have the free trade agreement with the EU, as currently Kosovo has free trade relations just with the countries in the region.
The EU is an important market for exports, but also to test the economy [to determine] if it can stand in a competitive market like the European one."
