22/12/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 22/12/11
The winter market for what are referred to as "traditional producers" in Bucharestˈs Obor Square is buzzing with visitors. 
People jostle to make way to the wooden stalls, take a look at the various foods and other products, and then head off to the next seller.
Only a few however, ask the merchants to allow them to sample the displayed products in order to make up their mind whether to buy.
"Give me just a bit, to quench my appetite!" they then tell the sellers.
One of the producers displaying products is Emil Costea, a meat producer from Alba County in central Transylvania who runs a micro-farm in his native village raising pigs, sheep and goats.
Costea's meat-based products -- different kinds of sausages, ham and bacon -- radiate the smell of smoked meat and are the main attraction for the wavering customers. 
"Christmas is meat time and then comes the cheese," Costea said.
Like the rest of the traditional producers, he is quick to boast the products are "100% natural".
But Costea seems bewildered by the people seeking the least expensive food or asking for samples to satisfy their hunger.
"They are going from stall to stall looking for the lowest prices. 
It is like an economic pilgrimage. 
Even a penny makes a difference," he told SETimes.
Costea explained this year is his first in Bucharest and he could not make any comparisons with sales the previous years, though most others are complaining of fewer and fewer sales.
"I think Romanians are weary of the times to come and keep the money in their pockets," he said as he arranged a display of jars with seeds and nuts dipped in acacia honey.
A couple of stalls down the alley, the Rahoveanus, from the Fagaras Country at the foot of the Southern Carpathians slopes, are behind the counter.
"We have sold in Bucharest for a couple of years, but this year the crisis has taken the heaviest toll on our sales," Ion Rahoveanu told SETimes.
Rahoveanu runs a family business that has spread all the way to the capital because of higher competition back home.
"Bucharest is best market in the country. 
The only problem is that competition here is becoming even tighter. 
The home-made products craze is attracting a lot of local producers here, even though some of them are questionable," he said.
The crisis is such that people try just about anything to secure a market share or simply survive. 
Unfortunately, the situation often turns into unhealthy competition of false claims.
What is the solution? 
Rahoveanu says a better regulated system in which traditional producers can certify their merchandise is urgently needed.
Another producer, Marta Hojda, an ethnic Magyar from Harghita County in eastern Transylvania, welcomes her customers with a warm smile.
Asked how sales are going this year, Hojda, like many others, answers with a smug "so-so". 
Yet, she is optimistic and proudly presents her home-woven wool blankets, leather slippers and waistcoats which, unlike the other traditional products, are not to be found elsewhere at the fair.
Before the economic crisis, sales for the months of December used to be up to ten times higher than the previous months. 
This year, retailers predict an average of 30% increase in sales.
But higher than average sales figures are expected in the electronics sector, as many Romanians wait for special end- of- year promotions to purchase such products.
Opposite Hojda's stall is Veronica, who sells home-made Christmas ornaments. 
Unlike the other sellers, she says she goes through the crisis with little emotions.
"What I sell here requires little investment. 
And they are not perishable like the meat products or the oven baked bread. 
Still, if I sell less, I feel the effects in my pockets," Veronica told SETimes.
Despite Romania's announced exit from the recession earlier this year and a record economic growth of 4.4% during the third quarter, the public is far from feeling the effects of an economic come back.
A Eurostat survey released this month shows Romania is ranked second from the bottom in purchasing power among the 27 EU member states, ahead only of Bulgaria.
