22/08/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/08/11
EULEX was prompted to ask for a ruling on immunity after it could not proceed with an arrest warrant for former minister of transport and current MP Fatmir Limaj, who, as a former KLA commander, is accused along with nine other people of war crimes in Malisevo. 
The nine others have already been arrested, but Limaj's arrest has been held up due to the immunity granted to him as a MP.
However, the head of EULEX, Xavier de Marnhac, has highlighted that the request did not pertain to a specific case.
"We will try to do our best to find a way to get this clarification, as it is important for Kosovo and the rule of law," de Marnhac said.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci underlined "this is an institutional obligation towards the citizens and the democratic world that this matter to be given a legal response".
But Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi refused to bring the issue up in parliament, insisting that it is up to the courts to interpret the laws and constitution.
"It is clear. 
The MP immunity is 24 hours. 
Whoever has problems with the interpretation should go to the constitutional court," Krasniqi said.
Experts consider MPs to have immunity in their capacity and activities, while arguing that some MPs hide behind immunity to avoid previous charges against them.
"After the last election, there were allegations that a large number of people with dubious pasts had become members of parliament. 
And they use immunity as protection from prosecution for offences that they had committed earlier," Seb Bytyci, executive director of the Balkan Policy Institute, told SETimes.
"Local judges and EULEX should be committed to continue [their investigations] and if someone is suspected of crimes, he or she should be tried," he added.
"A member shall not be immune to things they have done earlier. 
MP immunity is a concept that protects the MP from arrest for things they say in parliament. 
This is something that is installed in a democracy to protect the right of expression, not to protect MPs from justice if he makes war," argued Bytyci.
Avni Bytyci (no relation), head of the NGO Initiative for Progress (INPO), told SETimes that the problem of immunity began during the election period, when the Central Election Commission allowed candidates to participate who were under investigation.
"Although the constitution of Kosovo clearly states that immunity is not a guarantee that no investigation can be opened against any MP, the question arises how effective an indictment can be when the suspect is free and how it can affect the investigation," he said.
"Krasniqi is acting in a manner that the law allows. 
In this case he uses this system to protect his colleagues to a certain extent. 
Although I think as speaker of parliament he should suggest MPs give up their immunity so that investigations can be independent," Bytyci told SETimes.
However, some feel that by already announcing the indictment against Limaj, EULEX reacted prematurely before the constitutional court had time to review the matter.
"They [EULEX] had insisted that they cannot indict any MP, then they did so after the government asked for an opinion from the court, which is a mistake because they should have waited. 
Maybe one day the court will say the case can be closed, because it was not legal to proceed with it as at the time the immunity was not clear," Rraham Bajqina, a lawyer, told SETimes.
