29/01/2007

Bill Gates, the founder of Microsoft, will visit Romania in early February. 
Gates will appear at an event marking the launch of a new Microsoft product on the Romanian market. 
Microsoft Romania, which reported a 29% year on year increase in profits in 2006, is hoping to triple them by 2010.
***
Montenegro became the 188th member of the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) on January 24th. 
The country applied for membership following its separation from the former state union with Serbia last year. 
WMO is the UN agency for meteorology (weather and climate), operational hydrology and related geophysical sciences.
***
Bulgaria was accepted as a member of the International Parliamentarians' Association for Information Technology (IPAIT) at the 5th IPAIT Conference in Helsinki. 
IPAIT is a worldwide interparliamentary institution that aims to promote co-operation in IT and communication technologies.
***
The software arm of Greek telecom equipment producer Intrasoft International won a 20m-euro contract to provide network support for the European Commission (EC) the company announced on Thursday (January 25th). 
Under the deal, Intrasoft International will provide support for the EC's data, telephony, videoconferencing and television networks over the next six years.
***
A regional conference titled "Advancing Competitiveness via International Standards and Technical Regulations" was held at the Macedonian Chamber of Commerce in Skopje on Thursday (January 25th). 
It drew representatives of IT associations and experts from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria and Macedonia. 
Participants agreed that the introduction of international standards for quality operation was crucial for the progress of the IT industries in the region and for making it attractive to foreign clients and investors.
***
Macedonian Internet provider On.net launched fixed-line telephony services on Wednesday (January 24th). 
On.net is the second fixed-line phone operator in Macedonia, following Hungarian-owned Macedonian Telecommunications (MT). 
The company says it plans to compete with MT by offering lower prices for international and long-distance calls.
(Various sources -- 22/01/07-29/01/07)
