17/01/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 17/01/12
Hara Marandou has a graduate degree from Princeton University in civil engineering, but it was her diploma from the National Technical University of Athens that opened the door for her to one of Greece's 130 so-called "closed professions".
People in these professions -- which include beauticians, drama and dance school instructors, bakers, civil engineers, pharmacists, lawyers, insurance agents, employment consultants, diagnostics centre staff, translators, divers, cameramen, driving school instructors and cab drivers -- have long enjoyed monopolies or restrictions giving them guaranteed profits.
However, the closed profession model is one of the reasons international lenders say the country has gone to ruin.
Marandou said there's unease at her firm and among fellow engineers as the country's economic crisis has lessened the amount of work -- and as they fear that opening their profession will bring further competition diluting the field.
Already, she said, the government has ended the practice of allowing bidders to offer no more than a 20% discount, which has eliminated competition.
"Everybody made the same offer.
The bid was granted on the basis of the technical offer," she said.
"Now that has stopped," she told SETimes.
The country's new coalition government, led by Prime Minister Lucas Papademos, is now trying to reform the closed professions, but resistance remains strong.
The government has ordered that no license will be needed to begin a non-specialised profession, but it has treaded softly on the specialised fields.
"Ballets and dancing schools have been liberalised, but more complicated professions such as civil engineers, pharmacists and lawyers have not opened at all," Yannis Stournaras, head of the IOBE think-tank, told Reuters.
"The political system resists."
Only lawyers educated at a state university are allowed to practice, and their rates are set, limiting competition.
But many lawyers are getting anxious because their workload has dropped as Greeks -- buried under pay cuts, tax hikes, slashed pensions and layoffs -- have cut back on expenses.
Iphigenia Agrafiotis, who has a private practice specialising in divorce cases and contracts, told SETimes that some of her colleagues worry that allowing lawyers from other countries to work in Greece could flood the profession.
"There are lawyers who work for firms and the number of these lawyers is getting bigger.
We don't know what will happen," she said.
Most Greeks prefer to go to lawyers they know, or are referred to by friends or family, she said.
But this could change if foreign competitors come in and start lowering rates.
"Perhaps people will go to a firm with many specialties," she said.
Although the Troika and government said the lack of competition has hurt consumers, Marandou said the public doesn't see how the government hurts the professions by delaying payments for months, or years.
Her firm has three partners and five engineers and is owed more than 400,000 euros, she said, and now could find itself in bidding wars with foreign firms or engineers.
Already, she said, some domestic firms are reportedly offering discounts of 70% or more.
Like her father, Pia Koukouvinou, 42, is a pharmacist.
She said theirs is a misunderstood profession.
"We don't get paid for a long time,” she told SETimes from the tiny shop she runs near her home.
She said there are too many pharmacies in Greece, and that 200 have closed in the last year.
Now, she said, Israeli companies are poised to enter the market, a move that could alter everything in a business which is so regulated that pharmacists have to keep the same prices and shop hours and had to be at least 820 feet apart.
"[Foreign] firms are really desperate to get projects and work for a couple of years," and are willing just to meet payrolls, she said.
That's good for the government but, said Koukouvinou, not so good for the professionals whose lives will be changed.
"Before, we had a good life," she said.
"Now we don't."
