21/12/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/12/11
Eleven years since the fall of the Milosevic regime, even the biggest media outlets in Serbia still cater to the ruling elite, claims Serbia's Anti-Corruption Council President Verica Barac.
Barac told SETimes that Radio Television Serbia (RTS) is a most glaring example of a public service helping political parties rather than the citizens, in exchange for funding.
"When the Anti-Corruption Council requested their financing documentation, RTS Director Aleksandar Tijanic ignored [the request] and paid a penalty to the Commissioner for Information of Public Importance, but did not show anything," she said.
In a report released last month, the council asserted local media is completely controlled. 
"There is no longer a medium from which citizens can obtain full and objective information," it concluded.
The council also examined the media's ownership structure, as well as its co-operation with state institutions, agencies and production companies from 2008 through 2011.
Out of 30 leading media sources it analysed, it was not possible to determine the real owners for as many as 18.
Nine out of 11 TV and radio stations that broadcast nationally have no known owners but list offshore companies whose ownership structure is almost impossible to determine.
Selling advertising space is a very important element in media financing, and state institutions spend 165m euros -- or a quarter of total advertising capital in Serbia -- on it. 
It also awards between 21m and 25m euros through various public tenders.
"I do not defend the media, but in the difficult economic situation they are [forced to choose] to take money from the state and then obey, or not to take it and fail," Independent Association of Serbian Journalists (NUNS) President Vukashin Obradovic told SETimes.
Obradovic explained it is a case of systemic corruption by powerful government officials conducted quite perfidiously.
The council also analysed media PR agencies' ownership structures and concluded some have a very significant place in the advertising market, because "in addition to buying out advertising space from the media, they also work with a number of state institutions."
It stated that Srdjan Saper, adviser to President Boris Tadic of the ruling Democratic Party, and Dragan Djilas, vice president of the party, own the most powerful PR agencies -- McCann Erickson, Multikom and Direct media.
"For the democratic progress of society, media ownership is exceptionally important because it does not just serve to make profit in commercial companies, but also to trade influence in all aspects of life," University of Belgrade Political Science Professor Snjezana Milivojevic told SETimes.
The media often face charges filed against them by government officials, as well as steep fines from courts that rule in favour of the politicians.
In one recent case, the court issued a 3,000 euro fine against B92 journalist Suzana Trninic because during a broadcast she asked Parliament Speaker Slavica Djukic Dejanovic about the alleged employment of The Hague tribunal prisoner Franko Simatovic's wife in "Srbijagas".
Members of the public say that the government's influence is obvious, given the information published in the print and electronic media.
"There is no serious criticism of the government, or it is very mild. 
Clearly, the journalists are cautious not to anger the politicians and can't even ask them [about much]," law student Mirela Panajotovic told SETimes.
Belgrade dentist Aljosha Jerkovic told SETimes the journalists' fear could be seen recently, when Serbia was delayed EU membership candidacy.
"No one dared ask the government 'what now?' when they did not fulfill the election promises. 
Nobody analysed the government's mistakes, but the very next day began publishing the official affirmative statements in which they offer new promises," Jerkovic said.
According to Freedom House, Serbia in 2011 is listed among the partially free countries, holding the 72nd place out of 196 countries.
The European Commission has included the media among the priorities in monitoring the progress of countries that are on the road to EU accession.
