20/12/2011
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 20/12/11
In Kosovo, Christmas celebrations last two weeks -- with the Christian holiday on December 25th, New Year's on January 1st and Orthodox Christmas on January 7th.
Pristina offers a mosaic of celebrations, as does the small remote catholic village of Zym, in southern Kosovo.
Teacher Nikolle Kerhanaj is getting ready for Christmas in the village. 
He knows the rituals, and especially likes the buzmi ceremony, in which a branch is burned before Christmas Midnight Mass.
"It's a celebration that brings our people home," he told SETimes. 
But he is concerned that fewer people will get back home this year, due to the global financial crisis.
Ivan, who works in Croatian capital returned home this week.
"I always return here for Christmas, spend some day and go back to Zagreb," he told SETimes. 
For him, this is a tradition that he will follow.
Although early, many are getting ready for Orthodox Christmas.
Nenad, who lives in northern Mitrovica, told SETimes that this year's celebrations are proceeding despite the current political developments.
"We hope for more prosperous days all the year and celebrate holidays with the same concerns," he said.
A big concern for him, as for many others in Kosovo and around the world, is the economic crisis.
The turmoil has further hurt Kosovo's already languishing economy. 
As a result, citizens are relying more and more on remittances from family members living abroad. 
According to the Central Bank, up to 3 billion euros have been sent home to Kosovo in last five years.
Hajdar Pnishi lives and works in Switzerland. 
He said that many of his compatriots are planning to come home to Kosovo for Christmas and New Year's, but he will not be returning this year.
Meanwhile, peacekeepers and other members of the international community are also preparing for the holidays. 
Some will stay in Kosovo, while others plan to spend Christmas back home.
Rob Trotter and Marc Appleby are British telecommunication specialists contracted by KFOR. 
They do their work together, but for Christmas they will celebrate separately. 
Trotter will join his family in England, while Appleby will celebrate in Pristina. 
Facing different plans for Christmas they went out one week early to mark the day in a group.
"Today, we have organized 'The 12 pubs of Christmas' -- we'll visit 12 different pubs in the spirit of Christmas," Trotter told SETimes.
"It doesn't matter where you are. 
It's important to feel the spirit of Christmas," said Appleby.
