22/11/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 22/11/11
The Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) political scene ground to a standstill over a year ago; the country remains without a government as political parties spend time locked in bickering. 
The result has been economic stagnation and a severe blow to the EU integration process, while neighboring countries move towards membership.
"Time is not on our side as we are seeking a better political atmosphere to establish a favorable economic environment. 
Foreign direct investment (FDI) this year is down by 50%, and it is clear that in such a state we cannot attract new foreign investors," Kemal Kozaric, the governor of the BiH Central Bank, said in an interview with Banja Luka media.
"All of our activities to date, including the passing of laws, are now frozen and waiting for the new government. 
Even if we had the patience to calmly wait for a change, we are losing [potential] foreign partners who simply see no secure investment in such an unstable political environment," Dzemila Agic, director of the Centre for Ecology and Energy, told SETimes.
Members of the public are paying the most for this political malaise and their trust in democratic institutions is weakening. 
Still, the political crisis is mostly focused on politicians and far less so on its economic ramifications.
"Not included in the losses are forfeited funds. 
It is estimated that BiH has lost at least 168m euros in the period without a government," Lejla Dragnic, from the Centre for Politics and Government, told SETimes.
The loss of investment and time is not the only problem. 
EU funds, especially 303.2m euros in Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA), are frozen because the BiH Ministry Council, which approves projects, has still not formed.
"All of the lost investments are reflected in the number of unemployed in the country. 
[We already have] high unemployment and it is estimated that more than 530,000 are looking for work, which makes the situation worse," Kasim Selimovic, from the commerce section of the Economic Chamber, told SETimes.
Minister of Industry, Energy and Mining of the Tuzla Canton, Zeljko Knezicek, who started his mandate shortly after the election, agrees.
"Taking over the government means taking over responsibility for all the problems, and losing time on unnecessary things is in no one's interest. 
Cantons with formed governments are trying to fight problems that pertain to the citizens, but it's clear that we cannot do much as long as the state doesn't establish its structures," Knezicek told SETimes.
