22/11/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/11/11
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) published a report last month on the situation in Kosovo prisons and detention centres, acknowledging that "the legal framework governing the deprivation of liberty by the Kosovo Police (KP) has undergone certain changes."
"In particular, the maximum duration of police custody has been reduced from 72 to 48 hours;
as regards juveniles, the maximum duration of 24 hours remains unchanged," it said in the October report.
But the CPT highlighted a number of shortfalls, including allegations of ill-treatment of detainees and refusal to allow some to contact a lawyer until hours of interrogation ended.
"The CPT reiterates its recommendation that steps be taken to ensure that the right of access to a lawyer is enjoyed by all persons obliged to remain with the police, from the very outset," the report noted.
According to the Kosovo government, the situation in prisons has undergone substantial improvement.
"In general, these centres meet the conditions foreseen by international standards," Vigan Qorrolli, a legal adviser to Kosovo Justice Minister Hajredin Kuci, told SETimes.
The CPT said in its report that Dubrava, the largest prison in Kosovo, with an official capacity of 1,114, was accommodating 807 male prisoners at the time of the visit, with 33 others held in the prison's hospital unit.
The Lipjan Correctional Centre continues to serve as the sole detention facility for women and juveniles, with 160 prisoners.
Tome Gashi, a well-known Kosovo lawyer, says the prison situation can be viewed through two perspectives:
those there "by mistake" and others who know they are guilty.
"For them [in the second category] Kosovo prisons meet European standards because food is better there than it is for half of the Kosovo population outside.
They have very good treatment ...
they have more freedom than they should have in prison," Gashi told SETimes.
However, he points out that nepotism among prison workers -- coupled with low wages for staff -- leads to prisoner escapes.
Due to logistical issues, guards routinely work in prisons where relatives are inmates.
"Having tens of family-related prison guards in Dubrava for instance, is not a good thing, but there is no other choice for now," he said.
In its report, the CPT says its delegation "witnessed for itself instances of over-familiarity between staff and prisoners at Dubrava, which were indicative of a climate of favouritism".
It added, "The CPT calls upon the relevant authorities to take decisive action to combat the phenomena of corruption and favoritism in all penitentiary establishments in Kosovo."
Gashi also cites the high profile inmates who "create groups of their own within prison, especially those [serving] long-term sentences".
At that point, "The guards become more prisoner than the prisoners." He also points out other problems such as use of cell phones and other forbidden items within prisons.
One prisoner, A. Krasniqi, spent two months behind bars at both Lipjan and Dubrava.
He told SETimes, "Being sentenced for traffic violations, we had more freedom to walk, to make phone calls anytime we wanted, except for visiting time.
The conditions and the treatment were fine, but from my experience, I would say, there was more order in Lipjan than in Dubrava."
The Kosovo Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Victims, which also monitors prisons, acknowledges there has been progress, but says more must be done.
Feride Rushiti, director of the centre, says issues include infrastructure, prisoner accommodations and overcrowding.
In Dubrava specifically, she too cites "other issues such as corruption and nepotism".
