19/09/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 19/09/11
While environmentalists condemn plans to build a road in southwest Romania that would cut through a national park in the Retezat Mountains, local authorities insist it will benefit communities in the region.
The new road, DN 66A, is meant to link the town of Petrosani, the centre of coal mining in Romania, and the Baile Herculane mountains resort, and cut across Domogled-Valea Cernei National Park, the only intact forest in Europe below the Arctic Circle.
Opponents say it will likely destroy a protected area inhabited by the largest wolf, bear and lynx population in Europe. 
The animals, they say, will be constrained by 4m-high walls that will flank the road and prevent them from migrating in search of food and water.
They also claim the road is useless since there are already two alternative links between the two towns, and dispute the arguments of local authorities that DN 66A will economically invigorate the area.
"We called on the presidency and the ministries of transportation and tourism, but all our calls for dialogue were ignored," says Gabriel Paun, president of Agent Green. 
"Each time we asked the authorities for arguments in favour of the construction. 
We were merely told the road will serve local tourism, but there is no master plan that can quantify the benefits of such a road for the citizens in the region."
Paun's organisation has staged protests both in Bucharest and at the protected area. 
In late July, about 20 Agent Green members blocked road 66A in the Retezat Mountains demanding a halt to construction of the 19km section that cuts across the reservation. 
Protesters donned bear suits and held signs that read "Stop! 
This is my house".
An environmental impact study that provided the basis for going ahead with construction was inconsistent and fraudulent, Paun claims. 
"To cap it all, the World Bank and European Investment Bank refused to finance the project," he added, warning that his group plans to file a complaint with the European Commission.
The local authorities, however, claim the new road will positively change the area while protecting the environment. 
"We would not have taken up this project in the first place unless we had badly needed this road," Danut Buhaescu, mayor of Uricani, told SETimes.
"Mining, the activity we have lived off for so many years, is declining so we need to catch up and primarily get out of geographic isolation by building this access road. 
We don't want to live in a blind alley anymore," he added, mentioning that all alternative routes are too long and time costly.
"We have collected around 16.000 signatures and sent them to the government and the presidency to prove this road is a real necessity for the local community. 
All these attacks on us spoiling the nature are preconceptions stemming from a lack of serious public debate on the topic," Buhaescu said.
