21/11/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times -- 21/11/11
War veterans from Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) gathered in Novi Sad last month for the first meeting of the newly established Peaceful Coalition of War Veterans from the Western Balkans, sending a strong message of tolerance and reconciliation in the region.
The Coalition was set up in June this year with the main purpose of promoting peace and stability in all Western Balkan countries affected by the 1991-95 war, based on the principles of non-violence, mutual understanding and respect.
In a joint declaration, members of the Coalition stated their firm support for an open and clear dialogue between war veterans to put an end to prejudice, intolerance and hatred that live on in some.
They also expressed their intention to organise activities that will teach young people and society in general about the disastrous consequences of the war.
"When for some of us it was time for learning, we went to war.
And after that, we were never able make up for that period," the Coalition said in its declaration, expressing hope that those who went back to finish school would now share their knowledge.
"We, on our side, are going to share experiences that they probably don't have.
By learning from each other, we will get to know and help each other," the veterans added.
"The main message we would like to address to the young people is that violence can lead to nothing", Jeljko Vukelic, chairman of the Coalition, told SETimes.
"All veterans from the Coalition have experienced personal tragedies but have overcome them and would like, through their action, to give an example to other people that this is possible," he added.
Vukelic admits that the task they are undertaking is not an easy one, and the reconciliation process in the Balkans "will take time because there are still people who live with prejudice".
Many war veterans and ordinary people find it hard to forget the recent past and this is a serious problem, according to Predrag Jurekovic from the Vienna-based Institute for Peace Support and Conflict Management.
"Part of them are used by nationalistic politicians for their political goals or are, in some cases, themselves the driving factor for nationalistic mobilisation," he told SETimes.
Still, he believes "war veterans could play an important role in drawing attention to the social and psychological problems part of the former soldiers are still confronted with." "Disassociating from war criminals and showing empathy for the victims of the former enemy side would be a precondition for normalising relations also in this sector of society," Jurekovic added.
One of the newly established coalition's values has to do exactly with the condemnation of all war crimes and their perpetrators.
"We support the disclosure of what happened and where during the [1991-95] war," its members said in their declaration.
Goran Dokic, a social anthropologist specialising in war veterans' issues at Manchester University, notes that war veterans in the different countries face different challenges and have different status in society.
"For instance, while Croatian war veterans are in some important ways overcompensated by the Croatian state and have a recognisable body of representatives, in Serbia they are in many ways invisible and their population is fragmented into hundreds of veterans' associations which are struggling for very limited resources from the Serbian state," he told SETimes.
At the same time, he stressed that initiatives of joint efforts such as the Peaceful Coalition are an important step towards encouraging different people to talk about their experiences and promote peace and reconciliation in the region.
