23/02/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 23/02/12
Travellers in Southeast Europe have fewer choices -- and are paying more for flights -- now that Hungarian-owned Malev Airlines has shut down, travel agents say.
"Malev was a competitor to the Lufthansa Group in the region, which has more expensive prices, and it offered good connections to northern Europe, and the US," Shqipe Habibi of Ylli Travel Agency in Pristina told SETimes.
Habibi says that they have noticed fare hikes by other companies this month.
"There is an increase of prices to routes in northern Europe, Middle East and northern America, mainly on those where Malev had also flights, but we cannot do anything to prevent that; it is up to the flight carriers," Habib said.
Malev, which has been losing money for years, was renationalised two years ago when an effort to operate privately failed. 
It was grounded shortly after the European Commission ordered it last month to repay about 100 billion forints (344m euros) of illegally obtained state aid that it received since 2007.
The Budapest metropolitan court declared the company insolvent on February 14th and ordered it liquidated.
"We've tried to push it along and keep it flying as long as we could, but this is the end," Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban told reporters when the airline was grounded. 
"We can't keep this going on without the risk of losing the aircraft that are abroad."
Dritan Ballaj, owner of the Adriatic Travel Tirana travel agency and an expert on aviation, told SETimes that governments need to better protect passengers when it comes to airline flights.
"Europe is in a debt crisis now, and reports are that many companies will go bankrupt; the governments [of Albania and Kosovo] need to take measures which would protect the passengers, but also travel agencies which have contracts with carriers should insist on not increasing the prices," Ballaj said.
Ballaj said that the small number of regional air carriers makes the market for European carriers attractive.
"Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro and other countries have small carriers which do not respond to the needs of the passengers enough, while Kosovo does not have its own carrier. 
This makes European carriers look to the region and play with the prices, as they do not see competition," Ballaj said.
He adds that Serbian JAT and Turkish Airlines may provide options.
"JAT could be an alternative, and Turkish Airlines too, but the first one, for political reasons, has no flights to Pristina, while Turkish Airlines has enough capacity to respond to the space left by Malev," Ballaj said.
In a statement, Budapest Airport said that more than 20 destinations served by Malev will not be replaced by other companies, including most airports in the western Balkans.
Malev's abrupt grounding left many passengers scrambling. 
Shefqet Hyseni had to change his plans after his Malev flight from Pristina to Sweden was cancelled.
"We were not told ahead of time; it came as a surprise for me because I was a frequent flyer of Malev. 
When I heard the news, I went to the travel agencies but they could not do anything. 
... 
I bought new, more expensive seats and my family [travelled separately] because seats were already booked," Hyseni told SETimes. 
He is still awaiting compensation from Malev.
Arta Krasniqi, a Kosovo student studying in Budapest, told SETimes that the bankruptcy of Malev will affect her when travelling home.
"Previously, [when] I travelled with Malev to Pristina, it was a direct flight and not so expensive, but now there will not be any link from Budapest to Pristina, and I need to take other routes with stops, which will cost more," Krasniqi said.
Malev is the second European airline to stop service this year. 
Spanish airline Spanair S.A. 
stopped operations in January after a deal with Qatar Airways fell through.
