22/02/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/02/12
Three and a half years after its launch, rock music school in Mitrovica has been growing in popularity. 
More than 250 students have passed through the programme, which is guided by 12 teachers representing both parts of town.
With an aim of enabling Serbian and Albanian youths to interact freely and create music collaboratively, The Netherlands-based NGO Musicians without Borders established the school in 2008.
Mitrovica, ethnically partitioned into an Albanian south and Serbian north along the Ibar River and connected by a lone bridge, has lost much of its rock culture scene to competing turbo-folk music.
Musicians without Borders said it wanted to address the ethnic divide by reviving Mitrovica's rock spirit from the time before the 1999 Kosovo conflict, when it was known as a regional rock centre.
"The original idea was to have a rock music school for youth on both sides, in the basement of the cultural centre at the foot of the bridge, but the security situation never allowed this to happen," Musicians without Borders regional representative and school founder Wendy Hassler-Forest told SETimes.
Hassler-Forest explained the initiative was restructured to have one school with two branches, one on each side of town.
The school organises three to five joint events per year in which youth and teachers come together outside Kosovo, she said.
Two local youths act as co-ordinators of the school branches.
Mitrovica native and south branch co-ordinator Dafina Kosova said the school is the only project that broke through the political issues and succeeded in bringing Mitrovica youths together.
"Even though I have met most of my colleagues from the north only once, we constantly communicate via internet and phone. 
I regularly meet Nikola, the north branch co-ordinator, and we really get along," Kosova told SETimes.
Nikola R, who asked not to be identified by his last name because of security concerns, called the state of affairs with the school "perfect".
"All of my colleagues are doing their part regardless of which side of the river they come from, and that is the only thing that is important," Nikola said.
School enthusiasts said the most popular rock school project is the formation of the multi-ethnic band, The Artchitects.
"They are three of our best students from the north and three from the south of Mitrovica. 
Five of the six band members met at the 2010 Skopje Summer School, where they 'meshed' well as musicians. 
The sixth member, the singer, was selected because of her unique voice and incredible talent," Hassler-Forest said.
All six members attend either high school or university but four of them work as trainees at the rock school and spend as much as 20 hours per week on music, she said.
The Artchitects say they have different musical tastes, but developed a distinct sound for the band. 
Ethnic and musical differences are not obstacles to producing high-quality music, Hassler-Forest added.
Two of their more popular songs are "Belief" and "Bottletops".
To some, the band's future may be in question because of its ethnic mix, according to the Exit festival founder Dusan Kovacevic, but prospects so far are good.
"In music, everything comes only from quality. 
Music and politics are two completely different dimensions. 
A good example is DJ Fresh, a Britisher with Albanian roots, born in Pristina; her songs are great hits in Belgrade," Kovacevic told SETimes.
