29/11/2006
A permanent exhibition and an education centre opened on Monday (November 27th) at the Jasenovac Memorial Park, site of a former concentration camp established by the pro-Nazi authorities who held power in Croatia during World War II.
Serbs were executed there en masse, along with Jews, Roma and political opponents of the Ustashe regime.
The ceremony was attended by Croatian leaders, foreign diplomats and representatives of the Jewish community.
"Jasenovac leaves no room for doubt about how present-day Croatia sees events from WWII.
Here there is no room for downplaying or diminishing the atrocities, genocide and Holocaust that were committed in name of Croatia," said President Stipe Mesic.
South Korean director Kim Tae-Yong's movie "Family Ties" won the Golden Alexander award for best film at the 47th edition of the Thessaloniki International Film Festival in Greece.
"Family Ties" also got the award for best screenplay, which it shared with Brazilian Karim Ainouz's film "Suely in the Sky".
The Sarajevo National Theatre's Opera celebrated its 60th anniversary on November 24th with a performance of Gaetano Donizetti's "L'elisir d'amore" ("The Elixir of Love").
It was co-produced by the Romanian National Opera in Timisoara, directed by Ognian Draganoff (Bulgaria) and conducted by Robert Homen (Croatia).
The Bulgarian and Serbian men's volleyball teams are headed to the semi-finals of the Men's World Volleyball Championship in Japan this weekend.
The Serbian team, which still plays under the name Serbia-Montenegro, remains unbeaten in the tournament, while Bulgaria lost its most recent match against Brazil.
Romanian director Radu Jude's movie "The Lamp with the Hat" won the award for best film at the 16th Bucharest International Film Festival DaKINO last week.
The event featured short films -- both fiction and documentary.
This year, the award for best director went to Israel's Pini Tagver, for his film "Weitzman St. No.
10".
An exhibition of works featuring Istanbul by Turkish-born photographer Alp Sime opened in Athens on November 24th.
It will be on display there for three weeks.
(Various sources -- 22/11/06 - 29/11/06)
