17/08/2011
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 17/08/11
Given the recent enforcement of trade reciprocity measures against Serbia and BiH, a regional race has begun to replace these countries' products and satisfy market demand in Kosovo.
Macedonia, Croatia and Montenegro are the lead contenders, but other Balkan countries including Turkey should not be discounted. 
"In the coming period, we expect a visible increase in the percentage of exports of Macedonian products to the Kosovo market," Macedonian Chamber of Commerce official Jadranka Arizankovska told SETimes.
Macedonian companies are readying for the opportunity, and Chamber officials say they are competitive, but suggest the Macedonian government would be well advised to help improve the flow of goods and infrastructure.
"We have had intensive co-operation with the Kosovo Chamber of Commerce thus far, which was fruitful, but because of the latest Pristina-Belgrade developments this co-operation is deepening," Arizankovska said.
Officials say that there is little chance Serbian products may be re-exported to Kosovo via Macedonia, as Kosovo authorities are rigorously enforcing the new trade reciprocity policy.
In 2010, Macedonia exported over 320m euros in goods to Kosovo, or about 14% of Kosovo's total imports.
Serbia exported goods worth 319m euros and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) 83m euros, making up about 14% and 3.8% of Kosovo's imports, respectively.
The list of products Kosovo imports is varied and includes fire-resistant materials, sugar and molasses, wheat, starch, flour, fruits, vegetable oils, cereals, non-alcoholic beverages, animal feed, cement and construction materials.
Macedonian transport companies also expect a boost in trade with Kosovo, but say no great changes will occur overnight.
"The Kosovo market is not only close, but there is a need for many kinds of industrial and food materials, and those we have in abundance," Skopje transporter Risto Markovski, 52, told SETimes.
Veteran journalist Todor Stojcevski argues that Macedonia will likely benefit the most from the Kosovo-Serbia quarrel, but cautioned it must maintain good political and economic contacts with both countries.
"Economics knows no boundaries, but, unfortunately, perceiving all problems through an ethnic lens in the Balkans dominates and creates problems. 
Such perceptions arise because of unrealistic expectations and they cloud the reality," Stojcevski said.
"Under no circumstance should Macedonia take one side or another, but should neutrally and objectively follow its own interests through open co-operation with Kosovo and Serbia," he concluded.
Croatia also sees an opportunity to increase exports to Kosovo and officials promise a strong push to promote Croatian products -- primarily construction materials, textiles and foods.
Kosovo's Ambassador to Croatia, Valter Sadiku, invited all Croatian companies to enter the Kosovo market.
There are 120 Croatian companies in Kosovo, which account for a good portion of the 58m euros worth of Croatian exports.
Montenegro sees a chance too. 
Assistant Economy Minister Goran Scepanovic said Montenegrin products will not completely replace Serbia's but can do so in some areas, such as meats and drinks, provided they satisfy the standards specified by the Kosovo government.
