17/08/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 17/08/11
After weeks without resolution, strikes are still continuing at the chromium mine at Bulqiza in Albania, as well as at two other facilities.
The company that operates the mine, Albanian Chrome (ACR), has said it is willing to negotiate with the miners, but not with the unions that represent them.
In all, the unions say around 700 miners are striking, with ten of them on a hunger strike being conducted in shifts.
On Monday, ten Bulqiza miners who had been fasting for 23 days were replaced by ten others.
The following day, work stoppages began at the mines at Puka and Rrezhen.
Kol Nikollaj, who heads the miners' union, told SETimes that the strikers are demanding a 20% increase in salaries -- including pay for the workdays lost during the strike – and improved working conditions, such as places to eat and shower.
"We also want the administrator to leave because he is responsible for this situation.
Our demands have been accepted in principle, but they were not signed by ACR," Nikollaj told SETimes.
Nikollaj also said the miners' representatives met with ACR three times in January, with the Labour Ministry acting as mediator, but the talks bore no fruit.
"When negotiations fail, strikes follow.
Since the strike started, there has been no institutional communication with ACR.
However, we have 90 people who work in shifts to keep the mine in order and prevent it from being destroyed," Nikollaj said.
The miners' average net salary is 360 euros per month and they receive 120 euros compensation for food.
By contrast, the minimum salary in Albania is 142 euros.
Agimarta Lula, a representative of DECOMetal, DCM, the Austrian company of which ACR is a subsidiary, said the unions are complicating the situation.
"They have changed the profession of the miners, turning them into strikers," Lula said.
When ACR first acquired the mine on concession, she explained, Nikollaj and fellow union leader Tafe Koleci organised a protest demanding increases in miners' salaries – initially by 30%, and then by an additional 50% -- as well as investments to improve working conditions.
ACR, she said, accepted the demands and signed a three-year contract in January, which stipulated no further salary increases until 2013.
The company will not conclude an agreement with the two people who have unilaterally violated an existing one, Lula insisted.
"We can not treat the promotors of this strike seriously," she said.
The Ministry of Energy (METE), meanwhile, concurs with the miners' demands but not with the strike.
METE prefers "constructive dialogue" and strict implementation of the laws, the ministry said.
It has already suspended ACR's license in one mining zone, saying conditions must be improved.
"The government is not out of the game in solving this problem, but political will is needed,"Albanian Centre for Economical Studies Director Zef Preci told SETimes.
Failure to resolve the situation, he added, could eventually result in closure of the mines, bringing dire consequences to the workers and their families, the company, and the state budget.
Prime Minister Sali Berisha's administration "should call urgently the three sides ...
in order to stop the strike and get the problems on the table to talk about them with the interested parties," he said.
