18/11/2011
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 18/11/11
A group of Southeast European countries hopes to raise over 500m euros to resolve the problems of those displaced in the conflicts of the 1990s.
The first move towards regional co-operation started in 2005, with the Sarajevo Declaration.
Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia agreed to draft a joint plan to solve refugee problems.
However, little was done until 2010 when the first ministers' conference was held in Belgrade.
The principles established in the Sarajevo Declaration were elaborated upon during the conference.
"We warned the international community that for certain categories of the population, who still haven't solved their housing problems, life becomes harder and harder and we need some help if we want to put an end to this problem," Vladimir Cucic, commissioner for Refugees of the Republic of Serbia, told SETimes.
At the last ministers' conference held in Belgrade, in the beginning of November, the four countries' ministers of foreign affairs, together with the UNHCR, OSCE and EU representatives, agreed to organise a donor conference in the beginning of 2012.
The gathering will hopefully raise the 500m euros needed to implement a five-year plan designed to close down all refugee centres and provide housing for these people.
"A solution of the refugee situation is dependent on domestic and regional political stability and on economic, legislative and social reforms, as well as on the political willingness of all sides," UNHCR communications officer Andrej Mihacic told SETimes.
Among the neediest are approximately 4,100 people who still live in 42 collective centres.
Most of the refugees reside in Serbia.
OSCE Human Rights officer in BiH, Amela Tandara, finds that this is an opportunity to finally solve the problems of those living in refugee camps, especially vulnerable categories such as the elderly and ill.
"The OSCE and other international organisations in the region are keen to continue to actively support this process, in particular by pledging the necessary co-funding from donors," Tandara told SETimes.
However, many refugees think that the donor conference will not solve the main problem that many refugees face -- lost tenancy rights in Croatia.
"We don't want to be moved to social housing units which are just better-looking refugee centres.
We want our property, and our rights that were taken from us by the state of Croatia," Association of Refugees in Serbia head Milojko Budimir told SETimes.
Tenancy rights are still one of the key problems that have made finding a housing solution for refugees even harder.
In the former Yugoslavia, there were many socially owned apartments built by state companies and given to the workers.
People could keep them for life and transmit rights to their heirs, but could not sell.
When the war broke out and people migrated to other countries, the property law in Croatia changed and an estimated 30,000 families were left without homes.
This group of people is today the largest category of refugees and internally displaced persons in need of permanent housing.
Officials agreed that these funds will be spent to construct new homes or repurchase old apartments.
However, once the money is raised, the hardest part begins.
The four countries will have to determine where they are going to invest the money:
in the countries where the refugees come from, or in the countries where they have lived for the past 16 years.
