18/11/2011
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 18/11/11
Three up and coming Macedonian architects -- Dejan Sekulovski, Ilija Bozinovski and Dejan Spasenovski -- won the People's Choice Award in Barcelona for their project Tose Proeski Memorial House.
SETimes correspondent Marina Stojanovvska spoke with the architects about the award and the design they chose to use.
SETimes:
What does the award mean to уоu?
Dejan Sekulovski:
Considering the importance of this festival and the number of highly acclaimed professionals who participated, the very acceptance of our work amid such strong competition was of great satisfaction.
Everything else that followed seemed like a reward to us.
We presented ourselves and Macedonian architecture, as well as Tose and all that he has represented for Macedonia.
The prize opens the door to numerous specialized professional publications, media and web sites to further feature Macedonian architecture globally.
SETimes:
What inspired you to choose this particular architectural form?
Ilija Bozinovski:
Strength, simplicity, longevity, reliability and monumentality are characteristics of concrete.
Undoubtedly, there are parallels between these characteristics and the heritage Tose Proeski left.
Hence, it not by chance we chose concrete as the basic material in the creation of the memorial house.
As a counterpoint to concrete's sense of strength, the [rest of the] memorial house is constructed with glass -- a lightweight material symbolising human transience and vulnerability.
The glass structure is in the form of a cross, reflecting Tose's faith in God, but also his hometown Krushevo's traditional architecture and its cultural and historic monuments.
Colours, too, are an integral part in the overall structure based on the idea we had of Tose.
To put it simply, we decided that no one element should dominate or stand out with regard to the feelings you have when visiting the house, or to the desire to enjoy Tose's images and sounds which follow one everywhere in its interior.
SETimes:
Do you view the award as recognition of Tose as a person who, in many ways, unified the Balkans?
Bozinosvki:
Judging by the votes from the audience -- we were unaware of voters' profiles and country affiliation -- it is certain that many from Macedonia and the region who admire Tose and his music voted for us … How much Tose united the region with his music and deeds is shown by visitors' [high] daily attendance to the memorial house and Tose's great presence in the media.
SETimes:
How did you view the other two runners up?
Sekulovski:
To our great surprise and joy, the second awarded work -- the Museum of Memory and Tolerance in Mexico -- shares a similar story.
It is a well-designed facility of ultramodern architecture which also sends a strong message.
With regard to the project from India -- collective housing -- it is difficult to compare it with the other two, because it is just a concept, or a design, where you have total freedom to design without caring how practical or worthwhile it is.
We had no such freedom and that influenced us greatly in making the final decision in favor of this design.
SETimes:
Many people at the awards presentation expressed an interest in Macedonia's old architecture in Krushevo.
What are the results of that interest?
Bozinosvki:
While presenting the project in Barcelona, after the initial historical and architectural introduction to Macedonia and Krushevo, an emphasis was placed on understanding our object within that context.
For the overall shape of this structure, we used the traditional Krushevo house.
The three-member jury, consisting of eminent architects, fully recognized the main features and elements on which we based the whole concept, which is not intrusive and fits into the topography and surrounding of the terrain.
The jury discerned the structure amid the amphitheatric placement of the Krushevo houses, and remained in awe.
This was the reason they showed tremendous interest in the Macedonian heritage of construction.
