17/02/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 17/02/12
Bulgaria is one of 12 EU nations identified in a new report as having a risky economic climate in danger of falling deeper into crisis.
The European Commission (EC) published on Tuesday (February 14th) its first Alert Mechanism report, which analyses nations on several factors, including housing prices, exports and public debt, to determine if unhealthy macro-economic imbalances exist.
The report identified Bulgaria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, Hungary, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and UK.
Bulgaria was found to have exceeded EU thresholds for three indicators -- current account balance as a share of GDP, net international investment position (NIIP) as a share of GDP and unit labour costs (ULC).
The country's private sector debt, an indicator for internal imbalances, stood at 169% of GDP in 2010 -- 9% above the EU ceiling.
"At this point, Bulgaria has not been identified as a country with an excessive macro-economic imbalance," the finance ministry said in a statement to SETimes on Thursday. 
"Therefore, no corrective actions are required or will be taken for the time being."
The EC will study each of the nations in the coming weeks and plans to issue a new paper in May with specific recommendations for each of the 12 countries. 
If they fail to take the required corrective actions, Brussels could launch an "excessive imbalance procedure" against them, which could lead to sanctions.
Presenting the findings of the First Alert Mechanism Report under the EU's new rules on economic governance, the 27-nation bloc's Economic Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn said that its purpose was to tackle potentially harmful developments, rather than "name and shame" countries.
"The objective is to identify and help correcting risky imbalances that have built up in some member states over the years and help Europe's economies get back to a stronger footing so that they can withstand any future economic shocks," he said on Tuesday.
In numerical terms, Bulgaria's most significant divergence is on the NIIP indicator. 
While it should not surpass the -35% of GDP mark, according to the EU, in the Balkan nation's case it measured -97.7% of GDP in 2010.
That, the finance ministry said on Tuesday, was "driven by considerable capital inflows in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI) and by financing the national banking system by foreign parent banks in the years before the crisis" of late 2008.
Another factor was "the relatively low level of GDP compared to capital inflows". 
The ministry's expectations are that the country's NIIP will improve in the coming months and that the deficit under this indicator will be cut by 26% by 2013.
Bulgarian Industrial Association (BIA) President Bojidar Danev also linked the macro-economic weaknesses outlined in the EC report to the inflow of huge financial resources at the time of the country's EU accession.
"The fact that Bulgaria was joining the EU led to the creation of an extremely speculative environment in the country. 
Huge amounts of foreign banking capital entered the economy, financing mainly real property trade and the construction sector," he told SETimes on Wednesday.
"Those largely speculative financial flows were attracted by the high rate of return, which stood at between 20% and up to 50%, and was even higher in the field of real property trade," Danev further noted. 
"As a result Bulgaria experienced an incredible economic boom between 2006 and 2008, which eventually overheated the economy."
The inflow of huge financial resources is a test for small economies like Bulgaria, according to the economist. 
It makes them vulnerable to shocks and distorts their macro-economic indicators.
According to the finance ministry, Bulgaria's 2011 current account balance is expected to be in surplus of around 1.8% of GDP.
"The economic volatility observed over the past couple of years is not beneficial, of course, but it also shows that our economy can sustain similar shocks," Danev said.
