18/10/2011
By Erl Murati for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 18/10/11
After two years of protests and hunger strikes, Albania's Socialist Party ended its parliamentary boycott last month, but many see the action as much too little, too late.
In the European Commission's (EC) Progress Report released last week, the EC did not recommend EU candidate status for Albania, finding the country lacking in many areas of reform. 
The EC noted the SP's boycott contributed to the slow pace of reforms, something the opposition blamed on the government.
"Instead of carrying out reforms to improve democratic standards, Albania is experiencing a period of de-democratisation," SP lawmaker Ditmir Bushati told SETimes.
Returning to parliament, however, does not mean unconditional support for the draft laws the government is sending to parliament, the SP said.
"Our mission is not to vote for the incomplete initiatives of the government with an inflation of parliamentary statistics for adopting laws. 
We want to move forward and this time we have a real parliamentary initiative, which will transform EU recommendations into a concrete working plan," SP Vice-President Saimir Tahiri told SETimes.
The opposition presented a proposal outlining ten areas for government reform -- including a proposal that both parties reach a consensus on nominating the heads of independent institutions such as ombudsman and central bank governor.
"Our mission is not to pretend we are working, but to work hard in order for Albanians to have real solutions," Tahiri said.
But despite talk of party unity and leading government reform, the SP is not powerful enough to carry out reforms alone, with some questioning the party's unity.
According to former SP chief Fatos Nano, the party is not serious in its efforts to lead reform. 
"It's only [presenting] an image," Nano said.
Meanwhile, analyst Aleksader Cipa says that divisions within the party will affect its ability to lead.
"[The] opposition headed by Rama is in a situation where lack of initiative and solidarity with its leader is evident," Cipa told SETimes.
"The question is how sincere this decision to return to the parliament is. 
These signals are confusing and contradictory, just like the SP leadership," DP MP Tritan Shehu told SETimes.
"The opposition, with its stubborn stance over the past two years, damaged the image of the country, the reforms and [the EU] integration process," he added.
Still, others view the end of the boycott as setting Albania up for more political deadlock.
"What will happen with the opposition returning to parliament is very simple: harsh democratic dialectic will be transferred from the street to the parliament," journalist Mustafa Nano told SETimes.
He said, however, the situation could present a positive note.
"A number of laws for which both parties' consensus is needed in parliament will be approved due to domestic or international pressure. 
But this is only a small relief, because the antagonism between the majority and opposition will remain the same."
