16/08/2011
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 16/08/11
"When my friends were going to school, I, as a little girl of 13 had been married with a man, a friend of my father, in his 30s. 
I was scared when he was at home. 
I could even not enter in his room. 
I'll never forgive my father," said an unnamed juvenile bride from Van province, now in her 40s.
It is difficult to determine the exact number of juvenile marriages in Turkey as many go unreported or are unofficial "imam" (religious) ceremonies. 
"This makes the situation more problematic as they are not registered officially, making it difficult to track them," attorney Vildan Yirmibesoglu told SETimes.
However, according to the Hacettepe University Institute of Population Studies' data, the early marriage rate in Turkey -- defined as marriage at 17 years of age and younger in the 15-49-year-old age group -- is 28% on average. 
The number includes unofficial religious marriages and shows regional variation, with highs of near 41% in eastern and southeastern Turkey.
"When thinking of including women over 49 years of age it wouldn't be incorrect to say the numbers would be much higher," Dr. 
Ilknur Yuksel-Kaptanoglu of the Institute of Populations Studies told SETimes, adding that "Even though the numbers have been falling over the years, they are still high and continue to be a problem."
According to a recent report by parliament's Committee on the Equality of Opportunity for Women and Men, many families in eastern Turkey do not consider underage marriage a problem.
The Flying Broom Women's Communication and Research Foundation is one of the most influential civil society organisations campaigning against juvenile marriage. 
They are active in 54 cities, meeting with child brides to give them a chance to tell their own stories.
Speaking to SETimes, foundation chairwoman Halime Guner describes juvenile marriage as first and foremost a breach of women's rights. 
"We would like to change the perceptions," she explained, asking "Have you ever wondered the age of the bride when you attended a wedding ceremony?"
In Turkey, the civil law states people can marry at the age of 17, while the penal code considers people younger than 15 as children. 
However, in 1989, Turkey signed the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, which outlaws marriage before the age of 18. 
As a result of these conflicting numbers, the definition of who is a child is confusing.
"The lawmakers should increase the legal age of marriage from 17 to 18 as soon as the parliament is convened," argues Guner, adding that bone age and psychological maturity should also be taken into consideration.
The consequences of early marriages can be significant. 
It often leads to children dropping out of school and perpetuates the poverty cycle, but according to Guner it also contributes to domestic violence, incestuous relationships, health problems, and even death.
Girls between the ages of 15 and 19 are four times more likely to die in childbirth than adult pregnancies. 
According to statistics based on Yirmibesoglu's recent case studies, a quarter of women suicides in Turkey are from the age range of 14-16.
Since unofficial religious marriages constitute a significant portion of juvenile marriages, religious institutions can play an important part in prevention, says Guner.
"The president of the Religious Affairs [Directorate] told me once that they reach almost 23 million men around Turkey during Friday mosque sermons. 
They should use this opportunity to deliver a message emphasising the disadvantages of early marriages," says Guner. 
"Girls should discover the outside world, be socialised and be part of an organisation for breaking this chain of conservatism surrounding them."
