16/08/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/08/11
They may disagree on most other questions, but the major political forces in Kosovo share a consensus on at least one matter:
the government's move last month to take control of two border crossings in the north.
Arbana Vidishiqi, head of the Kosovo bureau of Radio Free Europe, says the intervention in the north marked the first time that the country's political elite has stood united in their support for the current administration.
"I believe it was the disappointment with the situation in the north, the 12 years of status quo which the Kosovo political elite blames the international [community] for," Vidishiqi told SETimes.
"They now see a case for a substantial change of this situation,"
Underlining the broad-based support, parliament passed a resolution supporting the decision by a vote of 89-8 on July 28th.
The only substantial dissent came from Vetevendosje, which said Prime Minister Thaci was not going far enough.
It urged the president announce an extraordinary situation in the country and halt talks with Serbia.
"Unification, mobilisation of all citizens and subjects to support the institutions to defend Kosovo is the only way to preserve the territorial integrity," said Glauk Konjufca, and MP representing the party.
He also accused Prime Minister Hashim Thaci of "personal protagonism", saying he wanted to do everything by himself.
The government's action was supported by the Students' Parliament of the University of Pristina.
Its chairman, Mentor Hasani, told SETimes that they fully trusted the Kosovo police and support the intervention.
"The action has united the politics in the country and its citizens because the intervention was indespensable," he told SETimes.
The non-governmental organization Nectar of Goodness, meanwhile, launched a boycott of products from Serbia.
A member of the NGO Lavdrim Gashi told SETimes that they intend to make the public "aware that they can fill their kitchens without Serbian goods".
Some political commentators, however, have reacted with caution, suggesting the actual consequences could be mixed.
"Nothing came out of the meeting in the UN.
The Kosovo government's action was legitimate, but not well-prepared and it failed at the end.
It will have a cost for Kosovo because a second attempt will be very difficult," analyst Nexhmedin Spahiu told SETimes.
"The northern issue in the talks can take another direction and get out of the Ahtisaari framework," he said.
"It would not be good to have a second state like Bosnia, divided in cantons and entities."
The government's move triggered a reaction from local Kosovo Serbs, who set up road blocks and prevented the police from gaining access to one of the border crossing points.
One policeman died in an apparent sniper attack.
The crisis defused after KFOR took over the posts.
Under a temporary agreement, NATO peacekeepers will continue to guard them pending a long-term solution.
