17/10/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 17/10/11
In its annual progress report on Kosovo, released last week, the European Commission (EC) called for launching dialogue on visa facilitation by the end of the year -- the first step that the country will take on its road to becoming an EU member.
However, not all the news was so positive.
According to European Commissioner for Enlargement Stefan Fule, Kosovo has achieved only limited progress on its reform agenda. 
Organised crime and corruption remain major challenges, and there is an urgent need for judicial reform, he said.
"The Commission proposes to launch a structured dialogue with Kosovo on the rule of law to address these challenges" Fule said.
While integration of ethnic Serbs in southern Kosovo has improved, Fule noted, the situation is the north remains tenuous. 
"It is of utmost importance that Kosovo launches a comprehensive agenda for the north," he said.
There were varying reactions to the report among Kosovo's political leaders, with the government saying it was the most positive one to date, and the opposition decrying the lack of progress.
"The report marks a new milestone for the intensification of structural reforms on the path towards EU membership," European Integration Minister Vlora Citaku said, describing the start of dialogue on visa liberalisation as one of the greatest achievements since the declaration of independence.
But the Democratic League of Kosovo saw less to celebrate."The concerns over the rule of law, which have damaged the image of Kosovo in the world, definitely slow the way in Kosovo's EU integration," the party said in a statement.
According to Seb Bytyci, executive director of the Balkan Policy Institute, the report highlights many failures in Kosovo, including the election process.
"Unfortunately, there have been many failures. 
The main problem is the stolen elections and dangerous game with the budget," Bytyci told SETimes. 
"I think the remarks of the Commission shall serve as a rebuke to Kosovo's government."
"The Commission has softened the rebuke with the promise of [visa liberalisation talks]. 
This is done to avoid leaving behind Kosovo in comparison to the region," Bytyci said.
For that very reason, Shehide Gashi, an EU integrations expert, told SETimes that the EU Commission will launch a new strategy on Kosovo.
"From the report this year, we see that Kosovo will get a new approach regarding the EU integration path, mostly with focus on judicial report and on the integration of the Serbs in the north," Gashi said.
Political commentator Fatlum Sadiku said that the government will face pressure to undertake the necessary reforms to ensure a more positive report next year.
"We [will] see that some members of the government, opposition and civil society are united that responsibility must be given for failures in certain areas," Sadiku told SETimes.
