17/10/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 17/10/11
In an effort to overcome the financial crisis and spur the economy, Croatian officials organised "Invest in Croatia" in Zagreb.
The October10th-11th conference attracted hundreds of foreign businessmen and Croatian millionaires living and working abroad.
"The government removed a number of potential investment barriers in the past years, and we are actively trying to attract foreign investments, as this is our policy priority.
By fighting corruption, we sent a clear message to our potential business partners," said Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor at the opening ceremony.
With Europe in the throes of a financial crisis, attracting foreign investment has become more difficult.
Tourism, energy and the food industry are the main points of interest in Croatia, where 24 billion euros have been invested since 1993.
"It is a good idea to gather business people and show the resources and projects here," Andrew Scott, a professor at the London Business School, told SETimes.
He pointed out the importance of continuing with reforms that would clearly signal to foreign investors the safe investment environment in Croatia.
Chamber of Commerce President Nadan Vidosevic told SETimes Croatia's geographic location makes it attractive to foreign investors.
Most optimistic among the participants was Ajit Singh from ACG Worldwide.
His company, headquartered in India, had no regrets about investing in Croatia.
They purchased a factory producing gelatin capsules.
"Two and a half years ago our investment became profitable.
Croatian workers are educated and prepared to learn," he told SETimes after his presentation.
He mentioned plans to expand the business with a new factory in Ludbreg, in Croatia's north, turning the business into a regional and European hub.
Well-known Croatian business people who made their fortune abroad participated in the Zagreb conference.
Millionaire Darko Koncar is interested in buying and restructuring the Croatian shipyard industry and members of the wealthy Luksic family from Chile attended the Zagreb conference.
Croatian Vice-President Domagoj Ivan Milosevic, the organiser of the event, presented a central data base of all investment projects in Croatia where potential investors can find important business opportunity details.
