16/11/2011
By Jonathan Levack for SETimes in Istanbul – 16/11/11
With many expecting yet another non-event, UN talks in New York on solving the Cyprus conflict ended at the last weekend of October. 
The sides were seemingly far apart on many of the core issues, but to many observers' pleasant surprise, the talks were not a complete waste of time.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon went as far as to describe them as "positive, productive and vigorous".
According to the Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation's (TESEV) Cyprus Projects Officer Erdem Aydin, there was "significant progress on the issues of internal security, EU matters and the economy".
Several factors have contributed to the sense of urgency and, some say, opportunity. 
Cypriot President Demetris Christofias was elected on the promise of returning to the negotiating table for a comprehensive solution. 
Yet more than midway through his term, he has not made any significant progress.
For the Turkish Cypriots, the benefits of reunification and an end to isolation are more obvious -- their stance in support of a solution has been clear for all to see over the last decade or so.
But recent escalation over oil and gas exploration in the Mediterranean has added yet another piece to this complicated puzzle, as well as another incentive to find a solution. 
Turkish Cypriot President Dervis Eroglu said such developments make a solution even more mandatory.
There is also the concern that when Cyprus assumes the EU's rotating presidency in the second half of 2012, the impact on Turkey's stagnant accession negotiations could be considerable.
Consistent with this prolonged conflict, no comprehensive deal was reached in New York and initial enthusiasm has fallen victim to the same old pessimism.
Aydin told SETimes that "while the general mood was positive, some media portals close to the [Turkish] government over-exaggerated the results."
Issues of governance, territory, citizenship and the extremely challenging property issue have yet to be solved.
According to Cyprus expert and Global Political Trends Centre (GPOT) Deputy Director Sylvia Tiryaki, "They have been talking since 1968 and they have been talking about exactly the same things: political equality, territory and property."
"The optimists are newcomers to Cyprus. 
They are comparing [recent talks] to those in the first half of 2011," she told SETimes
The general feeling is that the Greek Cypriot side has little incentive to negotiate a lasting deal. 
For Erdem Aydin, "While these developments pumped fresh blood into the stalling talks, I think more prodding is necessary, especially on the Greek Cypriots."
But with Christofias's domestic position anything but solid -- his government almost fell this summer after an explosion at a naval base resulted in the loss of 12 lives -- it's questionable whether he is in the position to do a deal.
"Christofias couldn't conclude a deal even if he wanted to," Tiryaki said.
This not only leaves the Turkish Cypriots economically isolated and stateless, but it also negatively impacts Turkey's EU accession process. 
Turkey has threatened to freeze negotiations when the Greek Cypriots assume the rotating EU presidency.
According to Turkey's Minister for EU Affairs Egemen Bagis, even if Turkey was to suspend negotiations in the second half of 2012, it would have little impact on the accession process.
"A candidate country interacts with the Presidency to open and close chapters [of the negotiations] or to meet at Association Council Meetings. 
First, no chapter was opened in previous presidencies and, second, the Association Council Meeting has been cancelled before," he told SETimes
