27/02/2007
Polish Foreign Minister Anna Fotyge arrived in Zagreb Thursday (February 22nd) and met with Croatian counterpart Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic.
The two discussed Croatia's aspirations for EU and NATO membership and boosting economic co-operation.
Fotyge also met with Parliament Speaker Vladimir Seks and President Stipe Mesic.
Serbia's President Boris Tadic, Austria's Chancellor Alfred Gusenbauer and Hungary's Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany gathered in Budapest on Sunday (February 25th) for a trilateral summit.
Issues related to Kosovo's final status, Serbia's EU integration bid, the situation in the Balkans and trilateral co-operation dominated the agenda.
Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik and the head of the Islamic Religious Community in BiH, Mustafa Ceric, met on Friday (February 23rd) in Banja Luka to discuss issues of bilateral interest.
They agreed on the need for more inter-religious, interethnic and intercultural dialogue, tolerance and reconciliation efforts in BiH and in general.
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, on three-day trip to Japan, met on Thursday (February 22nd) with his counterpart Shinzo Abe.
Talks focused on bilateral relations and economic co-operation.
The two reviewed a pilot-project on the construction of a new underground line in Bucharest that might be financed by the Japan Bank for International Co-operation.
Romanian President Traian Basescu was in Cairo on Thursday (February 22nd) to attend the Romanian-Egyptian Businessmen's Forum.
He extended an invitation to Egyptian investors to come to Romania, highlighting the potential of the country's 22 million-strong consumer market, especially in light of Romania's new EU membership.
Danish Foreign Minister Per Stig Moeller arrived in Belgrade on Thursday (February 22nd) where he was received by Serbian counterpart Vuk Draskovic.
Their focus was Kosovo, with Stig Moeller hailing Serbia's decision to participate in Vienna talks aimed at discussing differences in UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's future status proposal.
Stig Moeller also met with Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica.
Lithuania is ready to provide assistance to Croatia in meeting EU and NATO membership criteria, Lithuanian President Valdas Adamkus told his visiting Croatian counterpart Stipe Mesic in Vilnius on Tuesday (February 20th).
They also discussed ways to boost bilateral economic relations and encourage mutual investments.
(Various sources -- 20/02/07-27/02/07)
