15/12/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/12/11
Belgrade residents had a chance to become acquainted with the joys of science thanks to 300 young researchers from 31 scientific institutions, earlier this month.
The researchers explained and demonstrated various experiments to the visitors -- from an improvised crime scene, to the first models of seismographs dating back to the time of China's ancient civilisation.
A large number of visitors gathered in front of Zhang Heng's seismometer, which the geophysicist invented back in 132CE. 
Zhang used it to locate and register earthquakes, which was one of his official duties as court historian. 
The bronze device, nearly 2m in length, is comprised of a mechanism of levers and a pendulum, with eight dragon figurines placed along the edges.
Strong seismic tremors would release a metal ball from one of the dragons' mouths and the direction it moved in suited the direction of the seismic wave.
Another popular spot was the crime scene, where forensic "experts" discovered how a safe was robbed in an apartment and how a spat occurred over the stolen money.
Visitors also showed interest in the Lorenz wheel, which helps to more precisely determine atmospheric data, and thus forecast weather conditions.
Pharmacists explained "the turbulent life of a pill", while the development of a fetus was studied at the genetics counseling section.
Chemistry became interesting when elements changed color.
The diversity of species on the planet was illustrated with bones -- human, primate, frog, as well as the skeleton of a turtle.
Optical illusions made big items appear small and vice versa.
The youngest visitors squealed when a robot utilised for mine sweeping started handing out candy.
Lab mice were also "employed" to look for a way through a maze.
Geodetic surveyors showcased the properties of soil from various parts of the planet.
The organisers believe that the popularity of the festival shows that Belgrade needs a venue at which such exhibitions will be available to visitors daily, rather than just once a year.
The solution -- the Centre for the Promotion of Science -- will be built starting next year. 
It is to be the biggest institution of the sort in the region, where scientists will be able to use laboratories for their projects, as will "ordinary" visitors, who understand how much fun science can be.
"The crowd at the Science Festival proves there is definitely a hunger for science and knowledge in Serbia. 
When the Centre for the Promotion of Science opens, these kinds of exhibitions will be available to us every day and science will become much more approachable and comprehensible," director of the future centre Aleksandra Drecun told SETimes.
Jelena Veljkovic, 28, who attended the festival for the third time, told SETimes that the event gets better every year. 
"It's a great way to promote science, especially among the young population. 
[It's a] way to have fun, and learn at the same time."
