13/09/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/09/11
Residents of Kosovo villages located on the border with Serbia have been surprised to encounter the Serbian gendarmerie in their towns, or stationed close by.
"It has become part of our life to see them in the village;
we cannot work our land or go into the woods because they are there and would arrest us," said Bahtir Mustafa, a resident of Gjilan.
"We have appealed to the police and KFOR, but except for [setting up] some patrols, they say they cannot do anything more."
Because Serbia does not recognise Kosovo's independence, it also does not acknowledge the boundary line as a state border.
In Belgrade's opinion, the demarcation is merely administrative.
Adding to the problem is a lack of signs and border markings.
According to Pellum Kallaba of the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, it is time for border demarcation to be depoliticised and seen instead as a technical problem that affects the daily lives of citizens.
Confusion over the border has led to arrests, he said, while others have suffered economic damage.
"The border line with Serbia is about 360km -- the most sensitive areas are Karaqeva in eastern Kosovo, notably in the municipality of Kamenica," Kallaba told SETimes.
He explained that the current border was set up under the June 1999 Kumanovo Technical Agreement -- signed between NATO and the Yugoslav Army.
Kosovo's people were not a party to the agreement, he said, describing it as the main cause of the current border problems.
Kosovo Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi, however, says the problem is not with the delineation but with Serbia's stance on Kosovo.
"There are not many issues that do not match between the border of the two countries.
They [may] consider Kosovo part of Serbia, but the administrative boundaries that have been previously so and now are largely correct on both sides," Rexhepi told SETimes.
He said he expects that the European Commission will pressure Belgrade to resolve this issue with Kosovo.
"There is no chance of becoming an EU member without defined borders," Rexhepi said.
KFOR spokesperson Ralph Adametz told SETimes that the mission does not have the mandate to resolve the problem.
"KFOR's mission is to monitor, lease and de-conflict the requirements of the military technical agreement signed in Kumanovo in 1999," he said.
"It includes the exchange of information concerning security forces on both sides of the Administrative Boundary line (ABL), their exercises and operations on issues regarding the security on the ABL" Adametz told SETimes.
