14/10/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times -- 14/10/11
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) adopted a resolution last week outlining the need for solutions to the political situation in northern Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Albania.
"The issues for great concern are northern Kosovo -- getting security and free movement of people and merchandise; Bosnia and Herzegovina -- the political deadlock forming a national government; and Albania -- some signs of progress in the frozen and detrimental relation between the big parties," the document's author, Swedish PACE member Bjorn von Sydow told SETimes.
The October 7th resolution urges an immediate and objective investigation into an incident at Kosovo's administrative checkpoint with Serbia at Jarinje at the end of September, when six people were shot.
Problems in northern Kosovo are blocking progress in EU-mediated talks between Pristina and Belgrade, the resolution noted.
It proposes a mission for PACE's presidential committee "to intensify dialogue and overcome the tension" in the region. 
This mission "can make visits to hotspots and try to get the parties involved to take steps in accordance with the principles of the Council of Europe", von Sydow said.
Analyst Ian Bancroft, co-founder of the organisation TransConflict, stresses that the north will remain a key issue and should be part of the talks.
"Without a solution to the challenges facing the north, the Kosovo-Serbia talks have little prospect of success," he told SETimes.
"For any talks to succeed, EU guarantees are essential. 
Now that Serbia has obtained EU candidate status, the EU might have more leverage. 
This means Serbia will have to really take seriously its commitments to the EU and its messages to improve relations with Kosovo, if it is to advance in negotiations with the EU," Kosovo political analyst Seb Bytyci told SETimes.
The on-going political stalemate in BiH is another area of concern. 
According to the document, this stalemate "has had dire consequences -- the country has seen its credit ratings downgraded by international financial agencies; foreign direct investments have fallen 75% since 2009; unemployment is at over 43% of the working population."
Von Sydow sees the solution through "internal negotiations between the competing forces in order to avoid a looming stand-still in the national economy due to the absence of further international financial support".
Bancroft underlines the deep divisions plaguing BiH, which all bodes poorly for any resolution of the country's problems.
"Republika Srpska's opposition to strengthening the state-level of government means that the creation of new ministerial portfolios as a means of resolving the problem is not an option; whilst new elections would fail to solve the core problems and would instead only contribute to a widening of divisions," he told SETimes.
As for Albania, PACE praises the conclusion of the 2011 local elections and "encourages all parties to strengthen ... 
their internal democratic functioning, work towards normalising the political situation and start a political dialogue within the parliament on the priorities and necessary reforms to be carried out".
Analyst Genc Mlloja, however, says this progress is too little, too late.
"The two main political parties [the ruling Democratic Party and the main opposition Socialist Party] have remained stuck to their positions despite their declarations on the will to overcome the deep division between them," he told SETimes.
