14/10/2011
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 14/10/11
The European Commission (EC) recommended in its progress report Wednesday (October 12th) that Montenegro open negotiations for EU membership, saying the country achieved satisfactory progress in political and institutional reforms.
The EC noted progress in all areas, prompting EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fule to announce that no EU member state would avoid approving the start of negotiations with Montenegro.
Montenegro's government and the entire opposition hailed the EC recommendation.
"This is a big step towards the collective and unified fostering of the environment for reforms. 
It was initially created by ruling structures to fortify their power against a conservative and nationalistic opposition, but it has become a principal tool for further democratisation and the fight against organised crime and corruption," European Movement President Momcilo Radulovic said.
The EC decision will be final if it is confirmed by leaders the 27 EU-member states in December.
After Croatia completes its negotiations with the EU, Montenegro will be the only Balkan country in the final, yet most demanding stage of EU accession.
According to analysts, such a status will support domestic reforms, compelling the government to tackle issues on which it otherwise might hesitate.
The hesitancy particularly extends to the rule of law, independence of the judiciary and the fight against corruption and organised crime.
While the undertaken reforms strengthen gains in these areas, Montenegro must make further progress, including in strengthening the capacity of the administration and the state audit, as well as regarding freedom of the media.
The EC urged parliament to better supervise the work of the government, especially through frequent questioning of ministers so as to allow the opposition to initiate hearings.
Radulovic explained that the EU negotiation process is also allowing greater room for intervention from abroad to address Montenegro's power systems' irregularities.
"This will open additional space for democratic and reform pressure from both EU institutions and EU member states on the ruling structures and institutions in Montenegro to continue with additional efforts," Radulovic told SETimes.
He argues that those who interrupt this process of institutional and democratic consolidation will face strong domestic pressure from the general public and experts, as well as from various EU and other international factors.
Fule explained that the EU will start a new approach in its negotiations with Montenegro.
It will be the first to negotiate Chapter 23, referring to the rule of law, independence of the judiciary, freedom of speech, and visible results in the fight against crime and corruption. 
The chapter will be the first on the agenda and will be closed last.
"The EC recommendation to Montenegro to the date of the negotiations is very supportive of the further process of democratisation and Europeanisation of the country," Centre for Civic Education representative Daliborka Uljarevic told SETimes.
Uljarevic explained that Brussels' approach to negotiations -- conditioned by progress and concrete results -- is very useful.
"All this will make intensive communication with Brussels, but also narrow down manipulation. 
... 
The EU will closely monitor our government, which will be obliged to undertake more concrete and visible results because the internal pressure for reforms will be supported with EU pressure."
But not everybody embraced the EC report. 
National Council for European Integration member Boris Raonic said the recommendation is no reason for euphoria.
"The strengthening of administrative capacities will not be easy," Raonic told SETimes.
