22/01/2007
Turkey is preparing to launch third generation GSM systems, which will allow the introduction of videophones and other services.
Turkish Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim announced the planned upgrade Thursday (January 18th).
A group of medics from Albania will attend special training courses in France and Italy before returning to their country to perform the first ever kidney transplant there.
The project is being implemented under INTERREG programme, which organises co-operation between Albanian and Italian health sector specialists.
The leading Greek telecom operator OTE says it had 512,000 high-speed customers at the end of December 2006, a threefold rise since the previous year.
The telco has lowered broadband internet prices by 67% since 2003.
A system allowing the automatic processing of cases was introduced at the Commercial Court in Belgrade on Thursday (January 18th), as part of a $12.8m project co-financed by USAID.
It provides for automatic selection of trial judges to ensure fair play and eliminate the possibility of corruption.
All commercial courts in Serbia are expected to be equipped with the system in the next 18 months.
Romania's IT and communications market reported a total turnover of 6.7 billion euros in 2006 -- an increase of 24% from 2005, according to the Institute for Calculation Technique.
The telecommunication services sector holds a share of 62% of the total business volume, or 4.1 billion euros.
Although it has a lower share, the software and IT services represent the most dynamic segment of the industry, with annual growth rates of over 40% in the past few years.
The first project for boosting computer literacy of Roma in Croatia wrapped up in Zagreb on Tuesday (January 16th).
During the programme, each Roma youth received a European Computer Driving Licence (ECDL) START certificate.
In November and December, the group successfully passed four educational modules -- a prelude to earning the ECDL Core Certificate.
(Various sources -- 15/01/07-22/01/07)
