14/10/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 14/10/11
The EC report published on Wednesday (October 12th) did not recommend candidate status for Albania. 
It found the country has made limited progress in fulfilling the political criteria for joining the EU.
"Important EU-related reforms have been hampered by a political stalemate," the report said. 
"Progress in addressing key priorities and other challenges identified in the opinion has been uneven."
The report pointed to areas such as the work of parliament, elections, judiciary, anti-corruption policy, property rights and improving the living conditions of the Roma.
"Albania will need to make considerable and sustained efforts in all areas identified in last year's opinion."
The EC did note that action was taken to combat organised crime, improve the treatment of detainees, and guarantee children's rights. 
In addition, officials in Brussels said there are signs Albania's political leaders are seeking a way out of their longstanding impasse, which has led to partial parliamentary boycotts and blocked legislation.
"Some positive signals suggest that the political parties want to restart dialogue. 
This is urgently needed to re-establish and maintain a level of co-operation which would allow for progress on the EU integration path," EU Commissioner Stefan Fule said.
According to political commentator Genc Mlloja, the findings are no surprise. 
Both the majority and opposition will be held responsible for the failure to join Serbia and Montenegro in EU accession talks, he told SETimes.
"This episode reveals that the Democratic Party (DP) and Socialist Party (SP), or, better yet, their respective heads, Sali Berisha and Edi Rama, have not taken seriously this stage of Albania's EU membership, and their stubbornness did not show any sign of flexibility in fulfilling the 12 demands presented by the EC," Mlloja said.
"All other political factors should be re-engaged to strip Berisha and Rama of their monopoly of the Albanian political scene," he added.
Analyst Zef Preci said the report demonstrates the problems Albania faces when it comes to building the institutions of a free market economy and the defining role of internal factors in the process.
"This report clearly reflects that Albania has a democratic deficit," Preci told SETimes. 
He suggests that both "the arrogance of the rightist majority in power and the blocking positions of the left opposition" are reasons behind the failure of the EC report.
Responding to the report, Albanian President Bamir Topi said he would continue to encourage the politicians to adopt real European behaviour.
"These political actors should find the way of normal political communication and proper institutional dialogue which has been missing for some time, becoming also the main reason why [the country] did not receive a positive assessment from the EU," Topi said.
