29/05/2006
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 29/05/06
Well-entrenched cliches are often brought into play when the EU is being described:
single markets, the free flow of capital and labour, increasingly more uniform pieces of national legislation, strict anti-trust laws, devolution of public policy prerogatives to supranational bodies, and so on.
These cliches project the image of a Union in which corporate identity becomes ever more detached from member countries, according to the logic of economic liberalisation.
To paraphrase one of Kinichi Ohmae's well known books, a "Union without borders" epitomises, on a smaller scale, the borderless world envisaged by advocates of globalisation.
One can draw, from the logic of liberalisation inside the Union, the rhetoric that extols the virtues of "European champions" -- companies which operate across European borders and are capable of being key global competitors.
European Commissioner for Competition Neelie Kroes does it frequently in the more or less fractious debates she has with the governments of individual EU member states.
"The borders are gone.
It is all about European champions, and global champions," Kroes said in March.
"When we took the decision to come together in the EU, when we took the decision to create one internal market, the national champion [became] outdated."
According to one line of thought in Brussels, the so-called European Champions should underpin the EU's ambition to become the leading economic player in the world economy -- the paramount mission set forth in the Lisbon Agenda.
For several decades now, leading EU member states have tried to match the prowess of American and Japanese firms, and the Union's further development has been seen in this framework.
Within the last decade, this rivalry has acquired an additional dimension owing to the economic rise of China, India, and other Asian nations.
However, there have been series of recent developments in the EU which do not fit into the conceptual framework described above;
rather, they clash with the logic of single markets.
For example, the Union's heavyweights have used a variety of means to maintain the primacy of domestic capital in banking, public utilities and other sectors that are judged to have national strategic importance.
Thus, when the Italian group Enel announced its plans to acquire a majority stake in Gaz de France, the French government responded swiftly:
a merger between Gaz de France (where the state has a controlling stake) and the private group Suez was announced.
In his turn, Romano Prodi retorted that were the Left to win the national elections in Italy, it would block attempts by French firms to take over Italian companies.
This is the same Prodi who formerly occupied the post of European Commission president.
The Spanish government, too, has reacted negatively to the plan of the German group Eon to take over Endesa, a leading Spanish public utility.
The list of defensive moves goes on.
For instance, several high profile European politicians voiced concern about Mittal's attempt to acquire a controlling stake in Arcelor, in the steel industry.
Incidentally, Mittal is owned by a family of Indian origin, though the firm is headquartered in Europe.
Or consider the pharmaceutical industry, where the French government has backed top national companies in order to maintain a national flavour.
In Germany, government officials as well as heads of companies are concocting schemes and "poison pills" for the sake of fending off hostile takeovers.
What lies behind this apparent resurgence of protectionism when it comes to leading national companies in various fields?
One explanation would be that liberalisation (or globalisation), by its very nature, brings about such reactions throughout the world, in rich economies as well as poor ones.
In addition, the EU is going through a difficult period, manifested by demographic issues, the crisis of welfare states, productivity slowdown, and other factors.
In such a climate, "economic patriotism" is a predictable policy offspring.
The implacable development of single markets entails defensive reactions one way or another, some would argue.
Because competition produces winners and losers, there may be an inherent temptation on the part of EU member governments to support their leading firms.
However, there is another way of framing our analysis.
We could also say that the vision of a Union made up of equal partners (in terms of bargaining power and the ability to shape formal and informal networks of interaction among governments and private companies) is far from corresponding to reality.
The "heavyweights" have sought and will continue to seek ways to uphold their vectors of economic power and obtain preferential treatment -- remember, for instance, how Berlin and Paris got away with a serious breach of the Financial and Stability Pact rule on budget deficits.
As fondly as we may wish to talk of a European playing field, the idea of "Europe" remains something of an abstraction.
Given this underlying nebulousness, it is not surprising that the bloc's leading players try to keep decision-making centres at home.
One can go further with this logic of power distribution in the Union.
As long as a common foreign and security policy remains a distant goal, and as long as military (nuclear) arsenals are not under common (EU/supranational) control, it is unrealistic to expect that large countries will nonchalantly allow the takeover (sometimes hostile) of their top firms by foreign companies, or let major companies go down the tube – we may recall here the controversy around Alstom and the dim view Paris took of a possible Siemens-led rescue operation.
Moreover, the fight against terrorism increases the propensity of national governments to reinforce their local means of response, which involves locally-controlled industrial firms.
Another factor relates to a scenario which is seldom discussed publicly, but is surely on the radar screens of strategic planners and thinkers.
Let's assume that the economic and political project of the Union, for various reasons, gets bogged down over time, or becomes increasingly diluted.
In such a case, governments will want to have vectors of economic power under domestic control.
What Commissioner Kroes calls "European champions" would be an object of competition among major EU member countries when it comes to controlling stakes and who should host the headquarters.
In brief, the turn towards protectionism suggests that countries are hedging their bets when it comes to the long-term prospects for the bloc.
The irony is that protectionist strategies increase the chances for the Union to see its deepening stalled;
it favours centrifugal forces and the likelihood of sharpened divisions over all kind of basic policy issues.
Such a dynamic does not bode well for future European enlargement.
