13/02/2012
By Linda Karadaku and Safet Kabashaj in Pristina -- 13/02/12
The new coalition is called the Serb Movement of Kosovo and its founders are clear in their goal. 
"Our intention is to unify the Serb people and offer them another alternative," Mihajlo Scepanovic, leader of Serb Popular Party, tells SETimes.
Other Serb parties in the Movement include The Serb Movement of Resistance, the Serb Social-Democratic Party, the municipal leaders of Ropotova and Klokot, and NGOs.
The group says it wants to address a range of issues related to the Serb community in Kosovo, and to achieve a level of presentation that Kosovo Serbs have lacked until now.
The only party that is currently part of the government is the Serb Liberal Party (SLS). 
"We want Serbs to have another [outlet], in which they can address [their problems] -- not only through the SLS. 
We have nothing against this party, but we believe that a different way of thinking should be developed; they do not represent Serb interests sufficiently," Scepanovic says.
He adds that the new Movement would act differently on issues such as "an independent Serb TV station, which has remained only on paper. 
We would move this forward because the right for this channel is legitimate and based on the Ahtisaari Plan," he says.
The Movement has cultivated both contacts and support from various parties in Pristina. 
"We have a lot of friends among Albanian politicians. 
They also want to have an alternative among the Serb parties. 
We have a different vision of problems [confronting] Serbs in Kosovo and we want to give them a chance to solve those problems," Scepanovic says.
There are mixed reactions among local Serbs regarding the Movement. 
Gracanica resident Zoran Gligorijevic tells SETimes that a Kosovo-based movement might better address the real concerns of Serbs in Kosovo, than those operating as a branch of political parties in Serbia.
"There is a noticeable setback in Belgrade-based political parties [in terms of] really addressing issues for Kosovo, and practically-speaking, in missing concrete programmes. 
So, there might be [room] for the new movement if they have a good programme," Gligorijevic says.
Fellow Gracanica resident Aleksandar Todorevic is more of a sceptic. 
"The initiative is a response by local politicians frustrated with their political organisations," Todorovic told SETimes, noting all those in charge of the new movement are veterans of current political parties.
"Almost every day, there are people saying 'I'm not pleased here, so I'm going to establish another one'," said Todorovic. 
He argues that the current situation provides an opportunity for virtually anyone to establish a party, count on considerable financial support from somewhere, with the goal of winning seats "in whatever assembly".
"It's a reality. 
We have hundreds of political parties," he adds.
Srdjan V, who wants his last name withheld because he lives in Mitrovica, says he likes the idea of seeing Serbs in Kosovo united, but "experience has shown that as soon as the politicians win the seats, they forget how they managed to get there. 
However, let's try this one as well," he tells SETimes.
