13/10/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Tuzla -- 13/10/11
As the world embraces modernity and increasingly works on promoting IT literacy, BiH is trying to come to terms with a growing segment of its population that is illiterate.
According to the last census conducted in 1991, 9.9% of adults are illiterate.
The non-governmental sector estimates that number is far larger today.
"All societal problems emerge from the fact that we have a huge number of illiterate people and that nobody is concerned about it," linguistics Professor Senahid Halilovic told SETimes.
Urban areas have the least number of illiterate people, but in the rural areas education may not be a priority, particularly for women.
Traditional rural culture places a premium on women being at home, taking care of the children and family, not studying.
Typical of this lifestyle is Mejra Karic, who lived in the Podrinje region.
Even though Karic comes from a wealthy family, her father was a strict, patriarchal man who viewed schooling as not suitable for female children.
Merja married early, gave birth to three children and lived a life as a devoted wife according to tradition, but quietly lamented the fact she did not know to read or write.
In the ensuing war in the 1990s, her husband was listed as"missing", while Merja had to leave her village with the children.
"I understood what it truly means to be illiterate in the new environment, without my [extended] family.
When I need to obtain documents, I do not know where to go.
Officials sometimes get angry;
they tell me it is all written, and I am embarassed to say I can't read," she said.
"It is most difficult when the children bring a school document I need to sign.
What can I do?
I take ink and a leave a fingerprint," she added.
Some do not leave their lives to fate.
Karic, for example, finished school for adults at age 47 and ensured that all of her children attend school.
Still, educators say the extent of illiteracy in BiH is worrisome.
"We are not dealing with basic illiteracy only, but also the inability to recognise the need of our population, which yearns for reforms in education," Halilovic said.
Elementary education is required by law in BiH, yet a large number of children do not attend school without anyone being held to task for it.
A related problem is the high cost, and unfortunately, for a large number of parents at a time of economic crisis, education is a luxury.
"Bosnia and Herzegovina is a society of poor people, [many of] which do not have conditions for education.
Although a signatory of the Convention for the Rights of the Child and, as such, obliged to enable equal access to schools to all children, this is not the case.
Children in different cities do not have similar conditions for education," Bosnian language Professor Enver Kazaz told SETimes.
Kazaz explained that the issue of illiteracy should be an issue of reforms of educational and moral values during the upbringing of a child.
Roma children are particularly affected.
They are most often left to wander the streets and frequently resort to begging to earn money for their familes.
For many, there is no room for school -- a reflection of their parents' desires.
That's why the NGO Children's Country decided to reach the Roma children through a project called "Street Kids''.
In addition to making them literate, the project's goal is to present a view of a different life than experienced thus far.
"We work with 100 children at present who have no conditions for education and we are trying to make them part of the regular school system.
Unfortunatelly, the co-operation with the education establishments is not praiseworthy," project educator Dzenana Smajic told SETimes.
