23/01/2007
The Slovenian Embassy in Skopje announced that it has assumed the role of NATO contact embassy in Macedonia, as of January 1st.
Slovenia vowed full assistance to Macedonia's "accelerated preparations" for entry in the Alliance, and will work to improve communication with the Macedonian public and institutions, raising public awareness of the benefits and obligations of NATO membership.
Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel visited Skopje on Friday (January 19th).
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis hailed Croatia's progress last week during a visit to Zagreb.
He said the country could serve as an example to the rest of the region in terms of Euro-Atlantic integration.
His comment followed talks with Croatian counterpart Ivo Sanader.
Pope Benedict XVI held a private audience Wednesday (January 17th) with Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader.
Afterwads, Sanader said the pontiff showed great interest in the progress of Zagreb's EU accession talks, and accepted an invitation to visit Croatia in the future.
High Representative to Bosnia and Herzegovina Christian Schwarz-Schilling and EU security chief Javier Solana condemned any attempt to link the future of the Bosnian Serb entity, Republika Srpska, (RS) with the Kosovo status issue.
Following talks with Solana and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn in Brussels on Wednesday (January 17th), Schwarz-Schilling said the EU is unhappy with comments from Belgrade suggesting the outcome of the Kosovo status issue would impact RS.
Resolving Kosovo's final status will not jeopardise security in the region, Romanian Defence Minister Sorin Frunzaverde and visiting Macedonian counterpart Lazar Elenovski agreed last week.
They said regional co-operation is key to Euro-Atlantic integration and the stability of Southeast Europe.
Romanian President Traian Basescu and his Ukrainian counterpart, Viktor Yushchenko, inaugurated a new joint border crossing over the Tisza River last week at Sighetu Marmatiei-Solotvino.
They also discussed bilateral ties, expressing interest in boosting co-operation in the energy sector.
(Various sources --16/01/07-23/01/07)
