13/10/2011
By Ben Andoni for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 13/10/11
Thirteen-year-old AP and her 10-year-old brother KP can not go to school in their village near the town of Shkodra because of a blood feud involving their parents. 
Due to ongoing vendettas, hundreds of children are forced to stay at home, or to hide with their families, and are unable to attend school.
"[More than 900 children in Albania] … can't go to school. 
Some of them work to help their families," Albanian Committee of Nationwide Reconciliation Chairman Gjin Marku told SETimes.
Around 5,000 people in Albania are somehow affected by blood feud killings -- revenge killings by a victim's family against the killer's family, according to Marku.
Although the blood feud phenomenon dates back to the Middle Ages, many of the "rules" have not been adapted to modern times. 
The killing of women and children is prohibited, but most are forced to go into hiding or remain closed in at home.
Making matters worse, the practice of vendetta has spread from the north of the country to the cities and southern rural areas.
In a bid to educate these "trapped" children, the education ministry launched a programme called "Second Chance" this summer.
"Special classes are held three times a week, for ten hours a week. 
Lesson hours are 45 minutes long," Deputy Education Minister Halit Shamata told SETimes.
"We assist by sending in teachers of the school closest to the child's residence. 
In most cases, we prefer teachers who have taught these children before, when they normally attended the lessons. 
Teaching in these conditions entails difficulties, but teachers try to do the best for these children," Shkodra Education Director Atrida Feketi told SETimes.
Taking into account the difficulties and additional elements of teaching students in isolation, teachers receive overtime pay for their efforts.
However, it is impossible to assist all the children who are affected -- especially since the numbers from the vendetta associations and the numbers from the ministry greatly differ.
In all, 41 children in the Shkodra District were assisted by the Second Chance programme last year. 
Associations say that there are hundreds of children in the district who are affected.
"[At the beginning of] every year, we send an official letter to organisations of local government, municipalities and communal units, to verify the whereabouts of families included in blood feuds. 
[This helps us identify] the number of children that we have to assist with teaching in the house conditions," Ferketi told SETimes.
But despite the good intentions of the programme, the students' psychological situation is grave and their education falls behind those attending regular school.
"It is true that the school district helps some of them. 
So far this has been done by providing the appropriate payment for teachers, but it is very difficult to continue to provide productive results in their education," Marku told SETimes.
