13/10/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/10/11
In its latest progress report, unveiled on Wednesday (October 12th), the European Commission (EC) recommended that Serbia should be given EU candidate status.
The report acknowledged that Serbia has taken considerable strides in co-operating with The Hague tribunal, strengthening the rule of law and respecting human rights.
The launch of membership talks, however, was made conditional on improved relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
"We recommend that accession negotiations be opened as soon as Serbia achieves further progress in meeting the one key priority we identify, namely, further steps to normalise relations with Kosovo in line with the conditions of the Stabilisation and Association Process," EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fule said.
Kosovo has clearly become an official political condition for Serbia's EU accession, Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences professor Predrag Simic told SETimes.
The EC's recommendation, he said, is the result of compromise among the three most influential EU states -- Germany, France and Great Britain.
"There is room left where the terms that we heard from the leaders of certain EU countries are not strictly fixed, as well as there is room left for diplomacy," he said.
"To what extent Serbia can respond to [this situation] in the pre-election period is a different question, but at this moment we can be happy with the Commission's position."
A negotiations date in December is unrealistic, Simic said, adding that the most difficult decisions will probably have to wait until after Serbs go to the polls.
By law, that must happen no later than the spring of 2012.
According toTransConflict founder Ian Bancroft, EU members will have different interpretations of the provision concerning "significant progress".
For Germany, he said, it means annulment of Serbian institutions in northern Kosovo.
"Serbia will also be expected to refrain from attempting to organise elections in the north -- having already exempted Serbs there from the census -- and to support the handing over of control of the court in North Mitrovica to Pristina," Bancroft told SETimes.
"Some European countries will invariably try to soften this stance, fearful that Serbia's enthusiasm for its European course may wane," he said.
As expected, Serbia's political parties interpreted the EC decision differently.
Opposition Democratic Party of Serbia spokesperson Petar Petkovic told SETimes that Serbia has been "newly blackmailed by the EU".
The country "should not pay for further progress in EU integration with territory", he said.
By contrast, Liberal Democratic Party leader Cedomir Jovanovic said the government should meet the expectations of the European partners in Kosovo or step down.
Serbian President Boris Tadic said he is proud of the portion of the report dealing with the country's progress.
He also said Belgrade wants the Kosovo issue to be resolved peacefully.
"Serbia opened a dialogue and wants it to continue to find an acceptable solution for all, as well as wants a realistic solution.
But Serbia has principles which it will not abandon -- such as the indivisibility of territory," Tadic said.
The EC recommendation is to be verified by the EU Council in December.
