12/08/2011
(Utrinski Vesnik - 12/08/11; OSCE, SNA - 11/08/11)
Reiterating its concern over the continuing deterioration of media freedom in Macedonia, the OSCE urged Skopje on Thursday (August 11) to put an end to the repression of electronic and print news outlets and attempts to silence critical voices in the country.
The 56-nation organisation's representative on freedom of the media, Dunja Mijatovic, said she was "alarmed by the sharp decline of media freedom" in the Balkan nation and criticised the authorities for shunning the body's calls for steps to improve the situation in this area.
"This is, unfortunately, the fourth time in the last two months that I have raised different issues related to the ongoing deterioration of media freedom," she wrote in a letter to Foreign Minister Nikola Poposki. 
"Despite repeated calls to the government to reverse the situation and show respect for OSCE media freedom commitments, the situation seems to be getting worse."
The OSCE official cited in her letter several disturbing cases, including the termination of the mandate of the entire managing board of the public service broadcaster, MRT, in late July, as well as actions against critically-oriented media outlets and individual journalists.
Mijatovic sent her letter to Poposki two days after Tamara Causidis, a journalist at the Skopje-based Alsat-M TV station and head of the Independent Trade Union of Journalists, was sacked on Tuesday, without notice.
While the broadcaster's move "could be seen as purely a business decision, it is, in fact, also indicative of the highly politicised nature of media affairs and a fear of critical voices," the OSCE official said.
The fact that Causidis's dismissal followed the protest held by her union late last month against political and business influences in Macedonian media, raised suspicions that Alsat-M TV's move was politically motivated and aimed at punishing the journalist.
Mijatovic was particularly concerned by the step taken by the MRT council's on July 31st, when it announced its decision to terminate the mandate of all seven members of the public broadcaster's managing board without having even launched a process for the appointment of their replacements.
"It is crucial that the Council when deciding on changes to the MRT management board interprets the law in the best interests of maintaining a politically and editorially independent public service broadcaster," the OSCE official said.
Other disturbing cases Mijatovic pointed to in her letter included the Agency for Electronic Communications' decision to revoke the licence of Macedonia's oldest television, A1 TV, as well as the closure of three dailies, which were all placed under investigation for tax evasion and money laundering in late 2010. 
Their bank accounts have been frozen since 27 January.
Mijatovic also criticised the changes to the country's Law on Broadcasting Activity, under which the number of members of the Broadcasting Council were increased to 15, with the six new ones to be nominated by bodies effectively controlled by the ruling party.
"These amendments run counter to the purpose of the law, which is to ensure the political independence of the regulatory authority," the OSCE quoted Mijatovic as saying in a letter to the government last month.
