10/09/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/09/11
Greek Foreign Minister Stavros Lambrinidis met with Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci on Thursday (September 8th) to confirm his country's perspective on the European perspective for the whole region.
Lambrinidis said that Greece recognizes the aspiration of all peoples of the region to be part of the EU.
That vision, he noted, has been translated into a concrete plan known as Agenda 2014.
"This plan will be built on the foundations of the Thessaloniki Agenda 2003, when all EU member states agreed on the region's European perspective.
This perspective includes Kosovo," Lambrinidis said.
He expressed appreciation that the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade has made concrete progress and should continue in this direction.
"In this way the EU, and Greece in particular, will be nearby," said Lambrinidis.
He met with Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and visited the Serbian Orthodox Monastery of Gracanica.
After the meeting, Thaci said that Kosovo-Greek relations are on a good level, adding that Greek companies have been present in Kosovo for some time.
"We have a significant presence of Greek business in Kosovo, which is a success.
We want to emphasize that the Greek business community is welcome to invest in Kosovo," said Thaci.
In the coming months, Kosovo is expecting to join the European Bank on Reconstruction and Development.
Officials in Pristina are counting on Greece's support in obtaining the membership.
Kosovo political commentator Fatlum Sadiku told SETimes that Greece is not a problem for Kosovo because the country is part of Southeast Europe and understands the region's problems.
"Even though Greece does not recognize Kosovo, they know that creating obstacles like Romania or Spain are doing would mean creating problems and threats in the region, and being part of the region they know the problems and the causes of it," Sadiku said.
Kosovo, he added, is not pressing Athens to change its stance on independence.
"The government will not insist on recognition," he said.
"They have found a modus vivendi with Greece, in that the Greek side will not present an obstacle for Kosovo in joining international organisations and the European integration process."
Kosovo Chamber of Commerce Secretary-General Berat Rukiqi told SETimes that Kosovo can benefit economically from Greece's geographical position.
"Kosovo can use Greece as a place for trade and economic action because of the ports it has, such as Thessaloniki, which play an important role in linking trade with other continents" he said.
"Kosovo must realize the direct relationship not only with Greece but with all countries in which it has economic interests."
Non-recognition does not present an obstacle for bilateral economic relations, he said.
"Kosovo has reason to have good relations with all countries, those who recognize and those that have not recognized Kosovo.
Some countries are reluctant to extend support because of political sensitivity of the issue.
However, many of those states which have not recognized Kosovo, have offered support and have showed interests in broader trade relations," Rukiqi said.
In Sadiku's view, Greece will likely be one of the main countries helping to promote Kosovo's European perspective.
"Considering the Agenda 2014 proclaimed by Prime Minister Papandreou, Greece will be the main country which will pressure on other members of the EU to offer a more clear European perspective on Kosovo, by enabling free movement and contractual relations between the Union and Kosovo" he said.
