11/08/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 11/08/11
The cross-cultural education mission of the OSCE in Kosovo requires that minorities and majorities alike learn about each other's culture, respective history, as well as the value of tolerance and pluralism.
SETimes spoke with several Kosovo students of different nationalities and ethnic backgrounds to find out how closely the current situation approximates the OSCE's standards.
Genta, a 15-year old Albanian, attends Iliria elementary school in Pristina.
She has studied Kosovo's history up to the proclamation of independence, yet something is missing from her curriculum.
"We have not learned about other ethnic groups.
The teacher told us that Kosovo also has minorities and explained how they came and settled in Kosovo, the Slavs and the Turks," Genta told SETimes.
She has no contact with children of other ethnic groups in Kosovo.
"I met Serbs in Brezovica.
They told us that Kosovo is Serbia, we told them Kosovo is independent," she says, adding that all she knows is that Serbs "expelled us from home and we came back".
Haki Kasumi, a Kosovo teacher and a historian, told SETimes, "If you know someone else's history, there'll be less hate, animosity and better common understanding.
Teaching isolated history [of just one people] would have a negative impact."
However, Albanian language history books are focused on the main protagonists of Albanian history, while textbooks in Serbian present Kosovo as "the cradle of the Serb people".
David, a Serbian who is Genta's age, attends the secondary school for economics in Mitrovica.
"It's interesting when the teacher talks about relations between Serbia and Albania.
He always says we have helped each other in the Balkan Wars and world wars.
What is happening in Kosovo [now] is not very clear to us.
We do not learn Albanian in school, which I believe is wrong.
The teacher of Serbian language told us that Serbs who live at the border with Romania learn Romanian as a second language;
those close to the border with Bulgaria, learn Bulgarian," David told SETimes.
He adds that the teacher tells the students that "Kosovo is Serbia," and says David, "I believe it is like that."
Daut, a Roma parent whose 12-year-old attends the Mustafa Bakiu elementary school in Prizren, says he cannot recall his son learning anything about multiple ethnicities at school.
Qylanxhiu also complains that a pejorative name for the Roma people appears 13 times in an eighth grade text book, something the community protested.
He confirms that the Roma community has asked the Kosovo Ministry of Education to include Roma culture, tradition and language in the curriculum.
"We have no other state.
We see Kosovo as our country and we would be very happy to see prejudices disappear, so we can all be known as Kosovars," Qylanxhiu says.
Cansu, a 16-year-old Turk, attends the Pristina Sami Frasheri elementary school, as instruction is also offered in Turkish.
"We learn mainly about Turkish history at school," he says, adding that students are also taught about the two world wars, but nothing in particular about other ethnicities in Kosovo.
"We see Kosovo as our common home and we want to build our future here," Cansu says.
