11/08/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 11/08/11
Over the past few months, a panel has been working to overhaul the constitution that has governed Kosovo since shortly after its declaration of independence in 2008.
The reform process was prompted by the presidential crisis in late 2010 and early 2011, which resulted in two successive heads of state – Fatmir Sejdiu and Behgjet Pacolli -- stepping down after being found in breach of the constitution.
The commission mandated to oversee the revamping began its work in April, after a political agreement was hammered out among the main parties -- the PDK, LDK and AKR -- that resulted in the election of current President Atifete Jahjaga.
"The commission has analysed all presidential systems and around 40 constitutions, to see the best models that can operate in Kosovo," says Vjosa Osmani, vice chairman of the commission.
"Around 30 provisions in the constitution will be changed, including drafting a new law on electing the president."
Recommendations include making the president electable by the people, rather than by parliament as is currently the case.
Parliament would no longer play a role either in electing the head of state or removing a president from office.
Arianit Kelmendi, an elections expert who has monitored voting in Kosovo since 2000, tells SETimes that the constitutional changes are welcome.
However, he added, they do not address the problems that have marred past presidential elections, and do not guarantee that the elections will be better organised in the future.
"Political parties have viewed the system as wrong, and not themselves.
This has made them focus more on the constitution, rather than in having a look at what went wrong during the last elections," Kelmendi told SETimes.
Avni Bytyçi, executive director of the NGO Initiative for Progress, takes a similar view.
"The political crisis in Kosovo was born because of election fraud, and in the absence of political legitimacy, it is natural that a political crisis arises.
Stolen elections have caused the crisis, not the constitutional provisions relating to the president," he said.
"I think Kosovo must analyse the political situation better, do studies in the field to show real political topicality and then build a system of democratic government, while checks and balances should be built between the pillars of power, as they are missing now in practice," Bytyçi said.
Reform advocates, however, say the constitutional reform process is a vital step towards gaining full independence, as opposed to the system of supervised independence currently in place.
"Nobody intends to unilaterally terminate international supervision … but we have the idea to transfer international executive powers to local institutions," Gazeta Express quoted Constitutional Reform Commission head Arism Bajrami as saying.
International Civilian Office (ICO) spokesman Andy McGuffie, however, said the commission is not making any changes that would affect the Office.
"No amendments that would affect the mandate of the ICO are being considered.
The International Steering Group will decide on the future of the ICO," he tells SETimes.
