13/12/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo and Belgrade - 13/12/11
Moments before the signing of the Protocol of Co-operation between the war crimes prosecution offices of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia, the deal fell apart reportedly because of an administrative issue.
The protocol is aimed at preventing parallel processes for the same crimes in countries of the region.
"The joint position of all three BiH presidency members was to stop the signing of the protocol because the requisite procedure was not respected.
That is under an exclusive authority of the BiH presidency and includes a previous decision by the council of ministers, the presidency and the parliament -- none of which was consulted," BiH Presidency Chairman Zeljko Komisic said.
The procedure ought to have been known to the BiH prosecution, the presidency claimed, since only the presidency has the authority to make international agreements on behalf of the state of BiH.
While the three-member presidency claims it knew nothing about the protocol, the position of the prosecution is that this document is not eligible for ratification.
"The prosecution of BiH considers this is not a question of an international agreement concerning a concrete thing, but rather of a protocol about co-operation of two prosecutions, which allows a closer definition of offering international legal help in cases concerning war crimes, which was regulated earlier by signed international agreements," BiH Prosecution Office's representative Boris Grubesic said.
While the public awaits a legal resolution, the media questioned the protocol's substance.
It is reported that the basic premise of the document is to regulate providing evidence and carrying out the cases according to the suspects' citizenship -- ie, the place where the crime was committed -- all in order to avoid parallel proceedings.
The Serbian prosecutor's office did not comment on the delay in signing the protocol, but did say its existence is necessary and useful.
"We are prepared to sign the moment the political factors and political positions harmonise, and when the interest for signing from both sides is discerned.
We had such situations earlier with Croatia and Montenegro, as between Montenegro and Croatia.
The signing [of protocols] then showed ...
it to be an exceptionally good step which prevented parallel prosecutions and made prosecuting the cases of war crimes quite more effective," Serbia's Deputy Chief Prosecutor for War Crimes Bruno Vekaric told SETimes.
Some feel the protocol could put BiH prosecutors in an inferior position, making it -- in effect -- a branch of the Serbian prosecutor's office.
Critics argue that because several BiH citizens are under investigation under orders of the Serbian office, the proceedings could endanger reconciliation in the region.
"It is questionable whether the protocol foresees a two-way co-operation, or whether it refers only to one side.
Serbia's prosecution undertook few actions which were considered as provocative and which happened at politically sensitive moment.
Because of it, BiH has perhaps decided not to support this protocol," Committee of Human Rights Lawyers YOUCOM Director Milan Antonijevic told SETimes.
Antonijevic argues that the existence of political will is more important than yet another document whose clauses are not respected.
Sinan Alic, president of the Foundation of Truth, Justice and Reconciliation, agrees.
"Protocols such as this one are signed primarily due to scoring political points towards Europe, and the reality of arrests [captured by] 'let us see who will do whom first' is not changing.
In case the agreement results in processing crimes where they took place, it will be good, but I do not think there is political readiness for it yet," Alic told SETimes.
Analysts argue that even if the protocol is never signed, nobody would lose out.
Two European conventions -- one concerning offering legal assistance in criminal affairs, and the other on resigning cases in criminal affairs -- clearly regulate all that is needed for the treatment of crimes in these legal areas.
But while the conventions serve the West European countries well, they are still doing badly in the former Yugoslavia.
How the war crimes victims will be protected if Serbia and BiH sign the protocol appears to be of secondary concern for the politicians.
"For us it is more important how the victims will be protected if it comes to proceedings in Belgrade, and nobody has been able to clarify that point for us," Association of Concentration Camps President Murat Tahirovic told SETimes.
