11/08/2011
By Özgür Öğret for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 11/08/11
The AKP-run municipality's recent seating ban affecting Istanbul's lively Beyoglu district -- coinciding with the holy Islamic month of Ramadan -- has faced fierce opposition from restaurant and bar owners.
Beginning on July 27th, municipality authorities began removing street-side tables from restaurant establishments in Asmalimescit, a historical neighbourhood known for its vibrant nightlife.
Many bars in the area had moved much of their seating outdoors in response to a law banning indoor smoking in 2009.
Despite some criticism from bar patrons and owners, most residents accepted the municipality's new policy.
The outdoor tables had cluttered the narrow alleys of Asmalimescit, making it difficult for people to navigate along the streets.
However, public outrage began once Beyoglu authorities removed tables around Beyoglu's main thoroughfare, Istiklal Street, and in the upscale Cihangir neighbourhood.
Rumours have circulated that the policy was drafted after conservative Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan passed through Asmalimescit on June 15th and became angry that people were drinking in the streets.
Tahir Berrak Karasu, deputy president of the Association for Beyoglu Entertainment Locations (BEYDER), confirmed this rumour to SETimes based on his interviews with eyewitnesses.
According to Karasu, bar employees claimed they witnessed Erdogan's car stuck in traffic and some people cheered the prime minister by raising their glasses.
"This is not something [Beyoglu District Mayor] Ahmet Misbah can do on his own," Karasu argued, blaming the municipality for their approach.
Instead of talking to the association, the municipality tried to discourage members of the public from attending protests on the issue, the latest of which was held on Wednesday (August 10).
While restaurant and bar owners are organising protests to garner public support, the Beyoglu Municipality has remained silent, with the exception of a recent press bulletin defending its practices.
The municipality argued that occupancy deals with establishment owners are subject to change and have been violated with the constant increase in tables.
According to the bulletin, "Establishment owners who benefit from the occupancy practice cannot be allowed to use methods that are unfair, limitless and conflict with commercial and social ethics."
The bulletin, however, was released before the practice spread to other parts of Beyoglu where the aforementioned reasons do not apply.
The municipality claims to have received almost 1,000 complaints on the matter.
It has offered numerous reasons for the policy including alley crowding, the proliferation of establishments with only outdoor seating, the threat to cultural centres and other cultural establishments, as well as the overall decline in neighbourhood quality due to alleys turning into open bars.
Not everyone is unhappy with the new table policy, as some Asmalimescit residents have experienced problems with the bars before.
An art gallery owner, who preferred to remain anonymous, said the gallery has had endless arguments with the bars for blocking the entrance with tables.
Some of the disputes have resulted in police intervention and the owner claims to have been threatened and intimidated by the establishments' managers.
Still, some people remain optimistic that after Ramadan the municipality will allow some of the tables back.
Karasu disagrees.
"This is not the first Ramadan Beyoglu has had," he said.
He presumes that local authorities are working on a new occupancy plan that will be announced soon.
