25/04/2007

A photo exhibition dedicated to Bulgarian sumo wrestler Kotooshu Katsunori, born Kaloyan Stefanov Mahlyanov, opened in Yokohama, Japan. 
Titled "Kotooshu and his Home Country Bulgaria", it features photos of the wrestler's life and career, as well as of Bulgarian cultural and historical sites. 
The exhibition is one of the central cultural events in Japan marking Bulgaria's accession to the EU.
***
Six ceremonial pottery artefacts were returned to Greece on April 18th and will be housed at the Agora Stoa of Attalus museum in Athens. 
British scholar and collector Martin Robertson, who passed away in 2004, instructed in hs will that they be given back. 
He inherited the miniatures from US archaeologist Lucy Talcott, the recording secretary of the Agora excavations, who purchased them at a Greek antiques store.
***
The 24th Music Biennale festival opened at the Croatian National Theatre in Zagreb on April 19th. 
The programme includes performances by some 31 Croatian and foreign music ensembles. 
The festival will continue until April 28th.
***
An exhibition presenting Italian abstract art from 1910-1960 is on display at the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts (SANU) gallery in Belgrade. 
Some 70 works from private collections are featured. 
The exhibition was organised jointly by SANU and the Italian embassy in Serbia. 
It will run until May 31st.
***
Montenegrin Culture Minister Predrag Sekulic visited the Sarajevo Book Fair on April 20th. 
He said culture and art are the best paths towards regional co-operation, and expressed hope that SEE culture ministers would support an initiative to revoke duties and taxes on books and other press items in a bid to encourage cultural exchange.
***
The second International Modern and Contemporary Dance Meeting opened in Durres, Albania, on April 23rd. 
The event, organised by the Durres Beauty Association, is directed by dance professor Gjergj Prevazi. 
Dancers from Albania, Canada, France, Italy, Macedonia, the Netherlands, Serbia, Sweden and Switzerland will be participating.
(Various sources – 18/04/07-25/04/07)
