11/11/2011
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 11/11/11
Respecting Kosovo's borders is of vital importance for all regional countries and the best solution for attaining regional peace, Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha said during a visit to Macedonia on Wednesday (November 9th) at a joint press conference with Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski in Skopje.
"All suggestions for changing territorial integrity are taken straight out of Slobodan Milosevic's archives," Berisha said.
The two leaders characterised Macedonia-Albania relations as friendly and the political dialogue between them exceptional.
"Our countries have a joint future in NATO and the EU. 
Albania recognises the great progress Macedonia has achieved by fulfilling all NATO membership conditions," Berisha said, expressing hope the name issue with Greece would be solved for Macedonia to find its place in the Alliance.
The two leaders agreed the global economic crisis can be overcome by advancing big infrastructure investments aimed at attracting foreign investment. 
Berisha expressed readiness to build a railway terminal in Struga, from where Macedonian goods would be transported to Albanian ports.
Gruevski stressed Macedonia's determination to overcome all lingering questions through dialogue based on the principles of "respecting sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and peaceful solution of disputes".
Veteran analyst Petar Skrbina told SETimes that the six million Albanians in the Balkans -- spread over different states -- should be accepted as economic partners, not as a potential threat.
"The West supports regional economic and political integration, if that is mutually acceptable by the subjects. 
Berisha does not back away from these processes and trends; his support for regional integration only strengthens Albania's position," Skrbina said.
"Some interpret this as an attempt to create 'Greater Albania', but too much attention is given to this notion needlessly. 
No Albanian politician or columnist in Macedonia ever said they do not feel Macedonia in their country. 
All we need is improved social integration," he said.
However, Jove Kekenovski of Bitola's St. 
Kliment Ohridski University argues that the prime ministersˈ statements are diplomatic niceties that do not match reality.
"The new Balkan borders have not been fully drawn. 
Several years ago, I warned it is a question of time when the partition of Kosovo will come on the agenda. 
The reality is the status quo at the Jarinje border crossing can not be maintained for long," Kekenovski told SETimes.
He says an exchange of Medvedja and Bujanovac in southern Serbia for the northern part of Kosovo and autonomy for other parts in Kosovo is likely. 
"It will affect Macedonia very negatively, and a new destabilisation of the region would then be possible," he said.
During his visit, Berisha also met with Gruevski's ruling coalition partner and Democratic Union of Integration (DUI) leader Ali Ahmeti. 
Ahmeti briefed Berisha on DUIˈs interpretation of the Law of Amnesty, under which four war crimes cases involving Albanians were withdrawn from prosecution, as well as the need to advance the use of the Albanian language.
Both Ahmeti and Berisha praised the recent Albania-Kosovo agreement to cross borders solely with an ID card, and argued for maximum border liberalisation.
"Ahmeti and Berisha agreed to form a co-ordinating council to mark the 100th anniversary of Albania's independence and Flag Day," DUI said in a statement.
"By celebrating the establishment of the Albanian state and nation in 1912, Ahmeti is scoring points in his party but also among the Albanians in Macedonia," Skrbina told SETimes.
"Several years ago, Berisha publicly said his determination is for six million Albanians to become one. 
It means the idea for Greater Albania has not died down. 
Celebrating jointly the 100-year anniversary of Albania is part of that scenario. 
If Macedonia does not soon become a full member of NATO, we will enter a process of federalisation, even if there is already a certain degree of dual governance," Kekenovski said.
