10/08/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 10/08/11
Carrying Ankara's "final messages" to the Syrian regime, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu met with President Bashar al-Assad for six hours in Damascus on Tuesday (August 9th), aiming to "sit down and talk for one last time", a Turkish official told SETimes.
"Our message to al-Assad is pretty clear:
by continuing the military operations against civilian protesters he risks losing Turkey's support," Sinan Ogan, a member of the Turkish Parliament's Foreign Affairs Commission, told SETimes.
"If the bloodshed does not stop immediately, that might be the last meeting with the al-Assad regime," he warned.
"He [al-Assad] must understand that there is no way back for him hereafter," Ogan underscored.
"If he continues to kill innocent people, Turkey will have no other choice but to stand behind upcoming UN decisions."
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan held a high-level cabinet meeting Monday to discuss external security matters, including neighbouring Syria.
At least 550 people have died there in the past week, the bloodiest since protests began in March, according to media reports.
Erdogan suggested there would be consequences if Syria fails to heed Turkey's calls, saying Ankara has "run out of patience" over the brutality of the crackdown.
"We do not see the Syria issue as an external one.
It is an internal issue for us," he stated last week.
"We share a border of 850km, we have historical and cultural ties and … we cannot just watch what is happening there."
Meanwhile, some ruling party members, including former Hatay MP Mustafa Ozturk, still hope that Ankara's message to al-Assad will yield "positive results".
"We have to be careful here.
Our daughters still live in Syria with their families;
their children are here.
So, we can't close our eyes and take a sharp turn towards our closest neighbour and family members," he told SETimes.
"If al-Assad reveals a reform package and starts to take steps towards protesters, then we might consider it as a positive sign," he added.
Ayse Zarakol, assistant professor of politics at Washington and Lee University, doesn't expect Ankara's message to change Assad's mind, but "either way, it is a win-win for the AKP."
"In the unlikely event Assad does moderate his actions, AKP claims credit," she told SETimes, arguing that if al-Assad is eventually ousted, the AKP can claim to have stood up for human rights and democracy.
"Even if Assad manages to hang on with Iranian support, the AKP would not lose much for having played tough with him.
In such isolation he would likely be clamouring to re-establish economic ties with Turkey."
Zarakol said the Turkish government is calculating that the world community is increasingly impatient with Assad.
"They [the Turkish government] believe the tide has turned in the region for Muslim democracy.
They believe themselves to be on the right side of history and are making a power play with this public message for regional leadership against Iran, which remains the only country in Assad's corner."
Osman Bahadir Dincer, a Syria expert at the International Strategic Research Organisation (USAK) in Ankara, believes Turkey is unlikely to go further than discussing its "critical message" with al-Assad.
"If that was our final message, then what is Davutoglu doing in Damascus?" he asks.
"I believe our Syrian friends and brothers are expecting more from us.
We need to follow a sharp strategy here," he told SETimes.
Back in Damascus, the Syrian opposition calls on Turkey to take major steps and stop negotiating with al-Assad.
Ausama Monajed, a spokesman for a group of opposition figures in Syria and abroad, told SETimes the Syrian protestors' expectations of Turkey.
"Oil sanctions;
more regime figure sanctions;
securing entry of Doctors Without Borders to Iblid and Bukamal … kicking out all Syrian intelligence officers from the Syrian refugee camps and allowing NGOs and international media access to the camps," are just some of the actions Turkey should take, he said.
