26/03/2007

More than 100 experts from various countries who have treated H5N1 avian flu patients met at the Turkish seaside resort of Antalya to exchange experiences and discuss the improvement in survival rates. 
The three-day seminar was organised by the WHO. 
It concluded with the publication of new, updated guidelines for H5N1 treatment.
***
An international team of researchers, headed by the University of Bonn, plans to probe the layers of sediment at the bottom of Turkey's Lake Van for information about climate patterns over the last 500,000 years. 
Studying the sediment rings can reveal when volcanoes near the lake erupted, while sunken pollen grains show what sorts of plant life flourished in the area over time. 
The team, which conducted a preliminary study two years ago, has applied for funding from the International Continental Drilling Programme.
***
The Serbian Union of Librarians will hold its annual seminar First Virtual Library Network of Serbia between April 17th and 19th in Ljig, project co-ordinator Gordana Stokic Simoncic announced on March 19th. 
The event is expected to draw participants from ten Serbian libraries. 
They will discuss issues related to libraries' functions and e-environment activities, with a focus on children's departments.
***
The Serbian telco Telekom Srbije announced on March 20th that it would provide over 5.4m euros for projects to develop fixed and mobile telephony and broadband internet access. 
Telekom Srbije has invested nearly 129m euros for related purposes in the past six years.
***
The head of the European Commission Delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dimitris Kourkoulas, met with Civil Affairs Minister Sredoje Novic to sign a procurement agreement for a new wireless telecommunications system. 
It will be used by the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council (HJPC), as well as courts and prosecutors' offices in BiH. 
The EU is investing some 5.6m euros in information and communication technology programmes in the country.
(Various sources-19/03/07-26/03/07)
