10/11/2011
By Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/11/11
One Serb was killed and two others wounded after Albanian and Serb groups clashed in the northern Kosovo neighbourhood of Brdjani/Bergjani on Wednesday (November 9th).
Security forces were on the scene searching homes, but no arrests have been reported.
Kosovo Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi said that the incident was inter-ethnic, but the incident was being viewed as a robbery.
"We are [launching] joint investigations with EULEX," Rexhepi told SETimes.
"What is important is to catch the perpetrator(s) and bring [them to] justice."
Brdjani/Bergjani is a mixed area where tensions have remained high after Albanians started to rebuild their houses under KFOR protection.
Mitrovica Mayor Krstomir Pantic condemned the situation, and voiced his displeasure with KFOR.
"Unfortunately, when we show good will and when we allow freedom of movement for members of KFOR, here's what happens to Serbs in Kosovo and Mitrovica," he told SETimes.
KFOR spokesperson Uve Novicki told SETimes that the incident started when a group of people tried to rob a building site in the neghborhood.
"Suddenly there was shooting, three people were injured, one died.
KFOR was not involved at all," Novicki told SETimes.
He confirmed that the situation is calm for now.
"We hope it will remain like that.
The mayor should contribute to a peaceful situation instead of inciting it," Novicki told SETimes.
Serbia Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic asked EULEX to take over the investigation instead of the Kosovo Police.
Bogdanovic called the incident "a terrorist act", which "should be revealed as soon as possible".
The incident comes amid months of tensions over the future of Kosovo's disputed north -- where Serbs are a majority, but Kosovo authorities in control.
Earlier on Wednesday, NATO-led troops in Kosovo fired tear gas to stop two trucks trying to drive into a new checkpoint south of Gate 1 near the Jarinje northern border crossing.
KFOR said the use of gas was "short, isolated and justified".
Tanjug news agency quoted the head of Leposavic municipality in the north, Branko Ninic, saying the Serbs in the north would continue to "peacefully" oppose what they call installment of Kosovo institutions in the northern gates.
Ninic added that KFOR had used tear gas "without a reason" and that the "citizens are not resisting KFOR and other international organizations, but only the institutions of Kosovo".
Besim Hoti, a spokesperson for Kosovo police, told SETimes there is no change in the security situation.
Kosovo police are not involved in KFOR actions in the north.
"There were no inter-ethnic incidents.
It is an issue [of the Serbs] opposing the international and local institutions," Hoti told SETimes.
The situation in northern Kosovo has drawn the attention of the UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, last expressed in the latest UN report.
"The underlying, unresolved issues constitute a threat to the region's peace and stability.
I am concerned … about the deterioration of inter-ethnic relations throughout Kosovo," said Ban said.
He appealed to Pristina and Belgrade to act with restraint and patience and continue to show confidence in the dialogue, which has not restarted yet.
