10/11/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/11/11
Citizens of Banja Koviljaca, a small town 173km west of Belgrade at the border with Bosnia and Herzegovina, held a protest last week demanding asylum seekers leave their town.
The protests started after the authorities suspected that Abdulrashid D, a 25-year-old Afghan man, together with four compatriots raped a tourist from the UK.
Officially, there are 80 asylum seekers from Somalia, Pakistan, Tunisia and other African and Asian countries residing in Banja Koviljaca's asylum centre, but concerned locals say there are many more that illegally live in town.
"You meet them everywhere, they hang out in the streets day and night, and we not know who these people are," resident Verica Dokmanovic told SETimes.
The asylum centre has existed for several decades and housed thousands of people during the wars in the former Yugoslavia. 
In the last three years, however, there are an increasing number of immigrants from Africa and Asia who are running away from poverty and conflicts and seek to enter European countries.
"We have been warning the state government for months that we experience problems because of the large number of immigrants, but no one has done anything to help us,” Loznica municipality President Miroslav Vukosavljevic told SETimes.
Banja Koviljaca is a tourist town with an internationally renowned medicinal spa and numbers 6,000 residents. 
Since the beginning of the year, 2,500 refugees have passed through the asylum centre.
"Serbia is not prepared for that many immigrants," State Commissariat for Refugees representative Jelena Maric told SETimes.
Maric explained another asylum centre was recently opened in Bogovadja because the number of asylum seekers in Serbia has increased ten times in the last three years.
"We demand that asylum seekers be repositioned in other parts of Serbia and [in] legal residences," Loznica Mayor Vidoje Petrovic told SETimes.
Many citizens do not allow their children to attend school because they fear for their safety. 
Out of 400 pupils in the town’s elementary school, only 20 attend classes.
Commissariat officials said the centre in Bana Koviljaca will not be closed, but the government seeks opportunities to open new ones.
"We asked the defense ministry to provide some unused barracks which we would adapt to an asylum centre," Refugees Commissioner Vladimir Cucic told SETimes.
Cucic argued that a semi-open regime needs to be introduced at the Banja Koviljaca centre -- where asylum seekers could request permission if they want to get out.
The Asylum Seekers Assistance Centre announced it will undertake activities to calm the situation and rekindle a sense of solidarity. 
It will circulate a newsletter to describe the difficult circumstances that forced asylum seekers to leave their countries.
Officials say most Banka Koviljaca citizens have nothing against asylum seekers, but one group is spreading panic and hostility.
"At the protest against asylum seekers, some people used very inflammatory rhetoric, I do not know whether they are aware of what it could lead to," Center for the Protection and Assistance to Asylum Seekers Executive Director Radosh Djurovic told SETimes.
Djurovic cautioned the protest has worried and frightened asylum seekers and they now rarely come out of the centre except when trying to obtain food.
Djurovic also said locals were never attacked by asylum seekers, and the police have still not provided any information about the circumstances of the British tourist’s rape.
Serbia is among the world’s top three countries by the number of asylum applications -- trailing Afghanistan and China.
