10/10/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/10/11
The ongoing protests by Serbs in Kosovo's north have sparked a serious security situation for KFOR.
In an exclusive interview with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku, KFOR Commander General Erhard Drews discusses the security situation and the possibility for a solution.
SETimes:
How would you assess the security situation in northern Kosovo?
General Erhard Drews:
The situation remains volatile and needs continued close monitoring.
We look to all sides to prevent actions that may be perceived as provocation.
SETimes:
How difficult is it to control northern Kosovo in terms of security?
Drews:
Currently, groups establishing barricades in a way locked down their roads and every normal economic or social activity is prevented.
Barricades in that extent do not represent a form of peaceful protest but are doing harm to economic development.
Moreover, they impact on the ability of firefighters, ambulances and other emergency organisations to assist people living in the area.
I would like barricades to be removed as a result of a political process, not by force.
At KFOR we always try to avoid unnecessarily injuring someone or even hurting innocent people.
There is always the risk that the action aimed at removing the barricades by force might jeopardise a peaceful and safe environment.
Having said that, KFOR reserves the right to act whenever it is deemed necessary for operational reasons.
Our focus is on enabling civilians to lead normal lives:
I am therefore glad that the administrative boundary gates are open.
The problem is they cannot be used because some individuals and groups decided to set up roadblocks around them.
So it is not NATO which is cutting off access to Serbia:
it is those who built the roadblocks.
SETimes:
Will KFOR take future steps to remove the barricades in the north?
Drews:
As I said before:
KFOR reserves the right to remove the barricades whenever it deems necessary.
We will certainly not tolerate them forever.
We have all necessary capabilities to remove any obstacle if requested.
As of now KFOR forces will continue to remain engaged with the aim of allowing for the people themselves to come to the conclusion that a voluntary removal is foremost in their interest.
However, at some point our assessment will lead us to the conclusion that we remove roadblocks where this is required.
SETimes:
Serbs have accused KFOR of shooting on civilians in the latest incident in the gates in the north.
How would you respond to that?
Drews:
KFOR's actions were clearly in self-defence.
They were proportionate and based on the use of minimum necessary force, in accordance with our mandate.
That has been admitted by the Serbian Minister of Defence, even if only some days later.
I think it is known to the public that our Rules of Engagement are robust and give the commanders the necessary options to carry out their mission successfully and safely.
As a last resort, my troops are empowered to use force to defend themselves.
SETimes:
You are supporting EULEX at the gates.
How efficient is your co-operation with EULEX police?
Drews:
Our co-operation is excellent and I can say that our joint presence really symbolises that we, KFOR and EULEX, stand side by side.
We have a complex political situation that leads to complex operational challenges.
We will continue to address them jointly.
The co-operation is effective because it is very clear who does what:
EULEX is in charge of Gates 1 and 31 and is supported by Kosovo police and customs officers.
KFOR troops are manning the security perimeter around the gates.
Both gates are technically ready to be fully operational, but the roadblocks and barricades that have been erected on nearby roads prevent the gates from opening.
No commercial, pedestrian or vehicular traffic is possible at this stage.
SETimes:
There has been information for new reinforcements sent to KFOR.
How significant is this reinforcement?
Drews:
No additional troops were brought in from outside theatre, though additional KFOR capabilities were moved to the gate from within Kosovo in response to the security situation around the Jarinje crossing point on September 27th.
In part two of this interview, Drews discusses a solution for the situation in the north, and the mission's relationship with the local Serb population.
