09/08/2011
(Various sources -- 05/08/11 - 09/08/11)
A two-month ban on short selling on the Athens Stock Exchange entered into force on Tuesday (August 9th) morning, after the bourse's main index sank to its lowest level in more than 14 years at the start of the week.
Announcing its decision following the end of Monday's session, Greece's securities regulator, the Hellenic Capital Markets Commission, said the move was prompted by extraordinary circumstances and would be effective until October 7th.
"The board of the capital market commission, after considering the urgent circumstances on the Greek market, has decided to ban short selling in listed stocks on the Athens bourse," Reuters quoted the commission as saying.
In short selling, the seller does not own the stock, but borrows it and sells it, expecting that its value will decrease, when he or she can buy it back at a lower price and keep the difference.
The Greek regulator decided to impose a ban on the practice after the Athens general index dropped 6% during Monday's session, ending at 998.24 points, thus slipping to a level below the psychologically important 1,000-point mark for the first time since January 1997.
It is the third time since the global financial crisis broke out in late 2008 that the body has resorted to such a measure.
According to commission officials, it was primarily foreign investors that conducted most of the short-selling activity on Monday.
"We saw a continuing increase in short-selling positions and marginal sell orders coming from short positions were really having an effect on the market," Financial Times quoted the regulator's chairman, Anastassios Gabrielides, as saying.
He also suggested that the ban could be lifted before October 7th.
Monday's decline reflected a host of recent unfavourable developments, the latest being the one-notch downgrade of the US debt's top AAA rating by Standard and Poor's (S&P) rating agency last week. 
It came amid a spiralling crisis in the Eurozone that has further fuelled concerns that other debt-laden members of the 17-nation club, aside from the already bailed out Greece, Ireland and Portugal, might need rescue aid to avoid default.
Just days after the July 21st deal on a fresh 109-billion-euro bailout for Greece, fears grew that Italy and Spain, the third- and the fourth-largest economies among the 17 EU nations using the euro, could be dragged into the area's widening debt crisis. 
A set of measures aimed at convincing markets that the Eurozone can deal with the ongoing crisis have failed to produce that effect.
The panic sparked by S&P's announcement last week hit not only the Greek bourse, but spread also to many other stock markets on Monday, including those of Bulgaria, Serbia and Turkey.
Of the three countries, Bulgaria appeared to be least hit with its main SOFIX blue chips index dropping 2.32% to 390.07 points at the close of the session.
Meanwhile, Serbian and Turkish stocks each fell the most in the course of the past about three years. 
Serbia's Belex15 index slumped nearly 5.9%, ending at 639.33 points at close Monday.
Investors' shaken confidence also saw Turkey's benchmark Istanbul stock index fall by 7.1%, the largest decline since October 2008, to 52,284 points -- the lowest level recorded since March last year.
