11/07/2011
(CNA, AP - 08/07/11;
BBC, Xinhua, Voice of America, AP, Zaman, Aljazeera, Famagusta Gazette - 07/07/11)
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon hosted a fresh round of talks between Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Dervis Eroglu in Geneva on Thursday (July 7th).
After the meeting, Ban said the UN has failed to reach any significant progress in the ongoing talks to reunify the divided island.
"Some important areas have not been touched yet," Ban said, but at the same time recognised the efforts both sides have made to move the negotiations forward since January, when the previous trilateral meeting was held in Geneva.
"The leaders have agreed to enter into an intensive period of negotiations on the core issues when they return to the island," Ban stated, expressing hope that "by October the leaders will be able to report that they have reached convergence on all core issues, and we will meet that month in New York."
"This will take the Cyprus negotiations close to their conclusion and would allow me to give a positive report to the [UN] Security Council on the matter.
It would also pave the way for me to work with the parties towards convening a final, international conference," he said.
The Greek and Turkish communities in Cyprus relaunched their direct reunification talks in 2008.
The main source of dispute in the talks has been the reinstatement of ownership rights to the thousands of people who were forced out of their properties when Cyprus was divided in 1974.
Other problems include power sharing, economy, territory and security, citizenship and EU membership.
In his first reaction after the meeting, Christofias said Greek Cypriots are ready to intensify the talks and expect the Turkish Cypriots to follow a policy in line with the agreed basis of the Cyprus talks that would pave the way for a productive dialogue aiming at reaching a solution of the Cyprus problem.
"The Greek Cypriot side is ready to enter into a substantive discussion on all chapters of the Cyprus problem with the Turkish Cypriot side in the context of the UN-led peace talks aiming at finding a comprehensive solution that will reunite the island," he added.
Turkey's Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu met Eroglu in the Turkish part of Nicosia on Saturday to discuss the results of the meeting.
Speaking after the discussions, Davutoglu expressed hope that a deal on the island's reunification would be a fact before Cyprus takes over the EU presidency in the middle of 2012.
"It will be against European values if one side is being isolated and the other side will be seen as the representative of the entire island during this presidency.
This will be another mistake," Davutoglu said.
According to Davutoglu, the deal should be reached by the end of this year and should be followed by referendums in both parts of the island sometime in the first months of 2012, which would allow Cyprus to assume "a legitimate presidency to represent the whole island."
