10/02/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 10/02/12
Although the country began constructing highways more than a decade ago, BiH has built only 72km of roads.
Authorities are hoping that construction will be accelerated, and the new highways will save the economy.
The RS Ministry of Transport and Communications announced a tender for the construction of the Banja Luka-Doboj Motorway, which is planned to run 37km.
The 3 billion-euro road will be part of a 400km network of highways that the entity is planning to build by 2020.
The country's other entity is building a 340km highway -- Corridor 5C -- which will also cost about 3 billion euros.
FBiH authorities said, however, that construction is going slowly.
BiH's Parliamentary Committee for Transport Chairman Petar Kunic says funding is one problem.
"In addition to the lack of money, politics is also to blame for the lack of roads.
The highway is the basic preresquisite for the development of a country;
I think that businessmen and citizens and politicians agree on that," Kunic told SETimes.
A large portion of the construction funds -- 70% -- are expected to come from loans and credits from international financial institutions.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (ERBD) and the European Investment Bank (EIB) have expressed interest in this project, which is the biggest infrastructure project in BiH ever.
FBiH Traffic and Comunications Deputy Minister Zeljko Matoc said that the construction of the highway through BiH will produce thousands of new jobs and launch businesses.
"If we had started to build highways immediately after the war, we wouldn't even feel the economic crisis now.
Unfortunately, BiH lags behind the region.
A highway for a country [is like the] human bloodstream.
If there are no highways, there's no strong industry," Matoc tells SETimes.
Vranica Commerce is a firm that deals with the international transport of goods.
Director Enes Secunovic tells SETimes that given the current condition of roads, a new highway could reduce costs.
"The roads are full of holes;
it costs a lot of money [due to] the depreciation of the trucks.
It would be much better to pay a road toll than paying truck repairs," Secunovic said.
Boris Tihi, a professor at the Faculty of Economy in Sarajevo, says a new highway network in BiH could have regional benefits as well.
"Tourism, transport and industry would have the greatest benefit from the highway.
The highway would connect BiH with the region and with Europe.
It would also mean more foreign investment," Tihi told SETimes.
Tihomir Ljubojevic, director of the Tourist Organisation of RS, told SETimes that traffic infrastructure is a major factor in the tourism sector.
"Speed limits, police controls, tight roads, holes in the roads ...
it's all things that tourists [factor in].
If someone wants to visit one of our mountains, they need to drive ten hours to get there."
