10/02/2012
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/02/12
Reporters and editors in Kosovo say the government's decision to remove the 16% value added tax (VAT) on the media is a needed step towards stabilising the industry.
The decision benefits more than 100 broadcast companies and more than 20 daily and periodical print outlets. 
Removing the VAT is particularly important for broadcasters, which have higher costs because of their expensive, digitalised process.
"It's a significant contribution for enforcing media sustainability at a time when they are facing numerous problems," Imer Mushkolaj, chief executive of the Kosovo Association of Professional Journalists, told SETimes.
The VAT is a tax on profit on a product -- the difference between what an item costs to manufacture and the price for which it is sold. 
Collections occur every time a business in the supply chain purchases or produces a product and resells it.
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci promised to eliminate the VAT on media during the 2010 election campaign.
Many media organisations have relied on foreign donations and advertising from government departments for financial support. 
But the government stopped advertising last year and international donations have waned.
Naile Selimaj Krasniqi, head of the Independent Media Commission, told SETimes that the decision is especially productive for media imported equipment. 
She says some broadcasters required help from Independent Media Commission (IMC) to facilitate import of their equipment, something her institution was unable to do due to legal constraints.
"At the time when Kosovo media are facing serious challenges, especially after the government's decision to ban advertising in the media, VAT removal is a great facility for [the] media market in Kosovo, which is relatively small," Mentor Shala, deputy general director for Kosovo Public Broadcast, told SETimes.
Shala says the decision will help establish media freedom, since the media will now have more money to spend on reporting and development.
"VAT removal will significantly help media for a quick digitalisation, because it's a complex and expensive process," said Shala, adding that the VAT discharge will be useful also for local businesses in Kosovo, as they pay large sums for advertising.
Mushkolaj doubts that VAT removal is directly linked to editorial independence.
"Some professional journalists and media know to work in the interest of objective public reporting, even before this decision, and will continue to do so. 
Some journalists and media serve as spokespersons for institutions, and do not care for editorial independence. 
They have another mission," he says.
Adrian Qollaku, editor at the daily Zeri, agrees that the VAT discharge will boost media sustainability and will further stabilise his newspaper, indirectly enforcing its independence and professionalism.
"Indirectly, sustainability and independence of media will be effective for the society for the basic reason that it will protect public interest and human rights," Qollaku told SETimes.
However, while the government claims to be addressing media concerns, Qollaku says that the government should first be more transparent with the media.
"For over a year, it [the government] doesn't have a spokesperson. 
In some cases, individual ministers cut off media relations if they are criticised on an abuse or law violation, and it's something we experienced in two cases in talking to our newspaper," he says.
