08/11/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 08/11/11
Boosting co-operation on security matters, including civil emergencies, was the focus of a conference hosted last week in the Kosovo city of Pec.
Defence ministers from Albania and Macedonia attended the Thursday (November 3rd) event, led by Kosovo Security Forces Minister Agim Çeku.
Also present were senior officials from Croatia, Montenegro and Slovenia and representatives of NATO and the US European Command.
It was the first meeting at such a level organised by Kosovo.
Two countries -- Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia -- were not invited due to their non-recognition of Kosovo as an independent state.
"This century is the century of integration and globalisation, which helps us to know each other better, help each other, exchange best practices, and find more acceptable solutions in establishing peace and stability worldwide," Kosovo President Atifete Jahjaga said as she addressed participants.
"Threats against our national security are not isolated, [nor] specific problems to our respective countries," she said.
"The challenges faced by region are threats of transnational and global nature, which do not recognise state borders."
Boosting emergency response capability is an important issue for the region, Security Studies Professor Avdullah Hasani told SETimes.
"[The conference] comes soon after the Serbian-Russian emergency centre became operational," he said.
"I would not see this conference as a direct action because of this emergency centre, but addressing this important aspect of civil security in the region is important."
According to military commentator Fatmir Halili, the event was a boost to Kosovo's regional profile, even though participation was limited.
"It's unfortunate that not all countries participated at the ministerial level as had been announced," he told SETimes.
"Nevertheless, I think the image of the country can be improved by such events where Kosovo shows its readiness to take responsibilities for regional and global challenges."
He added that Kosovo should press ahead with efforts to become part of the regional and international security framework.
"There is the political obstacle of non-recognition which makes it difficult to join PfP or NATO at all, but this neither has harmed relations with NATO," Halili said.
Political commentator Fatlum Sadiku said, however, that the conference should have included more countries from the region.
"It is unclear why the organisers did not invite countries like Turkey, Bulgaria or Hungary when Slovenia was invited.
Those countries, and especially Turkey, play an important role in regional security and partnering with the KSF," Sadiku told SETimes.
Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania should hold political and defence consultations in the future, he said.
"The leadership of those countries meets annually.
Now the time has come for foreign and defence ministers to consult regularly, because those countries are small and territorial neighbours, which make co-operation an imperative," Sadiku said.
Speaking at the conference, Albanian Defence Minister Arben Imami said Kosovo has support in the region for its efforts to integrate into regional and Euro-Atlantic structures.
He described the meeting as a significant milestone.
"Taking into consideration all the support that the North Atlantic Alliance has consecutively given to this new state of Europe ...
all of us hope that this road will be much shorter," he said.
"But we must say that this is a step forward."
