24/07/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 23/07/06
VMRO-DPMNE has emerged as the winner of the Macedonian parliamentary elections, garnering the most votes and the most parliamentary seats. 
The general consensus is that party leader Nikola Gruevski -- who has received the mandate to form a new government -- faces a difficult task over the next four years, particularly on the economic front.
Analyses have shown that it was mainly because of poor economic results, low living standards and, most importantly, the enormous unemployment rate that the incumbent Social Democrats lost the elections.
Gruevski has promised a lot. 
There is almost no area that has not been covered by VMRO-DPMNE's programme, "Renaissance in 100 steps". 
The party has been calling for swift change, and voters responded to that call.
With a degree in economics and a track record as minister of finance in the last VMRO-DPMNE-led government, between 1998 and 2002, Gruevski is seen as a moderate. 
His pledges essentially boil down to this: in the coming period, the state will intervene in the market by opening its coffers for state-run investments. 
For instance, capital investments in infrastructure, as part of a larger support for total investments, will increase.
The outgoing Minister Nikola Popovski represented the opposite pole. 
He carried out a rigid economising policy, imposed fiscal discipline and had a conservative approach to monetary policy. 
The outgoing government was disciplined in fulfilling all the requirements imposed by the IMF and the World Bank.
Some experts say the Macedonian economy has been operating at "dry", with very low levels of state investment in the past years. 
Consequently, the state coffers are full, the currency is stable and inflation rates are low. 
These are parameters that speak of a good foundation for a stable and sustainable growth. 
For example, two months before the elections, the government sold the state-run power supply company for 212m euros. 
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski then pledged to deliver his promise that the money would not be spent and would be made available to the new government, whatever it is.
Gruevski should therefore have a good foundation for improving the economic situation. 
In addition, sources in Brussels point out that Macedonia can count on about 200m euros from the new EU Instrument for Pre-accession fund over the next three years.
The last time VMRO-DPMNE was in power, then Finance Minister Gruevski carried out a rather undisciplined monetary and fiscal policy, which led to termination of the arrangements with the Breton Wood institutions. 
The "Renaissance in 100 steps" suggest the party's philosophy has not changed; however, the situation is different. 
Macedonia now has EU candidate status, its credit rating has improved, and great improvements have been made in the security situation. 
The time may be ripe for a policy shift, say experts.
EU support, at least in the second half of 2008 and in 2009, could be used for infrastructure projects -- roads, sewage and water supply networks. 
This means engagement of large construction companies, job creation and the fostering of a better business climate for small-size enterprises and secondary activities.
"Fiscal policy will continue to be disciplined though moderately more relaxed in the area of capital investments. 
Starting from 2007, we will increase public investments on the level of 5 per cent of GDP (currently at 3 per cent), the average of the EU new members. 
We will use these investments to fund important infrastructure projects," says the VMRO DPMNE in its Programme.
If the economic performance of the country improves, it will be able to meet one of the conditions -- stable economy and sustainable growth -- for EU membership. 
At the same time, an improved economy will bring relief to Macedonia's citizens.
However, Gruevski must now sell the IMF and World Bank on a more relaxed fiscal and monetary policy and fewer constraints on state spending.
Macedonian companies have long sought an abandonment of the fixed exchange rate of the denar, which is pegged to the euro at the rate of 1:62. 
The companies argue that the denar is overvalued at the current rate, hurting exports and making them uncompetitive in foreign markets. 
They want to see the introduction of floating or market exchange rates. 
The danger of meeting such requests is the possibility of an inflationary spiral. 
The alternative is devaluation of the denar.
The plans presented in Gruevski’s programme are ambitious, experts say. 
He anticipates, for example, the lowest tax rates in Europe -- via introduction of a flat tax, with a single rate for personal income tax. 
Taxes on profits would be lowered in two phases, to 12 per cent in January 2007, and to 10 per cent in January 2008. 
The value added tax, meanwhile, would be lowered from 18 per cent to 5 per cent for agricultural raw materials and machinery in October 2006. 
The party says any resulting holes in the budget could be filled through more efficient tax collection.
Macedonian businesses and individual citizens appear to welcome such changes. 
However, what they want even more than that is a concrete improvement in living standards. 
Gruevski and VMRO-DPMNE come into office with the public behind them, but maintaining that support will likely hinge on being able to deliver on campaign promises.
