24/11/2006

The World Economic Forum, which opened in Istanbul on Thursday (November 23rd), focused on regional energy policy, energy transportation resources and transit security. 
Turkish Industry and Trade Minister Ali Coskun, speaking at the opening ceremony, noted that Turkey placed 17th among the 20 strongest economies in the world over the past few years. 
He said his country is an example of stability for the Middle East, the Caucasus and the Balkan countries.
***
Only two companies -- Austria's Telekom Austria and Serbia's Telekom Srbija -- submitted bids in the privatisation tender for 65% of the Republika Srpska (RS) firm Telekom Srpske by the November 20th deadline. 
RS Transportation and Communications Minister Nedeljko Cubrilovic said the low number of bids would not affect the cabinet's intention to sell Telekom Srpske for at least 400m euros.
***
Bulgaria's State Commission for Energy and Water Regulation has imposed 11,000 euros in fines on the Austrian company EVN for violations in August electricity bills. 
EVN runs two Bulgarian regional power distributors, at Plovdiv and Stara Zagora. 
Lack of preparation resulted in overcharging subscribers.
***
The Croatian food and pharmaceutical company Podravka is in talks with Austrian-registered Kreis Industriehandel on the purchase of a majority stake in the Banja Luka food and beverage producer Vitaminka. 
Local press reports say the price of Kreis Industriehandel's 76% stake in Vitaminka could reach 30m euros.
***
A new gas pipeline, connecting the Croatian oil and gas industry INA's new platforms in the north Adriatic Sea to the Pula terminal and further to Karlovac, was officially inaugurated on November 22nd. 
Total investment in the project exceeds 100m euros. 
According to Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, the new gas pipeline is expected to reduce supply problems during the winter and enable the development of gas networks in the region.
***
Macedonian internet provider On.net last week announced plans to start offering telephony services on the local market -- in competition with the Hungarian-owned Macedonian Telecommunications (MT) -- as of January 24th. 
The company has sealed interconnection agreements with MT and the Greek-run mobile phone operator Cosmofon, and expects to sign an accord with the other wireless carrier, T-Mobile Macedonia.
(Various sources 17/11/06-24/11/06)
