05/09/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 05/09/11
With veteran politician and former KLA member Fatmir Limaj under a fresh indictment on war crimes charges, speculation is mounting about the potential impact on Kosovo politics -- and, in particular, on Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo.
EULEX last week officially confirmed the indictment against Limaj and nine others. 
They stand accused of torturing and killing prisoners held at a detention centre in the village of Klecka in 1999.
The case has been held up for months because of Limaj's immunity as a member of parliament, and due to political quarrels over how to handle the issue.
According to political commentator Fatlum Sadiku, an unfavourable court ruling against Limaj could also have a negative effect on Thaci during next year's presidential elections.
"His party, despite differences, is still together. 
But if Limaj is sentenced, as one of the main members of PDK he will hold Thaci responsible, and leave the party, Sadiku said. 
"This is one of the reasons why Thaci is trying to convince other political parties to postpone the presidential elections until 2013."
According to Seb Bytyci of the Balkan Policy Institute, however, a verdict against Limaj could actually strengthen Thaci's hand, as his main rival for the party leadership would be out of contention.
"A possible arrest or guilty verdict of Limaj can have several consequences. 
Regarding PDK, it may weaken its position in general. 
But it may strengthen the position of Hashim Thaci within the PDK, as Limaj is seen as a rival," says Bytyci.
The delicacy of PDK's internal politics was already on display as the government and parliament grappled with the issue of immunity.
"There are two blocs in PDK, one led by Thaci and one led by [Parliament] Speaker Krasniqi and Limaj," Sadiku explained. 
"When the prime minister sent the immunity file to the court, despite the speaker's opposition, it was clear that the processes ahead would make the politicians angry because of the feeling that one side loses and one wins."
Meanwhile, Limaj is also under investigation for corruption, a spokesperson for the EU's justice mission confirmed to SETimes. 
The allegations stem from his time as minister of transport.
The probe is "ongoing," said the spokesman, Nicholas Hawton, adding that it will take time, and a prosecutorial extension may be needed.
"A large amount of material is currently under assessment. 
Noteworthy is that the KCCP (Kosovo Criminal Code of Procedure) provides the possibility for the prosecution to investigate a complex case for 18 months and, in addition, in 'extraordinary cases' to file a request for extension to the supreme court of Kosovo for a further six months. 
People under investigation continue to be interviewed by EULEX prosecutors," Hawton said.
In 2003, Limaj was indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on war crimes charges stemming from alleged abuses at another KLA detention camp, in Lapushnik. 
He was acquitted of all charges.
"The Klecka case is not the same as the one for which he was acquitted in the ICTY," Hawton stressed.
