05/09/2011
(The Sofia Echo, Sofias News Agency, FOCUS News Agency, Dnevnik.bg -- 04/09/11 - 05/09/11; Mediapool, Sega, Reuters, AFP - 04/09/11)
Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB) on Sunday (September 4th) nominated Regional Development Minister Rosen Plevneliev as its candidate for Bulgaria's upcoming presidential elections.
The 47-year-old soft-spoken technocrat is one of more than a dozen contenders hoping to win the October 23rd vote and succeed incumbent President Georgi Parvanov, whose second five-year term ends in January.
Other key presidential hopefuls include Bulgaria's first EU Commissioner Meglena Kuneva, who is running as an independent candidate and former Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin, who has been nominated for the post by the country's Socialist party.
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov, the leader of GERB, officially confirmed Plevneliev's nomination at a news conference in Sofia, along with that of Justice Minister Margarita Popova as vice-presidential candidate. 
The two ministers, neither of whom is a member of the ruling or any other party, will submit their resignations on Wednesday, when their replacements will be announced.
Hours before Borisov's announcement, polling agency MBMD named Plevneliev as the front-runner in the presidential race citing the results of its latest public opinion survey, noting however that Bulgaria's next president is likely to be elected in a run-off on October 30th.
The regional development minister would garner 32.7% of the vote if the elections were held today, MBMD said. 
Kuneva would come out a distant second with 15.7%, ahead of Kalfin with 12.3%. 
Whoever of those two would make it to the second round of the vote, Plevneliev would win, the agency believed.
Volen Siderov, the head of the ultranationalist Ataka party and the only leader of a parliamentary represented party running for the presidential post, is expected to get only 2% of the vote, well below the 21.5% he garnered in the first round of the last presidential elections in 2006. 
He was then defeated in the run-off by Parvanov, who won a second term in office after taking 76% of the vote.
Krasimir Karakachanov, the leader of another Bulgarian nationalist party, VMRO, is likely to muster 2.3% of the vote on October 23rd, while Rumen Hristov, who was nominated as candidate for the presidential post by the right-wing Blue Coalition, would get 1.9%.
Controversial Bulgarian businessman Alexei Petrov, a former commando and advisor at the State Agency for National Security who was arrested in 2010 on charges of involvement in serious organised crime could get 1.5% of the vote, according to the MBMD poll.
The survey, conducted by the agency between August 29th and September 1st among 1,052 voters, also showed that about 20% of the respondents will not vote in the election.
Alpha Research also expects the GERB candidate to win the vote, but in the second round, which other polling agencies also see as inevitable.
Aside from the presidential poll, local government elections will also be held in Bulgaria on October 23rd.
