08/07/2011
(BNT, Dnevnik - 07/07/11;
Mediafax, Voice of America, AP, Jerusalem Post - 06/07/11)
Benjamin Netanyahu became the first Israeli prime minister to visit Romania in 20 years on Wednesday (July 6th), as part of a European tour that includes Bulgaria.
Analysts say the tour aims to boost support for his country against the Palestinians' intention to ask the UN to recognise their independence in the autumn.
It is also part of a growing effort by Israel to strengthen ties with countries in the Balkans amid strained relations with Turkey.
"We reaffirmed our country's position that a negotiated solution between the parties, with no unilateral solution, is the only way to ensure real and solid grounds for a lasting peace," Romanian Prime Minister Emil Boc told a press conference after meeting with Netanyahu in Bucharest, confirming his country's support for Israel.
Netanyahu, meanwhile, emphasised the potential of cultivating ties with Romania.
"There are many problems [in Israel], particularly in agriculture.
You have plenty of water, we have little;
we have less land, you have more;
and more competition is needed in the agriculture and food industry.
Competition creates lower prices and better service, and Romania is only two hours away from Israel.
This should encourage Romanian producers of goods and services to come to the Israeli market," he said.
"We're decided to impose a new, pragmatic level to our bilateral collaboration," Boc said in turn.
He announced plans for a meeting in November to discuss joint projects in the fields of agriculture, energy, infrastructure, defence, tourism, health care, the environment and culture.
After meeting with Romanian President Traian Basescu, Netanyahu and his delegation of seven cabinet ministers arrived in Bulgaria on Thursday.
Netanyahu said the UN resolution on the Palestinian issue is not the only reason he came, but was among the topics discussed.
The Palestinians, who plan to ask the UN to recognise their independence in September, hope to win support from two-thirds of the 192-member General Assembly for a non-binding resolution.
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov said his country has always supported peaceful negotiations and mutual understanding.
"We are in talks with our colleagues at the EU;
our firm opinion is that everybody should sit back at the negotiating table, so that peace could prevail, and this will be our position at the UN," he said.
Netanyahu said his personal mission is to introduce Israel to the opportunities Bulgaria offers as a port to European markets and other economic benefits.
The meetings were followed by a joint session of the two governments chaired by their leaders, the first of its kind ever held by Israel in a Balkan state.
Bulgaria has only had one such session previously, with Greece.
The two countries signed several agreements -- on co-operation in the defence industry, industrial production, and on science and research activities.
They also renewed an agreement on mutual investment protection.
Late in the afternoon, Netanyahu met with President Georgi Parvanov, agreeing that traditionally warm bilateral ties should lead to more concrete economic results.
In an interview with Reuters ahead of the visits Wednesday, Netanyahu outlined the potential of Israel's relations with the Balkans.
"We are finding new partnerships, new alliances in places where we had once invested little time, energy and resources," Netanyahu said.
"While there is all this talk of Israel being isolated, these countries are deeply eager to develop ties.
