07/10/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/10/11
Since Slobodan Milosevic's autocratic regime was ousted in a display of people power on October 5, 2000, Serbia has held four general elections.
However, despite democratisation and the prospect of gaining EU candidate country status, ordinary citizens are still concerned over bread and butter issues.
With an average monthly salary of about 400 euros, Serbians have one of the lowest incomes and standards of living in Europe.
"I can't say it's worse now than it was under Milosevic;
there are no wars, sanctions and hyperinflation now.
Still, I'm not happy with how I'm living … I'm barely making ends meet and my salary is not enough to provide my five-member family with everything they need," explained mathematics teacher Milanka Predic, 42.
Jelena Trivan, spokeswoman for President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party, told SETimes that plenty has been done over the last 11 years, but that the battle for a better standard of living continues.
"The standard is better than it was in 2000, but still not satisfactory.
We have to fight for a better quality of life for citizens in the fields of economy and social policy, while in the judiciary we are facing an even more decisive struggle against corruption and organised crime," Trivan said.
She also stresses that prior to 2000, Serbia was a country ruled by dictatorship and chaos, whereas now it is a democratic country that hopes to become an EU candidate by the end of the year.
"The EU has acknowledged our reforms.
Still, the fact it took us 11 years shows what deep and extensive reforms had to be implemented," Trivan said.
She said that the 2003 assassination of the first democratically elected prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, slowed the reform process and revealed the extent of resistance to changes in the country.
The political scene has also undergone changes over the past 11 years and Milosevic's defeated Socialist Party of Serbia has again become a major player.
Since July 2008, the Socialist Party has been a member of Serbia's ruling coalition and holds three ministerial posts in the current cabinet.
Mirko Cvetkovic serves as prime minister, party leader Ivica Dacic is the first deputy prime minister and interior minister, and party vice-president Slavica Djukic-Dejanovic is speaker of parliament.
Dacic underscores that the Socialists of today are completely different than they were during Milosevic's rule.
"The Socialists are now a modern party of the left that fights for social justice.
I thank those who toppled us from power on October 5th, because in the meantime we've learned a lot and realised all of our mistakes," Dacic said.
In the election that preceded the changes of October 5, 2000, Milosevic was beaten by Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) leader Vojislav Kostunica, who was nominated by the then-United Democratic Opposition of Serbia.
Kostunica then became the president of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and later, between 2004 and 2008, occupied the post of Serbian prime minister.
Today his DSS is in the opposition.
DSS spokesman Predrag Petkovic told SETimes that the foundations of democracy were laid back in 2000, but that the current government has pushed the country into a deep crisis, with a failing economy and unstable state institutions.
"By leading the detrimental policy of no alternative to Europe, the current authorities have managed to shake up all values established on October 5th," Petkovic says.
"The solution lies in the policy of preserving state and national interests."
But sociologist Vladimir Goati believes Serbia is now a completely different country than it was 11 years ago.
"Serbia is a now a country much closer to civilisation, closer to the EU," he told SETimes.
