05/08/2011
By Ksenija Jurković for Southeast European Times in Sibenik -- 05/08/11
Joining the EU has long been considered something of a national mission for Croatia, and expectations that the country will benefit are high.
Access to a larger market, the free flow of goods and capital, and a greater degree of certainty for investors are just some of the benefits Croats could see by joining the EU.
"When investors come to my office, most frequently they ask me, 'When will you enter the EU?' Since I know the accession will happen within 18 to 24 months and that this is a reasonable period for investments, [I tell them] I am sure it is an impetus for new investments in the Republic of Croatia," Domagoj Ivan Milosevic, vice president for government investments, said after a business lunch organised by the American Chamber of Commerce in Croatia.
"I expect positive developments.
For tourism specifically, accession could mean an easier tourist influx once we enter the Schengen area, for which EU entry is a precondition.
We must win some EU grants.
I expect a ripple of positive effects," Josko Lokas, a tourism sector entrepreneur, told SETimes.
Economists are more cautious when it comes to the positive impact of Croatia's accession.
Zoran Aralica of the Zagreb Institute of Economics agrees that access to the large EU market will be an advantage for Croatia.
"However, caution is needed because doing business in the new regional markets [the EU] requires technical and technological expertise that our companies, by and large, do not have," Aralica told SETimes.
Many small and medium-sized Croatian enterprises harbour similar fears -- that they will face a disadvantage in penetrating a large European market lacking competitiveness, and that, for the same reason, they will not be able to retain existing ones.
"Accession to the EU will create problems both for trade and entrepreneurs in general.
It is obvious that technologically we lag behind the rest of the world, where progress is fast.
It is impossible to make up for five years of war and the economic crisis that will certainly last until the end of the year.
Hence, even the bleakest scenarios are possible, like the decimation of trade and other businesses," Ante Mihic of the Croatian Chamber of Crafts tells SETimes.
"Whether small and medium-sized enterprises will survive or perish depends primarily on the type and manner of operations and sustainability of total indebtedness of the economy at the macro level.
In fact, both conditions act simultaneously," Aralica said.
Withdrawing from CEFTA and joining the EU will result in tariff rate increases.
Among other things, it could affect the tobacco industry and the Croatian Tobacco factory Rovinj, one of the most profitable Croatian companies, which by and large exports to a number of neighbouring countries including Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Macedonia.
Concerns have been raised that the process might lead to increased prices, and indirectly strengthen the black market.
"However, the approaching Croatian membership has inevitably led to the initiation and strengthening of the policy process, which facilitated improved decision-making at the institutional level," says Aralica, citing the increasing number of participants in the creation and implementation of policy decisions.
"One of the positives [of the EU accession] is definitely access to EU funds," he notes, adding that state institutions must be able to formulate project activities to fund.
