07/12/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 07/12/11
Experts say Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) domestic producers will face a predicament as Croatia joins an export market out of the country's reach due to new regulations.
EU officials reiterated it is necessary to establish one "address" with which Brussels will be able to communicate.
Currently in BiH, there are 12 agriculture, ten cantonal and two entity ministries.
"Each ministry is conducting its own politics.
Farmers simply don't know where to turn," farmer Atif Malic from Jablanica told SETimes.
Currently, BiH exports steel, machinery and tools to the EU, while food export is problematic due to a chaotic administrative situation.
Officials in Sarajevo want to establish a state agriculture ministry, but politicians from Republika Srpska (RS) say it is not necessary, claiming that certain functions will be taken from RS to the state level, and in turn weaken the entity.
Experts, however, assess this is the least of the problems BiH will face as Croatia enters the EU.
Real obstacles that the domestic manufacturers will face include an insufficient number of equipped border crossings, under-equipped analysis laboratories, and lack of licenses, which are required for exported goods to enter the EU market.
Zeljko Marijan, director of the Livno dairy, says his company has already begun to search for other markets.
"Over 60% of our products are exported to Croatia.
We will lose a major market due to our tough policy," Marijan told SETimes.
The UNDP, however, considers it scandalous that no one warned BiH farmers and manufacturers about the danger.
"For example, you produce dry meat.
To export to Croatia you will have to go to Croatia to analyse the product in their laboratories and obtain a license from their government.
This is a major expense and time loss.
That is not how the trade process works," Nedim Catovic, the head of UNDP in BiH, told SETimes.
He added that BiH currently does not fulfill the EU conditions for trade, and therefore, BiH manufacturers and farmers will not be able to export products to Croatia.
"These are primarily milk and meat products," Catovic noted.
Snezana Stankovic, a Banja Luka-based economics expert, said that the two basic problems will be product quality and quantity.
"Our laboratories for testing food do not meet the EU standards.
Croatia is one of the most important markets for BiH and this problem will escalate when Croatia enters the EU," Stankovic told SETimes.
"The second thing is quantity;
BiH will not be able to export an unlimited amount of products in Croatia, but the quotas will be strictly regulated.
By entering the EU, Croatia will automatically stop the current import and export rules, which were regulated with a bilateral agreement," Stankovic concluded.
Ivana Sucic, the director of the Croatian Agency for Trade Policy and International Relations, told SETimes that Croatia will cancel all of its free trade agreements after entering the EU.
"Croatia will join the common EU trade policy and will take over the contractual relations which the EU concluded with third countries.
This means that goods will be exported from BiH to Croatia according to the rules and all other EU countries," Sucic said.
Border crossings are another problem that will complicate BiH exports.
According to the Croatian proposal, when the country becomes a full EU member, the entire export keystones of animal and plant origin from BiH will be possible through two border crossing, Gradiska and Bijaca.
Currently seven border crossings are open with Croatia.
Each crossing will be required to provide permanent phyto-sanitary and veterinary controls.
The state government gave instructions to all ministries to formulate an action plan in order to avoid the negative effects of Croatia's EU accession, the BiH Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations told SETimes.
Igor Gavran, a project manager in BiH's Foreign State Trade chamber, considers this just a declarative measure.
He said authorities need to react urgently to prevent a BiH food industry collapse.
"It's known about this problem for a year now, however, nothing concrete has been done.
Time has not expired, but I'm afraid that this will become an enormous problem if something is not done urgently," Gavran told SETimes.
"BiH will not be able to export almost any animal products except fish, and the value of exports to Croatia is almost 20% of total BiH exports," Gavran added.
