07/07/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/07/11
While awaiting the arrest of Goran Hadzic, the last of the 161 war crimes suspects from the former Yugoslavia, The Hague tribunal announced late last month that a new body will finish its work when the tribunal's mandate ends in 2014.
"If Hadzic is not arrested by June 30, 2012, he would be tried by the International Residual Mechanism," tribunal spokesperson Nerma Jelacic told reporters in Belgrade.
She explained that the International Residual Mechanism will act on appeals submitted by indictees after June 2013 and will have a section for crimes committed in Rwanda.
"The International Residual Mechanism will not, like The Hague tribunal, be able to raise new indictments, except in the contempt of court cases," Jelacic said.
A verdict on Momcilo Perisic is expected later this year, on Vojislav Seselj in the second half of 2012, and on Radovan Karadzic in mid-2014, Jelacic said.
She also said it is too soon to talk about the length of Ratko Mladic's trial.
"Serbia will continue to co-operate with The Hague tribunal until the end of its mandate, as well as with the Residual Mechanism," Serbia's National Council for Co-operation with The Hague Tribunal Office head Dusan Ignjatovic told SETimes.
Ignjatovic explained the Residual Mechanism was adopted in late 2010 by a UN resolution, and will almost certainly be launched with or without the capture of Hadzic.
It will primarily deal with nine Rwandan indictees, who have still not been extradited to The Hague tribunal, he said.
"The functioning of the Residual Mechanism is important to us, primarily because of the archive and the documentation from all processes that will be forwarded to the body by The Hague tribunal," Ignjatovic added.
Addressing the issue of forming a team that will examine the allegations of Dick Marty's report on the sale of organs, Ignjatovic explained that Serbia insists the UN form a body to conduct the investigation because all states will be required to co-operate in the investigation.
The most important issue for Serbia is the "political weight" of co-operating with The Hague tribunal, as well as with the body that will continue its work, Serbian Deputy War Crimes Prosecutor Bruno Vekaric told SETimes.
"So far we have co-operated with the tribunal, therefore I see no problem in continuing co-operation with the Residual Mechanism.
I think the Western countries' attitude towards Serbia will not change in that sense either," Vekaric added.
He thinks tribunal officials are not particularly eager to hand over cases to local courts and prosecutors in the former Yugoslavia after the end of the institution's mandate.
"According to what I have heard in contact with chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz, I am not sure there is any serious will in The Hague for handing over cases to local prosecutions," Vekaric said.
