07/07/2011
By Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 07/07/11
Serbian President Boris Tadic paid his second official visit to Sarajevo on Wednesday (July 6th), meeting with members of the tripartite presidency and lawmakers from both houses of parliament regarding bilateral relations and Serbia's support for BiH's European integration efforts.
In a number of prior trips to BiH, Tadic had visited Republika Srpska (RS) and its leader, Milorad Dodik, demonstrating Belgrade's support for the Serbian enclave vis-a-vis Sarajevo.
However, in visiting Sarajevo, Tadic's native city, he may be showing a shift in Serbian relations with BiH, which have long been at odds with each other since the war in Bosnia in the early 1990s.
In Sarajevo, Tadic stated he respects the Dayton Peace Agreement and wanted the same good relations with the Bosniak and Croats, as he did with the Serbs "We respect the BiH Constitution and want to raise our relations to a highest effective level in the domain of international relations, within the energy and production sectors, the fight against corruption, security, safety and defence questions."
"Our countries are connected naturally:
Serbs, Croats and Bosniacs live in BiH and Serbia, and our relations are cultural, economic and infrastructural," he added.
Some analysts suggest Tadic's visit came on the heels of pressure from Washington and Brussels, which have conditioned Serbia's Euro-Atlantic integration on co-operation with the international tribunal in The Hague and ending close ties with RS and its president, Dodik.
"This visit is the beginning of the end of the honeymoon between Belgrade and Banja Luka [capital of RS], and an end of Serbia's double-faced politics towards BiH.
It is time to send a clear message from Belgrade to the people and government of RS, that Sarajevo is their capital city," political analyst Svetlana Cenic tells SETimes.
During the visit, Bosniak presidency member Bakir Izetbegovic said similar meetings were needed to strengthen relations, underlining the cultural and economic basis upon which a strong foundation could be built.
"BiH has the biggest dealing of goods with Serbia.
More than one million Serbs live in BiH, and more than 300,000 Bosniaks live in Serbia.
We have all the reasons to develop better relations, and this can't be done without conversation," he said.
BiH presidency chairman Nebojsa Radmanovic, a Serb, said the talks were substantive, and highlighted the importance of the EU negotiation process in bringing all sides together.
"We talked about the border, about some common concerns ...
We agreed to solve all open questions as soon as possible because Serbia and BiH are important for the stability of the Western Balkans and for the European Union as a whole."
Tadic also touched upon the sensitive issue of genocide and war crimes commited during the Yugoslav wars, saying Serbia will co-operate with the tribunal in The Hague to bring justice to war crime perpetrators.
"Only this way can we build societies that have a future," he said.
As president, Tadic has twice visited Srebrenica, in 2005 and 2010, where he bowed his head out of respect to genocide victims, angering those who deny Serbians committed genocide there in 1995.
Tadic has come under pressure by Serbian ultra-nationalists after the arrest and extradition to The Hague of General Ratko Mladic, who has been accused of war crimes and genocide for his role in the Srebenica massacre.
"I would be very pleased if at the end of my political career many say that I am a traitor, as long as everyone lives well -- Serbs, Croats, and Bosniaks -- and that we have built highways connecting all our countries," Tadic said.
Tadic also expressed confidence that the last fugitive indictee, Goran Hadzic, would be brought to justice soon.
