06/02/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/02/12
Their numbers may be small but women and foreigners present specific issues both while behind bars and after release.
Jasmina Nikolic, manager of services at the non-profit NGO Victimology Society of Serbia, tells SETimes that overcrowding is an issue, as is true with prisons for men. 
At Pozarevac, the only facility for women inmates in Serbia, the capacity is 180 people.
"The reality is 290 inmates, " Zorana Vucicevic, adviser to the director of the Administration for Enforcement of Penal Sanctions, tells SETimes, adding that most are there for drug-related crimes, along with a "significant number of those who committed crime in situations of domestic violence".
Because of these marital or home issues, "The hardest problem for female prisoners is integration in society after prison," says Nikolic.
Dobrivoje Radovanovic, an associate in the Institute of Criminology and former dean of the Faculty of Special Education and Rehabilitation in Belgrade, is struck by the extraordinary discipline imposed in the women's prison, discipline he says that is even stronger than in prisons for men. 
"Ladies are leading prisons, including the educators, and only women are working in these institutions, playing the role of little 'kapo'," he told SETimes.
What to do after prison is the hardest question for female inmates, as suggested by the high rate of recidivism. 
Notes Nikolic, "Their biggest problem is how to provide livelihood because the employment of women who get out of prisons is at a very low level and there are very few jobs that they might work."
One example is the case of older prisoner, herself a victim of domestic violence. 
"We cannot find a job for her for one year although she is quite qualified," Ivan Kuzminović, lawyer from Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia, told SETimes.
Then there are foreigners, who make up about one tenth of all inmates. 
They are generally placed in the Sremska Mitrovica facility.
Bojan Gavrilovic, legal researcher at the Belgrade Centre for Human Rights, says there are two categories of foreigners. 
Those, the prevailing number in fact, who are from countries in the region. 
And those in the second category, "mostly people from Somalia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and some African countries, mainly affected by war, economic crisis or so. 
These are illegal immigrants," he told SETimes.
Since the majority of foreign prisoners are from the immediate area, communication with the staff is not a problem. 
But translators are supposed to be provided to prisoners who speak a language unfamiliar to the prison staff.
That raises an interesting point, says Djordje Alempijevic, of the Institute of Forensic Medicine in Belgrade. 
A member of the Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture, and of the Council of the Ombudsman for those deprived of liberty, he tells SETimes that brochures about the institution of Ombudsman and the rights of detainees were printed and distributed in Serbian and in the languages of national minority groups.
But beyond this, he says they "should be printed in other languages, since Serbia is at the edge of the Schengen/ visa-free system".
