06/12/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/12/11
The removal of some of the barricades in Kosovo's north, set up by the Serbs in late July in a bid to prevent Kosovo authorities from taking over the crossings to central Serbia, started after an agreement was reached between KFOR and residents in the village of Jagnjenica.
The village was the scene of serious clashes between Serbs and soldiers last week, when KFOR attempted to remove a portion of the barricade.
The incident left at least 23 KFOR soldiers and several dozen Serbs wounded.
However, on Monday (December 5th), Zubin Potok municipality head Slavisa Ristic and one of the KFOR commanders agreed to remove some of the barricades in Jagnjenica.
According to the agreement, KFOR will set up a checkpoint on the road, where it will work together with Serb members of the Kosovo police.
The agreement "makes life easier for the citizens", Ristic said, adding that the other barricades would remain on the road, along with the people who have been guarding them.
Although it was not the subject of the agreement, the removal of a portion of the barricades also started on Monday in the Leposavic municipality, close to the Jarinje gate.
The heads of several municipalities in northern Kosovo, who were adamant in not removing the barricades and accepting the agreements between Belgrade and Pristina, declined to comment.
One Serb guarding the barricade, Mica J, said it was "a sign of goodwill, and an indicator that KFOR is not an enemy of the Serbs".
"But people will keep watch on the side of the road and check how KFOR is implementing the agreement," he told SETimes.
Serbian State Secretary at the Ministry for Kosovo and Metohija Oliver Ivanovic told SETimes that this was "a wise move by the Kosovo Serbs that calms the situation".
"After calls by Serbian President Boris Tadic to remove the barricades, pressure on the Serbs in the north of Kosovo increased.
Also, voices became louder within KFOR in favour of radically resolving the barricade situation," Ivanovic added.
He noted, however, it is now important for KFOR to also adhere to the agreement, and pointed out that the force had lost the citizens' trust after having "sided with Pristina" on several occasions.
The northern Kosovo Serbs' decision was greeted with relief in Belgrade.
"[The agreement] is a positive move that marks the beginning of removing the barricades.
That is a good sign and a good start to the normalisation of the situation in Kosovo's north," said Serbian Minister for Kosovo and Metohija Goran Bogdanovic.
A portion of the European public also approved.
"The removal of barricades from northern Kosovo that started today creates conditions for the states which had been against Serbia's candidacy to change their mind before the EU Summit on Friday," said European Parliament Rapporteur for Serbia Jelko Kacin.
KFOR also described the move as "a step forward", but stressed that freedom of movement was not complete yet.
"KFOR does not value participants only by what they said, rather by what they actually did.
For example, there are still heaps of gravel at Brnjak (Gate 31) and Jarinje (Gate 1) and in Serbian territory, which hamper the free movement of citizens," KFOR said.
Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences Professor Predrag Simic told SETimes that the Serbs from northern Kosovo are seeking to absolve themselves of responsibility for the potential denial of candidate status on Friday, and to get somewhat closer to Belgrade again.
"It is difficult to say whether that will be enough for the candidacy, because that is something known probably only to German Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose country is conditioning Serbia the most," Simic said.
