05/01/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 05/01/12
Mirza from Kakanj was sentenced to six months in prison for illegal forest cutting. 
He says he has been waiting to serve his sentence for more than a year and a half.
"They called me from the court and told me to call them in March next year to place me in jail. 
The problem is that I cannot compete for any job until I serve my sentence. 
I am thinking of paying my fine in cash. 
I've heard that it is possible for a minor offense. 
One day costs 25 euros," Mirza told SETimes.
Mirza's case is only one example of the many problems facing BiH's overburdened prison and judicial system.
To alleviate the problem, a new state prison is being planned in the East Ilidza municipality near Sarajevo, which the BiH justice ministry responsible for the prison says will house 350 high-level convicts, according to EU standards.
The ministry formed a unit with members from the Republika Srpska (RS) and the Federation of BiH (FBiH) to take charge of building the new state prison which started to be constructed on December 2nd.
But delays and high costs have surrounded the prison in controversy.
"The first project didn't satisfy EU standards so we had to make a new one that meets EU norms, where each convict has 60 square meters of space," Jugoslav Jovicic, direct of the unit responsible for construction of the prison, told SETimes.
Construction was initially envisaged to start seven years ago, but was plagued by two failures to meet EU standards, causing the final price tag to jump to 39 million euros from the initial estimate of 15 million euros.
Both projects are funded by the European Commission with the partial support of the state.
Jovicic said construction is now going according to plan and that expenses would be cut where possible in order to bring the final cost down below the estimated 39 million euros.
The high cost of the project has provoked some to cry afoul despite assurances by the state justice ministry that construction is now progressing according to plan – the new prison is slated to receive its first prisoners in the spring of 2014.
The RS Minister of Justice Gerard Selman claimed this will be the most expensive prison in the world, but without the support of the RS.
BiH MP Milica Markovic has also been critical, saying it is inconceivable that the price of the prison construction has increased so much over the past few years.
"This is not an increase of five or ten thousand, but of millions, and the citizens have a right to know where their money will be spent. 
The central prison needs to be built because it is one of the CoE requirements in BiH to continue on the EU path. 
So, the authorities need to build a prison in line with EU standards," Markovic told SETimes.
Still, critics of the project question how the multi-million euro, high security project may expedite the cases of less serious crimes like Mirza's
Predrag Ceranic, a professor of security and defense issues at Banja Luka University, says that crowded prisons are an acute problem, especially in the Federation of BiH (FBiH), and that because of it, security in prisons can deteriorate.
"If you have war criminals or perpetrators of serious crimes at large, and people who committed a traffic accident behind bars, then something is definitely wrong. 
Priorities must be competent and authorities must solve this problem so it does not turn into a more severe one," Ceranic told SETimes.
In FBiH, about 1,000 convicts are waiting to serve a sentence. 
The RS has filled about 80% of its prison capacity. 
Currently, there are 14 prisons in BiH, eight in the FBiH and six in RS.
