06/12/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 06/12/11
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Kosovo Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj calls for strict implementation of the Ahtisaari Plan, which he says offers the Serb minority "the most advanced rights that a community can have in Europe".
SETimes:
How can long-term peace be achieved in the Balkans?
Enver Hoxhaj:
The only way is to have Serbia end its policy of unlimited ambitions.
It's time for Serbia to define its national interest, not as a territorial interest, but as an interest based on economic development and political integration, which means European integration.
The only chance that Europe had after the Second World War to overcome the conflict was by separating the national interest from the territory, and see national interest through economic development and political integration.
It's time to see this happen in Serbian politics after 20 years.
SETimes:
How will Kosovo resolve the problem of its north, which continues to experience incidents, including barricades at crossings?
Hoxhaj:
The situation in the north has been created over the last 12 years.
It has been produced from the time Milosevic was in power in Belgrade and above all, there are parallel security structures and other services that intend to exercise some sort of control in the north.
The only possibility for the integration of the north to the rest of Kosovo is the implementation of the Ahtisaari package, in the form that the Ahtisaari package foresees.
There cannot be a community within a country, where the majority lives in the south [and] the part that lives in the north has a more advanced position.
Whoever suggests another plan is among those who have not read the Ahtisaari Plan.
They don't know what the Ahtisaari Plan contains, and they have no idea that Ahtisaari offers the Serb community the most advanced minority rights that a community can have in Europe.
SETimes:
Are you ready to go beyond the Ahtisaari Plan to provide a solution to the north?
Hoxhaj:
The Ahtisaari Plan is a plan compiled by Martti Ahtisaari, who was the representative, or the special envoy of the United Nations.
It is a plan compiled over three years and it is a plan that has, at the same time, a strong legal framework, internationally and politically, which offers the Serb community, within the territory of the Republic of Kosovo -- be it south, be it north -- the most advanced rights that a community can have in Europe.
It also assures them that in special cases, this community can accept special support from the Republic of Serbia as well, which is not the case with other plans or rights that other minorities have in Europe.
SETimes:
What does Kosovo ask from the EU, in terms of integration, and in terms of dialogue with Serbia?
What should the EU do?
Hoxhaj:
Regarding the integration process, Kosovo cannot remain an isolated country.
Kosovo citizens cannot remain a forgotten people.
Among 50 million citizens in the Balkans who move freely nowadays -- without visas towards the European Union -- there are only two million citizens of the Republic of Kosovo who do not have such a right.
We expect to receive guidance from the EU this year on a set of standards to be fulfilled so that our citizens can also move freely without visas in the coming years.
We also expect the European Commission to strongly support Kosovo in being given the right for contractual relations between Kosovo institutions and certain institutions of the EU.
SETimes:
You are referring to the trade agreement?
Hoxhaj:
The trade agreement is one part of it, but there are also other agreements because until now Kosovo has had no contractual relations with any of the EU institutions.
SETimes:
Regarding dialogue, are you asking the EU to put more pressure on Serbia?
Hoxhaj:
Our approach as a serious state is that we are ready to continue the dialogue, but we think that the process cannot produce results.
In other words, there cannot be meetings if Serbia is not ready to implement the agreements to which we agreed on July 2nd of this year.
It is time for the EU to become serious and apply pressure on Serbia in order that Serbia implements these agreements, which are agreements in the European spirit.
The EU is based on two concepts:
the free movement of people and the free movement of capital.
The dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia, which is a dialogue on technical issues, intends to improve the free movement of people and goods.
