04/08/2011
By Linda Karadaku and Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 04/08/2011
KFOR and Serbian government representatives reached an agreement on Wednesday evening (August 3rd) to end the border crisis in the north, but the deal was rejected immediately by authorities in Pristina.
The commander of the NATO peacekeeping force, Major General Erhard Bühler, held talks at KFOR's Nothing Hill camp with Serbian chief negotiator Borislav Stefanovic and minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic.
The meeting reportedly yielded a plan under which KFOR will continue to maintain control of two northern border crossings -- Gate 1 at Jarjine and Gate 31 in Bernjak -- until at least mid-September, with an extension possible after that.
Barricades put up by local Serbs will be removed, and freedom of movement will be re-established, the two sides agreed.
"KFOR retains command and control of the crossing points;
cars, lorries up to 3.5 tonnes of weight and trucks with humanitarian goods including food may pass after an identity check and a search for weapons," KFOR explained in a statement.
The Kosovo government was clear in its response.
Kosovo is a "sovereign state, independent and autonomous in its decision-making", it said, terming the agreement "unacceptable" and "not implementable".
Bühler and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci held consultations into the late hours on Wednesday night, but Pristina continues to vow there will be "no step back" from its decision to place an embargo on Serbian goods and assert customs control in the north.
The government "welcomes KFOR's attempts to unblock the roads and create a safe environment for all Kosovo citizens, duties that are in accordance with the mandate KFOR has," the government said.
"For Kosovo, there will be no return to the situation prior to July 25th," it added.
KFOR spokesperson Captain Nikola Iovino told SETimes on Thursday that there would be "some talks" between KFOR and Kosovo government, but did not give any details.
According to Pellumb Kallaba, an analyst at the Kosovar Centre for Security Studies, the agreement reached last night is a temporary step designed to prevent escalation of the crisis and restore freedom of movement by removing the barricades.
"A temporary peace has been bought which is not stable, given that dangerous criminal elements operate in that region," he told SETimes.
"There is a danger above all that the government's decision on reciprocity of goods with Serbia will not be respected by KFOR, as a force with a mandate only to preserve security and calm in Kosovo."
In Belgrade, Centre of Ethnic Relations director Dusan Janjic said uncertainty remains over the precise nature of the agreement.
"The Serbian side does not impart full information because they want to persuade the Serbs from the north to remove roadblocks," he said.
Kosovo Serbs who spoke to SETimes said that even with the agreement, they continue to feel far from secure.
"At any moment we can expect that Thaci will re-send his people," said Boban Vukašinović from the village of Zupče.
"For us this is just temporary relief."
Many of the Serbs in the north have sent children to Serbia in recent days, expecting an escalation of the conflict.
"Rumours have been circulating that a new 'Operation Storm' will happen here, as in Croatia," said Rudare resident Rodoljub Teodosijevic.
"We removed the children and await what God will give us."
