03/08/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 03/08/11
The area slated for exploration is in the northeast, Novi Pazar, and may hold a treasure trove of shale gas deposits, scheduled for tapping courtesy of an agreement to be signed with the US energy giant Chevron.
Under the deal, Bulgaria would get 30m euros for the rights to prospect and explore the area. 
Proponents say it would cut energy costs and reduce dependence on Russia. 
But for environmentalists, it's a big red flag.
The region where drilling would take place is known as the "granary" of Bulgaria, probably the most fertile area in the country.
"Practically speaking, this land will become unusable," Petko Kovachev, an activist with the Greens Party told SETimes. 
"The whole problem is that they [the government] are trying to resolve one issue [Bulgaria's energy dependency] by creating an even greater one -- environmental pollution," he said.
The main opposition Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) has also been quite vocal in its rejection of the shale gas exploration and production project. 
The BSP insists on performing an environmental impact evaluation before the actual exploration work begins, rather than after that and ahead of production activities, which are the government's plans.
"Unlike prospecting and exploration of conventional natural gas, shale gas exploration represents a single technological production attempt, which means that drilling for shale gas production is in no way different from the drilling made in the prospecting and exploration phase," BSP lawmaker and member of parliament's environment commission Georgi Bozhinov told SETimes.
"The same chemicals and abrasives are used in the experimental phase as the ones used in the production phase," he added. 
"This experiment is made using a huge amount of water solution... 
We should be sure that in case some of this water solution leaks out, it won't harm the environment... 
That's why we want an environmental impact assessment for the prospecting and exploration phase."
"And after we have the results of the seismological research, the structure of the earth layers, and all those guarantees that this information will provide, after the experts give their opinion and the people are convinced, then these experiments could go ahead," he explained.
"We suggest holding a serious scientific discussion about the method, the particular conditions in Bulgaria, prevention we should secure, and ways to minimise the risk. 
And after this discussion, carry out an environmental impact assessment for the drillings. 
And if everything is alright, then they could go ahead with the project," Bozhinov said.
Asked to comment on its plans in Bulgaria, Chevron told SETimes in an e-mail statement that officials "look forward to working with the Bulgarian authorities and bringing our experience in exploration and environmental protection to progress this opportunity".
The company won licenses to explore for unconventional gas resources in Poland in December 2009, and plans to begin exploration activity there in the fourth quarter of this year.
In 2010 and 2011, Chevron acquired more than 4 million acres in Poland, Romania and Bulgaria to explore and evaluate gas shale. 
Poland is believed to hold some of the biggest shale gas reserves in Europe.
The total shale gas reserves on the continent, not counting Russia, are estimated at 18 trillion cubic metres. 
Apart from Poland, exploration work by various companies is ongoing in Austria, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Sweden and Great Britain.
France, however, which is believed to be the home of huge shale gas reserves, has banned drillings, citing environmental concerns.
