05/07/2011
By Biljana Lajmanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 05/07/11
Three newspapers closed down and 150 journalists took to the streets of Skopje on Monday (July 4th) after losing their jobs as a result of mismanagement and criminal wrongdoing by media owners.
The Department for Public Revenue blocked the account of Plus Production -- owner of the closed newspapers Shpic, Vreme and Koha e Re -- for failing to pay taxes. 
They didn't have the money to pay employees or buy materials, in essence, had no money regardless of the tax situation.
Meanwhile, the Broadcasting Council -- Macedonia's media regulatory body -- has all but split as several of its nine members accused council President Zoran Stefanovski of willful disregard and abuse of office.
Many media openly blame the council for political bias and leniency towards media that has defaulted on taxes.
"It is not our goal to punish the media, but we have to act and we act in the cases where we find breaches of law," Stefanovski told SETimes.
The country's Anti-corruption Commission also accused the council of meddling in its jurisdiction and failing to co-operate.
"We had problems because the Broadcasting Council did not provide its election media coverage report despite the obligation to do so," Anti-corruption Commission member Mirjana Dimovska told SETimes.
She explained that they obtained the report online but it was incomplete. 
The Broadcasting Council only registered the total airing time for political marketing, she said, but not the specific timing of aired commercials, thus making it impossible to calculate the value of the granted airtime.
Stefanovski said that the election coverage was not balanced and Macedonia earned criticism from media watchdogs such as Freedom House. 
"А1 TV was on the side of the opposition, while Sitel TV on the side of the government. 
This intensified the hatred between the two media," he said.
"The campaign by [A1] television … received only mild warnings and was not cited for breaking [election] laws despite directly broadcasting the opposition meetings," Sitel TV editor Ivona Talevska told SETimes. 
Sitel was given citations and heavy fines.
The Council is under criminal investigation because of Stefkovski signing a "cessasion agreement" on May 25th with A1 TV and with the opposition Social Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM).
The agreement stipulates the Council's financial demands for license and fees from A1 in the amount of 40,000 euros will be satisfied from the station's demands from SDSM for its election ads.
Financing by a political party -- especially during elections -- and through commercial deals such as cessation, is against the law. 
The Broadcasting Law also specifies that the licensee A1 must pay itself for the license.
Media expert Klime Babunski says media employees are under constant pressure, especially given the political party leanings of media owners.
"It has always been like this, quick marriages between the media and the political parties, and even quicker divorces," Babunski told SETimes.
A big responsibility for improving the situation falls on the Broadcasting Council, he said. 
"It is obvious that the Council has done something wrong and we are all now paying the consequences. 
Everything is coming back like a boomerang."
