03/11/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/11/11
The Kosovo assembly passed a bill last month enabling the Kosovo Security Force (KSF) to deploy in missions abroad. 
KSF Minister Agim Ceku praised lawmakers for closing a legal gap required to define the basis for such deployments.
"The KSF is a foreign policy instrument, because it creates alliances, creates partnerships, creates the image, brings friends and partners. 
... 
One of the interests of the country is that from a security consumer, KSF becomes a security provider," Ceku said.
The KSF has been deployed twice, assisting troops in northern Albania during catastrophic floods over the past two years, although no legal basis for such deployment existed then.
Experts are convinced that the KSF can be ready to deploy beyond Albania next year. 
Military commentator Fatmir Halili told SETimes the force is ready to undertake any duty, though it may perform better in some specialised areas.
"It is a force that is professionally ready to join international missions, even in difficult areas like Afghanistan or Iraq. 
One of the best tasks the KSF can do is demining," Halili said.
He explained that the force is essentially based on NATO standards and is under Alliance supervision. 
"This is an indicator that the KSF is an institution which has trust internationally and has relations with the most democratically controlled armies."
Security Studies Professor Avdullah Hasani agrees, saying KSF can be deployed abroad "early next year".
He cautioned, however, that Kosovo's participation in missions abroad will be limited, telling SETimes "Kosovo is not recognised officially as a state by the EU and the UN and this makes it impossible to take part in UN or EU peacekeeping missions. 
Concerning NATO, the doors are more open because of the organisation's co-operation with KSF."
Analyst Adrian Berisha, who specialises in European foreign policy, disagrees.
"Demining or assistance during floods are areas the EU would count in favour of KSF because of the reluctance by some Union members to send troops abroad," Berisha told SETimes.
Berisha adds that Kosovo should sign co-operation agreements with international organisations and with certain countries that may need the assistance of the KSF.
Most commentators agree with Ceku that KSF deployments will strengthen Kosovo's image, reversing the country's perception as being in need of foreign troops to one which contributes troops.
"Absolutely, I think Kosovo's image abroad will be made more positive if we contribute to international peace," Hasani said.
