03/08/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/08/11
KFOR is planning to deploy an additional 600 German and 100 Austrian troops from their reserve battalion to assist the 6,000 strong NATO-backed contingent already in Kosovo.
Additional troops are needed to keep peace in the country's north after tensions rose last week when armoured units from Kosovo's special police force took over Gate 31 at the northern border.
Local Serbs responded with roadblocks, preventing them from approaching the second crossing point at Gate 1, and violence ensued.
On Monday (August 1st), Prime Minister Hashim Thaci called an urgent meeting of the Kosovo Security Council to discuss the latest developments.
The council approved a recommendation "requiring all the security agencies to keep the highest level of readiness in case of any need for intervention".
Pristina security expert Ramadan Qehaja told SETimes that the council has taken the necessary precautions for the situation.
"NATO units [KFOR] stationed in that part of Kosovo have played an important role in controlling the two border crossings and in calming the situation created after the police intervention," says Qehaja.
"Higher readiness of security institutions is necessary when we know that the situation in the north may deteriorate further.
That means the necessity of using force and certain security measures if the situation dictates such a move," Qehaja said.
Florian Bieber, a professor of Southeast Europe at the University of Graz in Austria, told SETimes that parallels can be drawn between the crisis in northern Kosovo and the one in Georgia in 2008, but the impact in Kosovo remains to be seen.
"In both cases, a government sought to change the status quo with a unilateral move without consulting its allies -- or against their advice.
The government might be formally right to try to take control of its territory, but it seems like an unwise move, which escalated tensions and might actually backfire," Bieber said.
Despite this, he says he does not foresee an armed conflict.
"Pristina does not have the means to use force in the north, nor does Belgrade have an interest in an escalation.
The question is to what degree the Kosovo government will restrain itself and to which degree Serbia will try to curb the hold of the parallel structure in the north."
However, it will be difficult for Pristina and Belgrade to find a solution if the situation returns to the status quo or if the Kosovo police take further control in the north, which is rejected by the Serbs.
While Bieber is convinced that a temporary end of the crisis will happen by returning to the status quo, he says the north will be a topic during the EU-facilitated dialogue.
"The events have put the status of the north on the map of negotiations.
The question is whether technical talks can continue while ignoring this issue."
