04/01/2012
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 04/01/12
SETimes correspondent Menekse Tokyay discusses bilateral ties with Montenegrin Ambassador Ramo Bralic.
SETimes:
What specific actions is Turkey taking to foster the Euro-Atlantic integration of Montenegro?
Ramo Bralic:
Montenegro and Turkey have good relations;
there are no outstanding issues between our two countries.
We have the generous support of Turkey whenever and wherever we need it.
Turkey supported our independence and was among the first states to recognise Montenegro.
Turkey strongly supports Montenegro in preparation for NATO membership, and we hope to join NATO as soon as possible, as we are working hard towards that goal.
We successfully implemented the NATO roadmap and recently received the EU Council decision to start negotiations on EU accession.
SETimes:
What concrete steps has Turkey taken to foster regional co-operation, peace, and integration in the Balkans?
How does Montenegro view Turkey's increasing role in the Balkans?
Bralic:
Turkey is important for bringing peace and stability to the region and beyond.
A strong country with rapid economic growth and stability contributes to easing tensions and resolving problems in the region, in its immediate surroundings and wider Balkans.
We have a positive outlook on Turkey's role and presence, which can only bring prosperity.
We do not consider Turkey's presence in the Balkans as a proof of "neo-Ottomanism", as some claim.
SETimes:
Do you believe a positive Ottoman heritage is still influential in the mindset of Montenegrin people in terms of relations with Turkey?
Bralic:
Yes.
Montenegro had a specific status under the Ottoman Empire;
we received much help and quick international recognition after the Berlin Congress in 1878, and following the independence referendum in 2006.
King Nikola I twice visited Sultan Abdulhamid in Istanbul [in 1883 and in 1899] and the Ottoman sultan bestowed on him an Emirgan villa, a yacht, and a race horse with his own words addressed to King Nikola --"You're the only one who leads real and honest politics with me and my kingdom."
King Nikola was forced to sell the Emirgan villa while in exile, as a means to support himself.
Today, Montenegro has the full attention of Turkey, a result of our tradition of strong bilateral relations.
SETimes:
What are the relations of the Muslim minority in Montenegro with the government?
Bralic:
We have no problems with the Islamic community.
Their rights are determined at the Montenegro state level by the constitution.
They have their own structures and they can perform their duties without any restrictions.
Montenegro is an example of how minority people live in their country and demonstrate their commitment to it.
During the referendum, they absolutely voted for its independence, sovereignty and international integrity.
Minority people have a constitutional category in Montenegro, with all rights and obligations.
There is always room for improvement and that is the direction we are going.
SETimes:
What military-to-military co-operation exists between Montenegro and Turkey?
Bralic:
We have strong co-operation with the Turkish army, which is in training and constantly growing.
We are working on signing a military co-operation [agreement] between the two countries, which will soon be completed.
SETimes:
What co-operation exists between Montenegro and Turkey to combat drug and human trafficking?
Are there joint efforts?
Bralic:
The fight against trafficking and selling narcotics is very important in Montenegro, and law enforcement agencies are seriously working in that direction.
The sharing of relevant information is also improving.
Our specialists in the field pay frequent visits to Turkey for various reasons.
