21/02/2007

A Bulgarian-born director now living in London has won the Prix-UIP Berlin award for best short film at the 57th Berlin Film Festival, which wrapped up on February 18th. 
Ralitza Petrova won the prize for her film "Rotten Apple". 
Also in the short film category, the Turkish director Nesimi Yetik received the DAAD Short Film Award for his "Annem Sinema Ogreniyor". 
In the Panorama section, the Fédération Internationale de la Presse Cinématographique (FIPRESCI) jury prize went to another Turkish film, Fatih Akin and Ozer Kiziltan's "Takva -- A Man's Fear of God". 
Meanwhile, the Czech film "I Served the King of England", starring the young Bulgarian actor Ivan Barnev, won the FIPRESCI jury's prize in the Competition programme.
***
An exhibition of works by the young Bosnian artist Renato Rakic opened at the Banski Dvor Culture Centre in Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina, last week. 
It presents a cycle of drawings by Rakic, titled "Caput" ("Head").
***
Croatian tennis player Ivo Karlovic lost his match against Britain's Andy Murray in the finals of the San Jose ATP tournament, on February 19th. 
This was the second ATP final for Karlovic, who turns 28 later this month.
***
Marcos Baghdatis of Cyprus was runner-up in the Marseille Open ATP tennis finals, held in France on February 18th. 
Baghdatis lost to France's Gilles Simon, 6-4, 7-6. 
Earlier this month, Baghdatis won the Zagreb Open.
***
Carnivals took place in several Greek cities, including Athens, Thessaloniki, Xanthi and Patras, at the weekend, drawing thousands of people. 
The events included street parades, dance performances and revivals of old customs.
***
Macedonia's Association for Development of Turkish-Language Media issued the traditional Kutluk Veli Awards to 12 representatives of the ethnic Turk community in the country for their contributions during 2006. 
Among others, wrestling referee Nesret Liman was acknowledged in the Sports category, Mustafa Jasar in the Arts category and musical pedagogy specialist Aida Islam in the Sciences one. 
Actor Museref Lozana won the award for lifetime achievement.
***
An exhibition featuring Serbian native art was opened at the European Commission in Brussels. 
It includes over 70 works by 40 Serbian artists. 
The exhibition was co-organised by the Kovacevica-based Babka Gallery with the support of the Serbian government.
***
An art exhibition titled "Bad Girl: Sexuality in Western Art" by Serbian artist Ana Nedeljkovic opened at the Belgrade Youth Centre's gallery on February 20th. 
The author says her work is based on the book "Sexuality in Western Art" by Edward Lucie-Smith. 
The exhibition will continue until March 4th.
Various sources – 14/02/07-21/02/07
