04/07/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --04/07/11
While the Belgrade authorities are trying to present the first agreements with Pristina as a success that will help improve the lives of Kosovo Serbs, the opposition has branded them damaging to the national interest and the first step towards recognising Kosovo's independence.
After the talks in Brussels wrapped up, the head of the Serbian government's delegation, Borislav Stefanovic, insisted that the dialogue meant "neither an explicit nor an implicit recognition of Kosovo's independence". 
Commenting on the statement by Pristina counterpart Edita Tahiri, that the result from Brussels was "the first step towards Serbia's recognising of Kosovo", he said such claims were untrue.
"Edita Tahiri said that for internal political reasons and due to great pressure from the Kosovo opposition," Stefanovic told reporters, adding that Serbia would continue to issue IDs and license plates to citizens of Kosovo.
According to the agreement, Kosovo citizens would be able to enter Serbia with Kosovo IDs, but the Serbian police will issue them a special certificate. 
The same will be done with driver's licenses, as Belgrade is refusing to acknowledge Kosovo documents. 
Drivers from Kosovo would have to take temporary license plates from the Serbian police when entering Serbia, if their vehicles have license plates with the Kosovo coat of arms.
The decisions on implementing the agreements, which were not signed, now need to be adopted by the governments in Belgrade and Pristina. 
Their implementation, which may start as of November 1, will be monitored by a group comprised of representatives of the EU, Serbia and Kosovo.
Although Stefanovic tried to present the agreements as a way to improve the lives of Kosovo Serbs, the opposition fiercely accused him of violating state interests. 
"Agreement with the representatives of the illegal state of Kosovo is in violation of the Constitution of Serbia and UN Security Council Resolution 1244, and a breach of the legal documents on which the sovereignty of Serbia is founded," Slobodan Samardzic, vice president of the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia, told SETimes.
Analysts also reacted differently to the agreements. 
University of Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences professor Predrag Simic told SETimes it was good the agreements were made, and that the EU would "certainly approve of the move by Belgrade and Pristina". 
Asked whether the agreements were an indirect recognition of Kosovo, Simic said that "Belgrade knows full well what the red lines are in the dialogue with Pristina and that the Serbian government will not cross them."
However, director of the Kosovo Compromise project Aleksandar Mitic told SETimes that this was a step towards eventual recognition.
"Ever since the arrest of Ratko Mladic, we have witnessed growing pressure by Washington and Brussels to condition more concretely Serbia's EU integration through establishing good neighbourly relations with Kosovo. 
The agreements are thus the logical step in the crawling process of Kosovo's recognition," Mitic said.
The agreements were also received differently by the Kosovo Serbs. 
Milan Ivanovic, a representative of the Serbs from northern Kosovo, where Kosovo institutions have no authority, said the agreements were harmful to the Serb population and solidified Pristina's statehood. 
"It is obvious that Serbia is giving up on Kosovo, this means giving Kosovo up for the sake of European Union candidacy," Ivanovic told the Belgrade media.
However, Rada Trajkovic, who represents Serbs living in Albanian enclaves, said the agreements would help her compatriots in Kosovo. 
"After the agreements, Serbia has more credibility to deal with the issue of Kosovo and the enhancement of the local Serbs' living conditions, with support from the international community," she said.
