20/03/2007
Turkish State Minister and chief negotiator with the EU Ali Babacan took a European tour last week, stopping first in Switzerland, where he participated in an investment conference.
On Thursday (March 15th) he went to Strasbourg for two days, addressing the European Parliament (EP) and meeting with EP President Hans-Gert Poettering.
Babacan then travelled on to Romania and later Bulgaria.
Greece assumed the rotating one-year presidency of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly from Tunis, according to an announcement at the weekend.
According to Greek Parliament Speaker Anna Benaki, the Greek presidency's priorities would be improving the situation of socially vulnerably groups, youth and women.
Greek Deputy Foreign Minister Theodore Kassimis kicked off a several-day visit to Jordan on Sunday (March 18th).
During the visit, which will continue until Wednesday, he is meeting with senior government officials.
Albania's Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu visited Ukraine on Friday (March 16th) and Saturday for talks with counterpart Anatoliy Grytsenko.
Discussions focused on enhancing bilateral military co-operation, particularly in the context of the two countries' common aspirations for NATO membership.
Cyprus will not impose limitations on the entry of workers from Romania now that the country has joined the EU, Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos assured Romanian counterpart Traian Basescu on Tuesday (March 13th).
Papadopoulos made a three-day visit to Romania, accompanied by Foreign Minister George Lillikas and Commerce, Industry and Tourism Minister Antonis Michaelides.
Greek President Karolos Papoulias reaffirmed his country's support for Croatia's EU membership bid, saying eventual EU entry would be a positive development not only for Croatia but for the whole region, as it would reinforce the European perspective of the Western Balkans.
Papoulias, who visited Zagreb last week, made the statement after meeting with Croatian counterpart Stipe Mesic.
German Defence Minister Franz Josef Jung urged Turkey to help NATO operations in Kosovo, stressing that such an engagement would greatly boost the security situation in the region.
Jung met with Turkish counterpart Vecdi Gonul, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul and top army generals.
(Various sources -- 12/03/07-20/03/07)
