03/01/2012
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 03/01/12
After years of deadlock, Romania has sped up building highways amid greater demand from foreign investors and tourists. 
Larger investments in infrastructure projects have also increased jobs, helping the country weather the global economic crisis.
About 60 km of motorways became functional in 2011, expanding the national network in use to 370 km. 
Another 440 km are under construction, while other contracts for about 140 km await public bidding.
"2011 was the best year for transports," Transport Minister Anca Boagiu said recently. 
The boom was partly caused by the Romanian government's decision to either annul or renegotiate a series of contracts with foreign companies that were seriously behind the jointly agreed deadline.
At the same time, the authorities decided to penalize, from now on, any contractors who miss the construction deadline. 
The move prompted an acceleration of works.
"It is a victory of 'yes, it is possible' against negativism. 
A victory of 'yes, something good and lasting can be done in time'," PM Emil Boc said in early December, attending the inauguration of the 30km-long highway linking the western cities of Timisoara and Arad.
The road is part of the IV Pan-European corridor that links the border crossing of Nadlac and the Black Sea port of Constanta.
"One can notice if we invest more money in infrastructure, the effects are visible," he added.
Analysts confirm the leap in infrastructure development taken this year. 
"Apart from the 58 km of highways completed, we should also take into account the 500km of the national roads and 230 km of railways that were modernized in 2011, a new terminal opened at the national airport Henri Coanda and two new subway stations in Bucharest," Cristina Sbirn, an editor with the economic weekly Capital, told SETimes.
"The investments made by the ministry of transport in 2011 are significant: 1.8 billion euros, mostly coming from EU funds," Sbirn added. 
"Next year's budget is also investment oriented, with more than 2.5 billion euros, namely 74% of the ministry's budget, going to highways and modernization of national roads and railways."
A further 550 km of motorways are expected to be finalised by the end of 2013, she noted.
Highways are crucial for a state's economic development. 
"If we'd had by now such an infrastructure, big investors such as European motor companies wouldn't have avoided us," Paul Barbu, an economics editor at Prima TV, told SETimes.
He was alluding to a decision by the German company Mercedes to open a car manufacturing plant in Hungary, and not in Romania in 2008, due to improperly developed infrastructure. 
Foreign investors have repeatedly raised this issue when asked about the drawbacks of doing business in Romania.
"At the same time, exports, which are currently the engine of the Romanian economy, would have seen a quicker pace which would have translated into bigger economic growth. 
In a more expanded system of highways, Romania can also benefit from a traffic fee on them, but that doesn't apply under the current circumstances," Barbu said.
Acceleration of the pace construction is also good news for ordinary Romanians, who have long complained of traffic jams on the roads to either the seaside or the mountainous Prahova Valley, two of the main tourist destinations in the country, due to unfinished highways to these regions.
"If you go by car, you risk getting stuck somewhere where the highway ends. 
If you go by train, it takes too long because of the old railway system, which doesn't allow high speed," Andrei Rupcea, an engineer who commutes between Bucharest and Constanta, told SETimes.
In July, after the years-long modernization process of railway came to an end, a train ride between the two cities was reduced to only two and a half hours, from six before. 
The train now offers an alternative to those willing to go to the seaside in summer before the construction of the Bucharest-Constanta highway is finished early 2013. 
Almost three quarters of it are now in use.
"It is a start. 
I long for the day when I am able to drive across Romania without the frustration of always wasting time in long queues. 
This is Europe after all," Rupcea concluded.
