02/09/2011
By Sevda Yuzbasioglu for Southeast European Times -- 02/09/11
The increasing violence between Turkish security forces and the PKK has prompted the government to debate a number of new security precautions.
In addition to expanding military operations, granting governors additional powers has been under discussion since the last National Security Council (MGK) meeting on August 18th.
In Turkey, the governor is the most authorised public official of a province appointed by Ankara, controlling the police and gendarmerie.
Although military action requires written permission from the governor, with the new powers under discussion, the governor would also have a crucial role in deploying and administrating the military forces.
The issue has created heated public debate as "super governors" have become synonymous with the worst period in the state's struggle against Kurdish separatism under OHAL (State of Emergency Region) that ended in 2002.
Started in 1987, the emergency state was extended 46 times during which time six "super governors" were in charge.
The governors were exempt from accountability and their decisions were not subject to judicial process.
During this time countless human rights abuses were committed, including extrajudicial killings, population displacement and restrictions on other freedoms -- a period of history with which the country is still coming to terms.
However, Mehmet Yegin at the International Strategic Research Organisation (USAK) believes the Turkey of today shouldn't be compared to the Turkey of the 1990s.
"We do not see unsolved political killings, torture anymore.
We are going through a civilianisation process … For the first time in history, top military officials resign in this country instead of civilian officials," Yegin pointed out.
Yegin also stressed that this step is a matter of protecting civilians instead of combating them.
"The perception in the 1990s was very different," he said, arguing that during that time people suffered because the forces that were supposed to protect them also conducted attacks.
Now, he says, the government is trying to win hearts and minds by increasing the presence of civilians in the region.
However, according to terror expert and politician Umit Ozdag, granting governors power over military actions would be a mistake.
"Deploying and managing [troops] isn't something a civilian can do.
If you're the governor you can say 'There are PKK on that front, go and take them out', as a governor you should do this, you have authority.
But if you go out and give military commands like 'Encircle them from the right, climb from the left', then it will bring disaster," said Ozdag.
The debate over the role of civilians and the military in Turkey's anti-terror strategy has also brought up the issue of civil-military relations, with some arguing appointing "super governors" would reduce the military's role in the southeast.
Terror specialist Ercan Citlioglu says that the government wants to feel more authorised in the southeast region, even though the governors already have wide ranging powers.
"The speed of their [the governors] co-ordination [with the military] is crucial;
maybe red tape issues such as written permissions can be avoided.
By granting them [the governors] with new powers, the government's control over the region will increase," he argued.
