20/02/2007
European Commission (EC) Vice President and Justice Commissioner Franco Frattini arrived in Sofia on Friday (February 16th) for talks on judicial reform and the anti-corruption fight in Bulgaria.
Frattini met with Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev on Monday.
The visit is ahead of the EC's review of a report on Bulgaria's progress in these fields, followed by a decision on the possible introduction of additional safeguard clauses for Sofia.
Greece's President Karolos Papoulias, assessing the results of his visits to Bulgaria and Romania last week, praised bilateral ties with each of the two EU newcomers as excellent.
The president said the three countries share a common view on the European perspective of the Western Balkans, the need for a balanced and permanent solution to the Kosovo status issue and joint measures to ensure peace, stability, security and economic growth in the region.
Montenegrin Foreign Minister Milan Rocen and OSCE Ambassador to Podgorica Paraschiva Badescu met on Saturday (February 17th) to discuss the progress of reforms in Montenegro.
The two agreed that Euro-Atlantic integration is in the common interest of all countries in the region and contributes to regional development, stability and security.
Organisation of the Islamic Conference chief Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu visited the Turkish-run northern part of Cyprus at the weekend.
He called for the international community to relieve the economic isolation of Turkish Cypriots.
Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki met last week with Belgian counterpart Karel De Gucht in Brussels.
The two discussed Macedonia's EU integration bid and efforts to accelerate the reform agenda.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert arrived on Wednesday (February 14th) on a two-day official visit to Turkey.
He met with Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan, President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul and Defence Minister Vecdi Gonul.
A Macedonian government delegation, led by Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, kicked off a two-day visit to Brussels on Tuesday (February 13th).
Gruevski met with NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer and attended the North Atlantic Council meeting.
(Various sources -- 13/02/07-20/02/07)
