02/12/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb --02/12/11
Two major political groups, the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), and the parties grouped in the Kukuriku coalition -- the Croatian Social Democratic Party (SDP), Croatian People's Party (HNS), Istrian Democratic Assembly (IDS) and the Croatian Party of Pensioners (HSU) -- will battle it out Sunday (December 4th).
According to the latest polls, Kukuriku has a significant advantage over HDZ, which remains mired in the throes of corruption scandals.
Hrvoje Sadaric, the Croatian State Election Commission (DIP) spokesman, told SETimes that the Commission received reports on campaign financing and will report on any irregularities.
"During the election campaign, current data showed a decline in irregularity complaints compared to the previous parliamentary elections held in 2007. 
This parliamentary election marked the first time the law on financing political activities and election campaigns was applied and greatly raised the level of electoral transparency," Sadaric said, adding that around 4,000 registered observers will monitor the election.
Commentators and experts viewed the campaign as dull, saying that party platforms and programmes are largely the same as in the last campaign.
Boris Pavelic, a Zagreb-based journalist at the daily Novi List, told SETimes that HDZ's re-election campaign was pointless.
"It seems like HDZ cannot offer anything after all the scandals b
efalling it. 
Kukuriku coalition, however, has a huge advantage, perhaps because it doesn't have to address specific issues [like scandals]," Pavelic noted. 
HDZ, he pointed out, mainly emphasised national identity, while the coalition leaders sought to defuse tensions and conflicting rhetoric.
Zdravko Petek, a political science professor in Zagreb, described the campaign as "horribly boring" and said parties did nothing to encourage people to vote.
"We covered campaign research in previous years; I can say that political parties in Croatia do not differ by policy, only by ideology. 
For example, the difference is whether a party is closer to the Catholic Church or not. 
Nobody mentions how to fix the health system, education and other social issues far more important than ideology," Petek told SETimes.
He added that the campaign offered nothing new, and stressed it is already clear that Croatia will have a different government after the December 4th elections. 
Party officials from the Kukuriku coalition are expecting good results, in light of public frustration with the current government.
Dusko Kisberi, spokesman for the Istrian Democratic Assembly (IDS), told SETimes, "A number of people, who elected the current government, are unlikely to vote [now], which may explain slightly higher voter abstinence, compared to ... 
elections in 2007."
The ruling HDZ, however, continues to play the "nationalist card" in attracting voters, and polls suggest that the diaspora will predominantly vote for the party.
"HDZ has its traditional electorate in Bosnia and I'm sure that this election will be a success. 
However, it is possible that turnout could be lower because of the reduced number of polling stations. 
But in the end, there will be no problem for HDZ in Bosnia," Ivo Miro Jovic, one of the Mostar-based HDZ diaspora candidates, told SETimes, adding that nearly 300,000 BiH Croats, who hold Croatian citizenship, are expected to vote.
While HDZ is taking full credit for Croatia's EU accession prospects, nearly 40% of citizens still oppose joining the EU.
Zagreb resident Stevan Tripunovic told SETimes that he will vote, but predicts that once the country joins the EU, the politicians will not talk to citizens the same way anymore.
"It's like you're the last one to enter the amphitheatre for an exam. 
Everybody, the students and the professors are scanning you. 
I think that we will feel that way when we enter [the EU]," Tripunovic added.
Nadica Narancic, a Zagreb pensioner, told SETimes that she will not vote because she has "better things to do" on Sunday.
"It's my right not to vote. 
Every government will be the same. 
Regardless of who is elected, my pension will not get a raise. 
I can't wait for this election story to finish, so they can stop bombing us with their splendid ideas and proposals," said Narancic.
