02/12/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times -- 02/12/11
Since its establishment in 1993, the UN International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has been working to bring to justice those responsible for war crimes committed during the Balkans conflicts in the 1990s.
SETimes discussed the tribunal's past challenges and continued legacy with spokeswoman and war crimes victim Nerma Jelacic.
SETimes:
The ICTY is tasked with bringing to justice the conflict's war criminals and to bring justice to their victims.
What has been the biggest challenge in this endeavour?
Nerma Jelacic:
The tribunal has faced numerous challenges from the very onset of its existence.
It was the first tribunal of its kind, set up in the midst of the conflict at a time when local courts would have been incapable of investigating and prosecuting crimes themselves.
As such, it faced the daunting task of setting itself up from scratch:
from its rules and procedures, the manner in which to conduct investigations and secure state co-operation in obtaining evidence and in apprehending the accused, to the management of court documents, the running of a detention unit and the protection of witnesses.
The challenge of dealing with complex cases arose as soon as the first cases started … necessitating a fine balance between the right of the accused to a fair trial and the need to ensure the trials were conducted in as efficient a manner as possible.
This challenge increased with the adoption of the completion strategy in 2003, which required the tribunal to speed up proceedings in such a way that it did not, in any way, affect their fairness.
The tribunal's mandate exceeds simple prosecution to include activities outside the courtroom that contribute to peace and stability.
In 1999, the tribunal established the Outreach Programme, the very first communications programme of its kind in the history of international justice, with the goal of bringing the work of the tribunal closer to the people of the region.
Now it is the tribunal's legacy that poses one of its greatest challenges.
For the tribunal to successfully fulfil its mandate, it is absolutely crucial that it ensures its legacy keeps resonating long after it has closed its doors.
SETimes:
How do judges at the ICTY manage to stay unbiased, considering the emotional impact of most cases?
Jelacic:
It is the judges' duty to remain impartial and abide by the strictest standards of the rule of law.
All judges at the tribunal are highly professional and experienced.
It is solely on the basis of the evidence presented in court that judges render their judgments.
SETimes:
If you could name one case that has left the biggest mark in the ICTY's work, or has been a turning point, what would it be?
Jelacic:
It is impossible to point out any one case in particular.
All cases have played a crucial role in providing an opportunity for victims to step forward and testify and in doing so, bring them a sense of relief and justice.
And all have played an important role in developing international criminal and humanitarian law.
SETimes:
When do you expect the ICTY to complete its tasks and eventually close?
Jelacic:
The tribunal is still guiding its work in accordance with the last Completion Strategy Report, which was submitted by the President to the UN Security Council last spring.
The next report will be made later this year and the tribunal is taking all necessary measures to complete its remaining work by no later than end of December 2014.
All cases for which appeals will be filed after July 2013 will be dealt with by the Residual Mechanism, which will start functioning next year for the ICTR (International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda) and in 2013 for ICTY.
In the second part of this interview, Jelacic talks about the ICTY's activities aimed to prepare local courts in the Western Balkans to deal efficiently with war crimes cases.
