01/07/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 01/07/11
More than 40 war orphans from Iraq, nine to 16 years of age, traveled to Croatia to spend their summer holidays on the coast the last two weeks of June.
They were accompanied by 20 Croatian children, also war orphans.
This was their first visit to a foreign country, and for most, their first real holiday.
They enjoyed making friends with Croatian children, sightseeing, and improved their swimming skills in the clear blue Adriatic.
"We wanted to give these children an opportunity to experience a real summer holiday and make friends with Croatian children here, give them a chance to see and learn something new," Djurdja Adlesic, president of the foundation Croatia without Mines and the former vice president of the government, said at a press conference.
President Ivo Josipovic welcomed the young Iraqi guests.
They visited sites in Zagreb, before leaving for the Sukosan summer camp in central Dalmatia.
The children were special guests at the International Children's Festival in Sibenik.
At the camp, they played sports, enjoyed cultural activities, and took a brief course in the Croatian language.
Their hosts in Sukosan loved them, saying they were kind and humble, but excited by the novelty of the trip.
Their hosts were challenged to organise the delivery of halal food.
The children taught their hosts some basic Arabic words and sang children's songs in Arabic as they prepared for swimming lessons.
"The children are so kind;
we watched them play at the beach.
It was strange for us at first to see young girls enter the sea with their dresses on, but that is just a different cultural habit," Anamarija Lalic told SETimes.
She was with her family vacationing in Sukosan and saw the children every day.
Journalists that visited the camp saw how the children enjoyed the atmosphere and spending days in tranquility.
They did not directly speak to the press, but said they would promote Croatia "as heaven on Earth".
Iraqi TV documented the entire event.
Prominent Iraqi TV host Hashim Salman accompanied the little guests on their tour of Croatia and thanked the Croatian authorities for making the trip possible.
"The first such invitation we received was from Croatia, from a country that had a similar war destiny like Iraq.
You have put smiles on these children's faces," he said.
Many of them have suffered a lot, like 11-year-old Mustafa, whose parents were killed in a terrorist attack on Shi'a Muslims.
The children were born and raised in a war zone;
some having lost both parents in the war, and today live with foster families.
