01/08/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 01/08/11
Iliana Ivanova is a European Parliament (EP) member from Bulgaria's ruling GERB party.
In December 2009, six months into her EP post, she started an initiative to remove labour restrictions that prevent Bulgarian workers from landing jobs in ten EU countries.
Earlier this month, the initiative gained a powerful supporter – Bulgarian football star Hristo Stoichkov.
SETimes talked to Ivanova about the initiative.
SETimes:
What progress has been made since launching the campaign?
Iliana Ivanova:
As part of developing the overall campaign, I have submitted a series of questions to the European Commission (EC), regularly pressed the issue during key debates and hearings in the EP and wrote articles in European media.
In April 2010, I proposed a text to be included in the recommendations of the EP lawmakers on ways to fight the economic crisis.
It focused on the positive effects the expansion and free movement of workers and the removal of labour restrictions would have on improving the functioning of the internal market.
The EP Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection approved a text urging all EU member states that apply restrictions on Bulgarian workers to review their positions.
After discussing ways to boost the effect of our initiative on EU member states, Bulgarian Parliament spokesperson Tsetska Tsacheva sent letters to her counterparts in the ten European countries that still apply restrictions for Bulgarian workers -- Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands and the UK.
I have also had numerous meetings with these countries' ambassadors and with my EP colleagues.
SETimes:
Is it realistic to expect removing labour restrictions for Bulgarian and Romanian workers by 2012 per your initiative?
Ivanova:
I believe it is.
On June 18th, the EC began an EU-wide public survey about free movement of people and workers as well as discrimination that people from some EU member states face.
The survey is available in all EU languages and can be filled in online or on paper by August 12th.
The EC aims to assess the situation, identify the main obstacles and implement the principle of free movement and equal treatment of workers.
Another reason to feel positive is the answer I received to my second written question to the EC.
Labour commissioner Laslo Andor answered that at the end of the second transition period [end of 2011] he will ask those member states that want to extend it by another two years to provide "concrete and detailed evidence" of the need to keep restrictions.
SETimes:
How do your EP colleagues feel about your and Bulgarians' ambitions regarding the EU labour market?
Ivanova:
I have their total support.
As EP lawmakers, they are familiar and deeply appreciate the values of a united market -- most of all the free movement of people.
I was pleasantly surprised to be supported by the Dutch EP member Marije Cornelissen.
She is firmly against the restrictions on Bulgarian and Romanian workers and organised a television debate on the issue of opening the labour markets.
SETimes:
Who initiated the idea for Hristo Stoichkov to join the campaign?
Ivanova:
We both decided that this is a case in which his popularity, determination and professionalism could impact and help the campaign's success.
With the support of a world famous athlete like Stoichkov, the campaign demonstrates that workers in the new EU member states can contribute greatly to the common EU labour market.
SETimes:
What specific initiatives do you plan for Stoichkov, besides sending letters to EU member states to open labour markets?
Ivanova:
After the letters are sent, we will organise jointly with our Romanian colleagues a round table at the EP.
We want to invite other popular persons who agreed to join the campaign, including Stoichkov.
