01/08/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 01/08/11
Serbia's parliament met late into the evening Saturday (July 30th) and finally adopted a draft resolution on the crisis at Kosovo's northern border. 
The document condemned Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's government, saying its actions were a threat to "peace, stability and the possibility of finding a compromise solution".
Lawmakers demanded that the international community move to stop such moves by Pristina. 
They called for a peaceful resolution of the crisis and dialogue aimed at reaching a permanent solution.
Tensions erupted on July 25th after Thaci's government sent police to take over northern crossing points in a bid to enforce an embargo on Serbian imports.
Following resistance by local Serbs -- and the death of a Kosovo policeman in an apparent sniper attack -- KFOR moved to intervene.
Civilian traffic resumed on Sunday at the Brnjak and Jarinje border checkpoints under KFOR supervision, but the situation remains tense and local Serbs continue to man roadblocks in some areas, local media reported.
Although Belgrade is staunchly opposed to attempts by Pristina to impose its authority, some political commentators say the Serbian government has relatively few concrete options.
The reality on the ground poses constraints, argues Zarko Markovic. 
"We are much closer to the Kosovo government's establishing its state apparatus at border crossings than to returning to the previous state of affairs when there was UNMIK," he told SETimes.
Serbian authorities are seeking a solution that will not depict them as losers in the parliamentary elections next year, he added.
According to analyst Dusan Janjic, Belgrade has taken the wrong tack by shifting responsibilities to the international community and blaming KFOR and NATO.
Doing so "can bring Serbia into new conflicts with these organisations, which should be our partners in solving the crisis", he told SETimes.
"The content of the [parliamentary] declaration is dangerous," he said.
Serbian President Boris Tadic has accused some in the international community of using the enlargement process in order to pressure Serbia over the Kosovo issue.
"There is no better solution than dialogue, but Serbia will not agree to any change in the north of Kosovo and Metohija, nor to any blackmail related to European integration," Tadic said in an interview with the B92 media network. 
If recognising Kosovo's independence is ever set as a condition for accession, Tadic said, Serbia will say no.
Among the Serb public, opinions are divided as to what should be done.
"I do not understand why our government ruined our democratic, European future because of Kosovo, where for over ten years Serbia does not govern, and where it is clear that the Kosovo Albanians do not want to live in Serbia," Belgrade resident Isidora Kravljanac, 38, told SETimes.
The EU says it is sending a mediator, Robert Cooper, to help settle the border crisis. 
Meanwhile, two representatives of the Serbian government, Borko Stefanovic and Goran Bogranovic, have arrived in northern Kosovo to meet with the Serb community.
Media reports said they crossed into Kosovo via uncontrolled areas in the hills and forests after being refused entry at the Jarinje checkpoint.
