01/08/2011
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European times in Banja Luka – 01/08/11
Stress, strained relations with friends and family, bankruptcy and even suicide are often the outcome of guarantors no longer able to bear the weight of repaying other people's debts.
Nineteen guarantors committed suicide in the last three years, according to the Association for Protection of Guarantors of BiH.
"Guarantors have a signed contractual obligation to pay what others have borrowed if the borrowers are unable to pay the lenders, but they have no institutional protection," Association President Jovica Cvjetkovic told SETimes.
Cvjetkovic explained that in times of economic hardship, many want to help family, friends and acquaintances to obtain needed funding, but a large number are deceived by the very people they try to support.
According to Association data, there are 200,000 cheated guarantors, usually at the hands of friends or relatives.
In a country facing severe economic crisis like BiH, virtually any loan guarantor can potentially become a member of this group.
Problems with the guarantors emerged after the privatisation of the banking sector in 2002 and the arrival of foreign banks in BiH.
Credit expansion soon followed with massive borrowing by citizens that continued until the outbreak of the global economic crisis in 2008.
"The banks have valid contracts and can put the entire debt burden to the guarantors which they treat as equal to the borrowers.
Banks want to collect the debt as quickly as possible and are aware this can be accomplished much faster by charging guarantors rather than suing debtors," economist Sinisa Bozic told SETimes.
Bozic argues that the system is set up to allow borrowers to obtain loans in multiple banks and microcredit organisations, even if over-indebted.
"Initially, BiH's central bank did not have a Central Debt Registry (CKR) so that people borrowed beyond their means, but some borrowers soon began deceiving their guarantors who did not even know that over-borrowing occurred," Bozic said.
The Association is demanding a systemic resolution to the problem of guarantors, both in the two entities and at the level of BiH, as well as an organised a public campaign to that effect.
According to Cvjetkovic, the campaign's goal is to educate the guarantors, advocate amendments and additions to the law governing this area and to punish those responsible for defrauding guarantors.
Republika Srpska's Finance Ministry has already prepared draft legislation aiming to protect guarantors.
The Association leadership said it hopes the proposed legal changes -- specifying the precise obligations and rights of clients in their contracts with banks -- will prevent one from becoming a guarantor to over-indebted persons.
The Banking Agency of BiH, however, claims that this issue is already covered by the Law of Obligations, and recommends that the defrauded guarantors seek justice in court.
Its leadership said anyone who accepts being a guarantor immediately accepts the obligations of being the main debtor, and that all ensuing problems arising should be dealt with by the courts.
The Agency said it has launched a number of changes to address the systemic failures.
Since January, it prevents giving new loans to over-indebted persons.
The problem remains the already issued loans to a multitude of such people.
"Because it is unrealistic to expect retroactive changes to the law to relieve the guarantors of their obligation, the most practical thing is to put institutional pressure on the banks in case of payment delays or stopping debt payment [altogether].
Only when all options of the debtor are exhausted should collection be initiated from the guarantors," Bozic said.
