14/08/2006
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 14/08/06
Two countries in Southeast Europe -- Romania and Bulgaria -- are expected to join the Union on 1 January 2007. 
Another, Croatia, is likely to be put on a faster track. 
Despite worries about the EU's commitment to the enlargement process, the Balkan countries still appear to be moving closer to their accession goals. 
Assuming that remains the case, it will be up to regional governments to make the necessary economic, institutional and political adjustments. 
Let us consider, for instance, the implications for economic policy.
To begin with, it is important to distinguish between a "functioning market economy" and one that has the capacity to absorb shocks in a highly competitive environment, as is the case with the Union. 
Moreover, economic competitiveness must be understood in a profounder sense. 
Joining the European club demands compliance with a set of rules that dent traditional policy prerogatives. 
For instance, free capital movement (liberalisation of the capital account) is a must in the EU, whereas a premature opening is dangerous.
Likewise, new entrants are bound to enter the eurozone sooner or later. 
An economy that is not competitive enough would have a very hard time inside the single currency area.
It is imperative for countries joining the EU to have key institutions and mechanisms in place: a financial intermediation sector and an independent central bank, a substantial private sector where property rights are clearly defined and protected, a functioning judiciary and enforceable laws. 
Being able to fight corruption and organised crime effectively is also a prerequisite.
The economy needs to be stable. 
That means bringing down inflation to a reasonable level in a consistent manner, and maintaining low budget deficits while quasi-fiscal deficits are under control. 
Premises for economic stability are the operation of hard budget constraints and the spread of good governance practices in both the public and the private sectors. 
Low budget deficits imply coming to grips with the ballooning pressure on the pension system.
Public utilities are an important area of concern. 
It is unwise to privatise them blindly. 
As a matter of fact, there are utilities which should stay in the public domain; what has to be done in their case is to introduce good governance. 
Those utilities which are turned over to private hands need to be well-regulated, so that consumers are not abused by excessive tariffs.
However, some cautionary remarks qualifying the above observations are needed. 
The fact is that economic policymaking always involves tradeoffs.
Low annual inflation, at rates of 2 per cent to 3 per cent, is not easy to achieve in economies that are catching up, where income per capita is 5 to 10 times lower than the average EU figure (in PPP terms). 
In more rapidly growing economies, demand pressures collide with disinflation. 
This can also happen because prices of domestic services (non-tradeables) go up unabatedly -- the so called Balassa-Samuelson effect. 
As in Central and Eastern Europe, the Balkan economies have grown by more than 5 per cent on average in recent years. 
It is fair to acknowledge, however, that sustained growth asks for more fixed capital formation and human capital investment.
The currently low budget deficits may be misleading for two reasons. 
One is that they are likely to hide chronic serious under-funding of essential public goods, such as infrastructure, education and health care. 
Another reason is that after entry in the EU the new members have to boost public spending for the sake of complying with their obligations under the acquis. 
Therefore, one may confront situations where budget deficits get out of control.
Unless policymakers succeed in improving tax collection and reforming the welfare state (including the pension system) rising budget deficits can cripple overall economic stability. 
Rising deficits with growing current account deficits are not an anomaly in rapidly expanding emerging economies. 
Actually, current account deficits are increasing in most of Central and Eastern Europe because of economic growth differentials, compared to the older members of the EU, and surging bank credit extended to the private sector.
Against the background of capital account liberalisation, current account deficits that are not financed mainly by inward direct investment bring significant risks. 
It is the size of external deficits that complicates the task of policymakers when they have to decide on what is a prudent budget policy. 
This explains why the IMF has insisted that Bulgaria should run a surplus budget -- current account deficits have gone beyond 12 per cent of GDP lately and the currency board does not permit a fluctuation of the exchange rate.
Here we return to the issue of competitiveness. 
Because capital inflows can be quite substantial, or inflation differentials fairly high, the exchange rate may become excessively over-appreciated. 
This can erode competitiveness and destroy jobs. 
The effect would be particularly bad in economies that are plagued by very high unemployment, as in the Western Balkans. 
Low wages are not a panacea when Chinese and other Asian goods flood European markets. 
To a large extent, globalisation annuls the competitive advantage of low wages in Europe. 
The transfer of new information and communication technologies, combined with heavy investment in human capital buildup, are a must for securing long-term competitiveness.
Last but not least, massive migration can bring about important benefits, but it can also be a nuisance. 
Large remittances (to the tune of billions of euros for Romania and Bulgaria) can finance between 25 per cent and 40 per cent of trade deficits. 
But they imply the loss of highly skilled labour and, in numerous cases, disruption of family life. 
This said, for economies that suffer from huge unemployment, such as those in the Western Balkans, labour export is positive in net terms.
The bottom line is that policymakers in the Western Balkans must look beyond the economic numbers of recent years, understand the deep currents at work, be pragmatic, and learn from the experiences of current EU members, both old and new.
