26/07/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 26/07/12
The EU has expressed concerns that Kosovo authorities pressure and intimidate civil society when its activities do not correspond to the government's views and interests, but analysts are skeptical the government's subsequent efforts to improve co-operation will result in significant changes.
The 2011 EU progress report stated that civil society has not been involved in any debate in parliament.
"Public understanding of the role of civil society remains low. 
The environment in which NGOs operate needs to be improved. 
The government, assembly and municipalities need to cooperate more effectively with civil society," the report concluded.
Kosovo analysts echo the criticism.
"Relations between the government and civil society are not natural as would be expected in a functional democracy," Avni Bytyci, executive director of INPO, an NGO which monitors public policy implementation, told SETimes. 
"In many cases, the interests of civil society and government are opposites and in continuous conflict."
In response to the continued criticism, the prime minister's office and civil society organisations have begun creating a strategy to establish formal co-operation mechanisms. 
Officials hope the efforts will enhance the state institutions' obligations, including on ways for donating or bidding public funds.
"Creating a favourable legal environment ... 
participation in the design and implementation of public policy, co-implementation of policies concerning public service and financial support of civil society organisations, are some of the issues which it will be inevitable to address in the near future," Habit Hajredini, director of the good governance at the prime minister's office, told SETimes.
Bytyci said the solution is to respect the applicable law and adopt one of the many models in the EU which have resulted in good co-operation practices.
Donika Shaqiri, a PhD researcher on civil society in Pristina, told SETimes the situation in Kosovo mirrors the one in the region where governments most often do not want civil society included in decision-making processes.
But Bytyci is not optimistic that the government is serious in including civil society.
"The government is obligated by law to co-operate with civil society in some cases. 
Unfortunately, it has been shown that in every case when it found any justification for not doing so, it has used such a card," Bytyci said.
Dren Puka, chairman of the civil society coalition Civicos that represents 115 NGOs involved in the program, said it is satisfied with the process because its members have been able to participate.
