20/11/2006

Macedonian researchers can use the EU fund for science even though the country is not yet a member of the bloc, EU Commissioner for Science and Research Janez Potocnik said. 
He was in Skopje on Wednesday (November 15th) and Thursday for talks with Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski. 
According to Potocnik, Macedonia could become an associated member and benefit from the 2007-2013 EU Research Programme, which is to be endorsed in Brussels by the end of December.
***
A team of experts from the Nis Faculty of Electronics in Serbia has developed a new multimedia system designed to assist in educating children with hearing problems. 
It enables wireless transmission of sound from a microphone to the ear, enabling the children to move freely. 
The system will be applied at a specialised school for children in Bubanj.
***
A Croatian physics professor and two MIT graduate students say they have developed a model that is theoretically able to power electronic devices wirelessly. 
Although the team -- consisting of Dr. 
Marin Soljacic, Aristeidis Karalis and John Joannopoulos -- has not yet constructed or tested the system, computer simulations and theoretical calculations suggest it should work at distances of up to five metres. 
In the future, people will likely be able to charge their laptops or mobile phone batteries using such a system, Soljacic said.
***
USAID will donate software to ten Macedonian municipalities -- Skopje, Resen, Bitola, Stip, Veles, Kocani, Kavadarci, Gostivar, Gazi Baba and Strumica -- under the organisation's "e-Gov Project". 
The software will be used for the implementation of a pilot project aimed at ensuring transparency of public sector management and communication between local self-government authorities and citizens.
***
The World Bank has approved a 5m- euro loan for the construction of the new national Meteorology Centre in Tirana. 
The project will begin in early 2007.
***
Greece and Cyprus were among the 25 EU member states with the lowest levels of use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) by households, individuals and enterprises in the first quarter of 2006, according to a survey by Eurostat that was released last week. 
The survey, which covered the EU, Norway and Iceland, showed that the lowest proportions of internet access this year were registered in Greece (23%) and Slovakia (27%) -- compared to the EU average of around 52%. 
Greece and Cyprus were among the states with the lowest proportion of households with a broadband connection, with 4% and 12%, respectively.
(Various sources 13/11/06 - 20/11/06)
