18/12/2006
Some 61% of Greeks use the internet for work purposes, according to a new survey conducted by the AGB and the Observatory for the Greek Information Society.
The poll also found that 64% use the internet for e-mail, chat rooms and forums;
while 25% use it to search for information.
The Serbian-based IT company ComTrade Group announced plans to invest 100m euros to expand its activities in Southeast Europe in the next two years.
ComTrade has been operating in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia.
It recently opened a branch in Albania, and intends to enter the Romanian and Ukrainian markets in 2007.
Seven companies have submitted bids in the international tender for a 4.1m euro digital mapping project in Albania.
The winner will be tasked with building the first digital map of the country, which will be used in the land legalisation process.
The candidates are Austria's Meixner Vermessung zt Gmbh, Croatia's Geofoto, the Italian firms Compagnia Generale Ripreseaeree and SMA Basilicata, IGN France International, Israel's Operational Management Crisis Containment System and the Japanese-Finnish consortium Pasco-FINMAP.
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) government and Microsoft signed a strategic partnership agreement.
The document, sealed by FBiH Prime Minister Ahmet Hadzipasic and Microsoft BiH manager Lejla Zukic-Krivdic, regulates the right of use of the latest Microsoft programme packages by the FBiH administration and is aimed at establishing long-term relations between the signatories.
The Macedonian government last week presented four new projects, worth 20m euros, aimed at developing the domestic IT sector in the next four years.
A new cabinet post -- minister without portfolio in charge of information society -- is also being established.
E-Makedonija approved 74,109 euros for 11 projects aimed at information promotion, knowledge and IT education among marginal groups in Macedonia, ethnic communities and citizens with special needs.
The initiatives were selected from among 34 applications, submitted in a competition held by e-Makedonija in August.
Bulgaria submitted its candidacy to host next year's Symposium of World Telecom Regulators.
The gathering will precede ITU Telecom Europe 2007, which is scheduled for December 2007 in Sofia.
(Various sources 11/12/06-18/12/06)
