19/02/2007
Equipment that detects nuclear and other radioactive material was installed at the Slovenian-Croatian border crossing at Bregana on February 13th. 
The equipment was donated by the International Atomic Energy Agency, and will help border authorities prevent attempts to establish a radioactive material smuggling channel and potential terror attacks. 
The device is able to detect plutonium, uranium, thorium and other radioactive materials.
***
Albanian Minister of Education and Science Genc Pollo and Turkish counterpart Hysein Celik sealed a co-operation agreement on research technology on February 11th in Ankara. 
The accord envisions the exchange of researchers, to conduct studies and implement contemporary scientific approaches, as well as holding bilateral research conferences and workshops.
***
Turkey's leading mobile operator Turkcell selected Helsinki-based Valimo Wireless to assist with the Mobile Signature project, TurkcellMobilImza. 
The programme will bring electronic signature technology into mobile phones. 
Turkcell believes the market for mobile identity management and strong authentication solutions is in a fast growth phase -- as both government and financial institutions are seeking to supply more secure and user-friendly mobile phone-based document signing and transaction validation procedures.
***
The National Innovation Centre for Information and Communication Technologies was officially inaugurated in Sofia on February 12th. 
The centre was created by the State Agency for Information Technologies and Communication with the support of Microsoft Bulgaria. 
The centre will co-ordinate the development and implementation of high tech projects in which the higher educational establishments, the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences and private business will take part.
***
Serbia and Switzerland sealed an agreement on collaboration in the science sector on February 12th. 
The document allows Serbia access to financing under the 2005-2008 Co-operation between Eastern Europe and Switzerland (SCOPES) programme, run by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF). 
In particular, it provides for the realisation of 15 joint Serbian-Swiss research projects in the field of nuclear physics, ecology, healthcare, geology and chemistry, institutional partnership and funding of Serbian scientists in SNSF conferences.
***
The construction of a new bio diesel plant in Republika Srpska (RS) -- launched under a RS-US project -- was officially marked with a ceremony at the Sitnesi kod Srpca site last week. 
According to the US investors' representative Nenad Kokanovic, the cost of the project is estimated to be around $15m. 
He said that the factory would be constructed within six months and will lead to around 150 new jobs by the end of this year. 
It is projected to produce 60 tonnes of bio diesel fuel per day.
(Various sources -- 12/02/07-19/02/07)
