19/03/2007

Regular consumption of a few glasses of wine weekly has a positive effect on human health and can help fight tumours, according to research by a team of Greek scientists. 
The findings were presented at the Detrop food and drink exhibition in Thessaloniki last week. 
The project co-ordinator, University of Thessaly biochemistry professor Dimitris Kouretas, said his team had been working on the study since 2004. 
They found that grapes -- and, subsequently, both white and red wines -- conduct plant polyphenols, which positively influence human cells, bacteria and enzymes.
***
Companies interested in procurement tenders in Albania will now be able to obtain all the necessary documentation online, under a joint project of the Albanian government and USAID. 
Previously, firms had to buy tender documentation from the Public Procurement Agency, but the material will now be downloadable for free from the Agency's site.
***
Swisscom AG, Switzerland's largest telephone company, plans to invest more than 62m euros over three years in urban internet networks in eastern European countries, including Poland, Bulgaria, Romania and Ukraine, CEO Carsten Schloter announced on Wednesday (March 14th). 
The firm is also examining the possibility of acquiring smaller local IT firms to bolster its solutions division, which provides network and technology services to business customers.
***
Montenegro is receiving its first topographic digital map, as well as a database for urbanisation and spatial planning, under a joint project of the Montenegrin government and the Japan International Co-operation Agency. 
Completion of the project was announced on Tuesday (March 13th).
***
The Macedonian government officially launched the Computer for Every Pupil programme on March 13th. 
The cabinet announced a public tender for the supply of 100,000 PCs for primary and secondary schools, which would be delivered by the end of 2007 and early 2008. 
In the second phase of the project, another 50,000 PCs will be purchased in 2009. 
The initiative is meant to help train students to use computers in their everyday learning and to encourage teachers to use modern teaching methods and techniques.
Various sources – 12/03/07-19/03/07
