24/04/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/04/12
Although the conflict in the former Yugoslavia ended more than 15 years ago, a significant surplus of weapons, state-owned and in personal possessions, remains. 
But the regional countries started a partnership with the US government and the UN Development Programme (UNDP) towards solving the problem.
According to the defence ministries of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia, the two countries have the most surplus of ordnance, about 18, 000 tonnes.
Serbia has about 12,000 tonnes of ammunition stored in open air. 
As of last June, military material is being kept in appropriate storage areas, which now counts for about 8,000 tonnes of ammunition.
In the early days of its independence, Montenegro counted around 9,700 tonnes of ammunition deemed highly destructive, including large amounts of light and heavy weapons such as T55 tanks. 
The number has since been cut in half, to about 4,100 tonnes.
Although defence ministries' data of regional countries is official, there is speculation that the countries do not have actual numbers of weapons on their territory, since acquisition of military equipment and arms went unsupervised during the conflicts.
"Judging by the weapons storage problem, Croatia has old ammunition without the basic information of the expiration date. 
[Such ammunition] is a potential hazard due to consistency changes of the ammunition material caused by the time," Vlatko Cvrtila, a professor at the Zagreb Faculty of Political Sciences, told SETimes.
The Croatian Defence Ministry said it is continuously working on the problem, in co-operation with the US government and the NGO Norwegian People's Aid. 
The US donated 3.4m euros for the purpose.
"The US company Sterling invested about 3.8m euros. 
In addition, the UNDP in BiH plans to assist in the destruction of surplus arms, military equipment, and ammunition," BiH defence ministry spokesperson Uma Sinanovic told SETimes.
Montenegro is managing its weapons surplus threefold: through the preventive destruction of ammunition using its own resources; the MONDEM programme for demilitarisation -- a joint programme of the Montenegro government, the OEBS, UNDP and partnering countries; and through an agreement for the destruction of small weapons and various types of ammunition in partnership with the US government.
Regional co-operation is made possible through co-operation with the US, EU, and other organisations especially because Southeast Europe is one of the main routes for illegal weapon trade and transport.
"Co-operation is a unique way by which the countries can solve not only national but international weapons problems. 
There are numerous instruments based on international documents and regimes which the governments can use to reduce, eliminate, and destroy large quantities of arms and ammunition. 
But regional countries should develop their own initiatives. 
Existing weapons represent a major illegal trade problem, or direct or indirect threat to life and property of citizens who are still close to many warehouses of arms and weapons," Cvrtilo said.
According to Aleksandar Radic, an analyst at the Belgrade-based NGO Euro-Atlantic Alliance, the illegal weapons trade is one of the most important consequences of the surplus, making initiatives and changes on the regional level necessary.
"It is obvious that governments in the region are trying to achieve results in this field, but one of the main problems is the law and its contrast to the practice, as it is well known if someone wants to obtain weapons they will get it in some illegal way," Radic told SETimes.
He added that SEE states should make changes to allow one to obtain a weapon by receiving adequate training and licenses.
Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac recently made one of the first appeals for regional co-operation in dealing with the problem of weapon surplus at the Southeast European Co-operation conference in Belgrade, when he pointed out that Serbia has the capabilities to help other countries in solving this issue.
At the same event, Frank Boland, a NATO representative, said that the initiative is important because it contributes to safety and security in the region.
