16/03/2007

The popular Swedish furniture retailer IKEA will open a new location in Bucharest on March 21st, the company said in a press release. 
The store will cover 26,000 square metres and initially offer 7,000 furniture articles and accessories. 
The total investment is 25m euros. 
Ikea says it expects approximately 2.5 million visitors during the store's first year in business.
***
Global steel giant Arcelor Mittal said on Tuesday (March 13th) that it would launch a 98m-euro investment programme to revive the integrated production of steel at its Bosnian factory Mittal Steel Zenica. 
Modernising the production facilities is expected to take 16 months. 
Production capacity will be quadrupled, to around 2 million tonnes.
***
Construction work on the Burgas-Vlora pipeline will start late April or early May, according to Edward Ferguson, president of AMBO, the company that manages the project. 
The 900-km long pipeline will connect Bulgaria's Black Sea coast with Albania's Adriatic shore, and will pass through Macedonia. 
The project is estimated to cost around 1.4 billion euros. 
Completion is expected by the end of 2010 or early 2011.
***
Four Macedonian metal companies, "Makstil", "Fakom", "Iskra" and "11th October" announced they would merge into one group, to jointly explore export opportunities of Far East markets. 
The companies say that the enterprise's main target would be the Chinese market, where they would offer materials for infrastructure projects, as well as for construction and shipbuilding sectors.
***
One of Croatia's leading retail chains, Plodine, plans to invest 55m euros to open ten new supermarkets this year, CEO Mile Curkovic announced on Wednesday (March 14th). 
The total number of Plodine's supermarkets and shopping centres will rise to 37, creating 500 new job openings and bringing the number of employees to almost 2,000.
***
Speaking at a joint Croatian-Kosovo business forum in Pristina on Monday (March 12th), Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku called on Croatian companies to invest in Kosovo. 
Ceku and the Croatian Ministry of Economy state secretary, Vladimir Vrankovic, highlighted the energy sector, telecommunications and transport as particularly promising areas for co-operation.
***
EU Commissioner for Environment Stavros Dimas warned last week that Greece would face "serious problems" if it does not reduce its use of high-polluting fossil fuels such as lignite coal and shift to cleaner energy resources. 
He cited statistical data that suggested Greece generates 9.2 tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2) per capita annually. 
The EU average is 8.5 tonnes. 
That makes Greece the second worst-offender in terms of CO2 emissions, behind Portugal.
(Various sources – 09/03/07-16/03/07)
