19/06/2012
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 19/06/12
Bulgaria continues to lead the Balkans and European countries in alcohol, cigarette and drug consumption among teenagers, according to a recent survey by the European School Survey Project on Alcohol and Other Drugs (ESPAD).
Substance abuse in Bulgaria is increasing -- due to the use of amphetamines and cannabis, and to the growing number of girls as users.
A study released on June 5th showed that Sofia ranks second only to Monaco among 36 countries studied, in the use of amphetamines. 
The results reveal 7% of the surveyed Bulgarian teens report such use. 
In comparison, it is 1% in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia; 2% in Croatia, Greece, Montenegro and Romania; and 4% in Cyprus.
Some suggest the reason behind this drug boom is its low price compared to other illegal substances.
"Back in 2001 and 2002, when a joint cost about 0.50 euro cents, amphetamines cost 15 euros for 1 gram. 
Now, ten years later, a gram of marijuana costs 15 euros, while the price of amphetamines [is] 17.5 euros," said IH from Sofia, who refused to reveal his name for safety reasons.
"One gram of amphetamines is enough to make four to five people high. 
Besides, when you take amphetamines, you can drink a lot without getting drunk," he said.
Binge drinking among Bulgarian students is far above the average rate in Europe. 
The study shows that more than 39% of 16-year-olds have consumed more than three beverages on one occasion in the past 30 days.
"Our observations suggest that 5% of all 300,000 students in Bulgaria get drunk at least three times a week, which is extremely bothering. 
We are talking about students aged 15 to 19," said Momcil Vasilev, director of the Sofia-based National Focus Centre for Addiction, and one of the study's researchers.
Most other Balkan countries have lower levels of alcohol and alcohol consumption among teens compared to the average of countries included in the study.
Some suggest this is due to a relatively recent opening of the region to Western culture and lifestyle, and larger drug markets.
Anina Chileva, ESPAD's lead researcher for Bulgaria, thinks the key to reversing the alarming trend is prevention.
"We need an interactive health education, based on young people's involvement, their inter-communication, and to set up a youth environment where choosing not to use drugs and alcohol is seen as a trendy, adequate and intelligent choice," she told SETimes.
According to Vasilev, this situation will probably worsen.
"Bulgaria is an example -- the moment we opened up to all markets, we also opened up for this one. 
And when there is a market, there is usage," Vasilev told SETimes.
