18/07/2012
By Lily Lynch for the Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 18/07/12
A Serbia constitutional court ruling that reduces Vojvodina's autonomy is igniting a new debate about the entity and whether the new Serbian government will seek further concessions.
The court's decision on July 10th comes just weeks after the election of former nationalist Tomislav Nikolic as president, and as a coalition government headed by former Socialist Party spokesman and Prime Minister-designate Ivica Dacic prepares to assume power.
The ruling means that the province will no longer have jurisdiction over environmental, agricultural, and rural development policies.
"This decision is the biggest assault on democracy in Serbia since the murder of Zoran Djindjic," Branislav Grubachki, former MP for the League of Social Democrats of Vojvodina, told SETimes.
"Dacic had said there would be no further intrusions into Vojvodina's autonomy, but he is not to be trusted."
Others, including the more nationalist political parties, welcomed the court's decision.
"[Serbia] can be pleased because the country's constitutional order and law have been defended from injustice and separatism, which shows that Serbia has a future if it develops as a legally defined country," Vojislav Kostunica, president of the Democratic Party of Serbia, said.
The court also disputed the designation of Novi Sad as the capital of Vojvodina and the existence of Vojvodina's offices in Brussels -- which the province opened last October to gain better access to EU regional funds and improve foreign investments -- and elsewhere.
Vojvodina and Kosovo enjoyed the status of autonomous provinces within Serbia, a status gained in former Yugoslavia's 1974 constitution.
The provinces' autonomy was drastically reduced in 1989 when Slobodan Milosevic launched the so-called "anti-bureaucratic revolution," to consolidate and centralise power.
Vojvodina's assembly adopted a statute in 2009 which highlighted the province's autonomous status and respect for national minority rights in response to Serbia's 2006 constitution;
many believed the latter provided Vojvodina insufficient autonomy.
The newly contested law on the jurisdictions of Vojvodina was adopted to legitimise the contents of the Vojvodina statute on a national level.
Former President Boris Tadic declared it valid by decree and implemented it in 2010.
Some national minorities described the court's decision as problematic and politically motivated.
"There are definitely political reasons for the constitutional court's actions.
However, we have yet to see the entirety of the 90-page decision because it has not been made public yet.
We have only seen one or two pages," Pasztor Balint, head of the Parliamentary Group Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians, told SETimes.
More than a third of Vojvodina's nearly 2 million inhabitants are comprised of Hungarians, Slovaks, Croats, Montenegrins, Romanians, Roma, Bunjevci, Ruthenians and Macedonians and other numerically smaller minorities.
Grubachki said if degradations of Vojvodina's autonomy continue, he will be forced to return to politics.
"Others will join me and there will be a movement centred around this issue alone," Grubachki said.
