18/04/2012
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 18/04/12
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is taking action to uproot the use of pirated computer software -- an issue that has plagued Southeast Europe -- and officials are optimistic that efforts will bring the practice under control.
"Pirated computer programmes can easily be purchased on the street in most BiH towns for only several euros.
Their use is widespread by both individuals and institutions," Ibrahim Tirak, director of the Federation of BiH's Inspection Commission, told SETimes.
Illegal downloads of software is estimated to cost BiH 11m euros and 1,400 jobs annually.
Authorities began inspections throughout the country three weeks ago to determine which organisations used unlicensed software and then provided a window of five to seven days to purchase it legally.
Within a week, the inspectors charged various institutions 360,000 euros in value added tax on the newly purchased software.
"We started by inspecting big industrial subjects -- banks, microcredit organisations, insurance associations and construction companies," Besim Durakovic, director of the Tuzla canton's Inspection Commission office, told SETimes.
Durakovic said officials are confident software piracy can be brought under control, but only after inspections extend to individuals as well.
"Countries where software piracy exceeds 66% can expect no serious investment," Mirna Milanovic-Lalic, legal adviser to the Business Software Alliance, told SETimes.
Montenegro and Albania lead the region in illegal use of computer software, estimated at 83% and 77% respectively, according to global research presented by the Business Software Alliance, an international association that supports the software industry.
While Croatia has the lowest rate -- 53% -- the number of pirated computer programmes, games and operating systems is rapidly increasing.
Illegal use of software in BiH is estimated at 66%.
"The BiH government has decided to establish order in all social arenas.
Intellectual property protection is of great importance for BiH, especially because of the World Trade Organisation and the [EU] agreement of stabilisation and association," Federation of BiH Prime Minister Nermin Nikshic said.
BiH officials said the inspections also aim at raising awareness about the use and distribution of licensed software in order to stop the expansion of the burgeoning gray economy.
They expect media support to create maximum impact, but, ironically, the majority of media use pirated software.
Edin Shehic, who assembles information for a television station founded and financed by the Sarajevo cantonal government, described the government's hesitation to purchase licensed software given the chronic lack of funds.
"I assemble [materials] on a computer which has no licensed programme, but was bought illegally for 5 euros.
To license all the equipment we need a lot of money, and the government will certainly not allow it," Shehic said.
A basic software package costs 180 euros;
the price of specialised software depends on the profession but costs much more.
Some small businesses that anticipate being fined for being unable to buy licensed software complained that the timeframe the government allows is insufficient.
Binasa Ruzdic, a real estate adviser, works for one of the two organisations that expect to be fined.
"They fine us right away.
Many private owners will not be able to withstand the [financial] weight," Ruzdic told SETimes
The effective protection of intellectual property is one of the preconditions for the development of the IT industry, according to Lejla Zukic-Krivdic, director of Microsoft BiH.
"The inspections are carried out by checking all software, not solely Microsoft's as the most common one.
We support the initiative," she told SETimes.
