16/07/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/07/12
When Serbia Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic represents Serbia as chairman of the UN General Assembly this fall, he'll be living in a lavish apartment in New York that costs 12,000 euros per month.
While the average monthly salary in Serbia is about 285 euros, Jeremic is seeking a monthly salary of nearly 23,000 euros, plus the housing allowance, for his one-year term leading the UN, according to published reports.
The government allocated an initial 2.4m euros to finance his salary and living expenses in New York, as well as for support staff to assist him.
More money will be allocated to cover his expenses and salary from January-September next year.
Dragan Djilas, Belgrade mayor and Jeremic's Democratic Party (DP) colleague, said the allocation is "shameful."
"I'm sure that Jeremic can carry out the task he was elected for with a monthly salary lower than the one he set for himself, and that he can live in an apartment far more modest than the one he chose," Djilas said.
Jeremic called Djilas' statements a "demagogic outburst" and the "first shot fired in the battle for the future and soul of the Democratic Party."
"Serbia's presiding over UN will, undoubtedly, cost money… All the doors of the world, political and economic, will be open for Serbia.
This is an honour that carries a certain price," Jeremic said.
Dejan Vuk Stankovic, a political analyst and an associate at the Institute for Social Sciences, also said the money is inappropriate for Jeremic's presidency, especially at a time when Serbia faces major economic and budget challenges.
"All this is happening at a time of general budget shortage, when the belt-tightening is proposed to budget users, especially the public sector employed and pensioners.
At a time when already low salaries and pensions must be further cut, someone is taking millions of dollars to preside over the UN General Assembly," Stankovic told SETimes.
He added that the presidency will serve more for Jeremic's personal promotion rather than for Serbia, and that the post will not lead to a diplomatic turnaround for Serbia.
"If we're talking about the proportion between the invested funds and possible benefits, then it is actually a disproportion.
That money certainly will not improve Serbia's foreign policy position.
It will enable Jeremic to enjoy luxury and self-promotion," Stankovic said.
Vladimir Goati, sociologist and the president of Transparency Serbia, said Jeremic's move was "imprudent and on the edge of reason," in the face of economic problems plaguing the country.
"It is grotesque that a country standing on the brink of bankruptcy is acting wastefully on an international level," Goati told SETimes.
He thinks the entire DP leadership, rather than just Djilas, its deputy president, must condemn Jeremic's budget.
"This wasteful move will be an easy win for the new government, which is to be formed by the Serbian Progressive Party, the Socialists, and the United Regions of Serbia.
I think the new government, with citizen support, will immediately abolish this decision on expenditures," said Goati.
Milana Stamenkovic, a student, told SETimes that the money could be spent on more important things.
"There are extremely poor families that cannot feed themselves;
they should be given those funds and helped," she said.
