13/02/2007

At a joint news conference Monday (February 12th) with his Bulgarian counterpart, Georgi Parvanov, Greek President Karolos Papoulias said Greek-Bulgarian relations were entering "a golden age". 
He added that the two countries, together with Romania, could form a "Balkan nucleus" with an important role in EU decision-making. 
Papoulias was on a two-day visit to Sofia.
***
Hungarian President Laszlo Solyom, beginning a two-day official visit to Romania on Monday (February 12th), called for more rights for ethnic Hungarians in Romania. 
Following talks with counterpart Traian Basescu and Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, Solyom urged the Romanian Parliament to accelerate the adoption of a draft law guaranteeing more rights to minorities, including cultural autonomy.
***
Turkish Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc told visiting Croatian counterpart Vladimir Seks on Monday (February 12th) that Turkey fully backs the country's aspirations to join NATO and gain a non-permanent member seat on the UN Security Council. 
During his visit, Seks also met with Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer.
***
Turkish Army General Staff head General Yasar Buyukanıt left on Sunday (February 10th) for a several-day visit to the United States, at the invitation of his US counterpart, General Peter Pace. 
Discussions are expected to focus on bilateral military ties, the situation in Iraq and the Middle East, the fight against the terrorist Kurdistan Workers Party and the draft US congressional resolution on the alleged Ottoman-era genocide of Armenians.
***
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader arrived on Thursday (February 8th) for a two-day official visit to Romania. 
He met with representatives of the Croatian minority from the villages of Karasevo, Klokoti, Ravnik and Lupak in the western part of the country. 
There are reportedly around 14,000 Croats living in Romania. 
Culture Minister Bozo Biskupic and Economy Minister Branko Vukelic accompanied Sanader.
***
German Minister of Europe Gunter Gloser was in Athens on Thursday (February 8th) to meet with Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and her deputy, Yiannis Valinakis. 
Talks focused on the priorities of Germany's EU presidency and the EU constitution. 
The officials also discussed Turkey's European prospects, Kosovo and Greece's name dispute with Macedonia.
***
The Kosovo status issue and Albania's NATO membership bid were the main topics during a meeting between Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli and Czech Senate Chairman Premysl Sobotka in Prague on Thursday (February 8th). 
Topalli said Albania has made considerable progress in NATO membership preparations, especially with regard to the fight against corruption and organised crime.
(Various sources -- 06/02/07-13/02/07)
