17/04/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 17/04/12
The value added tax (VAT) rate in the region ranges from 17% and 25% and that difference, as well as frequent rate increases, are increasingly prompting consumers to seek goods in countries with a lower tax rate, depriving home governments from raising much needed budget funds.
"In parts of eastern Croatia, along the Sava River, consumers now purchase goods in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), as well as in Slovenia and Hungary," Drenislav Zhekic, director of the Serbian Chamber of Commerce in Croatia, told SETimes.
Croatia leads the region with a highest 25% VAT, but other regional EU member states Romania, Greece and Bulgaria trail closely with 24%, 23% and 20% respectively.
"It is always better for an economy if the taxes are low, but our reality is that there is no political will to create the conditions for low taxes as well as low government spending," Aleksandar Stevanovic, an economist at Serbia's Centre for Free Trade, told SETimes.
Still, Serbian officials have announced they, too, will increase the current 18% VAT.
Stevanovic explained that a VAT hike will lead to inflation and citizens receiving less goods and services relative to their income.
"If salaries do not increase [concurrently], those people which create value will lose and the ones which receive money from the budget will benefit, absent a huge tax evasion," Stevanovic said.
While observers say tax increases will be postponed in Serbia until after the May 6th elections, businessmen argue against any VAT hikes.
"The rate is charged in advance and companies have to pay VAT after invoicing, regardless of whether the invoice is paid. 
The entire risk of non-payment falls on the businessmen. 
The government takes its part no matter whether the business materialised," Miroljub Aleksic, president of Serbia's Alco Group, told SETimes.
Other regional countries like Montenegro -- which has the lowest VAT in the region at 17% -- are sticking to the decision not to raise the tax.
"We consider it appropriate to Montenegro's existing economic conditions and also because it contributes to creating a competitive and stimulating investment and business environment," Milica Vuletic, of the Montenegro Tax Administration, told SETimes.
Similarly, Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said "we are making maximum effort ... 
not to raise taxes."
Macedonia’s standard VAT rate is 18%, but it has 5% for certain products to stimulate consumption and economic growth. 
The World Bank's Paying Taxes 2012 lists Macedonia as fourth in the world for its low cumulative tax rate of 9.7%.
Economists argue a sustainable VAT rate is one that allows to optimally fill state coffers but does not encourage consumption migration nor tax evasion.
"The solution for all the countries and the region is to institute similar VAT rates," Zhekic said.
Given that the regional countries strive to join the EU, they are expected to increase their VAT closer to the level of EU member states.
The relevant question then concerns the level of government spending, according to Stevanovic. 
A high VAT rate is meaningful only if the taxes on labour and the capital gains are low. 
"Serbia can increase its VAT only if it reduces other taxes," he said.
If not, Stevanovic explained, the VAT increase will be another futile government move that will be accompanied by tax evasion and enlargement of the gray economy. 
This applies to all the countries in the region, he said.
In Croatia, some cost of labour taxes were lowered to compensate for VAT increases.
