22/03/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 22/03/12
There are 1,033,507 people unemployed in Greece.
If you were unlucky enough to be one of them that was standing in football-field length lines on a chilly March morning -- waiting for a monthly benefit -- it seemed like they were all there.
The jobless rate has hit 21% and is expected to reach 25% by the end of the year.
The lines are going to get longer.
Maria Paissiou, 44, a German language teacher who'd been working for a private school, said she'd been waiting three hours for her number to be called.
Unlike many who said they were angry with the government for the economic crisis gripping Greece, she told SETimes, "It's our mentality … we're all to blame."
Her words echo those of Deputy Prime Minister Theodoros Pangalos, who said all of Greek society is at fault – from politicians who hired hundreds of thousands of needless workers, to those who took the jobs and did little to earn their pay.
Workers from private companies have swollen the ranks so far, victims of a deep recession in which more than 111,000 businesses have closed, including 30-40% of those in the centre of Athens.
About 150,000 public workers will be fired over the next three years.
Many companies have also begun to implement unilateral cuts in wages, with some workers reporting their pay being cut by 33-50% -- more than public workers' salaries have been slashed.
"They've brought us to such despair to accept this little amount of money," said Paissiou, standing just outside the door of a forlorn-looking room where scores of people sat blank-faced waiting for their turn to be called.
On March 16th, the monthly benefit was cut from 461.50 euros to 360 euros to keep pace with 22-32% cuts in the minimum wage, the deepest for those under 25, for whom unemployment is now at 51.5%.
The number of jobless grew by 300,000 in 2011 and is already at 23.5 percent, according to Greece's statistics agency ELSTAT.
It was a doubly difficult day for Babis and Athina Paschos, 34 and 32, as the married couple had both lost their jobs.
He said he'd seen it coming as the store where he worked as a manager, as sales fell so precipitously the past year.
"When a shop has no business and you see it every day, you know …," he said, his voice trailing off.
His wife worked at a children's clothing company for eight years, but lost her job when the workforce was cut from 150 to 40.
The couple is thinking about giving up on their homeland.
"I have a cousin in Canada, in Toronto, in the restaurant business and we're thinking of going there," he said.
They have two children, 5 and 3 years old, and said they are worried they won't find work before the benefits run out in a year.
Alex Afouxenidis, a researcher at the National Centre for Research in Athens, said the situation is more dire than it seems, as some 500,000 people have no income at all amid growing numbers of those whose unemployment benefits have run out.
"Greece doesn't have a viable set of policies … [to] promote growth," he told SETimes.
The General Confederation of Greek Labor warned that "the number of those without a job combined with the reduction in unemployment benefits create an explosive mixture with unpredictable social consequences."
