17/04/2012
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 17/04/12
Citizens and analysts have voiced confusion with the Serbian government's call not to hold local elections in northern Kosovo on May 6th.
Minister for Kosovo and Metohija Goran Bogdanovic said on Sunday (April 15th) that Serbia will not organise the elections in Kosovo due to UNMIK's negative response to the plan.
"Resolution 1244 is a mandatory legal and international act for us. 
[Holding the elections there] would cause violence and extra risks for Serbs south of Ibar River," the minister told SETimes.
Bogdanovic said, however, that this does not mean that Serbia would close its institutions in Kosovo and announced that instead of elected officials, the Serbian government would appoint municipal leaderships.
Dusan Janjic, the director of the NGO Forum for Ethnic Relations, told SETimes that such a stance from Belgrade would be a negative in the ruling Democratic Party's campaign.
"Firstly, it is unreasonable for Belgrade to have waited so long to announce the decision to Kosovo Serbs. 
Secondly, Kosovo Serbs will surely now lose confidence, if they had any, in President Boris Tadic and the Serbian government," said Janjic.
He said that it was also not clear why Belgrade was announcing the formation of new municipal bodies in Kosovo if it wanted to respect international obligations.
"One of the EU's demands is the abolition of Serbian institutions in Kosovo. 
If Belgrade does not respect this, it cannot hope for negotiations to start with Brussels," he said.
Aleksandar Mitic, the director of the project Compromise for Kosovo, believes the Serbian government made the decision under pressure from Washington and Brussels.
"The decision by the Belgrade authorities is a direct consequence of the ultimatum by the leading EU countries, which have put the Serbian government under a choice between the holding of local elections and the pursuit of EU integration," Mitic told SETimes.
He added that it was also clear that the Serbs in northern Kosovo would remain defiant.
"Tadic and his government have little or no authority among Serbs in Kosovo, even among the members of Tadic's party, who realise that what is taking place is a forceful attempt at integrating the Kosovo Serbs in the Albanian institutions," said Mitic.
Serbs in northern Kosovo, for now, show no signs that they intend to listen to Belgrade.
Dobrosav Dobric, the president of the Municipal Assembly of Zvečan, said that his municipality has the right to organise elections, and would do so on May 6th.
"We will not wait for the Albanians to organise elections for us. 
If the Serbian institutions are closed, then there will no longer be Serbs here," he said.
Serbs in the Kosovo Pomoravlje region, south of the Ibar River, were also puzzled by Belgrade's stance.
Dragan Nikolic, the leader of Kosovo-Pomoravlje District and appointed by the Serbian government, said it was particularly bad that Belgrade had not consulted Kosovo Serbs.
"The current situation is exhausting and confusing. 
Confidence in both institutions and leaders has been undermined," Nikolic told SETimes.
Berat Bejtullahu, a researcher at the Centre for Conflict Research and Resolution in Pristina, told SETimes “Serbia is playing cards here. 
In one hand, it says it will not organise local elections, but the mayors in northern Kosovo have announced they will organise [them] by themselves, which will of course be financed by Belgrade. 
Bogdanovic made it clear that the new government will have to decide to recognise those elections or not, and they will do that, and this is a dangerous precedent."
He added "Serbian elected mayors will harm the Kosovo-elected Serbian representatives, and we have a strange situation when we have two groups of Serbian leadership in Kosovo."
SETimes correspondents Ivana Jovanovic in Belgrade and Muhamet Brajshori in Pristina contributed to this article.
