14/02/2007
The Turkish film "Takva -- A Man's Fear of God" was shown at the 57th Berlin Film Festival on Monday (February 12th).
Directed by Fatih Akin and Ozer Kiziltan, the film was presented during the "Panorama" event.
The filmmakers say they hope "Takva" can show people another side of Turkey and the complexities of Turkish society.
Bulgaria won a friendly four-nation football tournament held in Cyprus on February 7th.
The Bulgarian team defeated Cyprus 3-0 to place first.
Runner-up Cyprus was followed by Hungary, which beat Latvia, 2-0.
Other friendly matches were held last week, with the following results:
Macedonia-Albania-1-0, Croatia-Norway 2-1, Georgia-Turkey 1-0 and Romania-Moldova 2-1.
An exhibition of the Polish artist Antek Grzybek opened at the Academy of Fine Arts gallery in Sarajevo on Monday (February 12th).
The exhibition, titled "Space, Time and Context", includes photographs and video art works by Grzybek that detail life in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A photo exhibition titled "Antarctica:
It's This Way Here" was staged at the Murgash Gallery in Sofia last week.
It includes 35 photos by medic Anton Paroushev, who spent two months at Bulgaria's St. Kliment Ohridski base on Livingston Island.
Representatives of the Greek government and the Getty Museum sealed an agreement on the return of two Greek antiquities -- a 4th century BC gold Macedonian wreath and a marble statue -- to Athens by the end of March.
Culture Minister Giorgos Voulgarakis welcomed the agreement, saying it confirmed mutual confidence.
The International Olympic Committee announced last week that it would discuss Montenegro's membership in July.
If its candidacy is approved, Montenegro will become the 204th Olympic nation.
Montenegro Fashion Week was held last week at the Splendid Hotel in Budva.
The event, organised by the Montenegrin fashion agency Dani Models, in co-operation with the Belgrade-based Klik agency, featured designers from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia.
Serbian director Emir Kusturica was awarded the French Order of Arts and Literature, Grade of Knight, at a ceremony in Paris on February 8th.
According to French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, Kusturica was acknowledged for his contribution to promoting cultural diversity.
"Kusturica is a giant, an artist who carries within him everything that Europe represents -- positive values, drama, and tragedy.
He is an artist of specific strength and geniality," de Vabres said.
(Various sources -- 07/02/07-14/02/07)
