16/05/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/05/12
Uros Urosevic and his wife Ana escaped from Croatia in 1989 and came to Serbia, leaving everything they owned in Zadar, Croatia.
Their home is now Belgrade.
After 23 years spent in collective refugees camps where they had seven children, the family recently received a new apartment in Belgrade.
"We are very, very happy and excited … But, I can't fully enjoy our happiness since I do not know how we are going to pay the bills," Urosevic, the head of the family who worked as a professor of philosophy and sociology before the conflict, told SETimes.
However, his teenage daughter Desanka Vera Urosevic is thrilled.
"I do not feel like a stranger anymore," she tells SETimes.
The Urosevic family's apartment is one of 19 flats in Belgrade that were built at a cost of 516,000 euros to provide sustainable housing solutions and to help the most vulnerable refugees and internally displaced persons to get better social positions.
The project, called the Social Housing in Supportive Environment, is funded by the US government, as well as by UNHCR, the city of Belgrade and the Ana and Vlade Divac Foundation, in co-operation with the Commission for Refugees in Serbia.
"Our plan is to get grants for homes for all people in collective camps in Serbia, as well as to foster their economic sustainability, like we did with our 'Raise!' project," Uroš Delić, corporate philanthropy co-ordinator at the Ana and Vlade Divac Foundation, told SETimes.
"All the families that took part in that project received 2,000 euros to start a business and get proper education," he said.
"In 1996, we had 610,000 refugees in 700 collective centres.
Today, we have 74,500 refugees and 210,000 internally displaced persons.
There are 39 collective centres -- 13 of them are in Kosovo," Jelena Maric, public relations adviser to the Commissariat for Refugees of Serbia, told SETimes.
Although, Serbia has the largest number of refugees, many of the other former Yugoslav countries face the same situation.
There are 305 displaced persons and 1,061 individuals living in collective centres or other forms of collective accommodations in Montenegro.
According to UNHCR data, 250 refugee households or 800 individuals reside in collective centres or other forms of collective accommodation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
In Croatia, there are still 607 refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons, mostly accommodated in five collective centres throughout the country.
Although the countries have internal government projects to accommodate refugees and internally displaced people, the countries have joined to form the Regional Housing Programme.
The programme, which aims to ensure the return and reintegration of refugees and displaced persons, was launched in April in Sarajevo, and plans to help at least 74,000 individuals.
The programme will be implemented in parallel by the four countries over a five-year period beginning this fall.
"The Regional Housing Programme is a unique example of regional co-operation aimed at resolving a protracted displacement situation and could be used as a model for resolution of long lasting refugee and internal displacement crises worldwide," Vesna Petrovic, UNHCR spokesperson, told SETimes.
But for some refugees, almost all hope is lost.
Stana Manigoda, 60, came to Serbia from BiH in 1994 with her disabled daughter.
They have been living in a collective housing centre in Krnjaca ever since.
Manigoda receives about 78 euros a month in retirement from Republika Srpska.
Because her husband sold their apartment in BiH for 3,000 euros before he died, Manigoda has been passed over from receiving one of the social apartments.
"I am trying to fix this problem with searching for proper documentation and proof that we didn't get more money for our property in Herzegovina.
All I do want is to have private space for us and proper conditions to care for my [daughter] Olivera," she told SETimes.
