14/06/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 14/06/12
Residents in the Republika Sprska city of Banja Luka are protesting the local government's decision to tear up a local park to make way for a new office building -- the latest example of Balkan governments deciding to sacrifice green space in favour of private enterprise.
Protests that have continued for days in Banja Luka are so far ineffective, but citizens have hopes that officials in the Bosnia and Herzegovina entity will relent.
"Parks are the lungs of a city," Bojan Hrstic, 28, of Banja Luka told SETimes. 
"With the destruction of this city park, authorities cut off one lung. 
No one can move the limits of Central Park in New York, not even one inch for 200 years. 
Here, the city centre turns into a concrete jungle because of money," he said.
Local authorities have sold more than 20,000 square meters of state land in the centre of Banja Luka to Mile Radisic, a local businessman, for 2.2m euros. 
Radisic, a close associate of Republika Srpska President Milorad Dodik, is building the facility for 100m euros.
The protesters are calling for social and political change, using social media. 
In Banja Luka, the Facebook group "Save the park" grew to more than 50,000 members in just a few days.
Authorities insist the land deal is above board.
Goran Kocic, a member of the ruling Union of Independent Social Democrats in the city parliament, told SETimes that the opposition is merely using the park issue to score cheap political points ahead of local elections.
"There is [complete] documentation for the land and the entire project is completely regular. 
I toured the whole former Yugoslavia, and believe me: no city has such parks as Banja Luka. 
What this city lacks is investment. 
This investment is worth 100m euros, and I think that's the thing about the whole story," Kocic said.
Such protests rarely have had an impact.
In Zagreb, residents protested in January 2010 over the construction of a shopping centre and public garage in the pedestrian zone of the city centre. 
After months of demonstrations and hundreds of arrests, Tomo Horvatincic, a Croatian businessman, opened a shopping centre on the site previously known as "Flower Square."
In a section of Novi Sad, Serbia in February 2011, nearly 100 trees were cut down to make way for a warehouse despite several days of public protests.
In Belgrade however, residents thwarted development and saved the park in the city's Zvezdara section several years ago. 
Investors began digging up the park in 2006 in order to build a skyscraper there. 
But after two years of protests, city authorities opted to keep the park where it was.
That's the outcome that Miodrag Dakic, president of the NGO Centre for Environment, sought in Banja Luka, coupled with transparency. 
"Green areas are planned to disappear overnight, with suspect agreements and decisions. 
We are asking city authorities to allow us access to complete documentation concerning this land. 
They have not done that so far," he told SETimes.
Nihad Cengic, a professor at the Faculty of Architecture in Sarajevo, said that the loss of green areas is a growing phenomenon in Balkan cities. 
"The problem is that only individuals benefit from these [sales]. 
Construction of facilities on a park site [means] investors will get a short-term profit, [which] is selfish," Cengic told SETimes.
