11/06/2007
The head of the Joint Research Centre (JRC) at the European Commission, Roland Schenkel, says co-operation between his organisation and the Bulgarian scientific community is developing at a stable pace. 
Speaking in Brussels at a news conference for Bulgarian media, he noted that the JRC is currently working with 25 partners in the country, and has employed nearly 80 staff members from the two newest EU member states, Bulgaria and Romania.
***
A unique university endoscopy centre opened at the Pleven Medical University in Bulgaria. 
The centre, the first of its kind in the Balkans, features an experimental operating room, halls with an audiovisual conference network, a virtual endotrainer for real-time training, and a library. 
A fully modernised system allows a real-time connection with diagnostic and therapy centres around the country and abroad.
***
Eating more beans can be very beneficial for health, Greek experts said during a conference held by the Agricultural Development Ministry in Athens. 
According to Greek clinical nutritionist Anastassios Papalazarou, beans have levels of protein comparable to meat and should be consumed more regularly. 
Even the gassy side effect of beans consumption is helpful, he said, since it helps clean dangerous carcinogenic substances from the intestines.
***
A regional conference on use of ground waters took place from June 7th to 9th in Belgrade, drawing some 350 Serbian and foreign experts. 
Discussions focused on the management of groundwater resources and water supply, and on international co-operation in this area.
***
Macedonia and Italy will soon collaborate on blood plasma processing and organ transportation projects, Macedonian Health Minister Imer Selmani said on Monday (June 4th). 
He also said Italy is providing a 2.6m-euro loan, to modernise medical technology in Macedonia. 
The goal is to improve medical equipment for the smaller healthcare facilities.
***
Turkey has decided to the join the Plant for the Planet: Billion Tree Campaign of the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), the Turkish Environment Ministry said on Tuesday (June 5th). 
As part of the campaign, the country has pledged to plant some 200m trees annually. 
The UNEP aims to encourage nations to plant at least one billion trees worldwide during 2007.
(Various sources – 04/06/07-11/06/07)
