15/08/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 15/08/12
Agriculture Minister Miroslav Naydenov reached an agreement with three of the biggest retail chains in Bulgaria to freeze prices of 10 locally produced staple foods for three months, but critics said it is the latest blow to the country's small business.
"Livestock breeders, meat and dairy processing companies and the chain stores all claim they are operating at a loss. 
Yet, consumers are not buying the end products at lower prices," Naydenov said.
The foods include bread, yoghurt, milk, white and yellow cheese, butter, eggs, chicken, pork and sausages.
Naydenov announced the arrangement with the Bulgarian branches of Metro Cash & Carry, Kaufland and Billa a day after informing the press that the state agency for national security, the national revenue agency as well as the economic police are investigating possible irregularities along the entire producer-to-retail trade line.
Tania Todorova, who owns two mini-markets in the village of Kokalyane near Sofia, echoed the widespread discontent that the deal is a significant blow to Bulgarian small businesses.
"The prices producers ask us to pay are not the same as those offered to the big chain stores. 
We do not get the discounts they get," Todorova told SETimes. 
"When a pensioner comes and sees that the price of their favourite yoghurt is about 10 cents higher here than that at the big retail chain, they say, I'll go and buy it from them.' "
Politicians from both sides of the political divide also criticised the move. 
The right-wing Democrats for a Strong Bulgaria called it a cartel agreement in direct violation of Bulgaria's law on protecting competition.
The Bulgarian Industrial Association and the Made in Bulgaria Union warned about potential bankruptcies along the entire production-to-market line.
Luchezar Bogdanov, an analyst with Sofia-based Industry Watch consulting company, said that politicians will always feel tempted to do something in when a problem comes up.
"Because they do not have too much imagination, their typical response comes in the form of a ban, sanctions, [new] regulations or attempts to fix prices," Bogdanov told SETimes.
The deal Naydenov struck in early August likely will not produce a lasting result.
Following street protests against rising fuel prices, Prime Minister Boyko Borisov's government signed an agreement in March 2011 with the Bulgarian branch of Russian oil company Lukoil, freezing retail fuel prices for a month. 
Shortly after the freeze expired, prices exceeded the pre-freeze levels.
Bulgarian President Rosen Plevneliev, who served as minister of regional development in the current government prior to his nomination last September, also criticised the deal.
"Prices cannot be reduced by agreements with several chain stores. 
They can go down by creating a competitive environment with fair competition between suppliers and manufacturers," the Sofia News Agency quoted him as saying.
