10/04/2007
Kuwaiti Prime Minister Nasser Mohammed al-Sabah met with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, President Ahmet Necdet Sezer and Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc during a visit to Ankara that began on April 3rd.
According to news reports, al-Sabah suggested that Kuwaiti businessmen were interested in investment opportunities in the Turkish-run northern part of Cyprus and that they would welcome the opening of a TRNC trade office in Kuwait.
Macedonian and Albanian defence ministers Lazar Elenovski and Fatmir Mediu met on Saturday (April 7th) in Tirana to co-ordinate steps their countries will take over the next two months with regard to their NATO membership bids.
They expressed confidence that Albania, Macedonia and Croatia will receive invitations to join the Alliance at the NATO summit in 2008.
A Turkish armed forces delegation of 12 generals and admirals arrived on Friday (April 6th) on an official visit to Macedonia.
The group, led by Lieutenant General Hasan Memisoglu, met with Defence Minister Lazar Elenovski and Deputy Chief of General Staff Adil Gazafer.
Talks focused on the army's new structure and progress in defence reforms.
US Assistant Secretary for European and Eurasian Affairs Daniel Fried reaffirmed his country's commitment to the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and support for its future in Europe and NATO, as he arrived on a two-day visit Wednesday (April 4th).
He met in Sarajevo with the BiH presidency members, government and parliamentary representatives.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan visited Syria on Tuesday (April 3rd).
He met with Syrian President Bashar al-Asad and Prime Minister Mohammed Naji Otri to discuss economic co-operation.
The officials also talked about the situations in Iraq and Lebanon and about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Bulgaria's Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev visited Croatia last week at the invitation of counterpart Ivo Sanader.
Stanishev met with President Stipe Mesic and Parliament Speaker Vladimir Seks, and attended a joint business forum.
Stanishev was accompanied by a Bulgarian business delegation, in a bid to boost bilateral ties in the economic and trade sectors.
Representatives of the Montenegrin Interior Ministry and the Danish Emergency Management Agency (DEMA) sealed an agreement last week envisioning co-operation in the field of civil protection and rescue in case of natural disasters and other calamities.
Under the accord, DEMA will donate computer equipment and vehicles, and assist in implementing a project establishing radiation control stations and in training personnel.
(Various sources -- 03/04/07-10/04/07)
