12/04/2012
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 12/04/12
Police in Serbia have arrested nine people and are seeking five others in connection with the 2008 attacks on foreign embassies by demonstrators protesting Kosovo's declaration of independence.
The suspects, several of whom are football hooligans, were arrested in four towns Tuesday (April 10th) and Wednesday.
They, and the five other suspects being sought by police, are wanted in connection with the February 21st 2008 torching of the US Embassy and the stoning of the Turkish Embassy in Belgrade.
The US Embassy was attacked after a rally organised by the Serbian government, that attracted several hundred thousand people. 
Hundreds of demonstrators, mainly football fans, attacked and torched the US Embassy in downtown Belgrade. 
Police tried to protect the building, which was empty at the time, but soon withdrew.
Zoran Vujovic, a fan of Belgrade's Partizan football club, was killed in the attack on the embassy. 
In all, 130 people were injured, including 52 policemen; 192 rioters were arrested.
Serbian state prosecutor Zagorka Dolovac said that the initial arrests were just the beginning of a broad action. 
"We will not stop at this. 
The police and prosecution will continue working."
But Interior Minister Ivica Dacic said police had failed to notify him about the operation, as required.
"That is inadmissible, because according to the law they are obligated to do so. 
I was elected by the people and the parliament to run the ministry and to act as civilian control of police actions, which I cannot do unless I am informed of their actions," Dacic said in an interview with the Belgrade daily Vecernje Novosti.
He added that the arrests could have been made "at any time" rather than just before the elections early next month as well as the deciding game in the Serbian football championship, when many fans gather in one place, creating a serious security risk.
Dobrivoje Radovanovic, of the Institute for Criminological and Sociological Research, has no doubt that the arrests are tied to the May 6th elections.
"It would be an insult to the Serbian police that they needed four years to find out who had attacked the embassy, after all the TV footage of the event and the arrests made immediately after the riots," Radovanovic told SETimes.
He, however, is sceptical when it comes to locating those who ordered the attacks on the embassies.
"Such an investigation would lead to people from the political parties. 
And there is a tacit agreement between the parties not to have each other arrested. 
That has already happened in certain investigations," Radovanovic said.
