10/11/2006
Visits to Bulgaria by foreign tourists rose by 5.1% year-on-year from January-September 2006, according to the latest data of the National Statistical Institute.
The data showed that the increase was due to a great extent to visits by Romanian tourists, which increased by 2.2 times year-on-year over the period, representing three quarters of the overall increase.
Seven companies -- two Albanian, three Swiss, one German and one Czech -- participated in the Albanian government's tender for imports of electricity in 2007, state power utility KESH said Tuesday (November 7th).
None of the bidders, however, offered to supply the entire amount of 2.2 million MWh of electricity.
The price of a potential deal is estimated at around 162.8m euros.
The German government approved a 2.6m-euro loan to Albania for support of the Small- and Medium-sized Enterprises (SME) sector, under a bilateral accord signed in Tirana on Wednesday (November 8th).
The Mostar-based company Amitea will invest 7.9m euros in the construction of four mini-hydropower plants in the municipality of Konjic, Bosnia and Herzegovina.Under the deal, construction must be completed in 2 years.
Macedonia's foreign trade gap reached a record $945.7m in January-September 2006, according to official data.
Overall trade volume was $44.4 billion – of which 60.7% was imports and 39.9% exports.
The EU remained the country's main trade partner during the period.
Leading Croatian pharmaceutical producer Pliva -- which was recently acquired by US-based Barr Pharmaceutical -- reported a 12% decrease in its overall revenues from January-September.
According to the company, the decline is attributable to a $126m loss in its royalty revenues in the United States, due to a patent expiration.
Macedonian fuel distributor Makpetrol said Wednesday (November 8th) that it will launch a biodiesel refinery in Skopje during the middle of next year.
Makpetrol plans to invest around 5m euros in the project, which aims at producing some 30,000 tonnes of biodiesel annually.
The World Bank board endorsed a $180m loan to Romania for road infrastructure upgrades.
The credit, which has a 17-year maturity and 5-year grace period, will be designated for modernisation of the existing road and railroad infrastructure, lowering of transport costs, and boosting economic competitiveness.
Turkey's Defence Ministry and US-based Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation signed an agreement on the sale of 17 new S-70B Seahawk helicopters to Ankara.
The realisation of the deal will start in 2009, according to official statements.
(Various sources – 03/11/06-10/11/06)
