14/08/2012
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Ohrid -- 14/08/12
Two decades after the end of the so-called work camps, popular for their collective, volunteering effort in the former Yugoslavia, the idea of volunteerism is being revived from Ljubljana to Skopje with a renewed will among young people.
"With volunteerism we want to bring closer the young people. 
This idea was the best from the former Yugoslavia, fully accepted by the US and Europe," Zoran Stevoski, a former volunteer from Macedonia and a participant in 10 volunteering actions throughout the former Yugoslavia, told SETimes.
He is a member of the ex-volunteers club Coast of Youth, recently formed in Ohrid, with an aim to stir youth to get on the right path, away from violence.
Today, similar associations exist in almost every bigger city in Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), and Montenegro.
The last of the camps were held about a year before Yugoslavia broke apart in 1990, and were responsible for helping to build roads, railways, railway stations, dams and other infrastructure. 
Every year around 50,000 youth took part in the so-called youth work initiative.
Former work camp volunteers remember initiatives as opportunities for hanging out, meeting people and having a good time. 
In Ohrid, for example, in 1984 and 1985, through two volunteer initiatives, a few major infrastructure objects were built and are still functioning.
Milorad Dzordzevic, president of the volunteers' organisation from Belgrade, founded in 2009, told SETimes that behind the slogan "Belgrade -- city with an open heart," in September, will organise a meeting of former and present volunteers from the former Yugoslavia.
"Our goal is to attract the youth who are not politically engaged but might feel left behind, since our country considers those young people that are not affiliated with any political party," Dzordzevic said.
"Not only are my children showing interest, but their friends, and some students are interested, with whom I co-operate," Ivancica Markovic from Croatia, a participant in nine volunteering actions, told SETimes.
"We want to prove that we can live together; and while politicians want to divide us, the ordinary citizens show there are no divisions among them," Nevena Terzic from Zenica, told SETimes.
"We want to bring back the collective voluntary work and distract the youth from hanging out on the streets," Senad Memik from Sarajevo told SETimes.
Many former and current politicians in the countries of the former Yugoslavia participated in the volunteering actions work camps. 
Among them were Montenegro Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, Belgrade Mayor Dragan Djilas, former Macedonia President Branko Crvenkovski and Serbian MP Aniko Ziros-Jankelic.
"I think of such work initiatives as great opportunities for young people to recognise and overcome mutual prejudices. 
I was happy when former volunteers contacted me again," Ziros-Jankelic said.
"Many who do not have the means to travel get involved, but we get organised and with common transportation, we head to the volunteering work destinations," Marija Amon from Slovenia told SETimes.
Last year, in Vrnjacka Banja, Serbia, 150 youth volunteers built the Lipovacka River riverbed in three weeks. 
This summer, similar volunteer work is held in the Slovenian city of Portoroz.
Many said that though the former Yugoslav system was not successful, the volunteer work initiatives were a success.
"As a child I watched a Doboj-Zenica railway station being built in BiH. 
I felt that atmosphere. 
We sang as we worked, and I often brought water for the volunteers," Muhamed Pivic from Zenica said.
Ljupco Keverovski, psychology professor at Bitola State University, said volunteer work camps with their positive effects can work in present-day conditions.
"If we turn away from historical implications [of work camps] when they were important and popular in the society, now we can talk about their potential implications in the current conditions: strengthening the spirit of unity, fostering shared values, breaking down various prejudices. 
[Work camps] can be adapted to modern-day conditions," Keverovski said.
