09/03/2007
The European Investment Bank (EIB) announced that it will lend 55m euros to Sisecam, a leading Turkish glass manufacturer, for a modernisation and capacity expansion programme.
Sisecam's investment programme includes the construction of a new float glass line and the construction and operation of a coating line at a production site in the province of Bursa, the country's second industrial hub after Istanbul.
New car sales in Croatia rose by 3.6% in February, reaching 5,806 units, according to data from the Promocija Plus market research agency.
Car sales dropped by 33.8% in February in comparison to January 2007.
According to the data, Opel leads in terms of car sales in Croatia with a 14.5% market share, followed by Peugeot with 10.4% and Volkswagen with 9.5%.
The international ratings agency Standard & Poor's affirmed Greece's long- and short-term sovereign credit ratings at "A" and "A-" respectively, retaining a "stable" outlook.
The agency noted the Greek government's fiscal consolidation programme, but cautioned that without further structural changes, this consolidation would be unsustainable in the long run.
Romanian company Cuprom has bought the Serbian mining and smelter complex RTB Bor Group under a privatisation agreement totalling some 305.3m euros, officially sealed with the Serbian government on March 5th.
The French bank Societe General said it has offered to pay 43m euros for a 100% takeover of Macedonia's Ohrid Bank.
Societe General explained Macedonia's EU candidate status and foreign investments as the growing potentials of Macedonian economy.
Nokia, the world's leading mobile phone supplier and a leading supplier of mobile and fixed telecom networks, plans to invest 200m euros in a mobile telephone factory and a research centre in Cluj, Romania, Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu announced on March 7th.
The project will create some 15,000 new jobs.
The European Commission recommended a tighter fiscal policy for Bulgaria and Romania in 2007, in its report on compliance of the EU members with the Stability and Growth Pact.
The EC suggests that Bulgaria should invest additional efforts to consolidate its fiscal policies, aiming at a higher budget surplus than the 0.8% GDP envisaged in the budget law.
(Various sources – 02/03/07-09/03/07)
