10/04/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova and Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Sofia and Bucharest -- 10/04/12
Air traffic in Europe is expected to reach more than 20 million flights per year by 2030, up from 10 million flights in 2010.
Currently, about 9% of the overall air traffic in the EU overflies Bulgaria and Romania, and is set to grow.
The lack of a unified air traffic control system within the currently fragmented European airspace is blamed for the lower efficiency of air travel across the continent.
It also leads to additional traffic jams, which affects safety and limits capacity, while increasing both the cost of flying, as well as the amount of gas emissions.
In response to the dramatic growth in air traffic and travel, the European Commission (EC) launched the EU's Single European Sky (SES) initiative in late 1999 to meet future capacity and safety needs through legislation.
Since then, two key legislative packages have been adopted -- the first one (SES I) in 2004, with which the functional airspace block (FAB) concept was introduced as a means for reducing airspace fragmentation, and a second set of measures (SES II) in 2011.
EC Regulation 176/2011, included in that package, set December 4th 2012 as the deadline for the implementation of all blocks.
In Europe, delays attributable to air traffic management account for 1,000 hours each day, according to the European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL).
It expects the situation to improve when the FABs are in place.
"Within a FAB, air traffic flows and air navigation services are integrated and managed according to operational needs, rather than national boundaries.
They result in significant capacity gains and in a more efficient use of airspace across the continent," the agency explained.
The nine FABs that have been developed will replace the current portions of airspace controlled by the national governments of the 27 EU member states, plus those of third parties joining the programme.
On March 14th, the Bulgarian parliament ratified an agreement on the establishment of a FAB between Bulgaria and Romania under the SES initiative.
The move came three months after top officials of the two Balkan countries' transport ministries signed the accord in December 2011, more than seven years following the inception of the project, dubbed DANUBE FAB, in October 2004.
The DANUBE FAB agreement settles the governance structure of the project, specifying the roles and responsibilities of all involved, including the two countries' air traffic services authorities, Bulgaria's BULATSA and Romania's ROMATSA, the military and regulators.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia are part of FAB Central Europe, along with Austria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Albania, Egypt and Tunisia are named as associate partners in the BLUE MED block including EU members Cyprus, Greece, Italy and Malta.
Denis Huet of EUROCONTROL's European air traffic management performance review unit in Brussels says however that it is "very difficult to quantify the benefits from the FABs."
"What we know is that the FAB partners have to provide a set of information by June this year and in particular how the FAB contributes to doing better than each individual EU state," he told SETimes.
The FABs are created on the basis of countries' geographical location, BULATSA expert Asen Stanoev, who serves as the deputy head of the Bulgarian side of the project, explained to SETimes.
Therefore, neighbouring countries, such as Serbia, can be included in the DANUBE FAB.
"A large percentage of the main air traffic flowing through Romania flows through Serbia as well.
We consider [the Serbs] as a strategic partner" and are in talks with them, he said.
"We want to partner with them," he added, noting that he "wouldn't exclude Turkey, either".
"We are open to partnership and co-operation, and to any positive ideas," Stanoev also said.
One of the main objectives of that initiative is to ensure that the same rules and procedures for air navigation services are applied across the airspace of the Balkan nations.
"The air navigation services ...
will be more effective through an integrated approach of the air traffic management meant to optimise the traffic flows, as well as its control regardless of the air space boundaries," ROMATSA said in a statement for SETimes.
"The air traffic services will still be maintained by the two regional control centers in Bucharest and Sofia while the two countries' air spaces will be thus re-projected to allow for the air traffic optimisation according to an approach based on performance and without any reference to borders."
Aside from "shorter distances, lower fuel consumption and CO2 emissions, more benefits will be achieved through implementing direct routes which will be established based on expertise and knowledge the two states acquired," the statement added.
According to ROMATSA, as a result of the establishment of the FABs, the global flight distance will be cut by around 1 million nautical miles per year, implying less air pollution and a reduction of the costs of flying by nearly 5m euros per year.
