13/03/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 13/03/12
Seething over austerity measures created by an economic crisis, and disgusted with the major parties of PASOK Socialists and New Democracy Conservatives that have ruled for more than 30 years, Greeks are turning away from them in record numbers.
Nearly one-third say they will not vote when elections are held this spring to replace the hybrid government composed of the uneasy once-dominant partners and headed by former European Central Bank (ECB) Vice-President Lucas Papademos.
Eager to fill the vacuum, two dozen political groups have sprung up, some formed by former MPs who were tossed out of PASOK and New Democracy for voting against austerity measures imposed by the EU-IMF-ECB Troika.
It seems likely the next government will be a coalition, ending the two-party system in Greece and the dynasties of the Karamanlis and Papandreou families.
"There is declining trust of Greek citizens towards the major parties," Dimitris Sotiropoulos, a professor of political sociology at the University of Athens, told SETimes.
The number of parties in Greece's 300-member parliament could increase to eight or nine, from five, if they achieve a 3% threshold to gain seats. 
About 60% of voters said in a recent poll they favour smaller political movements and prefer another coalition government.
With 80% of Greeks blaming PASOK and New Democracy for the crisis, they are turning to political groups such as the existing Democratic Left -- an offshoot of former PASOK members -- and the rising new strength of the Communists.
"The political system is under stress and the traditional bipartisanship is breaking down," Alex Afouxenidis, a researcher at the Institute of Political Sociology, National Centre for Social Research in Athens told SETimes.
But Sotiropoulos said that New Democracy and PASOK should finish first and second in the election, which is expected to be held either April 29th or May 6th.
"Recognisable leaders will be able to rally voters who are only attracted temporarily by new parties … the system in Greece promotes the performance of the largest parties," he said.
New Democracy leader Antonis Samaras, who opposed austerity during former Prime Minister George Papandreou's two-year reign, is the favourite to become the country's leader -- although his change-of-heart in backing the demands has made his popularity plummet.
Finance Minister Evangelos Venizelos is the favorite to replace Papandreou as PASOK leader and take over the unenviable task of trying to convince Greeks to vote for the man who doubled their income and property taxes.
Greek law provides the winners with 50 additional seats in parliament, but the numbers now remain so dismal even that may not help the frontrunners.
"If PASOK doesn't get enough of the vote, it won't be able to form a grand coalition," Athens-based Institute of International Economic Relations Director Haralambos Tsardanidis told SETimes.
That likely means squabbling and would require Greek President Karolos Papoulias to ask the party leaders, one-by-one, to reach a consensus.
"There will be pressure from the Europeans to form a government," so that Greece doesn't remain mired in doubt, further roil world markets worried the country can survive, and jeopardise the eurozone, Tsardanisis added.
Venizelos said he's committed to keeping the deal with the Troika, but Samaras said he wants to renegotiate the terms -- a prospect that could create a rift even if there is another hybrid government.
"Coalition governments in Greece don't work well, and PASOK shows no chance of winning, even if Jesus Christ was their candidate," Kostas Karamanlis Institute for Democracy's head of research Antonis Klapsis told SETimes.
But, he sees the long-time rulers remaining that way even if they have to share power and oppose each other at the same time.
According to Sotiropoulos, however, most people will vote for what they know, even if it hurts them. 
"Protest," he said, "is always balanced with a need for a predictable life and stable environment."
