13/03/2012
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/03/12
For the majority of Serbian citizens, buying an apartment is an elusive goal. 
With an average salary of 400 euros, customers are hardly lying awake at night deciding which loan to choose. 
It is rather more often the case of which lender will even consider their application.
"They are not expensive housing loans due to high interest rates; [it is] because of the obscene price per square meter," Association of Serbian Banks general secretary Veroljub Dugalic told SETimes.
Per square meter, the average cost of an apartment in Belgrade is 2,000 euros. 
For an apartment offering 70 square meters, a 20-year-loan -- installments without interest -- is over 500 euros per month.
"We need an apartment, but my wife and I do not dare take [a loan] because the euro is more expensive in Serbia," Darko Lakitic of Belgrade told SETimes. 
He is a young doctor, with a monthly salary of 550 euros.
Interest rates on housing loans in the euro range are between 4% - 8% annually, while the banks argue that there are no conditions to lower them. 
Loans in local currency are available through the Societe Generale Bank, but the interest rate is 17.63%.
Serbia lacks 20,000 to 30,000 new apartments per year, but builds less than 10,000. 
Minister for Planning, Environment and Mining Oliver Dulic has described the situation as disastrous for the construction and building materials industry. 
He blames this lack of residential construction on the National Bank of Serbia, which has tightened lending, forcing buyers to put 20% down of the total amount of loan in cash, rather than 10% as before.
"The sale of apartments has been reduced by nearly 30%," Dulic told SETimes.
Since the middle of last year, the number of commercial mortgage loans approved has plunged by 15.3%. 
Before this credit crunch, about 1,000 apartments were selling per year in small towns. 
In contrast, across all of Serbia last year, there were only about 2,000 contracts.
To help the construction industry, the government adopted a decree on relief for the purchase of subsidised housing, offering a lower interest rate to everyone, including couples over the age of 45. 
Before, only 20-year mortgages were available. 
Now, 30-year terms are available.
"While property prices in the world fell more than 50% because of the crisis, in Serbia, despite falling sales, vendors do not want to give up their profits," economic analyst Radojka Nikolic told SETimes.
Comparisons show that in Zagreb and Ljubljana, the average salary requires a potential homeowner to work ten years to buy an apartment of 60 square meters. 
In Serbia, that same person would take 20 years.
Apartment sales are off in Croatia as well, but for a different reason, a glut of available homes. 
There are nearly 50,000 dwellings built, for which there are no customers. 
Croatia enjoyed a construction boom in recent years, but the economic crisis took a toll on customers’ savings. 
So in the last three years, prices have skidded more than 15%, and it is estimated that they will fall further over the next five years. 
In Zagreb, the price per square meter has dropped from 2,050 euros to 1,750.
EU membership in 2013 may attract some buyers, but not enough. 
"It will be interested foreigners, but they certainly will not buy all the apartments that are now empty and losing value," Vjekoslav Dolac, a construction company owner from Dubrovnik, told SETimes.
In Montenegro, apartment sales are virtually flat. 
Prices are lower by up to 30%, compared to the "golden" year of 2007, when a wave of Russian buyers swooped in. 
Five years later, there are no more foreign buyers, and for locals, the prices are too high.
The government initiated a campaign "1.000 plus" to address the housing problems of young people, but interest has been low. 
The number of new apartments sold is down by more than 60%. 
Buyers simply don’t have the money, even for an average price of 1,200 euros per square meter.
"We’re selling an apartment of 68 square meters for 70,000 euros, but haven’t had a customer in nine months," Podgorica resident Smiljana Dedic told SETimes. 
Her family bought their home four years ago for 83,000 euros, but is forced to sell it now because Dedic lost her job.
