09/02/2007
The World Bank endorsed a $3m Emergency Recovery Grant for bird flu prevention in Kosovo, under the Bank's Global Programme for Avian Influenza.
The project is aimed at helping the interim Kosovo institutions prevent outbreaks and deal with the socio-economic consequences of the disease.
The 3rd Turkey-US Economic Partnership Commission (EPC) meeting was held in Ankara and Istanbul.
Talks focused on developing economic and commercial relations between Turkey and the United States.
The first session was held in Istanbul on Thursday, with the participation of private company executives.
Friday's session, attended by representatives of institutions, was held in Ankara.
The Macedonian government awarded the country's third mobile license to Austria's Mobilkom, the only bidder in the international tender.
Mobilkom, which is paying 10m euros for the ten-year license, said it would offer rates that are between 50% and 67% lower than those of the existing wireless players on the Macedonian market, T-Mobile and Cosmofon.
The IMF's Board completed the second review of Albania's performance under a three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Extended Fund Facility arrangement.
In a statement, the Fund welcomed the maintenance of Albania's strong macroeconomic performance, low inflation and stable economic growth.
Republika Srpska's (RS) government and two Russian companies -- NeftegazInCor and Zarubezhneft -- sealed an official agreement on the sale of RS oil refinery Bosanski Brod, the motor and industrial oil manufacturer Modrica and fuel retailer Petrol late last week.
The total commitment of the Russian buyers amounts to 979m euros, covering the purchase price and investments in modernising the facilities.
A consortium of two Kosovo companies and the Italian-US firm Kosmocell won the tender for the second mobile phone operator license in Kosovo, the province's telecom regulator body announced on February 6th.
Kosmocell will pay 81m euros for the license.
An IMF mission visiting Macedonia last week praised the country's progress towards completing the second review under its three-year, $75.8m standby arrangement with the Fund.
Macedonia successfully met the macro-economic targets for 2006, its fiscal position remained strong and interest rates were kept low, mission chief Mark Griffiths said.
At the same time, Skopje was urged to clarify its strategy for restructuring the telecom sector, improve tax collection rates and adopt new banking legislation.
(Various sources -- 02/02/07-09/02/07)
