08/06/2007
Istanbul hosted a high-level conference titled "Turkey and the EU:
Together for a European Energy Policy" on Tuesday (June 5th).
Speaking at the conference, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said negotiations on the Energy chapter will be a key part of Turkey's EU accession talks.
The country will have an important role in the EU's energy policy, he said.
The EU finance ministers decided on Tuesday (June 5th) formally to end the Excessive Deficit Procedure imposed on Greece since 2004, and to lift similar procedures imposed on Germany and Malta.
The ECOFIN Council's decision followed a recommendation by the European Commission in May.
Sales of new cars in Croatia rose by 2.9% year-on-year from January to May, reaching some 35,000 units, according to the Promocija Plus agency.
Opel remained the most popular car, holding a 15.8% market share from January to May, followed by Renault with 10.8%.
Albania has banned smoking in public places, including bars, restaurants, public offices, schools and hospitals, under a new law enforced this month.
Violators face fines of up to 360 euros.
Montenegro's power utility EPCG announced on Tuesday (June 5th) that it has submitted a proposal for an electricity price hike to the state energy regulator.
EPCG is requesting a gradual rise in electricity prices for households from the current 0.06 euros to 0.10 euros per kWh, starting in July.
The number of foreign tourists visiting Romania in April reached 535,900, up 20.1% year-on-year, according to the latest data released by the National Statistics Institute.
More that half of all foreign tourists were citizens of EU member states.
Serbian Economy Minister Mladjan Dinkic on Wednesday (June 6th) listed the priorities for his ministry.
These include structural reforms, the privatisation of 1,250 public companies by the end of this year, a rise in the employment rate and in export levels, and equalisation of regional development across Serbia.
(Various sources – 01/06/07-08/06/07)
