10/08/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/08/12
Regional countries are beginning to require that consumer packaging be recyclable in an effort to reduce the waste stream and help protect the environment in compliance with EU directives.
The EU requires that more than 50 percent of waste materials -- paper, plastic, glass, metals and non-hazardous construction waste -- be prepared for reuse or recycling before 2020.
Close to two-thirds of all waste is consumer products' packaging.
"The laws provide not only increased penalties for polluters, but also establish a system of waste separation, thus creating room for the development of a recycling business where tens of thousands of people can find work," Suzana Djordjevic, executive director of the ecological fund Ecotopia, told SETimes.
Nearly 10,000 people in Serbia have obtained jobs in the environmental sector in the last four years, and an additional 40,000 jobs can be created.
Croatia began implementing an EU environmental policy in 2005, and adopted a waste management law, as did Montenegro.
Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina took similar action in 2010.
The move in Croatia created 5,000 jobs, and the overall environmental results put the country on par with the environmentally progressive EU member states.
The key to successful waste management is regional co-operation, according to analysts.
"For example, Montenegro does not have enough packing waste to build independent recycling facilities, but some neighbouring countries do, and are interested in processing waste packaging," Djulijano Grum, project leader at the Fund for Environmental Protection and Energy Efficiency of Croatia, told SETimes.
Grum said it is important to continually stay in touch with businessmen from regional countries interested in importing packaging waste, because that often produces win-win situations.
The potential is huge.
Serbia recycles only 15 percent of its total waste, whereas the EU recycling average is more than 50 percent.
Among the most important operational subjects for the successful processing of waste package management are independent organisations that obtain technical systems to reuse and recycle waste.
This year, each regional country formed such an independent organisation.
"In Macedonia it is Pakomak, in BiH Ekopak, Eco-irradiation in Croatia, and so forth.
Co-operation among them is constant, especially because the inherent problems are common to all," Rebeka Bozovic, director for communications at Serbia's organisation, Sekopak, told SETimes.
Bozovic said that all the organisations are members of Pro Europe, a pan-European group that works in waste systems in over 30 countries.
According to the EU directive on waste, member states should build their own infrastructure for waste management, but if it is not economically feasible, they could create joint structures.
"Still, the strongest meaning of 'regional co-operation' is faster EU integration," Djordjevic said.
