08/05/2012
By Aleksandar Pavlevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 08/05/12
The seemingly unending economic crisis is forcing countries across the region to swallow hard and borrow money at rates that are less than attractive.
Macedonia's government borrowed 250m euros from Deutsche Bank last month. 
The rate for the five-year loan was 6.83%, but there was little room for hand-wringing, as the money is required to finance the 2012 budget and to refinance the obligations on the basis of the Eurobond, which matures in January 2013.
Nikola Popovski, a professor at European University in Skopje, warned that the more credits that are taken out with high interest rates will suffocate the weak economies of the region.
More and more countries are entering the vicious cycle that comes with taking high-interest loans, Popovski said.
In 2011, Serbia sold 756m-euros worth of ten-year Eurobonds on foreign markets with 7.25% interest. 
This, according to Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic, marked the first time state securities were sold on the European market. 
The interest in the bonds -- at a time of unfavourable developments in global markets -- showed investor confidence in Serbia, the prime minister said.
The funds raised through the sale of the bonds are being used to finance the 2011 budget gap.
But the move by Serbia was chancy, and the money earned from the sale must be retuned at a higher price, increasing the country's external debt, Professor Ljubodrag Savic of the Economic Faculty in Belgrade, told SETimes.
Serbia has recently resold three-year government bonds -- selling them once on February 28th and again on March 27th -- with total nominal value of 89m euros. 
The bonds were sold at a rate of return of 7.14% annually, and recovery is due March 1st 2015.
Although the practice is risky, Serbia is not the only regional country to succumb to the borrowing method.
In Montenegro, the government recently borrowed 150m euros from the Credit Swiss Bank. 
Finance Minister Milorad Katni said that the loan will be used to fund budget needs, service debt and to create fiscal reserves.
Of the 150m euros, 52m euros will be used to refinance an existing debt with the same Swiss bank, while the rest of the 98m euros will be used to cover deficits and debt servicing.
In an unprecedented move, Croatia launched 1.5 billion five-year $1 bonds on the US market last month, at a yield rate of 6.3%. 
The bonds mature on April 27th 2017 -- making Croatia the most indebted country in the region for the next five years.
"This is a sign that countries in the region do not have enough tax sources to fund the cost and they have to borrow. 
The condition declines year-to-year, and debt grows. 
Indebtedness is more common, and the economic situation isn't improving," Zivko Atanasovski, professor of Economic Faculty in Skopje, told SETimes.
"If the state borrows money to return previously created debt, that will not generate growth in the future. 
All this affects the interest rates that are approved for a specific country," Atanasovski added.
He said the rule is simple: if a state is risky in terms of return on a loan -- is located in a "dangerous" region, has an underdeveloped economy, weak exports, low GDP and a growing percentage of debt -- interest rates will be higher for that state.
Therefore, the countries of Western Europe receive loans with rates 2 to 3% lower than those in the Balkans.
Despite the high gains from the loans and bond sales, the key problem will occur when the countries will reach a situation in which they cannot repay the loans: small development will stop and investment in the region will disappear, Atanasovski warned.
