07/11/2006
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic met with Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert in Jerusalem on Monday (November 6th).
Draskovic is on a three-day visit to Israel, also holding talks with Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres and Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni.
Bilateral relations and the status of Kosovo are on the agenda.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov praised the level of bilateral relations with Albania as "developing dynamically".
He made the comment during talks on Wednesday (November 1st) with Albanian counterpart Besnik Mustafaj in Moscow.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's tripartite presidency members -- Zelko Komsic, Nebojsa Radmanovic and Haris Silajdzic -- were inaugurated on Monday (November 6th).
The three won the October 1st elections.
Former Turkish Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, 81, died on Sunday (November 5th) after spending five months in a coma as a result of a stroke.
Ecevit served five terms as prime minister, until 2002.
Serbian Army deputy chief Major General Zdravko Ponos was in Sofia for a three-day visit last week.
Issues related to bilateral military co-operation topped the agenda.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's chief negotiator with the EU, Igor Davidovic, and the head of the BiH Directorate for EU Iintegration, Osman Topcagic, met with US Deputy Assistant Secretary Rosemary DiCarlo in Washington on Wednesday (November 1st).
TurkishPrime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan met with visiting Bulgarian Deputy Prime Minister Emel Etem on Wednesday (November 1st).
The two discussed a relaxed visa regime for Turkish citizens after Bulgaria joins the EU.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader and Parliament Speaker Vladimir Seks decided on Thursday (November 2nd) to establish a state committee for Croatia's membership in NATO.
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin met with Harald Kreid, the general director of the Central European Initiative (CEI) on Thursday (November 2nd).
Kalfin briefed him on efforts to assume the CEI chairmanship next year.
(Various sources 31/10/06-07/11/06)
