06/03/2007
Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer reaffirmed his country's support for the quick admission of Albania into NATO, during a meeting with his Albanian counterpart, Alfred Moisiu, in Ankara on Friday (March 2nd).
The two assessed bilateral ties as excellent, and discussed ways for further collaboration in the health and defence sectors, economic matters and education.
A Serbian government and business delegation led by Rasim Ljajic visited Kuwait at the weekend.
On Sunday (March 4th), Ljajic met with Kuwaiti leader Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmed al-Jaber al-Sabah to discuss the possibilities for economic and defence industry co-operation.
Representatives of the Serbian company Jugoimport-SDPR visited the Kuwaiti Defence Ministry for talks on a joint project.
Britain's Prince Charles and wife Camilla arrived on Thursday (March 1st) for official visit to Banja Luka, where they inspected British peacekeepers serving in EUFOR.
The royal couple took part in the British military parade marking St David Day and met with Bosnia and Herzegovina's tripartite presidency members.
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski and Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa agreed on Wednesday (February 28th) during a meeting in Skopje that UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan is a good basis for the resolution of the Kosovo status issue.
Jansa also reaffirmed his country's support for Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic bid and for the country's economic development.
Romanian President Traian Basescu confirmed that his country backed Albania's candidacy for NATO membership, as well as its integration in the EU, during talks with Albanian Parliament Speaker Josefina Topalli in Bucharest on Wednesday (February 28th).
Macedonian Defence Minister Lazar Elenovski and visiting Montenegrin Defence Minister Boro Vucinic sealed a memorandum Tuesday (February 27th) on defence co-operation.
Elenovski said Macedonia, as a serious candidate for NATO membership, would be ready to share its integration experience with Montenegro and help the country draft strategic NATO membership documents.
Finnish Parliament Speaker Paavo Lipponen said his country would back Croatia's EU entry in 2009, during talks with his Croatian counterpart, Vladimir Seks, on Tuesday (February 27th) in Zagreb.
According to Lipponen, there are no major obstacles to Croatia's gaining full EU membership by that time, provided the country proceeds with the implementation of set reforms.
(Various sources 27/02/07-06/03/07)
