07/03/2007
Greek archaeologists discovered the apparent remains of an ancient market in the southern Athens neighbourhood of Voula.
The site, spreading over 1,500 square metres, includes shops and a religious centre.
It dates back to the 4th or 5th century BC and is thought to have belonged to the ancient Athens municipality of Aexonides Halai.
The Romanian comedy "12:08 East of Bucharest" received the Best Picture award at the Mexico City International Contemporary Film Festival.
The film is the first work of director Corneliu Porumboiu and depicts life in Romania 16 years after the fall of communism.
The Macedonian Ministry of Culture, together with the International Management Group, kicked off a 350,000-euro project for the rehabilitation of Macedonia's Contemporary Arts Museum.
The museum includes more than 5,000 paintings and sculptures from 1,750 artists representing 62 countries and claims to have one of the most interesting and comprehensive contemporary arts collections in Southeast Europe.
The Fifth Filmmor International Women's Film Festival on Wheels will be held between March 10th and 18th in Istanbul.
The festival will screen 60 films from nearly 50 countries, with three themes -- "Women's Cinema", "Honour" and "Shorts by Women -- Turkey".
Albanian boxer Kreshnik Qato won the EEEU super middleweight title, defeating Russia's Alexander Zaitsev in Tirana.
In the lightweight category, Bulgarian Olympic medallist Tontcho Tontchev won the championship title, defeating France's Frederic Gosset in the first round.
Montenegro was officially admitted to the UNESCO on March 1st, becoming the 192nd member.
Foreign Minister Milan Rocen sealed the UNESCO Constitution and deposited the instruments of acceptance at an official ceremony in London.
UNESCO Director-General Koichiro Matsuura praised the accession, noting that the Montenegrin medieval city of Kotor and the Durmitor National Park are already on the World Heritage List.
(Various sources – 27/02/07-07/03/07)
