05/04/2012
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 05/04/12
Serbia President Boris Tadic's decision to step down ten months early in order to run for another term is expected to help the ruling Democratic Party in the general and local elections next month, as well as set up a showdown in the parliamentary elections with the Serbian Progressive Party.
Tadic announced on Wednesday (April 4th) that he will step down from office in preparation for a presidential campaign.
The election is expected to be May 6th, the same day that municipal and parliamentary elections are scheduled.
As president of the Democratic Party, Tadic will be the favourite to enter the second round of presidential elections with Tomislav Nikolic, leader of the opposition Serbian Progressive Party.
But Tadic's resignation also raises several questions -- is the state, which just achieved EU candidate status despite its refusal to recognise Kosovo, stable enough to conduct presidential and parliamentary elections at the same time?
And how will adding the presidential race change the outlook of the other elections?
University of Belgrade professor and Institute of Social Sciences associate Dejan Vuk Stankovic told SETimes that in making his decision, Tadic had both state and party interests in mind.
"Serbia has gone through a period in relations with the EU and negotiations with Kosovo.
I think it is right, after such events -- during which the government had been disputed many times -- to have everyone vie in the elections and clearly see who enjoys popular support.
There is no better opportunity for that than general elections,'' he said.
Tadic's decision will also likely help the Democrats.
''According to all opinion polls, he is much more popular than his party;
his appearance in the campaign and on the ballot will bring the Democrats back a number of voters who would have abstained or voted for someone else,'' Stankovic said.
He believes the president's decision will also have far-reaching consequences in the parliamentary election, because that vote will now turn into a showdown between the two strongest parties -- the Democrats and the Serbian Progressive Party.
''There is the phenomenon of so-called symmetrical voting, because people tend to vote for one candidate and then also for the party he or she represents.
Since Tadic and Nikolic will now dominate the campaign, one can expect the electorate to polarise between the Democrats and the Progressives, whereas smaller parties without strong presidential candidates will lose votes,'' Stankovic said.
Petar Petkovic, spokesman of the Democratic Party of Serbia, which according to the opinion polls is one of the parties that will win less than 10% of votes, doesn't think Tadic's decision will have much impact on the general election.
''Tadic has so far, despite occupying the presidential post, been heavily involved in his party's campaign.
Now when he is an official presidential candidate, I think the Democrats will not profit much from that, because Serbian citizens are experienced voters who know they should vote for the programmes and ideas that can bring them improvement,'' Petkovic told SETimes.
Nikolic was not surprised by the president's resignation.
''I hope the presidential election campaign will be fair and based on programmes, unlike the hitherto parliamentary campaign,'' he said.
However, the matter of state stability at a time when the government has a technical mandate and both parliament and the president are facing elections is also being raised.
Balint Pastor, an official of the ruling coalition member Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians, said that Tadic's decision was not good for the stability of institutions.
Pastor told SETimes that for the sake of institutional stability, the mandates of the parliament and the president were meant to last for different periods of time -- four and five years.
But Social Democratic Party of Serbia leader Rasim Ljajic, another coalition partner of the DP, believes Tadic made a good decision.
The election processes are being merged and the state is saving money during the ongoing severe crisis.
''On the other hand, we will quickly get both a government and a president with full mandates, so that we can continue down the path to the EU and solve the big economic, political and social problems we are facing,'' Ljajic told SETimes.
Stankovic agrees that Tadic's decision was the right one.
''I don't think the state would be stable if Tadic remained president and Nikolic's party won the general election.
That is why it is better for them to face off in the elections now, so that the winner can have full legitimacy for the difficult decisions to be made,'' he said.
According to him, the state can be shaken up only by incidents in Kosovo.
"I don't expect any dramatic events in Kosovo prior to the elections, and it will be good for the Kosovo issue that Serbia gets legitimate representatives at all levels of authority now,'' he said.
