07/03/2012
By Maria Paravantes for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 07/03/12
The old adage "a picture is worth a thousand words" is definitely true about A Balkan Tale photo exhibition [www.balkantale.com], which opened earlier this month at the Bath House of the Winds -- Museum of Greek Folk Art in Athens' Plaka borough, and runs through April 8th.
The travelling photo exhibit organised by the Athens Goethe-Institute, with financial backing from the EU, focuses on the Ottoman Era and its cultural influence on the Balkans through the lens of five photographers based in the Western Balkans.
Through parallel interactive events, it aims to encourage the preservation of the monuments the photos capture.
Educational programmes in six languages introduce schoolchildren to the lives of the Balkan peoples between the 14th and 20th centuries.
The visitors are taken back in time with the sights, sounds and smells of the Ottoman times.
"The exhibit and the project as a whole began after findings indicated that Balkan cultural heritage has been overlooked," historian and project supervisor, Professor Christina Koulouri, told SETimes.
The majority of existing Ottoman-period buildings has been destroyed, but the existing mosques, bridges, public baths, churches and aqueducts are seen in a new light.
The exhibition project -- a collaborative effort of historians from the region -- challenges the audience to look beyond national boundaries and explore common Balkan history.
"The period before the establishment of Balkan nation-states, which is associated with centuries of Ottoman presence in the Balkans, is a 'dark' era in both senses of the word -- it is unknown and considered of no cultural worth," Koulouri explained.
The aim of the project, however, is to highlight this "forgotten side of our common Balkan history through Ottoman Era monuments, for the most part, public buildings 'used' by different ethnic and religious groups".
Koulouri added that Balkan peoples co-existed for centuries within the Byzantine and Ottoman empires, either in different but bordering nation-states or within Europe, which after 1989 began to expand its understanding of a "border" as a concept.
"It is wrong to consider co-existence as being only harmony and peace.
On the contrary, co-existence also includes conflict and war.
Europe is the most articulate example of this.
In the last century, two world wars took place on its territory, but its people, the majority, believe they belong to the same cultural whole and that they make up a union within their differences.
This said, we tend to forget that the Balkans is Southeast Europe," she said.
All five participating photographers agree that being given the opportunity to explore the historical and cultural significance of the centuries-old sites and monuments motivated them to get involved in the project.
"It felt like a natural continuation … to first capture the character of these sites and then photographically represent them," Skopje-born Ivan Blazhev told SETimes.
Blazhev thinks A Balkan Tale is a vivid example of a creative co-existence and stresses its constructive importance in today's reality.
"There are many real-life examples of harmony.
On the other hand, it pains me when I see and think of the many real-life examples where such co-existence is denied and seems impossible to achieve.
It comes natural to me to think that co-existence is possible, but then, sometimes, I wonder if I am just an idealistic optimist," he said.
For Tirana-based, German-born Jutta Benzenberg, it was all about being given the chance to visit places in Albania she never visited before, and the challenge to "feel" a part of its history through its monuments.
"I did not want to photograph these buildings in a touristy way, but rather try to capture their use and role in the daily life of the people," Benzenberg told SETimes.
She is quick to point out her search for a direct link to the object of her art.
"Sometimes I would go home without having felt that special link ...
so I would return and wait for something to touch me ...
that's what I believe makes this project so interesting;
you have five different visual views on history," she explained.
"For me it was about exploring the meaning of these monuments in the current social and political environment they belong to," Belgrade-based photographer Ivan Petrovic told SETimes.
He added that for him, the co-existence of Balkan peoples should not be an issue at all, since it is all about politics.
For Paris-born Kamilo Nollas, A Balkan Tale is all about quashing stereotypes and going beyond the "demonisation" of the Ottoman Era.
"I don't believe the concept of borders should even exist.
It is vital that through projects such as these we are able to see what brings us together, to identify the good things other cultures left behind through their passing," Athens-based Nollas told SETimes.
Nollas said that through his travels across Greece, he discovered through the monuments that in daily life people lived in harmony.
"Synagogues, churches and mosques stand side by side."
From Athens A Balkan Tale will travel to Thessaloniki, Belgrade, Pristina, Skopje, Tirana and Brussels, and then Germany.
