06/02/2007
Polish President Lech Kaczynski held talks in Bucharest with Romanian counterpart Traian Basescu and Prime Minister Calin Popescu-Tariceanu on Friday (February 2nd).
Discussions focused on bilateral ties, energy issues, the resumption of talks on an EU Constitution, and the situation in the Balkans.
High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling was in London on Thursday (February 1st) for a series of high-level talks regarding the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
He met with Britain's Europe Minister Geoffrey Hoon.
Schwarz-Schilling is preparing a detailed assessment of BiH's progress and conditions in the region.
Later this month, the Peace Implementation Council will meet to determine when the Office of the High Representative should close.
French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin visited Bucharest on Thursday (February 1st) for talks on bilateral relations.
After meeting with his Romanian counterpart, Calin Popescu-Tariceanu, de Villepin said that the French giant Gaz de France wants to become a partner in the Nabucco gas pipeline project.
He then travelled to Bulgaria, where he met with Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev and Parliament Speaker Georgi Pirinski.
Macedonian Defence Minister Lazar Elenovski wrapped up a three-day trip to the United States on Thursday (February 1st).
In Washington, Elenovski met with US Defence Secretary Robert Gates.
He also met with his Albanian counterpart, Fatmir Mediu, and US Deputy Defence Secretary Gordon England to discuss the Adriatic Charter countries' NATO bids.
Macedonia's EU Integration Minister, Gabriela Konevska-Trajkovska, met in London last week with British Minister for Europe Geoff Hoon.
The meeting focused on security issues, Macedonia's accession to EU and NATO, and Kosovo.
Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Muallem paid a one-day working visit to Turkey, where he held talks with Turkish counterpart Abdullah Gul, President Ahmet Necdet Sezer and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Wednesday (January 31st).
Reportedly, al-Muallem and Gul expressed similar positions regarding the need to preserve Iraq's territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic met with a senior NATO delegation led by the Pact's Assistant Secretary General for Defence Policy and Planning Transforming John Colston on January 30th in Sarajevo.
Discussions focused on the pace of defence reforms in BiH.
NATO representatives stressed the importance of resolving the issues related to military properties, army staff restructuring and budget issues.
(Various sources -- 30/01/07-06/02/07)
