07/03/2012
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Time in Skopje -- 07/03/2012
Cross-border co-operation has been boosted by the second iteration of EU's Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance (IPA2) fund, which supports projects that advance harmonized sustainable development.
The EU formed IPA to modernize the entire pre-accession assistance within a unified framework.
It emphasizes cross-border co-operation, regional development, human resources development, transition assistance and institution building, and rural development.
EU member candidates -- and potential candidates -- typically sign a framework agreement with the European Commission to determine the grounds on utilizing the IPA funds.
Macedonia, which signed and ratified the agreement in 2008, increasingly views IPA allocations of well over 20m euros for cross border co-operation as a resource in advancing good neighbourly relations.
"Following the [first] IPA, Macedonia will continue cross-border co-operation with EU member states Bulgaria and Greece," Deputy Prime Minister for EU Integration Teuta Arifi told SETimes.
Arifi explained that Macedonia already concluded 31 IPA2 projects with Albania.
A cross-border programme will be established very soon with Serbia as well, she said.
Projects so far have included advancing tourism, transportation, renewable energy and energy efficiency, improving common infrastructure, institutional modernisation and cultural exchanges.
Overall, 83 cross-border agreements have been signed between Macedonia and the three neighboring countries, 60% of which are in the final stages of implementation.
A Joint Technical Secretariat overseeing IPA's Macedonia-Albania projects is located in Struga, with a regional office in Elbasan.
The cross-border programme covers the Pelagonija and Polog regions in Macedonia and Diber, Korca and Elbasan in Albania.
Similarly, Macedonia also established a Joint Technical Secretariat with Bulgaria -- in Kyustendil -- and a regional office in Strumica.
The two countries reached 34 agreements under the first IPA.
Bulgarian project consultant Nadia Petrova told SETimes the EU applications are not simple and that reality necessitates fostering even closer partnerships across the borders.
"It is best to have a consultant on the other side of the border.
...
This is how a success story is created," she said.
The beginnings were difficult and co-operation with Albania was hampered, Macedonian project consultant Alexander Cvetkovski told SETimes.
"Now the situation is much better.
Our Albanian consultants have improved knowledge of the application process," Cvetkovski said.
The IPA has also improved Macedonian-Greek co-operation.
In the first IPA call for cross-border project proposals, 18 agreements were concluded by applicants from Macedonia with partners in Greece.
The second call runs until May 13th and provides opportunity for bigger infrastructure projects.
"We have good partners and the implementation is solid.
Our focus as partners were municipalities, but in the current call we will collaborate with institutions such as museums, universities and public enterprises," Blagas George, a consultant from Edessa in Greece, told SETimes.
"The projects are needed, timely and are well regulated, according to Bitola Law Faculty Dean Ilija Todorovski.
"We expect a greater number of project proposals and quality projects in the future.
There is a good grasp of what is needed and partnerships have already blossomed across the borders.
In addition, there is experience with the application process and how to develop projects for maximum impact," Todorovski told SETimes.
