05/06/2007
Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki and his Albanian counterpart, Ljuljzim Basha, met on Friday (June 1st) in Skopje.
They discussed bilateral ties and preparations for NATO membership, as well as economic issues, the Corridor 8 and AMBO oil pipeline projects, the possibility of new border crossings, and an easing of the existing visa regime.
Montenegro's newly appointed ambassador to NATO, Veselin Sukovic, submitted his letter of credentials to NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer on Monday (June 4th).
During their meeting, Sukovic stressed that Euro-Atlantic integration is a strategic goal of his country, and reiterated Montenegro's commitment to strengthening regional security.
Croatian Parliament Speaker Vladimir Seks left on Monday (June 4th) for a three-day official visit to Poland.
His agenda includes meetings with President Lech Kaczynski and top parliament and government representatives.
Talks are expected to focus on bilateral ties and Croatia's bid for membership in the EU and NATO.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Presidency Chairman Nebojsa Radmanovic met with Slovak President Ivan Gasparovic last week in Bratislava.
Gasparovic said his country supports further EU enlargement, and is ready to help BiH in its efforts to enter Euro-Atlantic structures.
The two also discussed European integration and the issue of Kosovo's status.
Greek President Karolos Papoulias met with Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin on Thursday (May 31st) in Moscow.
Among other topics, they discussed the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline project.
Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli visited Kosovo on May 29th, staying for two days.
She met with Kosovo counterpart Kole Berisha, as well as with other officials and international representatives.
Topalli expressed optimism that a new resolution on Kosovo would soon be approved at the UN Security Council.
Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov paid a two day visit to Montenegro.
During a meeting with counterpart Filip Vujanovic, he pledged to be an "advocate" of efforts by Western Balkan states to join the EU.
(Various sources -- 29/05/07-05/06/07)
