06/03/2012
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 06/03/12
Frustrated by the lack of progress over the Cyprus issue, Turkey's top government officials have repeatedly declared that if there is no solution by July 1st, when Cyprus takes over the rotating EU presidency, Turkey would suspend dialogue with the Union until the following presidency in January 2013.
"All options are on the table for a solution to the Cyprus issue. 
The solution [that Turkey would consider] would include reunification under a deal that the two leaders could reach, creation of two independent states after an agreement between the two leaders if they are unable to reach a deal for reunification, or annexation of the [Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus] to Turkey," Turkey's European Affairs Minister Egemen Bagis said.
These harsh statements are mainly related to the deadlock over EU-Turkey relations under the conditionality of the Cyprus conflict, experts argue.
According to Istituto Affari Internazionali Deputy Director Nathalie Tocci, Bagis' statements are reminiscent of Turkey's stance towards the 1997-1999 Cyprus conflict when veiled threats of annexation were also made.
"It is no coincidence that such threats are being made again now," Tocci told SETimes. 
"In both cases -- 1997-1999 and today -- Turkey's relations with the EU were, and are, in a dire state. 
In the past, because of the cold shower received by Turkey at the Luxembourg summit in 1997, and today because of the stalled accession negotiations."
However, experts are not of the same mind concerning the greater significance of the statement.
European University of Lefke's Mehmet Hasguler thinks the recent emphasis made by Bagis is a significant counter-move showing that there is a wide range of alternatives on the table for the current deadlock over the Cyprus issue, he told SETimes.
"When AK Party came to power, it took over a heavy agenda on Cyprus and started to reverse the longstanding trend of accusing the Turkish community to block any solution."
However, being a guarantor state in Cyprus according to the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee, Turkey is prohibited from any annexation scenario, Cyprus 2015 Initiative Research Director and international relations professor from Eastern Mediterranean University Ahmet Sozen said.
"Bagis risks violating the very treaty obligations of Turkey under international law when he -- as a formal representative of Turkey -- discusses alternative solution models in Cyprus in this detail even for tactical reasons," Sozen told to SETimes.
Sozen said that annexation is not only devoid of the international law basis, but also of popular support among Turkish Cypriots.
"According to a public opinion poll that Cyprus 2015 Initiative conducted [in late 2010], 52% of the Turkish Cypriots find the 'annexation with Turkey' solution model as 'entirely unacceptable', while only 23% finds this option as 'satisfactory'."
But, tactical or not, all moves do have a price tag.
"Of course it is risky to show such harsh reactions concerning the Cyprus issue. 
But, if Turkey is determined to make such an annexation, we can assume that Turkey made a final decision about its EU membership bid," according to Hasguler.
"This should make all those -- in Cyprus, Turkey and the EU -- interested in a solution on the island realise how pivotal Turkey's accession prospects are to reconciliation in Cyprus," Tocci said.
