05/12/2006
Croatian President Stipe Mesic kicked off a two-day formal visit to Brussels on Monday (December 4th).
He met with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, European Parliament President Josep Borrell, NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, Belgium's King Albert II and Belgian government officials.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Friday (December 1st) after meeting in Berlin with Serbian President Boris Tadic that her country supports Serbia's efforts to proceed on the road to Euro-Atlantic accession.
She stressed, however, that full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal remains the key requirement.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader and visiting Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku agreed in Zagreb on Friday (December 1st) that the solution to the Kosovo status issue must contribute to the further stabilisation and normalisation of the region.
Ceku was in the Croatian capital as part of his ongoing diplomatic tour, aimed at boosting international support for Pristina's independence aspirations.
He earlier paid a two-day visit to Moscow, meeting with Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Titov and parliamentary officials.
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu was in New York through Thursday (November 30th) holding meetings with UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, special envoy Martti Ahtisaari, and ambassadors of the countries that serve as permanent members of the UN Security Council.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic met with the three members of the BiH presidency during a visit to Sarajevo on Thursday (November 30th).
Mesic urged the country to boost co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal and meet its obligations to the international community.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn was in Croatia from Thursday (November 30th) through Saturday.
He met with senior officials and participated in a conference on judicial reforms and anti-corruption efforts.
European Parliament President Josep Borrell reaffirmed his support for Albania's EU accession bid, saying the Union would be "incomplete without the Western Balkans".
He met with Albanian Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli in Brussels on Wednesday (November 29th).
(Various sources -- 28/11/06-05/12/06)
