06/11/2006

A group of 114 Nobel prize winners has written to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi about the case of five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor charged with intentionally infecting children with HIV. 
Independent, science-based evidence has not been allowed in the trial, the laureates wrote, adding that without such evidence, the cause of the HIV outbreak at the Benghazi children's hospital cannot be established. 
Western experts have suggested the infections were likely the result of poor hygenic conditions at the hospital and predated the nurses' arrival. 
A Tripoli court is due to issue a ruling in the case in December.
***
Internet use in Montenegrin municipalities is still very low and needs a significant boost, agreed participants attending a summit on IT use in local self-government. 
Held in Podgorica, the forum was co-organised by the Dutch-based international development organisation SNV and the German Agency for Technical Co-operation. 
According to data presented at the forum, municipal authorities still prefer to use the telephone for communication, rather than e-mail or the internet, a fact that keeps costs high. 
Currently every fifth or sixth municipality in Montenegro has its own internet line, while only three municipalities maintain their own information system centre as required under the new law on local self-government.
***
Romania remains among the world's ten most dangerous sources of IT crime, according to an annual report on cyber crime released by the FBI. 
However, the country dropped several notches, from fourth in 2002 to ninth in 2005. 
Commenting on the report, Romanian Communications and IT Minister Zsolt Nagy acknowledged that Romania is known not only for its highly qualified IT specialists, but also for its highly skilled hackers. 
However, he said, security legislation adopted last year is helping to better the situation.
***
Sofia will host the next ITU-Telecom Europe forum, to be held from December 3rd to 6th. 
According to the ITU, Bulgaria was chosen because of its progressing IT sector, imminent EU membership and growing opportunities.
***
The 6th BIHTEL International Conference on Telecommunication, organised by the University of Sarajevo's electrical engineering department, took place in Sarajevo from October 30th-November 1st. 
The main theme was "Building, Exploitation and Development of Telecommunication Networks". 
The conference drew together domestic and foreign researchers, as well as representatives of companies operating in the telecom and IT industries.
(Various sources – 30/10/06-06/11/06)
