06/04/2007
Croatian Railways and the German Railway Company sealed a three-year agreement on strategic co-operation, during a meeting in Zagreb on April 4th.
The deal provides for collaboration in the organisation of rail transport, project management, training of employees and equipment modernisation.
The World Bank's board approved a 7.5m-euro loan for the Development Policy Operation project in Albania.
The credit has a 20-year maturity and a 10-year grace period.
It is the first of three loans designed to support the government's National Strategy for Development and Integration and the achievement of sustainable economic growth.
Bulgaria's GDP growth reached 6.1% in 2006, according to the National Statistical Institute.
The registered growth of the economy was higher than the Finance Ministry's predictions of between 5.7% and 5.8%.
It was triggered primarily by investments and buoyant consumer growth.
In a statement issued on April 3rd, the Office of High Representative (OHR) expressed its dissatisfaction with the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's 2007 budget law, which was approved by the entity parliament several days ago.
According to the OHR, the law is flawed and incomplete.
In particular, it sharply criticised a planned 22% increase in public sector salaries and increased spending on other untargeted programmes.
A business gathering for Greek and Turkish entrepreneurs will be held in the Cretan town of Iraklion from June 22nd to 24th.
The event is being co-organised by the Iraklion Chamber of Commerce and the Izmir Hellenic-Turkish Chamber.
The agenda will focus on opportunities for co-operation in the transport sector, tourism and joint participation in EU projects.
Holcim Romania, one of the leading players in the Romanian cement market, plans to allot 86m euros for the upgrade of its production lines and infrastructure, logistics and environmental protection, according to a statement from the company on April 2nd.
It outlined the modernisation of the Campulung cement factory, due to be completed in 2008, as one of its investment priorities.
(Various sources – 30/03/07-06/04/07)
