05/02/2007
Croatian Minister of Science Dragan Primorac and his visiting Indian counterpart, Kapil Sibal, signed a declaration on strengthening bilateral scientific and technological co-operation.
Under the deal, a joint fund of 1m euros will be established to further expand exchanges in environmental science, oceanography, biotechnology, pharmacology, nanotechnology and shipbuilding.
Cyprus sealed an agreement with Dublin-based Mediterranean Nautilus to establish a new ring of the MedNautilus Pan-European network interlocking loop system.
The new cable system, "Minerva", will connect Cyprus with Italy, bypassing Turkey, Greece and Israel.
From Italy, it will connect Cyprus to MedNautilus.
It is expected to be operational in the third quarter of this year.
Greece's Public Power Corporation and the local company Rokas sealed a Memorandum of Understanding on a project to build 44 wind power parks on the Aegean Sea islands.
A study will establish the feasibility of constructing the power plants with a total capacity of 1,636 megawatts.
The agreement also calls for a feasibility study regarding the installation of an undersea electric cable connecting the islands and the continental parts of the country.
Representatives of IBM Serbia and the Faculty of Information Technologies in Belgrade signed an agreement on co-operation on Wednesday (January 31st).
The accord will enable the faculty to provide educational informatics programmes, based on IBM methodology, products and IT solutions.
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and Microsoft Corporation Chairman Bill Gates signed a Strategic Partnership Agreement for the modernisation of the Albanian public sector and the acceleration of the country's technological development.
Under the deal, Microsoft products and services will be used to cover the needs of the Albanian public sector over a three-year period.
Nexcom Bulgaria, a leading telecommunications operator with more than eight years of experience in the country, said that it has launched the first commercial WiMAX network in Bulgaria and the Balkans.
The network spans ten cities and allows for high-speed wireless voice, data and video transfer both for residential and business customers.
(Various sources -- 29/01/07-05/02/07)
