02/04/2012
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 02/04/12
The fledgling democracies of Southeast Europe have at least one thing in common with their older counterparts in the West -- criticism of campaign financing, and a perception that hidden contributions to political parties can carry power and influence.
"There is zero transparency of political party finances," Merita Mustafa of Transparency International Kosovo told SETimes.
Mustafa said political parties avoid disclosing their actual finances and also reporting relations with donor-businesses. 
"The parties award them with tenders after they get in power," she said.
Transparency International, an international organisation that monitors corruption, identified problems in disclosing party financing in recent elections in Kosovo, Albania, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia.
In Kosovo's 2010 election, political parties spent considerably more money on the campaign than they reported. 
"A political party [Democratic Party of Kosovo] spent around 1m euros, while it reported spending less than 200,000 euros," Mustafa said.
It recommended that Kosovo and Albania strengthen public disclosure of the funding with clear timeframes and publication mechanisms, as well as sanction offenders. 
The report noted some progress in publishing reports in Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia.
Gani Koci, Kosovo's deputy minister of economic development, said parties do not intentionally hide financial practices. 
He blamed the Central Election Commission and the Office of the General Auditor for failing to establish financial oversight.
"No political parties in Kosovo are as transparent as they should be," he told SETimes.
"There must be an increase of institutional control of political party finances, and the main actor for this is the Central Elections Commission (CEC)," Burim Ramadani, secretary of the opposition Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, told SETimes.
While the CEC has the legal authority to monitor party financing, it has been content with political parties submitting annual reports on financial transactions and not assessing them.
"In accordance with the law, we do publish the reports we receive from the contracted audit company," Fehmi Ajvazi, CEC spokesperson, told SETimes.
More than a year after the elections, however, the CEC's audit report has not yet been made public.
Ismet Beqiri, Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) secretary, said parties should be financed solely from the state budget.
"This way, everyone knows where the income is coming from and how it is spent," Beqiri told SETimes.
Last year, the LDK proposed an increase in the budget allocation for parties from 0.17% to 0.34%, which the government adopted in December. 
Kosovo now has the highest budget allocation for political parties in the region. 
By contrast, Macedonia allocates 0.06% of its budget to political parties, and Montenegro 0.05%.
Ruling parties are not keen on the idea of limiting financing solely to allocations from the state budget.
"Since we agree that there is no transparency in the finances of political entities, even with measures limiting their funds to state budgets, political parties will still find a way to acquire donations from businesses," Koci said.
Koci said he favoured legalising business donations with tax compensation for donors but at the same time placing limits on the amounts of donations.
