01/10/2012
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 01/10/12
In an effort to further regional trust and Euro-Atlantic integration, Macedonia has maintained efforts to boost military co-operation with other Southeast European countries.
"Macedonia has a broad and intensive co-operation with all countries in the region, both bilaterally and in the framework of regional initiatives. 
Bilateral defense co-operation with countries of the region includes fruitful co-operation … in all fields, from consultation to joint contribution to international operations," Macedonian Defense Minister Fatmir Besimi told SETimes
That allied forces in the region work to help each other toward Euro-Atlantic integration testifies to the fact that Macedonia has excellent co-operation with the countries of the region, Besimi said.
"The period of transition in Southeast Europe has increased the people's consciousness and their great desire to live in a common safety environment and to share common values and interests in the region," Radica Gareva, an associate professor at the Macedonian Military Academy and the state adviser for communication systems management at defense ministry, told SETimes.
The country's co-operation with Albania is based on a bilateral agreement signed in 1998, along with a Memorandum of Understanding between the ministries of defense and the US-Adriatic Charter, both signed in 2003.
Besimi had meetings this summer with Kosovo Security Forces (KSF) Minister Agim Ceku, KSF Commander Lieutenant General Kadri Kastrati and the Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci.
"Bilateral co-operation between the Republic of Macedonia and Kosovo has an important impact on the regional security, economic cooperation and the overall development of the two countries," Besimi told SETimes.
Macedonia's co-operation with Bulgaria is realised in several areas: military health professional training and military education, security and intelligence, planning, personal management, logistics and donations to equip the army.
"In the last two decades, there have been more regional initiatives that positively affect the building of mutual trust, regional peace, stability and economic development, and the development of joint military capabilities," Besimi said.
The Balkan Initiative Regional Approach to Air Defense is the first project to build common regional facilities. 
Macedonia believes that this collaborative approach can be applied to other projects in the area of modernisation of the national armed forces.
"We work hard to meet our goal, to be admitted in NATO. 
It is evident through the continuous reform process taking place in the Macedonian Army and the ministry of defense. 
Special attention is paid to the 'smart defense' concept by making efforts to boost our efficiency in the field of defense through intensive regional cooperation," Besimi said.
Citizens also feel NATO integration is necessary.
"It is good that we, as small country will join NATO for the security of the state itself. 
Not constantly asking whether someone will attack you or not," Skopje resident Gligor Jovanovsk, told SETimes.
