01/05/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 01/05/12
For the first time, a woman has been convicted of war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), for the murders of Croat civilians and prisoners of war during an attack on the southern village of Trusina in April 1993.
Rasema Handanovic was sentenced on Monday (April 30th) to five-and-a-half years in prison in exchange for agreeing to testify against six other members of the Zulfikar special unit of the BiH army, which carried out the attack.
Handanovic, 39, is a naturalised US citizen who was arrested in Oregon and extradited to BiH to answer for the crimes.
A total of 18 Croat civilians and four prisoners of war were killed in the attack, in which Handanovic was accused of taking part in a firing squad-style execution.
Her conviction shines new light on the role of women in the conflict.
Mirko Zelenika, president of the Association of Croatian War Prisoners, told SETimes that the judgment is a step forward in revealing the whole truth about what occurred during the war in BiH.
"It is good that this co-operating witness appeared, who will help so that all other criminals can be convicted, but it is not good that the [process] waited for 18 years.
The team that was accused of Trusina was responsible for all war camps in Herzegovina, through which passed more than 3,500 Croatian civilians during the war.
'
'I was a prisoner for two years and I watched this woman and her associates every day,'' Zelenika said.
''We received confirmation from the Office of the Prosecutor of BiH that this indicment shall be extended for all war crimes commited in the war camps."
Another woman who was suspected of war crimes during the 1990s in BiH, Azra Basic, was also arrested in the US.
BiH's judiciary accused her of committing war crimes against captured Serb civilians in a war camp near town of Derventa.
Basic stated in front of the grand jury in Kentucky -- where she was arrested in March 2011 -- that she doesn't want to be tried in BiH.
Two other women are currently on trial before BiH’s war crimes court in Sarajevo.
Albina Terzic, 40, and Marina Grubisc-Fejzic, 44, are former members of Croat forces.
In Serbia, a local court in Belgrade sentenced Nada Kalaba to nine years in jail in 2009 for taking part in the 1991 massacre in the eastern Croatian town of Vukovar.
Branko Todorovic, president of the Helsinki Committee of RS, said that Handanovic's conviction is proof that every social group committed terrible crimes in BiH's war.
"The montrosity of that war is reflected precisely in the fact that the crimes were committed by all.
Let me remind you of the case of Monika Simonovic, who was recently arrested for war crimes [she allegedly committed when she] was 15 years old.
It says that war crimes were commited by minors too.
Therefore, in my opinion, this was the most shameful war that happened in recent history," Todorovic told SETimes.
The only other woman from BiH who was sentenced for war crimes during the war was Biljana Plavsic, the former president of Republika Srpska, who was found guilty of persecution and crimes against humanity by The Hague-based UN war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
Plavsic was sentenced in 2003 to 11 years in prison and released after serving two-thirds of her term.
