01/03/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 01/03/12
Image can be everything, and the Kosovo Energy Corporation's (KEK) has been taking a beating lately, just as its distribution system is poised for privatisation.
To begin with, there are the customers who fail to pay their bills. 
"The debts of our consumers is around 400m euros," KEK spokesman Viktor Buzhala told SETimes
Then there are those who manage to tap into the utility illegally, which translate into additional losses of about 50m euros from theft, explained Buzhala. 
"We disconnect them from the system and [they] re-connect illegally."
But KEK's problems have significant ramifications that extend well beyond the power grid. 
It alone has an estimated 15,000 cases -- debt collection and more -- pending in courts. 
The court system in general is awash in a choking backlog of cases; part of the reason Kosovo's judicial system has been a main obstacle to achieving European standards.
According to Enver Peci, chairman of Kosovo's Judicial Council, the highest body in the judicial system, a year after the conflict ended in 1999, UNMIK opened courts and appointed judges and prosecutors "without any criteria".
To tackle the backlog that has ballooned in the years since, the council has increased the number of judges and prosecutors. 
April will usher in a new appointment period, which Peci hopes will ease the caseload.
"The judiciary is now undergoing the most important stages of reform," he told SETimes.
The Council -- supported by USAID -- has created special offices to deal with cases related to energy and other public companies. 
"And in co-operation with the companies, we have harmonised procedures for collecting debts easier," Peci added.
But those procedures don't extend to cases involving theft of power. 
And other cases are considered higher priority, explained Peci, such as "elections cases, corruption, and detention of minors".
Buzhala agrees. 
"It takes years, and then the problem is executing the decisions … there is a lack of will to execute them. 
Around 20% of energy is lost because of the theft, which causes operational problems [as well as] financial loss."
In frustration, KEK at one point proposed that judges be hired to handle its thousands of cases -- and even offered to pay the salaries involved. 
"But this was considered a conflict of interest," explained Buzhala. 
"The strategy to get out of this situation is in the hands of the courts, and we require the courts be more active to resolve the issue of energy thefts."
Economist Dardan Shabanaj said KEK's problems will affect its sale price, which in turn affects the state budget, and ultimately trickles down to every consumer.
"The distribution system of KEK will be privatised soon, and the theft of energy and the cases of not paying the bills ... 
can decrease the price of it," Shabanaj told SETimes.
