01/03/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Caglavica -- 01/03/12
A big sign at the end of the main street in Caglavica, a Serb majority village on the outskirts of Pristina, leads to the well-known media centre located in a three-story building. 
It opened in 2007 as an NGO, aiming to establish a dialogue between the Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians.
The centre has ambitious plans within the Kosovo framework and reality.
"We opened with little money," said Budimir Nicic, who initiated the opening of the centre. 
They started with public debates in 2007 and 2008 on TV and radio.
"It is not easy, but if you work and have the will, it can be done," Nicic told SETimes.
The centre produces a popular show among Kosovo Serbs titled Slobodno Srpski, meaning "Speak Serbian freely," a one-on-one talk show, discussing sensitive topics and challenging questions.
"Caglavica Media Centre is of great importance to us because it makes our approach to information much easier. 
It helps simply because this is probably the only media centre, the only such institution where Albanian politicians make statements in a predominantly Serb environment, send messages to Serb community, and it reaches them," Isak Vorgucic, a Kosovo Serb, told SETimes.
The centre broadcasts every Sunday and Wednesday on all Kosovo Serbian TV stations and Kosovo Public Broadcaster.
"We are aware that the Albanian community is also watching the programme. 
We receive feedback in Albanian on our website," Nicic said.
"Caglavica Media Centre is doing a good job in presenting the new Kosovo reality. 
They organise debates that several Kosovo media follow. 
The Centre is a place where different representatives can meet, including those who have not recognised Kosovo reality. 
They have equal access, discuss issues, [and] explain their stance. 
It's a new way of communication between Albanians and Serbs," Rabisha Muhaxhiri, a Kosovo Albanian, told SETimes.
Open public debates remain the strength of the centre, with Kosovo and Serb officials engaged in hot topics of the day.
"Just recently, we had Dragan Radenkovic from the Socialist Party of Serbia, Slobodan Petrovic, deputy prime minister in Kosovo, and the French Ambassador Jean Francois Fitou in a constructive, tolerant debate," Nicic says.
"So far we organised around 300 public debates, addressed many topics that are still negotiated in Brussels," Andjelka Qup, one of the centre managers told SETimes.
The Centre for Regionalism Novi Sad and Mother Teresa Society recently organised a public discussion in the framework of "Free Movement of People and Goods between Kosovo and Serbia in the Regional Context", supported by the EU, Civil Society Support, as the latest organised event at the centre, Qup added.
Caglavica Media Centre first started on the internet, and now provides services in the main Kosovo languages. 
Initially it received support from USAID and the US embassy, then other local and international donors.
Stanko Pevac, an IREX consultant, a USAID programme supporting media in Kosovo, says the centre provided a huge contribution to Kosovo Serb media, covering all relevant events.
"The media centre made an enormous effort to incite and encourage dialogue between Kosovo institutions, Serbian institutions, and international organisations. 
They started facing the three relevant sides, and these were pioneering achievements from 2007 onward," Pevac told SETimes.
Kosovo and Serbia have been talking with international mediation, but the Caglavica Media Centre initiated the dialogue long before, he said.
