03/01/2007
A monument honouring Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Mother Teresa (1910-1997) was formally unveiled in the Albanian city of Shkodra.
Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli, Culture Minister Bujar Leskaj and Shkodra Mayor Artan Haxhi attended the ceremony.
Mother Teresa, born Agnes Gonxha Bojaxhiu in an ethnic Albanian family in Skopje, was a Roman Catholic nun who devoted her life to helping the sick and the poor.
The late Pope John Paul II beatified her in 2003.
UNESCO declared 2007 as the Year of Emilian Stanev (1907-1979), one of Bulgaria's classical writers.
The initiative marks Stanev's 100th birthday and honours his contribution to world literature.
Bulgaria will hold a series of events in Stanev's hometown, Veliko Tarnovo.
The programme includes readings of excerpts from Stanev's masterpiece, "The Peach-Garden Trespasser".
Sofia's renovated Stefan Makedonski National Musical Theatre opens its doors this month, following more than six months of repairs.
The premiere of Hungarian composer Imre Kalman's operetta "Countess Maritza" will be held on January 12th.
French director Luc Besson visited Zagreb and Belgrade last week for the premieres of his new animated adventure epic "Arthur and the Minimoys".
Besson was awarded the Golden Seal of the Serbian film archive, Yugoslovenska kinoteka, acknowledging his contribution to the development of the world cinema.
Croatian painter Ivan Picelj received a Life Achievement award from the Croatian Association of Artists for 2006, at a formal ceremony in Zagreb on December 28th.
An exhibition titled "Clay & Color", highlighting the history of the art of porcelain from the mid-15th to the early 19th centuries, opened at the Byzantine and Christian Museum in Athens last week.
The exhibition runs through February 17th.
An exhibition presenting oriental carpet art is on display at the National Art Museum of Romania in Bucharest.
It includes 27 carpets from the 17th to the 20th centuries, coming from the Caucasus region, Central Asia, Iran and Turkey.
The exhibition will continue until April 1st.
(Various sources -- 27/12/06-03/01/07)
