28/03/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 28/03/13
According to the World Health Organisation's (WHO) estimates, at least 10 percent of the world's drug supply is thought to be counterfeit, creating tens of millions of euros in illicit profits and threatening public health and safety.
Fake medicines and counterfeit drugs may contain dangerous and illicit substances to substitute the active ingredients in original medicines and legal generic brands, putting patients' health a great risk, officials said.
The fake medicines circulate via the globalised drug trade, originating mainly from organised crime groups and drug cartels, rendering the geographical scope and complexity of control of such operations even more complex.
The internet and illicit "online pharmacies" have facilitated the entry of fake medicines and counterfeit drugs into the supply chain. 
According to the health organisation, at least 50 percent of medicines purchased over the internet from illegal sites that conceal their physical address have been found to be counterfeit.
To put a stop to the spread of fake drugs the international police agency, Interpol, announced this month a new deal with the pharmaceutical industry. 
According to the accord, 29 of the world's biggest drug companies will provide 4.5 million euros in the next three years to help respond to a growing and dangerous problem.
Under the framework of this collaboration, Interpol's Pharmaceutical Crime Programme will be created to focus on all types of pharmaceutical crime, then identifying and dismantling the organised crime networks related to this kind of illegal activity throughout 190 member countries' territories. 
The effort will also raise public awareness of the negative consequences of fake drugs purchased online, authorities said.
"With no country, no drug, no medical product immune from counterfeiting, a global effort is needed to combat this threat which puts the lives of millions of people at risk every single day," Interpol Secretary General Ronald K. 
Noble said in a statement.
In the Balkans and Turkey, experts told SETimes their countries are taking action against fake medicines but a global framework and international standards could help prevent the spread of the multi-million euro illicit trade.
In Turkey, 2 million counterfeit medicines were seized in 300 operations involving 534 people during 2012, according to police figures.
The majority of fake medicines were for sexual enhancement and weight-loss medications sold illegally over the internet.
In Turkey, drugs and medicines are tracked through a computer system and can only be sold through licensed pharmacies.
Harun Kizilay, the general secretary of Turkish Pharmacists’ Association (TEB), told SETimes uncontrolled online sales in Turkey lead to the spread of cheap counterfeit drugs.
"These products are like 'health mines,' it's not clear when they will explode," Kizilay said.
To combat the trade, the Ministry of Health, Turkish Police and Interpol have conducted joint operations and internet sites selling drugs are closely monitored and shut down.
"We expect that such operations will be conducted systematically and that with the common willingness of all relevant parties -- citizens, producers, health professionals and legal authorities -- this problem related to the public health should be resolved definitely in Turkey," Kizilay said.
Kizilay also said that consumers bear greater responsibility and should prefer pharmacies instead of the internet to buy medicines.
Dragos Damian, the head of the Romanian Association of Generic Drugs Producers, described counterfeiting medicines as a crime against people’s health, an economic crime and a crime against intellectual property rights.
For a number of reasons the counterfeit medicine market is underdeveloped in Romania.
"First, it is a small market compared to other European countries. 
Secondly, the medicine prices are the lowest among the European countries. 
And thirdly, the online trade environment, which is the main means of selling these fake drugs because one cannot verify it before ordering it, is less developed than in Western Europe," Damian told SETimes.
Though there are no official statistics concerning the fake drug market in Romania, some estimates put it at about 100 million euros per year. 
The main counterfeit drugs are those which boost sexual performance, weight loss medicines and steroids.
Greece is one of the most regulated countries among other Balkan countries. 
A strict medicine control system prevents the import of fake medicines into the legal distribution chain.
According to Natalia Toubanaki, a spokeswoman for the Hellenic Association of Pharmaceutical Companies (SFEE), Greece has in place an even stricter regime for medicines and pharmaceutical products than most of its EU peers.
Toubanaki said safeguards include the prescription of known medicines, or very similar brands, with the exclusive responsibility of the attending physician; implementation of a system that includes an authenticity sticker, a double barcode and unique serial number on every package, as well as exclusive distribution of all pharmaceuticals via licensed pharmacies.
"Citizens should not trust so-called electronic pharmacies, in other words, orders via the internet. 
It's obvious that any change in this very successful and tried system entails serious risks for public health," she said.
For his part, former MEP Emmanouil Angelakas, a pharmacist by training, said even stricter controls are projected after implementation of a 2011 EU directive – set to come in force on June 1st 2013 – mandating the auditing by EU inspectors of laboratories outside the Union supplying member-states with Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs), an initiative primarily targeting suppliers in India and China.
Angelakas, who was one of the most active MEPs regarding pharmaceutical policies when he served in the European Parliament, said the problem with falsified and counterfeit medicinal products – the specific EU term – deals primarily with brand name tranquilisers, drugs to treat sexual dysfunctions and analgesics.
Elsewhere in the Balkans, Mikailo Tijanic, the chief of the department for intellectual property rights in the Serbian Ministry of Interior, said that just as almost everywhere else illegal drugs for better sexual performance or against dysfunction are the most common in Serbia.
"The possible reason for this to hide people's identity so the one who is going to use these drugs prefers to buy them via internet instead of going to the pharmacy or so on and there is more space for selling the fake product," Tijanic told SETimes.
He added that his department has been dealing with online sales of drugs via websites specialised in so-called "best prices sales."
For a medicine or drug to enter the Serbian market it must get a license from the National Agency for Drugs. 
An international license is not enough to market a product on the Serbian market.
Tijanic said the Ministry of Health, Customs, the Drugs Agency, Interior Ministry and regional countries are all trying to fight the counterfeit drug market.
"Recently we had a regional conference in Zagreb where we agreed on forming the control groups in all countries which are communicating among each other regarding this topic and informing each other when something illegal appears. 
But, if something is forbidden in Serbia, it doesn’t mean it is also in Croatia, but it has to be checked on both sides," Tijanic told SETimes.
Correspondents Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest, H.K. 
Tzanis in Athens Ivana Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report.
