26/03/2013
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 26/03/13
Kosovo citizens are undertaking peaceful action to push the government to be accountable, and the efforts are beginning to yield results, experts said. 
What began as protests against erroneous energy bills from the Kosovo Electric Corporation, and the government's failure to act on them, turned into a series of protests against corruption.
More than 20 NGOs and three student associations organised a protest earlier this month that was attended by thousands of people in front of the corporation headquarters and the government building. 
The group gathered again on Friday (March 22nd).
"Kosovo is ours. 
We should not let Kosovo be stolen," said Arta Dobroshi, a popular artist who joined the protest, reflecting the calls for transparency and accountability from public officials.
Ilir Deda, from the KIPRED Institute, voiced the Pristina protesters' demand for corrupt officials to step down.
"We ask today that [Kosovo Electric Corporation Managing Director] Arben Gjukaj, [Interior Minister] Bajram Rexhepi and [Economic Development Minister] Besim Beqaj leave. 
They can not … remain in the office," Deda said.
The protesters blamed Gjukaj for overcharging citizens, Beqaj for not acting on his authority to oversee the electric corporation and Rexhepi for a number of corruption-related scandals in the interior ministry.
The protesters said public gatherings will continue until the officials are dismissed and face the law.
"Government ministers are walking with millions of dollars in their possession next to impoverished people. 
They were not rich when becoming ministers, but become rich by stealing public property," Avni Zogiani, chairman of the Pristina NGO Cohu, said.
The pressure citizens exerted resulted in an inter-ministerial committee overseeing the work of the Kosovo Energy Corporation to demand its board of directors to dismiss Gjukaj.
The corporation's response will follow an analysis and assessment by the independent Energy Regulatory Office related to the January energy bills, according to Nexhat Podrimaj, secretary of the electric company's board of directors.
"Only after a detailed and competent report by the regulatory office will we decide on the next steps, and eventually about people responsible for the situation," Podrimaj told SETimes.
But the report Podrimaj referred to has already been published, and the inter-ministerial call is based on the office's findings presented on March 14th.
"The report has been delivered to all parties, and it presents the office's findings and conclusions related to January energy bills," Adelina Murtezaj, office spokeswoman, told SETimes.
The Energy Regulatory Office found that more than a third of the 3,800 complaints are reasonable because the bills contained inaccurate figures of consumed energy. 
Regardless of the result, many are encouraged by the citizen activism and wanted to further encourage others not to be silent but hold public officials accountable.
"I know so many people who are disappointed with the current situation, but are [still] afraid to speak up publicly for fear they will lose their job," Murat Morina, a high-school professor in Pristina, told SETimes.
