28/06/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 28/06/13
Technology enthusiasts from across the region have joined together to share experiences, improve the performance of computer programmes and enhance innovation.
Known as "hackers," they have formed 10 hack clubs in the Balkans.
Through communication and gatherings, including a conference held earlier this month in Struga, Macedonia, they hope to contribute to an environment that will improve the region's technology base and keep young, tech-savvy citizens from seeking employment elsewhere.
Arandzhel Bujanovich, a member of Hack Club Belgrade, the region's largest club, said many are concerned about the so-called "brain drain" of young people leaving the region.
"We talk about these issues and how to stop this process in the Balkans and what impact it can have.
It happens some of our members get a job in another European country and stay there forever.
We are planning to organise public debates on which we will talk about outflow of smart people from the programming and information technology professions in Europe," Bujanovich said.
Hack club members are quick to point out that they should not be confused with cyber criminals, who break into email, bank and social media accounts.
"Hackers are not those who violate computers or steal information.
You need to distinguish between hackers and those others, which we call crackers, and who sometimes are dealing with illegal things," Vladimir Vasilev from Sofia, one of the founders of the four hack clubs in Bulgaria, told SETimes.
Jovanka Gulicoska, president of the hack club Kika in Skopje, further emphasised that hackers seek to innovate, and are not interested in violating the law.
"For example, looking for ways to use the router as another tool, how to do something useful for people.
We find new solutions from existing ones in terms of technology," Gulicoska told SETimes.
Members of Kika collaborated with Macedonian NGO Free Software last year to win first place in the national competition Better Ideas for EU Funds.
They created internet-enabled meteo sensor boxes, which collect information on environmental pollution, a problem the city of Skopje has being trying to reduce.
"The hack clubs are gathering people with knowledge and there they share knowledge not only of technology but also in many other areas.
The main idea is to have communication and co-operation between young people of the Balkans," Gulicoska said.
About 50 hackers from Macedonia, Bulgaria, Kosovo, Serbia and Croatia attended the recent meeting in Struga and exchanged experiences and the latest technological developments.
Participants presented ideas in the fields of information technology and computer engineering.
Dobrica Pavlinushich, member of hack club Mama in Zagreb, told SETimes that hack clubs in Croatia are growing, which is a reflection of the need for people to gain new information about technology.
"Many of our members are people who are working in IT companies.
…Members in these hack clubs are meeting at least once a week, and in many of them there are members who are related to technology, but there are members who are artists, students, high school students and intellectuals from various profiles," Pavlinushich said.
Hack Club Belgrade also is attracting members of diverse backgrounds.
"There are members with different educational profiles.
… We see the hack as an alternative educational space and we want to provide free education of web design or programming for the people.
In our hack club there are doctors, psychologists, philosophers," Bujanovich said.
How do you learn about the newest technology?
Tell us in the comment section.
