30/04/2013
By Selena Petrovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 30/04/13
Trade organisations and NGOs in the region are providing workers with a place to turn for assistance after many employees said they want more respect and fairness in the workplace.
Workers said they are not able to react when their rights are violated, such as working overtime without pay, receiving late paychecks and lack of respect from employers, because they worry they could be fired, leaving them unable to feed their families.
"I have been frequently faced with a classical problem: overtime I have not been paid for," said Nika Radovic, 35, a marketing expert from Zagreb. 
"The key problem was not just about putting in extra hours without being paid money for it. 
For me, the biggest problem was the employers' indifference toward the worker's efforts and the lack of appreciation."
Darko Sheperich, an adviser for social policy at the Union of Autonomous Trade Unions of Croatia, one of the organisers of a protest to be held on International Workers Day on Wednesday (May 1st) in Zagreb, told SETimes that workers' fears are understandable in this time of "high unemployment and a non-functioning legal state."
He said that workers have to realise the importance of their own engagement, namely the need to organise between themselves and increase their power in relation to employers.
"This is the very essence of unions' existence, and unions can help them," he said.
Tomislav Vidović, 47, who works in the household appliances industry in Zagreb, said the fundamental issue is that no one is protecting private sector employees.
"We work overtime without pay, and sometimes we don't even have time to go to lunch during work. 
Also, we know employers don't like it when we ask for a day off, so we try not to do that. 
[But] we don't complain because we need our jobs. 
We can get fired without any consequences for the employer. 
If we take them to court and win, damages are barely enough to cover legal fees."
Krunoslav Vidich, a spokesman for Croatia's Ministry of Labour and Pensions, told SETimes that the ministry is supporting workers through the laws and amendments it proposes.
He said workers' grievances are addressed in the changes to the Labour Act, which has entered the parliamentary procedure.
Vidich said that "in cases where workers are unable to exercise their rights, they can file an [anonymous] report with the state inspectorate." If the inspection determines the law has been broken, proceedings before the national courts will be launched.
Underprivileged citizens may also request free legal aid from the ministry of justice and district administration.
A recent study by NGO Belgrade Centre for Human Rights showed that employees deal with a series of problems at work, "although the right to fair and favorable working conditions has declaratively been adopted as a universal standard."
The authors added that "many employers have not been paying the workers their salaries or their mandatory contributions."
According to the Black on White campaign, a workplace dignity initiative by several Serbian NGOs, more than 60,000 workers in the country were not paid in 2012, and more than 5,000 firms have not paid employees' taxes and contributions. 
The group estimates the total owed at about 857 million euros.
In Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), workers turn to the office of legal aid network Vasa Prava (Your Rights) for assistance with issues such as non-compliance or non-existence of employment contracts, non-payment of contributions, late salaries or overtime without pay.
Ahmet Salcin, deputy director for legal matters at Vasa Prava, recommends that workers ask for inspection control at their companies by contacting the competent labour inspection authority.
"Inspection determines irregularities and … can penalise employers for offences, and [give] instructions how to correct the existing flaws and errors in their [employers'] operations pertaining to employees," Salcin told SETimes.
Will NGO efforts be enough to secure employee rights? 
Join the conversation below in the comments.
