25/03/2013
By Aleksandar Pavelvski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 25/03/13
Countries across the region are intensifying customs co-operation to empower their business sectors and strengthen the fight against cross-border crime, officials said.
Experts said the agreements ensure a better business environment.
"Customs co-operation among the states is very important because most often the sources for creating counterfeit goods and the importers are the same.
They migrate from country to country depending on where the control is weakest," Valentin Pepeljugovski, a professor specialising in intellectual property protection at St. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, told SETimes.
Turkish Customs Vice Secretary Hasan Koseoglu and Macedonian Customs Director Vanco Kargov met earlier this month to discuss introducing new IT systems in the two customs' directorates.
"Macedonia's customs continually works with customs offices in the region.
The co-operation is according to the requirements of the [Central Europe] Free Trade Agreement, as well as Macedonia's agreement with the EU," Kargov told SETimes.
The two countries' co-operation is based on the development of the New Computerised Transit System, which connects customs offices in 32 countries, including all EU member nations.
The system is more modern and effective than paper documentation, and adopting the system is a step countries must take on the path toward EU membership.
Koseoglu and Kargov agreed upon areas for further co-operation, with a particular emphasis on customs controls and investigations.
"The basic direction for further development of the Macedonian customs office is to become the best service for the citizens and companies, to prepare to function as part of the EU's customs union and introduce new technologies, which means a fully paperless work," Karkov said.
"Next, we will also pay much attention to highly skilled human resources ready for such [paperless] environment, but also individuals able to lead and manage the customs office in the future."
Kargov said the level of co-operation varies from country to country.
"We exchange information in electronic form with the Serbian, Kosovo and Albanian customs, while with the others in paper form, including with Greece at the border crossings for certain goods," Kargov said.
In 2011, Albania and Kosovo agreed to eliminate customs duties, which was of particular help given the difficult economic situation in Kosovo.
That same year, Albania and Serbia signed an agreement to abolish tariffs on all food products.
Macedonia signed an agreement with Montenegro establishing joint assistance in customs matters.
"This agreement creates a legal framework to ensure appropriate implementation of the customs legislation, especially in preventing, discovering and fighting fraud related to customs infractions, via exchange of information and joint assistance -- all to ensure the correct assessment of customs duties, taxes and other obligations," the Montenegro customs office told SETimes in a written statement.
In 2012, Macedonia filed 91 criminal charges against 141 individuals and firms for customs violations.
Officials seized 285,000 euros and about 650,000 items.
Businessmen agree strengthened controls are a necessity.
"I export spices to Macedonia and consider the legal safety of the border very important for my business to thrive.
This is the view of virtually all businessmen I have contacts with," Aslu Hadzi Hamza, a businessman from Turkey, told SETimes.
Croatia's entry in the EU this July will raise important customs issues.
The country will leave the Central Europe Free Trade Agreement trade regime and will have to impose EU-mandated customs duties for imports from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Croatian exports to BiH will also become significantly more expensive, which is why many Croatian companies are considering moving production to BiH and the other Central Europe Free Trade Agreement countries.
The new export regime will affect nearly 200,000 BiH food producers.
The country's biggest agricultural exporters are dairy companies, and more than 60 percent of the milk produced in BiH is exported to Croatia.
Enforcing the new trade regime and undercutting cross-border smuggling channels without disrupting trade and business relations will be critical.
"BiH has intensified co-operation with the customs office of Croatia as well as Serbia, and it is already showing results," Rako Kovacevic, spokesperson for the Directorate for Indirect Taxation, told SETimes.
