25/03/2013
By Biljana Lajmanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 25/03/13
In an effort to hold regional politicians accountable, several NGOs in the region are focusing on campaign promises, tracking what projects are initiated after the elections.
Improved infrastructure, new investments, schools, and gasification are projects that were proposed by Macedonian politicians in last week's local election campaign. 
Candidates for mayor and local councilors, both from ruling parties and the opposition, developed huge pre-election programmes.
"Citizens' expectations are rising to unseen limits and the winners of elections will face problems because they will not be able to perform the promise," Aleksandar Cvetkoski, president of the Association for Citizen Tolerance and Co-operation, told SETimes.
"Politicians promise the things people like to hear. 
[W]e don't have enough money to fulfill everything that is being promised … both by the government and the opposition," Cvetkoski added.
A recent public opinion survey by the association, however, showed that citizens are not easily swayed by pre-election promises. 
Nearly 75 percent of participants said that they don't believe that the future mayors will keep their pre-election promises, either because they promised too much or because they will not have enough money for the projects.
The ruling VMRO DPMNE has developed a programme for the city of Skopje with thousands of projects in their election campaign.
"We have proved that we can promise and keep the promise, without tricking the citizens. 
The deeds speak for our devoted work," VMRO DPMNE member Koce Trajanovski said.
Opposition SDSM candidate Jani Makraduli is also making promises for the capital.
"I will also make a complete revision of Skopje 2014 project, allowing people to give their opinion for the monuments built in the center of the city," Makraduli said.
With all these vows, keeping track of the realisation of the projects after the elections has proven to be a difficult task.
The civic initiative Istinomer (Truth-meter) was created in Serbia in 2009 to monitor and measure politicians' pre-election vows.
"For a period of a bit more than three years we registered 1,300 promises. 
Out of this number 850 got negative marks -- haven't even started, unfulfilled, started and stopped. 
It means that two-thirds of the promises politicians gave citizens aren't accomplished," Zvonko Ninkov, editor in chief of Istinomer told SETimes.
Civil activists observing political behaviour in Kosovo say such promises have turned into the norm for the country.
According to Petrit Zogaj, a Speak Up Movement activist, this happens because of "vast irresponsibility by politicians, and the lack of civilian population to push politicians for a better performance and fulfillment of their election promises."
During the last general elections in Kosovo in 2010, Zogaj led a project seeking accountability and measuring transparency of politicians.
He told SETimes that still some crucial promises from the last elections have not been fulfilled, including the promise of Prime Minister Hashim Thaci that within 15 months of his taking office, Kosovo would implement a visa-free regime with the EU.
Last year, two Romanian NGOs, the Ratiu Centre for Democracy and the Resource Centre for Public Participation, joined forces to track unfulfilled political promises in hopes of sparking a change in the political behaviour of the country's politicians. 
The website Who and what promised (Cine ce a promis) came into being through the joint initiative.
"Basically, what we aimed for is to create a data base in which people could introduce promises their political representatives and discuss them on the forum," Oana Preda, director of the Resource Centre for Public Participation, told SETimes.
With people engaging in public discussions on the website, Preda hopes that the initiative will pressure politicians to follow through.
According to Srdjan Dvornik, political analyst and owner of the publishing company Word and Advice, it can be simple to monitor and evaluate the promises of politicians.
"Critical political thinking, open examination of all government actions and critical public debate. 
To do that, the citizens should have the knowledge and the will to have constant political engagement. 
And there would be necessary uncorrupted means of the media and communication," Dvornik told SETimes.
Correspondents Katica Djurovic in Belgrade, Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest, Safet Kabashaj in Pristina and Kruno Kartus in Zagreb contributed to this report.
