04/04/2007

Croatia's water polo team won the 12th World Championship in Melbourne, Australia, defeating Hungary in the final on April 1st. 
The Croatian team scored 9-8 against the Hungarians. 
This is the first world title for Croatia in water polo.
***
Serbia's 19-year old tennis star Novak Djokovic won the ATP Masters Series tournament in Miami, defeating the Argentinean Guillermo Canas in the final on April 1st. 
It was the first ATP Masters Series title for Djokovic, who also became the youngest men's champion in the event for 23 years.
***
The Council of Europe is to sponsor a prestigious new film award at the Istanbul Film Festival, which opened on March 31st. 
The Film Award of the Council of Europe will be given to the work that best reflects the Council’s values of respect for human rights, individual freedom, political liberty and the rule of law. 
The award includes a sculpture in bronze and a cash prize of 10,000 euros.
***
Poets from 20 countries will gather in Istanbul for the second Istanbul International Beyoglu Poetry Festival, which begins on May 14th. 
The event will bring together 30 foreign poets and 60 poets from Turkey. 
The forum is organised by the Culture and Tourism Ministry and Istanbul's Bilgi University.
***
The premiere of the documentary "When Poets Were Killed" by the Albanian director Namik Ajazi, also screenwriter and producer of the film, took place at the Millennium cinema in Tirana on April 2nd. 
The documentary is dedicated to poets Genci Leka and Vilson Blloshmi, who were killed by the former regime in 1977.
***
An exhibition titled "Bulgaria's Orthodox Tradition -- Icons and Manuscripts from the 16th to the 19th Century" opened at the prestigious Ambrosiana library in Milan last week. 
Twenty six icons from the Bulgarian National Art Gallery and seven manuscripts from the Holy Synod's archive are on display. 
The exhibition, which is organised by the Bulgarian General Consulate in Milan, runs until July 1st.
***
An exhibition commemorating the 50th anniversary of the death of the world-renowned Romanian sculptor Constantin Brancusi (1876-1957) is currently on display at the National Cotroceni Museum in Bucharest. 
The exhibition, titled "Brancusi in His Fatherland", includes sculptures, documents, previously unknown photographs, as well as medals and stamps dedicated to the artist and his work. 
The exhibition continues until April 30th.
(Various sources – 28/04/07-04/04/07)
