22/05/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 22/05/06
With weather-related disasters becoming a recurring problem in the Balkans, authorities in the region are coming under greater pressure to show they are able to respond effectively. 
Critics say the floods have exposed serious deficiencies and may even prove a catalyst for needed political change.
"History and geography have ensured that the Balkan nations of Serbia, Romania and Bulgaria have been worst hit by the floods," opined the London Times in April. 
"It has left them with the legacy of communism: weak central governments, poor infrastructure and under-funded national agencies that have been overwhelmed by the devastation."
Serbia, along with its Balkan neighbours, was battered by floods during most of April, causing catastrophic damage to villages, farmland and infrastructure. 
One of the hardest hit areas was the province of Vojvodina, considered Serbia's "breadbasket" and home to some of the republic's poorest families. 
In addition to losing their homes, farmers have also lost their livelihood; as of May, some 240,000 hectares -- more than 5 per cent of the republic's 4.5m hectares of farmable land -- were affected. 
Shipping on the Danube was brought to a halt for weeks.
Estimates of the total cost run into the tens of millions, though conclusive figures will not be possible until the waters have fully receded and expert commissions have finished their investigations.
As of now, the Serbian government has allocated 3.2m euros from the budget reserve for rehabilitation from natural catastrophes (floods and rockslides). 
These funds, as stated by government decree, are intended for the most crucial measures needed to bring relief to flood-struck municipalities.
But relief in the wake of disaster is not enough, many say. 
Rather, more efforts must be focused on preparation. 
Experts say the damage from the most recent bout of floods would have been less severe had investments been made in building embankments, or in shoring up the existing ones. 
In this way, the money that is now being spent on relief efforts could have gone towards lessening the impact of the disaster in the first place.
Vojvodina, for instance, has long been considered the most flood-prone area of Serbia, but not a single kilometre of new or reconstructed embankment has been completed there since 1994. 
The question is not only one of shortage of funds. 
It also involves funds that have in fact been earmarked but were not delivered on time. 
As a result, little to no progress was made, and the contractors who undertook the flood defence works have not even been paid.
In addition to the immediate damage from flooding, there are the longer term losses caused by the destruction of cropland. 
According to the agriculture ministry, more than half the land available for corn was submerged. 
Corn farmers were unable to complete sowing on time, and the result will be a severely diminished crop.
The pain is, of course, borne most heavily by the affected farmers, but consumers are also affected -- market prices for early vegetables are already 20 per cent higher than average. 
Instead of declining in the spring, they are going up. 
The government has stepped in to offer expertise and technological help, but this is not a long term solution. 
Furthermore, unlike in many developed countries, most Serbian farmers lack insurance against such ravages.
Even after floods recede, there is a serious danger of contagious disease. 
Contaminated drinking water, for instance, can lead to intestinal infections. 
That presents municipal authorities with the laborious and costly task of cleaning and treating wells with chloride, while streets, squares, houses and yards that were submerged also have to be disinfected.
Furthermore, floods bring mosquitoes. 
Every year, Belgrade allocates 1.7m euros from the city budget to fend off these pests. 
This year, the funds will not nearly be enough. 
The problem affects all towns and cities along the flooded rivers and tributaries, including Belgrade. 
Finally, there is also another indirect cost in the form of crime -- specifically, the looting of evacuated houses.
Serbia has already begun the process of trying to secure aid from the EU, international financial institutions and relief agencies. 
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has vowed to do everything possible to speed the recovery, and President Boris Tadic is calling for greater investment in building embankments.
Meanwhile, Capital Investment Minister Velimir Ilic announced the allocation of 1m euros for an embankment project in the Zrenjanin municipality. 
It is hoped that this year's devastation will prove a catalyst for steps that have been needed for years. 
Still, the government remains constrained by scarce revenues and political gridlock. 
And even were it better organised, there are limits to any government's ability to manage the Danube. 
Miles wide in its Balkan stretch, it presents a daunting challenge.
