27/06/2013
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 27/06/13
A recent wiretapping scandal and massive protests against Bulgaria's new government are being closely watched by the EU, and will inevitably be reflected in the European Commission's (EC) future assessments of the country's progress, analysts and experts warned.
"Some of the recent developments in Bulgaria were not good and they raised concerns not only in Bulgarian society, but among the European partners of Bulgaria, especially the controversy over the appointment of the head of the State Agency for National Security," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said after meeting Bulgarian Prime Minister Plamen Oresharski in Brussels last week, adding that demonstrations in Bulgaria had shown "the depth of concerns in Bulgaria about the rule of law."
"I also urged the prime minister to consult widely, especially in the fight against corruption and organised crime," he said.
"My guess is that what is happening in Bulgaria will be reflected in the EC's forthcoming monitoring report in the end of 2013, because it is not of minor significance," Judge Neli Kutzkova, one of the founders of the Bulgarian Judges' Association and deputy justice minister in the 1997 caretaker government, told SETimes.
Earlier this month, Tzvetan Tzvetanov, former interior minister and current GERB MP, whose government resigned amid the February public protests, had his immunity lifted after being charged with failing to exercise proper control over interior ministry officials, thus enabling his subordinates to wiretap high-profile politicians, magistrates and businesspeople.
The prosecution announced it was about to press fresh charges against Tzvetanov, this time for refusing to allow the use of special surveillance devices in an investigation against a former head of a regional anti-mafia unit.
The events are unfolding in the face an ever-growing wave of political and social unrest, as people continue to flood the streets to protest the recently elected government of GERB's main political opponent, the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP).
The protests began with the appointment of a controversial media mogul to the helm of the National Security Agency.
Although 33-year-old Delyan Peevski resigned, the protests continue as the cabinet has been refusing to step down.
Francois Frison-Roche of the National Centre for Scientific Research, who has performed extensive research on Bulgaria's and Romania's EU path, told SETimes that foreign observers and decision makers "will carefully read the elements of the [forthcoming monitoring] report and adjustments that will be made by the Bulgarian authorities."
"One might also ask why five years after Bulgaria became an EU member it still needs this type of report," under the co-operation and verification mechanism, he said.
The co-operation and verification mechanism, which was introduced when Bulgaria and Romania joined the EU in 2007, aimed to smooth the entry of both countries, safeguard the workings of policies and institutions, and help address outstanding shortcomings, particularly in the field of judicial reform, corruption and organised crime.
Since then, reports under the mechanism have been published twice a year.
Dimitar Markov, senior analyst at the Sofia-based Centre for the Study of Democracy's Law Programme, told SETimes that Bulgaria's image abroad has been harmed by the recent turmoil.
Though expressing doubt over the possibility of serious unfavourable international consequences, Markov said that the events may cause negative assessments in the EC's monitoring documents.
"I don't believe the issue will bring any serious unfavourable consequences, since it remains largely an internal political problem on which other countries naturally abstain from taking a position.
… However, I do not rule out the possibility of recent events causing some negative assessments in the EC's forthcoming report on Bulgaria’s co-operation and verification mechanism," Markov told SETimes.
What do you think the consequences for Bulgaria will be if the EC report is negative?
Tell us in the comments.
