01/05/2007
General Wesley Clark, former Supreme Commander of the NATO Allied Forces in Europe, paid a two-day visit to Albania starting on Wednesday (April 25th).
He met with President Alfred Moisiu.
Clark was in Tirana to represent one of the bidders in the privatisation tender for the Albanian Oil Refining and Marketing Company.
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader and President Stipe Mesic met with Israeli Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres in Zagreb on Thursday (April 26th).
He praised the level of progress Croatia has achieved along the path to EU integration.
During their meeting in Athens on Thursday (April 26th), Greek Defence Minister Evangelos Meimarakis and his Bulgarian counterpart, Veselin Bliznakov, agreed that the two countries would shortly seal two new co-operation accords in the field of defence.
The ministers also talked about Kosovo.
Meimarakis reiterated Greece's view that an international military force must remain in Kosovo to ensure a smooth transition.
Greek Deputy Culture Minister George Orfanos was in London on Thursday (April 26th).
He and British authorities discussed security measures Greece should take in view of the upcoming Champions' League's final game, which will be played in Athens on May 23rd.
Albanian Minister of Integration Majlinda Bregu arrived in Brussels on Thursday (April 26th) for talks with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn.
Bregu briefed him about the current political situation, assuring him that Albania's foreign policies will not change despite Foreign Minister Besnik Musatafaj's resignation.
Macedonian Army chief Lieutenant General Miroslav Stojanovski and his Austrian counterpart, General Roland Ertl, held talks in Skopje on Wednesday (April 25th).
They agreed on the need to step up bilateral co-operation.
Qatar's Emir Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani met with the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency's Bosniak member, Haris Silajdzic, in Doha on Wednesday (April 25th).
Al-Thani said his country is interested in enhancing bilateral ties with BiH.
Silajdzic was in Qatar's capital for an international conference on democracy, development and free trade.
(Various sources 24/04/07-01/05/07)
