26/06/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 26/06/13
A recent verdict by the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) state court sentencing two political party members and an associate for committing acts of terrorism prompted security experts to demand state security agencies act more diligently in protecting elected representatives.
The court sentenced Zijad Dervisevic, president of the People's Prosperity Through Work (NSRZB) party for the Central Bosnia canton; Amel Sefer, a NSRZB party member; and their associate Sasa Bonic to 16 and half years in prison for attempting to murder Ivo Tadic, a delegate in the Federation of BiH parliament from the Croatian Democratic union-BiH (HDZ BiH) party.
"The accused were found guilty of committing a terrorist act by attacking the physical integrity of a person, all with the aim of ... 
influencing the establishment of the FBiH and BiH authorities following the elections," Aida Delic Volas, spokesperson of the Court of BiH, told SETimes.
The investigation showed the three suspects placed a bomb under Tadic's vehicle in April 2011 and activated the device via a remote control while Tadic was riding in the car with his colleague Pero Mamic.
Both Tadic and Mamic survived. 
Security experts said this is the 12th conviction on charges of terrorism in BiH since 1997 in incidents that have claimed the lives of four people and injured 19.
"This is the first case in BiH in which members of one party openly used terrorist methods to achieve their [political] goal. 
The definition of terrorism is to use violent action, killing and intimidation to achieve a political objective," Dzevad Galijasevic, director of the Southeast Europe Expert Team for the Fight against Terrorism and Organised Crime, told SETimes.
"This is a message to the state security agencies to pay more attention to the political parties, but also a message to the party leaders to look more closely as to who is seated in their local councils, boards and in the party structure," Galijasevic said.
Domestic terrorism is not specific to BiH, but is a Balkan phenomenon, said Dzemal Injac, a veteran lawyer from Sarajevo and an expert in criminal law including cases of terrorism.
"There was a murder in Albania [recently] at an election place and a string of assassinations of politicians in Kosovo after the war in 1999. 
These are all political murders bordering on attacks on the constitutional order of countries and terrorism. 
However ... 
the legal system has successfully combated such crimes as this verdict proves," Injac told SETimes.
"I do not believe that these attacks will happen often in the future because they all now know what awaits them -- jail," Injac added.
Tadic and Mamic said they are satisfied with the verdict, but it is unclear whether they will take steps against the suspected political party behind the attack.
"This judgment is proof that the NSRZB party is behind the terrorist attack. 
... 
We will decide [what to do next] after we get the verdict in writing. 
I am interested to find out who ordered this terrorist act," Tadic told SETimes.
The assassination attempt is proof that acts of terrorism can be driven by official politics, Mamic said.
"This was supposed to be a classical political murder. 
Luckily, me and my colleague survived. 
... 
I hope this will serve as an example to all those who may even think of doing something similar, that they will end up in jail," Mamic told SETimes.
What can countries do to stop politically motivated terrorism? 
Tell us your thoughts in the comments section.
