26/06/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 26/06/13
Economic difficulties have made peace more fragile compared to last year in most of Europe, including in the Balkans, according to the recently unveiled 2013 Global Peace Index report.
Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Kosovo and Macedonia have all slipped in the index rating, and there is concern about the situation in Greece and Serbia.
Experts said the report shows an increasing failure on the part of the states and the international community to meaningfully address poverty and political marginalization, which are fundamental to peace and security.
"The results should be seen as a call to the international community to advance their commitment to the principle of 'responsibility to protect' as the number of states failing to protect their own citizens is increasing," Ramadan Ilazi, executive director of the Kosovo Peace Institute in Pristina, told SETimes.
Ilazi said dialogue with Serbia has contributed significantly to the improvement in Kosovo's ranking (72nd), but its score on the chapter on society and security is a matter of concern.
"[E]specially [troubling are] the high rate of perception of criminality and the alarming score on the potential for political instability.
Widespread corruption, the rise of radical religious groups and the situation in the north are potentially the factors that contributed to this result," Ilazi told SETimes.
In Turkey, the cost of containing violence, which amounted to 5 percent of GDP or $760 per person last year, has not abated.
Turkey struggles to sustain a peaceful environment in areas related to external factors, such as its neighbour Syria.
It has organised 17 camps with more than 200,000 Syrian refugees;
it also has stationed up to 40,000 soldiers in the north of Cyprus since the 1970s.
Peace negotiations with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), which began earlier this year, have raised hopes for recognition of some political and cultural rights for the Kurdish community.
"In Turkey, we should get away from the perceptions like 'whoever is strong will win' or 'our nation and our religion is superior than others,' or 'everyone is enemy to our nation'," Havva Kok Arslan, lecturer on peace studies at Ankara-based Hacettepe University, told SETimes.
Arslan said that the approach to conflict resolution in Turkey, ranging from the Kurdish conflict to the latest demonstrations at Taksim Square in which four people died, should be redesigned to promote peaceful discourse, rather than a vicious circle promoting violence.
James Sweeney, professor at Lancaster University, said Turkey is in its own category but the other regional countries may look forward to greater stability because they are en route to EU membership.
"If it worked for France and Germany, it can work for the Balkan states as well," Sweeney told SETimes.
The report warned the situation in Greece is also troubling, and said the desire to clamp down on tax evaders is leading to a witch hunt.
"If this were to get out of control, the already tense situation in the country could deteriorate further," it said.
The governments of BiH and Macedonia can do more to improve the peace indicators, but their job is made much more difficult because of the economic crisis, Sweeney said.
"Large scale unemployment, especially youth unemployment, gives rise to dissatisfaction and can be a breeding ground that gives rise to instability.
[In the case of Kosovo] we must remain realistic about what international intervention and supervision can achieve.
The process of democratic change is largely an internal process," Sweeney added.
Serbia, ranked 62nd in the index, is facing numerous security risks but is in no current danger of major unrest and demonstrations like the ones in Turkey, Greece and Spain, according to Vladimir Goati, director of Transparency Serbia.
"Such things as rebellion are always unpredictable, especially during the economic crisis and when the government is announcing tougher austerity measures.
However, I see no signals pointing to any revolt or unrest," Goati told SETimes.
Goati pointed out that Belgrade recently signed an agreement on normalising relations with Pristina, but major tensions and protests were avoided.
"Serbia has lately had to make important and unpopular decisions, but contrary to our fears, no major violent protests erupted," Goati told SETimes.
SETimes correspondents Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo, Biljana Lajmanovska in Skopje, Menekse Tokay in Istanbul and Bojana Milovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report.
