02/04/2007
The Serbian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Microsoft sealed a three-year co-operation agreement.
The Chamber will use Microsoft software in its systems and plans to launch new electronic services.
A seminar titled "Nordic Construction Technologies and Innovations" was held in Zagreb on March 28th.
It aimed to present the experience of Nordic companies in using advanced technology and innovation, while observing high aesthetic and ecological standards.
The event was co-organised by the Nordic Chamber of Commerce and the Croatian Chamber of Architects and Engineers.
The Croatian government said it will allocate additional funds to boost the use of renewable energy sources.
Out of the price paid by consumers per kWh of electricity, between 0.2 euros and 0.4 euros will be separated and channeled into a special fund.
The fund will help finance new power generation facilities that are entirely dependent on renewable energy.
Nikola Hajdin was elected for a new four-year mandate as president of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Art (SANU), during a session of the institution's council, held on March 29th.
At the meeting, the SANU council also elected two new vice presidents and a new secretary general.
The Macedonian government and USAID inked a memorandum on co-operation in the development of an information society, via a project called Interactive Macedonia.
The project aims to help Macedonia reach modern European IT standards and improve communications.
Bulgaria uses the internet the least among the 27 EU member states, according to a survey by Eurobarometer, presented on March 26th.
While 75% of Europeans between the ages of 16 and 24 use the internet at least once a week, in Bulgaria the rate is 47%.
Next to Bulgaria is Greece, and in last place is Malta, where only 40% of the population uses the internet.
Radu Tudorache, 31, former manager of the National Regulatory Authority for Communications (ANRC), has been appointed the Romanian consultant for Google, the biggest worldwide internet search engine.
At the ANRC, Tudorache played a key role in establishing policies on interconnection fees charged by dominant domestic telephone operators.
(Various sources - 26/03/07-02/04/07)
