21/03/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/03/13
Croatia's new law on residency may affect Serbs that left Croatia during the 1990s conflicts and cannot achieve a sustainable return, refugee associations said. 
The UN Refugee Agency, however, said the concerns are unnecessary.
The law stipulates that Croatian police will remove persons from the state registry if it finds out, or is informed by administrative or judicial authorities, individual citizens or organisations, that the persons do not live at the address at which he is registered.
The law exempts those who have informed authorities that they have left Croatia temporarily and provided the reason, and those who are part of a voluntary return programme but have not returned yet due to property, housing or other difficulties.
When police discover that non-exempt residents at the address specified on their Croatian ID documents are absent, per the law, they will issue a request to have the citizen turn in his ID card.
"The persons will [then] be erased from [the state] evidence via an administrative procedure without the right to appeal," Petar Dzodan, member of the Association of Serb Refugees from Croatia, told SETimes.
More than 133,000 members of Croatia's Serbian minority exercised their right to voluntarily return, but only about half actually live there, according to the UN Refugee Agency.
Dzodan said that in the cases where ID documents are requested to be returned, the government will also initiate a lawsuit requesting the individuals to return the funds Croatia invested in the houses' reconstruction.
The reimbursement is not part of the law, but is a stipulation in the contract for reconstruction of houses for returnees.
A provision in the new law allows individuals who do not meet the exemption requirements to inform the police in Croatia or a Croatian consulate abroad by December 29th the reasons why they are not living in the country.
Despite this legally allowed transition period, Croatian police have already started inspecting residences.
While the law technically applies to all citizens, the Serbian minority find themselves at the centre of the issue because many of them are forced to live in two countries due to lack of employment opportunities in Croatia, according to Miodrag Linta, president of the Belgrade-based Coalition of Associations of Refugees.
"I do not know why [the dual residency] needs to be abolished because there is a system of control already," Linta told SETimes.
"By losing Croatian IDs, the Serbs in Croatia will lose the right to work, health insurance and welfare benefits. 
Indirectly, the loss of residence threatens the property of Serbs because their homes will no longer be considered a resident's property but rather cottages, and they will pay extra taxes on it," Linta said.
Dorijan Klasnic of the UN Refugee Agency in Croatia disagreed, and said it is crucial to distinguish between permanent and temporary residency in the law.
"Losing one or the other in no way affects rights, such as the right to citizenship, ownership, the using of agricultural land as well as other rights in Croatia," Klasnic told SETimes.
Klasnic said that the law establishes clear criteria that those who do not live in Croatia can be erased from the state register and which categories of people are exempt.
"The law is far more liberal than its predecessor, and takes into account the migration trends and movements," Klasnic said.
Croatia's Office of Human Rights said it does not have the authority to monitor the law's implementation, but it will react if it receives complaints about human rights abuses by forwarding them to the interior ministry.
