24/06/2013
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/06/13
The continuation of anti-corruption initiatives by Macedonian police has shown signs of success, including within their own ranks, a recent wave of arrests showed.
Police arrested 13 people earlier this month who are suspected of being involved in an international migrant trafficking operation that moved people from Greece through Macedonia and into Serbia.
Gordana Jankulovska, minister of internal affairs, said the trafficking ring has been responsible for the passage of more than 250 migrants from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sudan, Syria and other Arab and African countries.
"The criminal group charged from 120 to 200 euros per migrant for transportation from the border with Greece to the region of Kumanovo, where the migrants were temporarily accommodated, and then an amount of about 300 euros per migrant was paid for their illegal transfer to the territory of Serbia," Jankulovska told reporters.
The arrests were made in the southern villages of Gevgelija and Bograndc, near the Greek border, and in the northern village of Lojane, near the Serbian border.
Two migrants from Sudan were arrested along with 11 others, including a policeman who worked in the border service. 
The police operation, dubbed Koridor (Passage), is still pursuing two other suspected members of the trafficking organisation.
The police officer who was arrested played a key role in the trafficking, as he allegedly provided information regarding the movement and controls conducted by Macedonia's border police.
"The suppression of corruption in the police is a top priority of the ministry of internal affairs. 
The sector of internal control and professional standards, which as an independent organisational unit functions within the ministry of internal affairs, constantly works on detection and suppression of corruption between the police orders regardless if it is a matter of police at the borders or police that control traffic," Marija Jakovlevska, a counselor in the ministry's department of public relations, told SETimes.
Jakovlevska added that there are continual efforts to halt corruption by police, including an annual anti-corruption programme.
"When it comes to corruption within the police, we are working also according to the applications of the citizens, who are always anonymous, on our website. 
… Corruption can be anonymously reported. 
After the application, what follows is immediate action with the purpose of efficiently resolving events," Jakovlevska said.
The ministry of internal affairs co-operates with other institutions that work to halt corruption, including the state commission for prevention of corruption, especially in cases when policemen are involved.
Jakovlevska said the punishments for such cases are strict and that employees of the ministry who are involved in corrupt activities are dismissed from their jobs.
The ministry monitors migrant smuggling not only at the border crossings, but also at toll locations and on trains.
"Mostly these persons are transferred in inhuman conditions. 
For example they are put in trains where literally stock is transferred," Jakovlevska said.
A resident of Lojane who asked not be identified told SETimes that in the village and in nearby Vaksince, it is common to see people who are not from Macedonia.
"During the day they don't move around the villages a lot, but during the night one can notice people who do not speak Macedonian or Albanian, and their skin colour is dark," said the resident.
Are Balkan nations doing enough to stop human trafficking? 
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
