02/02/2007

Albania, Bulgaria and Macedonia sealed an agreement on the construction of the regional Bourgas-Vlore oil pipeline on Wednesday (January 31st) in Skopje. 
The project will be run by the US-based company AMBO, and a tender to select a contractor for the facility's construction will soon be announced. 
The 912km pipeline, connecting the Bulgarian port of Bourgas with Albania's Vlora port, via Macedonia, will carry Caspian oil from the Black Sea to the Adriatic, with an expected annual capacity of 35m tonnes.
***
Bulgaria's government sealed a contract with the Spanish company FCC on Tuesday (January 30th) for the construction -- with Romania -- of a second bridge over the Danube River. 
The Spanish firm won an international tender for the project. 
The 100m-euro, EU-backed project should take 38 months, with construction to start in May.
***
Croatia and the World Bank have successfully completed talks on the second Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL2) worth 150m euros, according to the Bank's office in Zagreb. 
The loan is aimed at supporting the Croatian authorities' implementation of key institutional and structural reforms and accelerating the country's EU accession process. 
The Bank's board is expected to endorse the credit in May.
***
Austria's Mobilkom was the only bidder in an international tender for a third wireless licence in Macedonia. 
The agency's tender commission is expected to announce the winner by February 12th.
***
Greece and Italy inked an agreement on Wednesday (January 31st) that envisions the acceleration of work on a natural gas pipeline connecting the two countries, which should carry Azerbaijani gas via Turkey to Western markets. 
The initial protocol for the 212km undersea pipeline was sealed in 2005. 
It would run from Stavrolimenas, Greece, to Otranto, Italy, and is expected to cut the EU's dependence on Russian gas supplies.
***
Montenegro and Singapore-based Aman Resorts signed a leasing agreement on Wednesday (January 31st), under which the company will run three leading Montenegrin hotels -- Sveti Stefan, Milocer and Kraljicina Plaza. 
Aman Resorts will pay Montenegro 2.1m euros annually, as well as 10% of earned profits. 
It also committed itself to investing at least 40m euros for modernisation of the hotels in the next two years.
(Various sources -- 26/01/07-02/02/07)
