25/04/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 25/04/13
Serbia's anticorruption agency has launched a multi-media campaign to raise awareness of a new national strategy to halt corruption, an issue that has been a significant focus of the government.
Previous anticorruption strategies in Serbia were unsuccessful because there was little public awareness. 
Officials are determined to change that, employing social media, radio, television and online media outlets.
The messages, using the tag line, "Say it! 
Silence about corruption is its approval," seek to improve public understanding of corruption and the mechanisms to prevent it and to encourage citizens to report incidents.
According to the agency, corruption in Serbia has removed enough money from budgets to build 500 kilometers of roads, construct 350 schools and purchase 7,500 medical devices.
Tanja Babic, anticorruption agency director, said officials and citizens are equally responsible for fighting corruption.
"The fight against corruption should start from above. 
Officials should do it by showing examples ... 
But changes should be started from below, from citizens. 
This is the purpose of this campaign, to activate citizens to take a part in the fight against corruption," Babic said.
She said that each citizen can contribute by simply rejecting corrupt activities.
"If someone requests something from a citizen to whom they have the obligation to provide a service, the citizen must know they don't have to do that and must reject it. 
[W]e must start from somewhere. 
There are also the agency, police, prosecution as institutions where citizens can go and report each cases," Babic told SETimes.
Yolanda San Jose, head of operations for the EU's delegation to Serbia, said it is crucial for citizens to understand that corruption impacts the entire population.
"It is a personal commitment that this is for the whole society. 
The citizens have to ask for accountability from the politicians and … institutions. 
They have to make them responsible. 
They have to complain, they have to bring the cases up," San Jose told SETimes.
She added that strong legal framework and a public administration that functions transparently are the keys that enable a society to fight corruption.
Bojana Radoicic, 29, a hairdresser from Belgrade, has been facing corruption when she visits the doctor, but said she didn't know what to do about it.
"I was giving some polite presents to some persons who are working in health sector in order to schedule some medical examination earlier, since, for some examinations, you have to wait more than six months," Radoicic told SETimes. 
"I've never given money to anybody. 
But even this perfumes and chocolates made me feel so bad. 
But I simply had to. 
Some of them simply told me, 'go and buy something nice and we'll make them more sympathetic.' I didn't have money for private doctors. 
I was wondering what should I do and to whom I should report but didn't find the answer."
Since the anticorruption agency opened in January 2010, it has received more than 600 reports from citizens, mostly claims about administration, the judiciary and health system.
The agency's website (prijavikorupciju.rs) has received 40 reports since the new public awareness campaign began on March 30th, and additional reports have come via the mail.
Agency spokesperson Aleksandra Kostic told SETimes that one of the agency's chief accomplishments was settling the dispute between ATP Vojvodina owner Ilija Devic and the city of Novi Sad over the city's mismanagement of contracts with the transportation company.
"[Devic] had exhausted all systematical mechanisms before he came to the agency. 
… Finally, we disentangled the case, only after our proposal for starting criminal proceedings against Igor Pavlicic, [who was] at that time the mayor of Novi Sad. 
Judicial authorities completed the process and reached a verdict in favor of Devic," Kostic said.
Will the campaign about the anticorruption agency's work make you more likely to report corrupt activity? 
Share your thoughts in our comments section.
