01/12/2006
Romania's electricity prices rise by 4.7% as of Friday (December 1st), under a decision by the energy regulator ANRE.
The hike, initially planned for January 2007, was put into effect earlier due to price increases on international energy markets.
The Albanian power utility KESH has decided to purchase electricity for 2007 from five suppliers -- the local GSA, Wonder Power, Swiss-registered Atel, EGL and EFT.
The five companies submitted bids in the government's recent tender for imports of electricity.
Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik said a draft agreement on the sale of RS oil refinery Bosanski Brod, motor and industrial oil manufacturer Modrica and fuel retailer Petrol with the selected buyer -- Russian Zarubezhneft -- will be ready in days.
Zarubezhneft will pay 121.3m euros for 70% of Bosanski Brod, 66.75% of Modrica and 70% of Petrol.
The European Commission (EC) has further toughened the regime for agricultural imports from Bulgaria and Romania after the two countries become EU members on January 1st.
The EC said the decision stemmed from the need to prevent the distribution of meat and dairy products of "doubtful" quality or origin.
The Croatian Privatisation Fund announced a new tender for the sale of an 80.2% stake in the local aluminium plant TLM on November 27th.
The minimum price is set at 6m euros.
The future owner must also invest an extra 92m euros in the next three years and retain the 1,400 employees in the first two years after the takeover.
The deadline for submitting bids is December 12th.
The World Bank has extended to Romania a $180m loan for support of the transport sector.
The credit, which has a 17-year maturity and a 5-year grace period, will be used to finance an infrastructure maintenance programme for roads and railways.
Kosovo's consumer price growth fell from 2% year-on-year in September to 0.4% year-on-year in October.
The decline was attributed to a slowdown of food price growth and lower transportation costs.
(Various sources -- 24/11/06-01/12/06)
