24/04/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/04/13
A new partnership with Turkey is poised to help Macedonian businesses make a successful foray into new markets in Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kuwait and Egypt.
Business leaders from Macedonia and Turkey agreed on a strategy to work together to break through in Asian and Middle East markets, where Macedonia's presence is small.
"The countries from this region are much more advanced in relation to the European countries. 
They have steady economic growth of 10 percent, and the growth of trade is also continuous," Branko Azeski, president of the Economic Chamber of Macedonia, told SETimes.
In 2012, Turkey's exports to these countries totalled more than 38 billion euros. 
Macedonia's total exports for last year were estimated at 3.3 billion euros, and only 0.6 percent were with the Middle East.
Hasan Hosben, co-chairman of the Macedonian-Turkish Business Council, said Turkey has an interest in helping Macedonia.
"We want to help [Macedonian] businessmen in … the markets in Euro Asia and Africa. 
We will lead your businessmen at our fairs and we will provide them a view of what is looked for at those markets," Hosben said.
"Azerbaijan is most interested in the agricultural products. 
Tourism and health are also good fields of co-operation and an opportunity for developing technology," Dzengiz Gjul, co-chairman of the Turkey-Azerbaijan Business Council, said.
Kemal Nazim, president of the community of Turkish businessmen in Macedonia, told SETimes that Macedonian construction companies can be competitive in these countries through joint investments with Turkish companies and an aggressive approach.
"Both sides can benefit because in those countries the economies grow enormously," Nazim said.
Blagoja Blazeski, a Macedonian who owns a company that operates in Egypt, said co-operating with Turkey can only help Macedonia enter new markets, as Turkey's economy is strong and healthy. 
Forming joint Turkish-Macedonian companies is a viable solution.
"It is hard to work alone on a territory where the language is a problem, as well as the political crisis, which was present in Egypt," said Blazeski, whose company makes automobile seatbelt products. 
"In such countries, solo actions are risky. 
At the moment, only five companies from Macedonia are working in Egypt."
Samer Faza, a Macedonian who lives in Jordan, said that in the countries of the Far East, there is little information about Macedonia.
"Macedonia should act more at those markets. 
People seek something new to discover and I think Macedonia has that something," Faza told SETimes.
What products and services from your country do you think would be the most marketable in Asia and the Middle East? 
Share your comments below.
