24/04/2013
By Linda Karadaku and Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 24/04/13
With the European Commission recommendations for Kosovo and Serbia, both countries have a chance to improve their economies, as well as to secure their place in a European future, analysts said.
The European Commission asked EU members on Monday (April 22nd) to launch talks with Pristina on a stabilisation and association agreement, and to start accession negotiations with Belgrade.
"Our recommendations today are therefore clear:
both Serbia and Kosovo deserve to move on decisively in their EU perspectives," European Commissioner for Enlargement Stefan Fule said.
The commission said Serbia had met the key priority of taking steps towards a "visible and sustainable improvement of relations with Kosovo," and recommended that the negotiations for the accession of Serbia to the Union should be opened.
The final decision will be made by the EU Council of Ministers in June.
To receive an official date, however, Serbia also has to prove itself in the implementation of the agreement.
If Serbia obtains a date for the start of negotiations, the country will be more attractive to foreign investors, Ivan Knezevic, a senior official of the European Movement in Serbia, told SETimes.
"Launching the talks would demonstrate the certainty of Serbia's membership in the European Union," Knezevic told SETimes.
However the date itself, without reforms, is not enough for investors to decide to come to Serbia.
"Regardless of whether it gets the date or not, [Serbia] should continue combating corruption, reforming the judiciary and carrying out structural reforms.
That is a prerequisite for enhancing the investment environment, creating new jobs and improving the economic situation," Knezevic said.
Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences professor Predrag Simic agrees.
"Serbia has now been given far more space than before.
Only after the next steps will we see whether this has paid off," Simic told SETimes.
In Kosovo, the stabilisation and association agreement will enable the country to export its products to the EU market without tariffs and to receive more financial and technical support from the Union.
The fate of Kosovo's economy is closely connected to the EU:
the Union is Kosovo's main trading partner, bringing foreign investments in the country, and there is a powerful Kosovo diaspora in the EU which brings in about 600 million euros per year, Ibrahim Rexhepi, executive director of the Kosovo Centre for Strategic and Social Research in Pristina, told SETimes.
"Kosovo can get closer to EU standards in all fields, and this will be reflected in building stable economic relations with other countries.
It will also have an impact on the well-being of Kosovo citizens," Rexhepi said.
Analysts said the move also represents a chance for the country to pave the way to a European future.
Five EU member states -- Spain, Greece, Cyprus, Romania and Slovakia -- do not recognise Kosovo's independence.
But with the agreement the countries could change their minds.
"Kosovo will have a contractual relationship with the EU if it signs the [agreement]," Seb Bytyci, another Kosovo analyst and executive director of the Balkan Policy Institute, told SETimes.
But others disagree.
"In principle, it will be a good sign because the remaining EU members which have not recognised Kosovo will soften their stance and their public declarations, but I don't think that will bring their recognition," Taulant Hodaj, an associate member of the European Forum Alpbac, told SETimes.
Some are still apprehensive.
"I'm afraid that after all the concessions we have made, some new conditions, obstacles and problems will follow.
I am in favour of Serbia's European path, but I'm not convinced that all doors are wide open to us and that we are completely welcome," Dragoljub Stevanovic, a Belgrade lawyer, said.
"It's good to have positive, concrete news coming from Brussels, for us and for [Serbia].
Let's hope those talks are finally over, with the historic agreement as they say, however, we only got some kind of a trade agreement I heard, and Serbia got more … they can be closer to the EU now," Vjollca Qerimi, a nurse in Pristina, told SETimes.
How will EU membership pay off for Serbia and Kosovo?
Tell us your thoughts in the comments.
