23/04/2013
By Mladen Dragojlovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 23/04/13
Bosnia and Hercegovina (BiH) will join regional countries in the effort to decrease region-wide plastic bag pollution, a problem not only because of the slow degradability of plastic, but also production and disposal processes, as a serious environmental threat.
Zoran Adzaip, an ecologist at the civil initiatives centre, said that BiH entity governments should pass a regulation mandating that customers pay for each plastic bag they use from stores and that bags are no thinner than 20 microns, since thicker bags are reusable.
"An interentity working group and representatives of [the centre], proposed regulations that define who must pay compensation, and we expect that governments in Republika Srpska and the Federation of BiH will adopt them by May," Adzaip told SETimes.
He added that some supermarket chains have already started charging customers for plastic bags.
The charge ranges from 2 to 10 cents, depending on the bag quality.
Adzaip said that markets that charge customers have had encouraging results.
"Our research shows that [plastic bag] reduction is already 20 to 30 percent.
For example, DM Supermarket chain introduced this practice last year, and according to their data, the reduction percentage in the use of bags is up to 70 percent.
Customers are changing their habit of taking free bags, instead they use fabric bags or reusable plastic bags," Adzaip said.
Money collected from plastic bag fees will be invested in projects to collect and properly dispose of the bag waste.
Biljana Bajic, ecology assistant at the Banja Luka-based workplace safety company VIZ Zastita, said plastic waste is environmentally dangerous, and its current disposal is inadequate.
"The best we can do in this case is to ban plastic bags, but it's not possible right now.
Recycling is not an option because these bags can be recycled just as raw material for new bags.
Another problem with plastic bag recycling is that bags are dirty and must be washed before processing, so the production is cheaper than recycling, and that's the main problem," Bajic told SETimes.
Serbia has made significant steps in reducing plastic bag pollution.
Lazar Stanojevic, an engineer and manager at Parka, a Belgrade import-export company, said that until January 31st 2013 only 35 of Serbia's 68 plastic bag producers reported the quantity of produced bags.
"Regional countries must work more in order to harmonise regulation.
One of the ways to decrease this pollution is to strengthen inspection supervision to convince producers that governments are serious about pollution reduction," Stanojevic told SETimes.
He also suggested encouraging producers to make more biodegradable plastic bags.
Darko Znaor, a Croatian independent environment and rural sustainability consultant, said his country announced last year that customers will pay for plastic bags in stores starting January 1st 2013, but it has not been enforced.
"I think repressive measures make little difference.
It would be better to educate citizens through various campaigns, raising awareness, with a continued effort in making people understand why this is a problem," Znaor said.
Do you use plastic bags?
What could persuade you to change to recyclable bags?
Tell us in the comments.
