31/05/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 31/05/13
A Pristina court issued a 30-day house arrest order for seven former Kosovo Liberation Army members during an ongoing EULEX investigation into their alleged involvement in multiple counts of war crimes, stirring reactions questioning the mission's focus.
The detained are known as the "Drenica Group" after the location of their operation in 1998 during the Kosovo conflict.
Two of the detained were the Kosovo Liberation Army's most senior commanders -- Sylejman Selimi, currently serving as Kosovo's ambassador to Albania, and Sami Lushtaku, who is a mayor of Skenderaj.
"The individuals are being investigated for war crimes ...
in the form of violation of bodily integrity and health of civilians held in a [Kosovo Liberation Army] detention centre located in Likovac," EULEX said in a press release.
Selimi has not been charged with any crimes, and has appealed the court's house arrest ruling, his lawyer Tome Gashi said.
"[T]he intent to make this case public at present may have a political motivation," Gashi told SETimes.
Thousands took to the streets in Pristina on Monday (May 27th) under the motto "Entire Kosovo is KLA" to protest the EULEX investigation.
"We invite President [Atifete] Jahjaga, Prime Minister [Hashim] Thaci and Parliament Speaker [Jakup] Krasniqi, to review the EULEX mandate immediately," Xhavit Jashari, chairman of the association of the Kosovo Liberation Army members' families, said.
EULEX has an executive role to prosecute war crimes in Kosovo as part of its mandate.
However, many war associations and ethnic Albanians believe that EULEX is "targeting" former Kosovo Liberation Army members instead of focusing on war crimes allegedly committed by Serbs.
"EULEX prosecutors are currently investigating 101 cases of war crimes," mission spokesperson Blerim Krasniqi told SETimes.
Gashi said the house arrest decision was prompted by the recently reached Belgrade-Pristina agreement, and others agree.
"The environment is being created 'to smooth' the aggressiveness of those 'almighty' people, following the reaching of the agreement regarding the north of Kosovo," Belul Beqaj, professor at Kosovo's Universum College, told SETimes.
EULEX will be part of the implementation of the agreement because of its role in the police and justice system in Kosovo.
How will EULEX's investigation of war crimes in Kosovo benefit the country?
Share your opinion in the comments space.
