31/07/2007
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis met with French President Nicolas Sarkozy in Paris on Monday (July 30th) to discuss economic relations, the environment and immigration policy.
They also addressed the situation in the Balkans, the Middle East crisis, co-operation between France and Greece in fighting wildfires, and the proposal for a Mediterranean Union.
Montenegro's foreign minister, Milan Rocen, was in Skopje on Monday (July 30th) for talks with his Macedonian counterpart, Antonio Milososki.
They signed an agreement on co-operation between the two ministries, and said another deal on co-operation in the Euro-Atlantic integration process will be signed soon.
Rocen also said he and Milososki discussed reviving the trilateral meetings between Macedonia, Albania and Montenegro.
Greek President Karolos Papoulias arrived in Cyprus on Saturday (July 28th) to participate in activities commemorating the 30th anniversary of the death of Archbishop Makarios III.
During his visit, he met with his Cypriot counterpart, Tassos Papadopoulos.
US President George Bush met with Macedonia's ambassador to the United States, Zoran Jolevski, on Friday (July 27th).
Bush said he believes Macedonia will be invited to join NATO at the summit in Bucharest next April, and he thanked the country for its contributions to the peacekeeping missions in Afghanistan and Iraq.
He also encouraged the Macedonian government to continue reforms.
At a meeting in Podgorica on Thursday (July 26th) the chief prosecutors of Montenegro and Albania -- Vesna Medenica and Theodory Solaku – pledged a united effort to fight organised crime.
They sealed a memorandum of understanding on co-operation between their respective institutions.
The Hellenic Navy General Staff chief, Vice-Admiral Dimitrios Gousis, paid an official visit to Podgorica last week.
The focus was on opportunities to boost military co-operation.
Greece was recently designated as Montenegro's contact country for its NATO membership preparations.
(Various sources -- 24/07/07-31/07/07)
