22/04/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic and Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 22/04/13
Analysts are hailing the agreement reached by Pristina and Belgrade over the management of northern Kosovo -- a deal that will allow both countries to pursue an EU path -- although some hard-liners are expressing reservations.
"For the region it sends the message that if an agreement is possible over arguably the most contested dispute, than it should be feasible elsewhere. 
Furthermore, it also ends the only open territorial dispute in the region," Florian Bieber, a professor of Southeast European Studies at the University of Graz, told SETimes.
Valon Murteza, a professor of negotiations and diplomacy at Monarch Business School, told SETimes that the agreement creates a prerequisite for progress towards normalisation of relations between the two countries.
"For Kosovo, it is important that the text of the agreement mention the opening of the road to membership in the UN. 
What is important now is its implementation," Murtezaj said.
"In this context it is important again that the presence of the EU and US, which will help the parties to remain [true to the] agreement ...," Murtezaj added.
The 15-point agreement that was initialed Friday by Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and Serbia Prime Minister Ivaca Dacic allows for an association of four Serb-majority communities in northern Kosovo that will administer public policy. 
The Kosovo Police will have jurisdiction in the region, but the Serb communities can choose the police commander and the police force's ethnicity will match the region.
The agreement does not call on Serbia to recognise Kosovo, but it specifies that neither side will block the other from joining the EU.
Both countries approved the agreement in parliamentary votes on Monday, although the vote was delayed one day in Pristina, when members of the Vetvendosje Movement on Sunday refused to participate, calling the accord a "Bosnisation of Kosovo."
"The legal and political conditions [for Serbia] is the recognition of Kosovo. 
The moral conditions is to apologise and return the bodies of missing persons, to end to the discrimination of Albanians in Presevo Valley, pay damages and return bank savings," Albin Kurti, Vetvendosje leader, said during his speech in parliament.
In Serbia, members of the Dveri movement and the Serbian Democratic Party gathered about 200 supporters to protest in the streets of Belgrade Sunday.
Slobodan Samardzic, a Serbian Democratic Party official, said that the protests were only the beginning. 
The group plans to be on the streets "every day," he said.
"Kosovo has been sold to Thaci … for insignificant data and Catherine Ashton's kiss," Borislav Prelevic, an official from the Party of Serbian Unity, said in a speech at the rally.
But Serbia Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic said that his country was able to maintain their requirements through the document.
"I feel proud that we reached an agreement starting from scratch and that nobody can say that it is disastrous. 
Not a single item of the agreement means recognition of Kosovo," Vucic said after the meeting in Brussels.
He said the government and parliament will hold sessions on Monday, and then again later in the week, to hold talks with Serbs in Kosovo.
Reaching the agreement is the first success of the EU's External European Action Service in the Western Balkans, Bieber said.
"Now, the EU has to live up to its side of the bargain and start accession talks with Serbia and also get Kosovo moving towards the EU," Bieber said.
Bieber said Kosovo Serbs in the north oppose the agreement because it puts an end to the status quo that had the north as a de facto part of Serbia, but without full state control.
"There is no deal that would have satisfied the dominant political elite in the north. 
The key will be to build confidence among ordinary citizens and address the fears that many will have over the fact that the north will be more closely linked to Pristina," Bieber said.
Mehmet Kajtazi, a teacher from Pristina, told SETimes, supported the agreement.
"I believe that our prime minister did the right thing, our interests were defended, we will have sovereignty over the north after several years, so I don't understand the opposition to it," Kajtazi said.
Governments in the region also welcomed the agreement.
Greece Foreign Minister Dimitris Avramopoulos said that it opens up new prospects and potential, paving the way for a common European future.
"This development, after long and difficult negotiations, reaffirms the political will and determination of the two sides to settle major pending issues to the benefit of their peoples, who can now look forward to accession to our great European family with greater optimism," Avramopoulos said.
How should the EU proceed with accession talks for Kosovo and Serbia? 
Share your opinions below.
