30/05/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 30/05/13
Turkey and Germany recently formed a new structure for their diplomatic relationship that analysts say should create an environment for solutions.
"Relations between Turkey and Germany are not state-to-state but people-to-people relations," Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu said at a press conference in Berlin announcing the framework.
The two nations have had diplomatic relations for 250 years.
Despite having similar opinions on many issues, friction has occasionally developed and dampened otherwise positive dealings.
The new framework, which among other things calls for periodic meetings of senior officials, is seen as a formal arrangement to reduce rough spots and foster improvement and solutions on difficult issues, such as Turkey's efforts to join the EU.
In a joint article in the Frankfurt weekly newspaper Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung Davutoğlu and his German counterpart, Guido Westerwelle, wrote that "after more than 50 years of Turkish migration, we find that harmony and peace are the main features of the Turkish community living in Germany."
According to the agreement, the two foreign ministers will meet at least once a year in order to examine the progression of the dialogue, while deputy ministers from the two countries, as well as undersecretaries, are required to conduct several talks throughout the year to assess opportunities for co-operation in common interest areas.
Amid a stalemate in Turkey's accession process to the EU, the start of the strategic dialogue is of greater importance. 
Although German Chancellor Angela Merkel has been cool to Turkey's eventual membership to the EU (and speaking of a "privileged partnership" instead of full accession), three negotiation chapters have been opened under her chancellorship and Germany has not blocked any chapters so far, unlike France and Cyprus.
Turkey is also determined to follow closely the case of neo-Nazi killings of eight Turks living in Germany, crimes attributed to racism. 
Westerwelle, at the joint press conference, said Germany has zero tolerance for such incidents.
A foundation for the relationship between Turkey and Germany is based on population. 
There are approximately 3 million people of Turkish origin living in Germany, the most anywhere outside Turkey, many of them children of Turkish workers who came to the country in the 1960s.
The significance of this new strategic partnership is derived from its structure, said Erhan Akdemir, head of an EU research centre at the Eskisehir-based Anadolu University.
"The agenda items in the bilateral relations will be elaborated through systematic and periodic meetings," Akdemir told SETimes. 
"The participation levels from the two countries also raises expectations towards obtaining concrete steps in the future."
Akdemir said the arrangement also is a sign that Germany realises the contribution that Turkey can make to resolving international and regional conflicts. 
Meanwhile, Turkey sees the role that Germany can play in developing a fair negotiation process with the EU by removing the barriers built by some member states.
"We are passing through a period where the two sides have an increased need for each other," Akdemir said. 
"Both the problems and the solution methods as well as opportunities are common provided that the two sides show sincerity and willingness to work together."
In addition, trade between Germany and Turkey has continued to increase in recent years and enjoys high-level support.
During her visit to Turkey in February, Markel was accompanied by a large group of German business leaders. 
Germany is Turkey's number one export partner, while bilateral trade reached up to $35 billion.
There are nearly 5,000 German companies operating in Turkey, and the direct foreign direct investment from Germany exceeded 5.5 billion dollars in the last decade.
The two countries also have strong ties through tourism. 
More than 5 million German tourists visited the country last year, the largest bloc visitors from any nation, according to government statistics.
Serkan Toeren, a Turkish-born politician who is spokesman for integration in German Free Democratic Party, said that the recently institutionalized strategic dialogue is a great opportunity to strengthen relations and provide a forum for discussion of European and international issues.
"This will not only allow for a better understanding of each other's positions but might also foster the development of a more concerted approach towards common issues, which might in turn positively impact the solution-finding process and the effectiveness of the decisions made," Toeren told SETimes.
"One of the main advantages of this format of dialogue is its flexibility," Toeren added. 
"The participants can therefore freely and flexibly decide which issues and issue areas will be addressed within this framework of co-operation according to the evolving needs."
The closer relationship also will be positive beyond the borders of Turkey and Germany, Claudia Roth, co-chairwoman of the German Green Party, said.
"It also serves the better interest of Europe and the international community to engage in a more effective co-operation," Roth told SETimes.
Dr. 
Burak Gumus, an academician at Edirne-based Trakya University, who has written several books about Turkish-Germany relations, agreed that the mutual relations are so intertwined that such a strategic relationship has many opportunities to enrich the ties between the two countries.
"Approximately 1 million ethnic Turks in Germany are entitled to vote in the elections and they have a power in determining the fate of the general elections going head to head," Gumus told SETimes. 
"Besides that, tens of thousands German-Turks have recently started to work as senior managers in German and Turkish companies bases in Istanbul."
Gumus said the two nations enjoy strong economies in the face of the global financial crisis.
"And the strategic mechanism will provide an opportunity to effectively coordinate the mutual interests and policies without misjudgments and conduct an easier lobbying among them," Gumus said.
Concerns about security and terrorism also overlap between the two countries, Gumus added.
"The ruling government in Turkey anticipates the support from the Germany in its fight against terrorist organizations, while German authorities are also concerned about the radical-Islamist youth, who are mostly from immigrant background, receiving war training and participating to the Syrian war," he said.
However, Roth warned this new process needs to be nurtured and followed up with action.
"Without set rules, strong and committed actors, this dialogue would be filled with just hollow words," she said. 
"When talking about a strategic dialogue, in times of electoral campaigning, the political direction of the federal government concerning the most important strategic question, the Turkish accession to the EU, has to be clearly positive and without any ambiguities."
Issues Germany will engage on with Turkey include human rights, minority rights, freedom of speech and religion and these are treated on the basis of European norms and values, Roth said.
The agreement between Turkey and Germany was signed May 12th.
What initiatives can Turkey and Germany take to boost co-operation? 
Tell us your thoughts in the comments.
