27/02/2013
By Mladen Dragojlovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 27/02/13
The first Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)-Azerbaijan business forum gathered dozens of business representatives looking for investment interest or co-operation with potential Azeri partners.
The forum, held in Banja Luka, attracted more than 20 Azerbaijan company representatives interested in investment or co-operation with potential BiH partners.
"We have significant financial resources and investment interest in various countries, including BiH.
We are interested in investing in the energy sector, agriculture and tourism," Muamed Musajev, president of Azerbaijan confederation of entrepreneurs, told reporters.
Rufat Mammadov, president of the fund for development and investment in Azerbaijan, said Azeri companies started investing in other markets in the past few years.
"Our investors show great interest in the Balkans, mainly in agriculture, food industry, energy sector, construction industry, but not only.
This forum should find out in what areas can both sides invest," Mammadov said.
He added that in the next few months all offers will be considered, and they expect signed agreements, taking into consideration complexities of international trade.
"Several years ago, Azeri companies started investing in other countries, first in neighbouring countries, then Eastern Europe -- Serbia, Romania, Croatia -- and we are still present in these markets.
We hope that BiH will soon join this list," Mammadov said.
"It will be good to take advantage of the Azeri business offers, it can be done as a co-operation with our companies, or through their independent investments in various projects," Borko Djuric, president of RS chamber of economy, told SETimes.
"Azerbajan investors have interest to invest in tourism, specially in the construction of hotels.
They also have interest to invest in the wood industry.
Before this forum their delegation went to visit several companies to see what is offered," Djuric said.
Azerbajan Economic Development Minister Sahin Mustafiev led the delegation and held several meetings with RS officials, including President Milorad Dodik and Prime Minister Aleksandar Dzombic.
