29/01/2008
US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo was in Pristina on Friday (January 25th).
She met with Albanian and Serbian leaders, and stressed that the US continues to support Kosovo's independence.
Economic relations between Macedonia and Qatar were the main topic of Monday's (January 28th) discussions between Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski and Qatari Emir Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani.
Crvenkovski, who is on a three-day visit that began Sunday, highlighted Macedonia's efforts to attract foreign investment and said his country's tax policy is the most favourable in the region.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Slovenia on Friday (January 25th) and met with President Danilo Turk and Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel.
The officials discussed the planned deployment of an EU peacekeeping mission in Kosovo, among other issues.
Cypriot Foreign Minister Erato Kozakou Marcoullis wrapped up a visit to Libya on Saturday (January 26th).
During meetings, she discussed Libya's role in Africa, the Cyprus issue, and co-operation between the two countries on different Mediterranean initiatives.
Serbian Labour Minister Rasim Ljajic, who is also head of the national council for co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), discussed ICTY co-operation with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn on Thursday (January 24th).
Serbian war crime prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic also attended the talks.
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic met with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Moscow on Thursday (January 24th).
They discussed Serbia's presidential elections and the Kosovo status issue.
France supports the fast European integration of Serbia, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said on Wednesday (January 23rd) after meeting his French counterpart, Bernard Kouchner, in Paris.
"Serbia and the whole Western Balkans enjoy the broad, firm and unconditional support of France," Jeremic told a press conference.
(Various sources 22/01/08-29/01/08)
