31/08/2007
Macedonia and Lithuania signed an agreement on Wednesday (August 29th) on the avoidance of double taxation and fiscal evasion, with a particular emphasis on income and capital taxes.
The accord was signed in Skopje by Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki and his visiting Lithuanian counterpart, Petras Vaitiekunas.
The World Bank will lend 14m euros to Montenegro, with the goal of supporting development of the tourism industry and security in the energy supply.
The loan deal was signed on Tuesday (August 28th) by Montenegrin Finance Minister Igor Luksic and World Bank representative Jan-Peter Olters.
This is the first time Montenegro has signed a contract with the World Bank since becoming an independent state.
The Republika Srpska government and Norway's Technor Energy signed a contract Tuesday (August 28th) on the construction of seven mini hydro power plants.
Implementation will start in March 2008.
The investment is worth 152m euros, and the Norwegian firm will operate the plants as a concession for 30 years.
The Serbian company Delta Invest announced on Tuesday (August 28th) that it plans to build a new mall in Belgrade in spring 2008.
The complex will consist of a shopping centre measuring 220,000sq m, and two towers measuring 100,000sq m each.
Total cost is estimated at 300m euros.
Fourteen Turkish companies and eight Chinese firms signed export agreements on Tuesday (August 28th).
The deals, worth a combined 154m euros, were signed during a visit by a delegation of Chinese public and private sector representatives.
Slovenia's power company, Slovenske Elektrane, purchased the Ruse heating station in Bulgaria for 85.1m euros.
The contract was signed on Tuesday (August 28th).
Spain's Aricam Group will build a 250m-euro cement plant in Albania.
In the first phase, the plant will produce 1.5 million tonnes of cement a year.
The amount will increase by 1m in the final phase.
Montenegrin Telekom is introducing new higher prices of fixed telephone services on Saturday (September 1st).
Under the new tariffs, prices of this type of service will be doubled, while prices of calls from fixed line to a mobile phone, as well as for international calls, will be reduced.
(Various sources -- 24/08/07-31/08/07)
