19/04/2013
By Ana Lovakovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 19/04/13
EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fule told Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) main political parties' leaders that the third round of high-level dialogue for the country's EU accession will be cancelled, and analysts now warn of dire existential consequences unless politicians act.
Fule said BiH needs to implement the European Court for Human Rights decision in the Sejdic-Finci case in order to submit a credible EU membership application. 
Without it, the EU cannot consider further steps for BiH on the union's accession path.
The BiH constitution prohibits candidates for the tripartite presidency who are not among the three "constituent peoples," Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs, in a provision that has hindered the country's European integration.
Jakob Finci, a Bosnian Jew, and Dervo Sejdic, a Bosnian Roma, successfully petitioned the European Court for Human Rights to have the law changed in 2009, but political resistance and upheaval in BiH have prevented action.
"If the politicians do not find a solution to implement the court decision by mid-June, the path to the EU is frozen until further notice, at least until mid-2015, since the EU is turning to its own issues," Srecko Latal, political analyst and member of International Crisis Group, told SETimes.
Latal said such an outcome means withdrawal of badly needed foreign investments, inability to access EU funds and complete stalling of reforms.
Investments in cash-strapped BiH have declined from 1.3 billion euros in 2007 to about 300 million in 2012. 
The country utilised 110 million euros from the EU's IPA funds last year.
"BiH stands to lose hundreds of millions of euro from IPA projects, and that may become the final trigger to accelerate the citizens' political awareness," Slavo Kukic, sociologist and professor at the University of Mostar, told SETimes.
"It could finally force us to start acting as people and citizens, not as Croats, Bosniaks and Serbs," Kukic added.
"The funds are delivered as if by spoon until the government entities fulfill the imposed requirements, commitments and obligations. 
The politicians are tasked to accelerate the process toward EU integration and change the BiH's status into an EU candidate, which will open the access to additional IPA components: agriculture, human resources and regional development," Mladen Ivanic, professor at the Economics Faculty in Banja Luka, told SETimes.
Kukic added that the IMF can also stop the flow of money for BiH's two entities.
"We will have to turn to some new philosophies and to generations of politicians who understand what actually EU is. 
If we do not do anything, we cannot expect help from others," Kukic said.
Implementing the Sejdic-Finci verdict is a major test for BiH's political structures but also for the EU, according to Zijad Becirovic, director of the International Institute for Middle East and Balkan Studies in Ljubljana.
"The EU has made numerous errors in BiH, and one of them is that it supported outside institutional meetings, leaders, political parties, and not the institution of the system and the Parliamentary Assembly of BiH, so EU has to change their focus," Becirovic told SETimes.
Latal argued the international community cannot continue to be passive if it wants to see progress.
"The international community assumes it was a simple task and technically easy to solve, but neglected the fact of how changing the elections for the presidency will mean substantial changes of the Dayton Peace Agreement," Latal said.
Some citizens agree.
"We have to awake from the lethargy and realise it is time to change the politicians which brought us to misery," Senada Berberovic, 51, citizen of Sarajevo, told SETimes.
What should the EU and BiH citizens do in order for the country's leaders to unfreeze EU accession process? 
Please share your suggestions in the comments space.
