20/12/2012
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 20/12/12
Macedonia's farmer's federation is hoping to increase Macedonian-Turkish co-operation by starting a large-scale pear production. 
The initiative was the result of a recent visit of Turkish businessmen from the city of Bursa, where 80 percent of the fruit in Turkey is produced.
The group visited Macedonia's Pelagonija region, where they met with farmers and examined opportunities for investment. 
They also plan to open a fruit redemption centre and a co-operative association.
"Our mission is to enhance the profit of the Macedonian farmer. 
In a short period, we are expecting to establish co-operation with Tuyap Fairs with the help of Turkish pear production farmers, and attract new investments. 
After discussions with the Turkish businessmen, we think that highly favoured pear variety in Europe can be grown in Macedonia," Andrea Sekulovski, president of the federation, told SETimes.
Currently, Macedonia's pear market is in deficit. 
In 1991, there were 1 million pear trees, but the number has dropped to about 360,000.
Bacterial disease and the lack of farming expertise are the main causes for the pear market decrease in the country.
Erdoan Dzeladin, a Turkish businessman and representative of Tuyap Fairs, told SETimes that his team detected a positive investment climate in Macedonia.
"Business relations were established at the agricultural fair in Bursa where [federation] president Sekulovski and the deputy agriculture minister talked with Turkish businessmen about pear-growing. 
Such meetings are opportunities to strengthen business co-operation between Macedonia and Turkey … and more are expected," Dzeladin said.
Turkish investments in Macedonia are increasing. 
Turkish TAV Company built two airports in the country, and investments in the health sector are growing. 
Turkey also entered the Macedonian banking sector with Chevahir Holding.
"Turkish brand Sutash invested in the agricultural sector, and the company's management assured us of their serious plans to develop the company, not only in our country, but beyond," Zoran Konjanovski, Macedonian deputy minister for agriculture and forestry, told SETimes.
The Sutash investment influenced other Turkish companies to invest in agriculture in Macedonia. 
In the south of the country, Turkish companies leased large areas of state-owned agricultural land for long-term crops, which prompted other investors' interest.
"I expect that the Turkish investments in agriculture will increase additionally in the period to come. 
Macedonia has excellent conditions for agriculture and comparative advantages. 
Our Macedonian agricultural product is excellent quality, and we, as a government make great efforts to attract foreign investments in our country," Konjanovski told SETimes.
