18/04/2013
By Kruno Kartus for Southeast European Times in Osijek -- 18/04/13
The recent arrest of South European Handball Association President Sandi Sola, who is accused of embezzling more than 10 million euros, shows the country's committment to fighting corruption, but shows the country must focus on the banking sector, experts said.
"It is excellent to see the state take action and have a will to solve problems in the banking sector.
Now, it is important to see whether the investigation will lead to court decisions, and how it will end," Nikola Kristić, president of Transparency International Croatia, told SETimes.
Sola is the majority owner of Karlovacka Bank, which is worth 26.6 million euros.
Police arrested him at the border where he was returning from a handball match in Skopje.
His mother, Maria Šola, a representative and advisor of the bank's management, and his brothers, Peter and Tomislav Šola, were also arrested.
The Office for Suppression of Corruption and Organised Crime also arrested Luka Miličić, the former director of Dalekovod construction company, and three others, in the sting.
The investigating judge set a one-month detention for all of them.
The office charged the eight with causing 5 million euros in damages to Karlovacka Bank and 7 million euros in Dalekovod between 2007 and 2012, by approving loans to their own private companies.
"The successful work of the police and quality co-operation with state prosecutor deserves every compliment and support of the ministry of interior," Interior Minister Ranko Ostojic told SETimes.
But not all agree that the case was handled in a timely manner.
"The case and suspicions in the business of Karlovacka Bank lasted for more than a decade … and citizens lost their property," Munir Podumljak, president of Partnership for Social Development, an NGO that focuses on corruption, told SETimes.
According to Podumljak, the lack of bank regulation in the country could be problematic in the fight against corruption.
"Despite the efforts of the EU to put banks under at least partial control, there are no national or international initiatives [to make bank business transparent], even though it is this public that pays and restaurate the damages of such a business."
Kristić agreed.
"The role of the Croatian National Bank, in controlling the banking sector, could be much tighter.
There could be that bad loans appear also in other, bigger banks."
Will focusing on the banking sector help Croatia fight corruption?
Tell us your thoughts in the comments below.
