21/06/2013
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 21/06/13
Bulgarians continue to protest in the country's biggest cities after forcing the resignation of the new government's pick to head the national security agency, but officials said the government stands firm against the protesters' demand to step down.
Stepping down would be an easy personal choice, but politically irresponsible and would destabilise the country, said Prime Minister Plamen Oresharski.
"I realise part of our government's legitimacy is lost, but in case of a resignation, there will be no legitimacy at all at a very crucial time for the country, when it needs to negotiate with the EU the funding of about 15 billion euros for the next seven years," Oresharski said.
The protests began with the appointment of controversial media mogul Delyan Peevski, a 33-year-old lawmaker from the ethnic Turkish Movement for Freedom and Rights (DPS) party, to the helm of the national security agency in a hasty procedure which involved changing legislation overnight.
DPS is a coalition partner of the ruling Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), which formed a minority government on May 29th together with support from the ultra-nationalist Ataka.
Peevski was fired in 2007 from the deputy minister post in the now-defunct ministry of disasters and emergency situations on suspicion of corruption. 
He was reinstated after the charges were dropped.
"I felt ashamed to stay home, because what we witness now is perversion. 
There were similar faces [like Peevski] in the previous government too, but what has happened now is too much," Kostantin Petkov, 39, an economist from Sofia, told SETimes.
The protests come only a month after Bulgarians chose the new government in May 12th snap elections.
Analysts said Bulgarians have been particularly sensitive to perceived abuses of power since the crisis toppled the previous GERB-led government.
"The Oresharski cabinet has already spent the fragile confidence it had when it started a month ago," political analyst Dimitar Avramov told SETimes. 
"It is hard to imagine government stability in this situation."
The new cabinet came to power with the intention of appointing a government of experts, rather than political figures, a promise many believe has not been kept.
Avramov said new snap elections now can help overcome the political paralysis, but people should press parliament to amend electoral legislation or risk a repeat of the situation in May.
Various proposals for changes to the electoral code are being backed by civil society, including a so-called ranked voting system, where voters can rank candidates on the party lists in order of preference, and amendments that would ensure transparency in the activities of the electoral administration and an option to appeal its decisions.
But demonstrators said they will not give up until the government steps down.
"I am protesting against the way this country is governed," Georgi Todorov, a 24-year-old protester, told SETimes.
"I insist on changes in the electoral law; they should guarantee more transparent elections and the election of people with high morals that can change this country. 
I do not care who will be in power, it's the decisions that matter. 
These decisions are absurd," he said.
Should new elections be organised in Bulgaria? 
Share your opinion in the comments space.
