19/12/2012
By Mladen Dragojlovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 11/12/12
Firecrackers, fireworks and other pyrotechnical devices have been part of holiday celebrations throughout the region for almost two decades, despite the fact that the number of injuries due to the misuse of the devices grows every year.
During the 2011 holiday season, more than 50 people in Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Montenegro were injured.
One factor contributing to accidents is that many of the devices are smuggled into the countries, bypassing safety controls. 
As the injuries increase, so do black market sales of the pyrotechnics.
"Over the past several years, our [sales have remained] the same, there is no increase. 
At the same time, we notice more and more firecrackers and other devices on the streets. 
The black market is killing our business," Biljana Divljak, co-owner of a pyrotechnical device store in Banja Luka, told SETimes.
She said that prices in the legal shops are higher than those on the street, but the legitimate fireworks sold in the stores come with the required safety certificates.
According to the indirect taxation authority of BiH, the black market is rapidly growing. 
Tax officers confiscated 2,600 euros worth of illegal fireworks in 2009. 
This year, that amount grew to 10,000 euros.
"The value of imported pyrotechnical devices this year is near 1 million euros. 
Custom officers confiscated small amounts of these devices in private vehicles. 
Most of devices are imported, legally or illegally, from China and Croatia," Ratko Kovacevic, a spokesman for the authority, told SETimes.
Police in the region launch actions every year to suspend black market sales. 
Some of the initiatives, which start in early to mid-December, include education about the danger of non-legitimate fireworks and confiscation of illegally imported devices.
Ivan Zarov, from the Serbian Interior Ministry, said last week that police will increase controls this year. 
He said the lowest fine for illegal possession and trading of pyrotechnical devices in this country is about 500 euros.
"In the last five years, police have confiscated millions of devices in the period of New Year and Christmas holidays," Zarov told SETimes.
In Republika Srpska, police remind citizens that the use of these devices is prohibited in public places and appeal to citizens to respect of the law as part of their Firecrackers Are Not Toys campaign.
Igor Crncevic has sold fireworks in Banja Luka for years. 
He said he used to sell illegal devices, but the increase in police crackdowns has made it too difficult.
"Police inspectors are in the marketplace every day. 
When they find somebody who sells these goods, they confiscate it and penalise the seller with high fines," Crncevic told SETimes.
