20/06/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Ohrid -- 20/06/13
Cybercrime has become a serious threat to security, and beating it will require a united front from the countries in the region, experts from several Balkan countries said.
At a recent meeting in Ohrid organised by NATO and the Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies in Skopje, participants discussed the best practices and policies for regional cyber security.
According to experts cybercrime in the Balkans is growing and countries must find mechanisms to minimise the threat.
Many countries around the globe do not have adequate legal regulations or a set of best practices for handling cybercrime, Toni Stojanovski, a professor of computer science at the University of Information Technologies in Ohrid, told SETimes.
"More and more financial transactions, financial data are on the web and therefore there is a greater motive for criminals or organisations to make certain illegal activities to reach the financial and other benefits," Stojanovski said.
"In the future, the Balkans will be more susceptible to cybercrime.
The best we can do at this point is to [educate] and [implement] legal regulations that will meet our needs," he added.
Milan Marich, director of information company IT in Podgorica, told SETimes that the Balkan countries urgently need to establish a joint body that will work on drafting legal regulations.
"Co-operation is needed between all countries in the region.
The legislation should be the same," he said.
The most vulnerable sectors in the region are banking and telecommunications, but all state institutions should be cautious, Marich said.
"If someone [commits] a crime with credit cards in Macedonia, we can expect the same in other countries in the Balkans," Marich told SETimes.
Regional co-ordination bodies are necessary, Predrag Paler, cyber security expert from the Faculty of Electrical Engineering in Zagreb, said.
"The question is whether we can react in time to prevent the occurrence of cybercrime.
In the Balkans, the systems that detect this type of crime are less developed, and therefore very slow to detect such cases.
Last year there was a major attack from Bulgaria on the banking system in the Arab countries, there was attack on the banking system that came from Romania too," Paler told SETimes.
In almost all countries in the region there are special departments within the police forces that handle internet crime, cyber-terrorism, and internet piracy.
But Paler said the departments need better personnel and equipment to be able to fully tackle this type of crime.
"They are not trained enough [and] there are no complete units who can cope with this.
Croatia, entering in the European Union, will have to fulfill all necessary European criteria in terms to fight against cybercrime and therefore their experiences can be transferred to other countries," Paler said.
The only way to protect against cybercrime is constant vigilance, monitoring and review of existing mechanisms for protection, Alexandar Risteski, a professor at the Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies in Skopje, told SETimes.
"Starting from the general policies for protection of the companies and countries and technologies that are used.
Measures taken here must be the same as elsewhere in the world.
It requires national policies and strategies to fight against cybercrime," Risteski said.
Have you or anyone you know been a victim of cybercrime?
What would you do if you were?
Share your experiences in the comments section.
