20/06/2013
By Mladen Dragojlovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 20/06/13
Former professional soldiers, unemployed workers, students and other Banja Luka citizens are demanding a host of changes by the Republika Srpska (RS) government, ranging from an improvement in student living conditions to the dismissal of certain government officials.
Nikola Dronjak, president of the RS student union, said university students have been frustrated for a long time with the government's lack of effort to improve their living conditions.
"For several years we demanded one more building at the Banja Luka University dormitory because present capacities are not enough to accommodate all students.
In the last two years I attended several meetings with ministers, prime ministers, and others responsible to solve this problem, but we saw only promises," Dronjak told SETimes.
Earlier this month, disgruntled citizens, led by a group of 2,500 students, marched in Banja Luka to draw attention to their demands.
"The protest started as student demonstration, but many citizens, former professional soldiers and the unemployed joined us, so it reflected a general dissatisfaction of RS citizens with the situation in the society," Dronjak said.
Students demand the construction of an additional pavilion in the Banja Luka student centre and expansion of the accommodation facilities for students at East Sarajevo University.
They also demand the resignation of RS Education Minister Goran Mutabdzija, cost reductions for masters-level studies and audits for private colleges.
RS Prime Minister Zeljka Cvijanovic pointed out that the government did not ban the protests, adding that such an expression of dissatisfaction shows that RS is a democratic society.
The RS government announced an international tender for the construction of the pavilion before the protests, but student leaders continued with the demonstration because other demands were not fulfilled.
Another issue at the centre of the protests is the disagreement between the Vulic family in Banja Luka and the local government.
In July 2012, the city government approved plans to turn a Banja Luka downtown park into a shopping and business centre.
The construction site is near the Vulic family house and shop.
Last month the construction company ordered the destruction of a part of the road that Vulic family uses as the only access to their home.
Zeljko Vulic said he is happy with the support from protesting students and activists.
"I hope their voice will move some things and help in my agreement with the local government and the construction company.
Last year I had the support of activists who tried to save the park, but unsuccessfully," Vulic told SETimes.
He added he will continue negotiations.
"Banja Luka doesn't have the serious number of citizens for protests that would be strong enough to push the government to solve social, economic, and other problem in RS, including problems of people like me," Vulic said.
Do you agree with the students’ protests and the peaceful way in which they were conducted?
Let us know what you think below.
