18/12/2012
By Ana Lovakovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 18/12/12
While welcoming the recent return to inter-party dialogue in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the Peace Implementation Council steering board recently expressed concern that concrete progress on reforms has stalled in the country since May.
The board, which met late last month, called on political leaders to renew their commitment to achieving the progress necessary to secure a better future for BiH.
The board called on leaders to take the steps necessary to accelerate the country's progress towards the EU, including implementing its obligations under the stabilisation and accession agreement.
But despite the board's urging, analysts are skeptical that the country's politicians can move the country forward on their own.
"When you have a corrupt political structure which acts as the underworld, it is hard to believe that anything good can happen.
This is all like a play in which the [council], the international community and domestic politics [are the actors]," Momir Dejanović, head of the Centre for Human Policy in Doboj, told SETimes.
Zijad Becirevic, director of the International Institute for Middle East and Balkan Studies in Ljubljana, said that politicians in BiH are going backward while other countries in region are making progress and changing.
"The political-criminal groups want each segment in BiH to subordinate themselves and their interests … all under the guise of the alleged protection of national interests," Becirevic told SETimes.
"BiH needs strong help in the fight against organised crime and corruption, and the process should start from the top," he added.
Šaćir Filandra, dean of the Faculty of Political Sciences in Sarajevo, said that political situation in the country is just beginning, 17 years after signing the Dayton Peace Agreement.
"The reason is the structure of the Dayton Agreement, which prevents the normalisation of political life," Filandra told SETimes.
He said that the ethnic construction of the constitution of the state, outlined by the agreement, is unsustainable.
"A political agreement by key political actors and political parties [is needed], and this can be achieved only with the assistance of the international community.
I hope that in the near future, through the integration process in the region, things can move in a positive direction," Filandra said.
"[The recommendations] for leaders in BiH is a normal diplomatic note which would not be necessary if we were in normal country.
It is hard to believe that this coalition is going to take the recommendation seriously and [orient themselves] on solving the problems of citizens in BiH," Žarko Papić, a representative of the Initiative for Better and Human Inclusion, an international NGO that is also a part of the UN, told SETimes.
Citizens also doubt any further development in the political situation.
They think it is necessary to have an agreement between parties, primary on the national level.
"Without the assistance of the international community, our politicians won't agree on any issue.
BiH is trapped by a three religious-nationalistic corrupt octopus," Ademir Patković, an electrical engineer from Sarajevo, told SETimes.
