23/05/2013
By Mladen Dragojlovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 23/05/13
A security official in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is raising renewed concerns about what she considers a threat in Gornja Maoca village, a radical Islamist enclave that she said is out of step with the rest of the country.
Residents of Gornja Maoca promote a way of life that is out of the legal framework in BiH, Dusanka Majkic, leader of the BiH parliament's commission for security, told SETimes.
She said children in the village do not attend school within the BiH educational programme, burials are not in accordance with laws and citizens do not vote in elections.
"Another problem is the fact that leaders of radical Islam community in this village are visiting other places and organise gatherings to promote benefits of Salafi way of life," Majkic said. 
"In this way they attract more supporters and members of the movement who cease to respect BiH laws. 
This problem will be solved when we adapt the law and order to security agencies to consider every manifestation of radical Islam as a criminal act."
The village is well-known to local authorities, who targeted the enclave in a 2010 raid by 600 police officers seeking Islamic extremists who they claimed were destabilising the country.
Radical Islam appeared in the Balkans in the early 1990s when conflicts began to rage in the former Yugoslavia. 
Mujahadeen fighters and religious leaders from the Middle East arrived in BiH to fight on the Muslim side, and many remained because they were able to obtain citizenship.
Amir Zukic, secretary general of the Democratic Action Party, said that he believed some exaggerate the problem posed by the radical Islamic community.
"Liberty of faith is guaranteed by the constitution, and everybody can practice religious rites [in ways that do] not jeopardise other citizens. 
I think that members of this community are not endangering anybody, but they must respect the laws. 
Police had several actions in this village and the result is that they find nothing illegal," Zukic told SETimes.
He added that basic education is determined in law as an obligation, but state institutions must find a way to accurately identify that children in Gornja Maoca do not go to proper schools and whether there are polygamous marriages, as claimed by several women's rights organisations.
"When responsible institutions determine that the law is disrespected, those who did it must be fined. 
Until then, we must respect that some people practice their religion in different ways than what is common for this country," Zukic said.
Majkic referred to Gornja Maoca as a "state within the state."
"BiH has seven security agencies which should deal with control of law enforcement on entire BiH territory, and they can't do it in this case. 
We don't know what is going on in Gornja Maoca, which is excluded from the country's political system," Majkic told SETimes.
Police officers from Tuzla canton are present daily in Gornja Maoca, but data about possible illegal activities is not publicly known. 
Officials at the BiH Ministry of Security declined to comment about the village or similar places because they do not discuss activities or operational data collected in the field.
"It would be good if Gornja Maoca is the only such place in BiH, but unfortunately it is not," Predrag Ceranic, a professor of law with the Police College in Banja Luka, told SETimes.
Ceranic, who researches issues of security related to radical Islam, said there has not been enough political will to solve the problem. 
He added that members of the BiH presidency have not paid enough attention to the issue.
"A few years ago there was an attempt in the BiH parliament to ban the Salafi movement. 
Serb representatives in parliament submitted a law on this issue, but it was clumsily written and unenforceable," Ceranic said.
Ceranic said banning any form of discrimination in BiH would be a more effective strategy. 
Women's rights are especially curtailed under the radical Islamic doctrine, Ceranic said. 
Women must cover their entire bodies, including their faces, and are not permitted to appear in public.
"It is absurd that in some of the terrorist acts in BiH, as the attack on the police station in Bugojno and the US embassy in Sarajevo, members of this movement wounded or killed Bosniaks, who belong to the same faith as Salafis," Ceranic said. 
"This is something the state must recognize as a threat to public security and solve it in very short time, before they spread their philosophy across the country."
What steps should Bosnian authorities take to monitor radical Islamic communities? 
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
