20/02/2013
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/02/13
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Serbia Prime Minister Ivica Dacic predicted that support for the country's accession to the EU will grow as people feel their lives improve and the country's reforms take hold.
Serbia has high hopes of getting a date this year to start EU accession negotiations, although support in public opinion polls for the process is the lowest in the past 10 years.
"We show in a practical way we need the EU as a partner in the economy, trade, investment, that European laws are good for our citizens, that with the EU mediation we can achieve our national interests," Dacic told SETimes.
"If we can bring in more investors from the EU and provide jobs to people, if in partnership with the EU we solve in good way political issues that we have, if we apply European laws and make life easier for people, the percentage of supporters of the EU will grow," he said.
According to KPMG auditing company, Serbia surpassed all regional countries in foreign direct investments, including EU countries Romania and Bulgaria, in 2011.
Although investors were keeping a close eye on President Tomislav Nikolic last year after he was elected, large investments from the Middle East and Turkey have been initiated this year.
"Serbia really is going steadily towards Europe and it is determined to install a system compatible with Europe as soon as possible,'' Milan Kovacevic, a foreign investments adviser and member of Scientific Society of Economists, told SETimes.
Vincent Deger, head of the EU delegation in Belgrade, said that in recent years Serbia has made significant progress and has invested in solving the key and difficult issues.
"For the citizens of Serbia that was not easy, but I'm sure most still want to live in the Europe ordered state," Deger told SETimes.
However, according to a December poll by the European Integration Office, 59 percent of people do not believe Serbia will enter the EU in 10 or 15 years.
"Too long is the road to 'the promised land,' and it seems to me that we older will not get there," Miladin Vlajković, a pensioner in Belgrade, told SETimes. 
He said that for now, he does not see any benefit from the EU.
But, according to Milan Pajevic, the director of the Government Office for European Integration, the data is not bad.
"Sixty-six percent of citizens support the reforms necessary for entry into the EU, while 62 percent support the resolution of problems in relations between Belgrade and Pristina," Pajevic told SETimes.
"Citizens want European reform in all areas of life, at work, in education, health, justice, human rights," Pajević said, adding that the government would respect the wishes of the citizens of Serbia by implementing reforms in line with European standards in all areas.
