21/05/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 21/05/13
The recent resignation of three members of the embattled Kosovo Privatisation Agency puts the future of the office back in the hands of a divided parliament, which has not been unified in its desire to open up the fledging nation to free enterprise.
Agency chief Blerim Rexha resigned this month, just three months after his appointment by Prime Minister Hashim Thaci. 
Rexha cited the agency's inability to increase transparency and change the model of privatisation as required by the Democratic Party-led parliament.
"It is indispensable now that the [agency] should change the approach towards the property, the assets it privatises and manages. 
This challenge certainly requires new people," Rexha said in a letter sent to the media.
Two agency board members resigned within days of each other -- Bernadette Roberts, the US representative and Dardane Peja of USAID.
"The resignation of Mr. 
Rexha is not a surprise, when knowing the problems filed for years regarding the privatisation process, the functioning of the Kosovo Privatisation Agency and the pressure done to the leaders of the privatisation process. 
Anyone who has dignity and integrity would do that," Ibrahim Rexhepi, executive director of the Kosovo Centre for Strategic and Social Research, told SETimes.
The privatisation agency signs contracts with investors to take over state-owned businesses and socially-owned businesses, companies that are managed by their workers. 
The contracts require many, but not all, investors to contribute a minimum sum into the business and sets quotas for the number of people to be employed. 
If the investors fail to meet the contract, the privatisation office can retake the business.
The agency's work is considered critical to reduce the government's portfolio and attract both local and foreign investors.
But the agency has been riddled with complaints of corruption, mismanagement and low sale prices that have failed to put euros into state coffers.
Even in parliament the effectiveness of the agency has been hotly debated. 
Last fall, members of opposition parties sought a suspension of privatisation of the public and former socially-owned enterprises.
The agency was leaderless after the June 2012 suicide of Dino Asanaj, whose June 14th stabbing death came as he was under investigation for allegedly seeking a bribe of 4 million euros from an owner of a Kosovo hotel that had been privatised. 
An autopsy ruled his death a suicide, although he had 11 knife wounds to the neck and chest.
Zenun Pajaziti, chairman of the parliamentary committee for Economic Development, Infrastructure, Trade and Industry, called on the government to quickly fill the agency's vacancies.
"This act of Mr. 
Rexha enables to free this process and appoint other members. 
We wanted the process to go well, but as we faced this situation with the resignations there, we have to fill in the board," Pajaziti told SETimes. 
Rexhepi was skeptical that Rexha's resignation will bring substantial change to the privatisation agency.
"But this resignation is a good pretext that the parliament deals seriously with the privatisation and the [agency]. 
If they don't do that, everything will go on like in the old days, with a lot of irregularities," Rexhepi said.
Kosovo does not have a specific law for privatisation. 
A 2008 law established the privatisation agency as an independent public body, but there is no law that specifies how privatisation will be carried out.
How would a privatisation law help Kosovo manage its government-owned businesses? 
Make your comments known below.
