20/05/2013
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/05/13
During a recent visit to northern Kosovo, Serbia Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic urged Kosovo Serb leaders to accept the agreement between Belgrade and Pristina, and to "leave the past and think about the future."
Belgrade is facing a challenge in getting Serbs in northern Kosovo to consent to the implementation of the agreement, which was forged last month in Brussels.
"For 10 years, Serbs in northern Kosovo are living by any legal rules, do not pay taxes to either Serbia or Kosovo, they have … no restrictions," Predrag Simic, a professor at the Faculty of Political Sciences in Belgrade, told SETimes.
"It adds to the fear of losing that privilege, just as great as the accusing the government of betraying their interests," he added.
Kosovo Serbs said the agreement will cancel their current parallel institutions of trade, judiciary, education and health care, and will put the minority group under Kosovo law.
"It means that we will live in the state of Kosovo, not Serbia," Milutin Zdravkovic, a Serb living in Mitrovica, told SETimes. 
He, like many of his compatriots in the area, said the agreement will never be accepted.
Vucic visited the four Serb municipalities in Kosovo, in order to garner support for implementing the agreement.
"We have to start to change, in our minds, we need to leave the past and to think about the future," Vucic told residents in Leposavic earlier this month. 
"Serbia has no other people, and that only with its people can prosper, but part of our nation cannot prosper without the state of Serbia."
He said that by the end of the year, local elections will be held in the municipalities and communities can be formed.
Holding elections in accordance with Kosovo law is "the most difficult and most painful concession" of Serbs, Vucic said, but he added that there would be plenty of "painful things Albanians will have to swallow."
According to the agreement, 98 out of 100 police officers in the north will be Serbs.
Belgrade will help finance the health and education systems, economic development and spatial planning, and the community of Serb municipalities will fully oversee it, Vucic said.
Vucic said Belgrade has the ability to apply the agreement without the people's support, but the government is hoping to avoid that.
The presidents of four municipalities agreed to continue joint activities to harmonise their position on the agreement.
When asked whether Serbs were going to be transferred to Kosovo's constitutional and legal framework, Vucic said that "it is not exactly like that" because Serbia does not recognise Kosovo.
"Therefore, Kosovo will not get a seat in the UN or anything like that," he said.
What can Belgrade do to make agreement more attractive to Kosovo Serbs? 
Post your thoughts below.
