28/01/2008
A centre for research and innovations that will be funded by state government organisations and trade unions from Greece, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Bulgaria, Cyprus and Macedonia will be established in Greece with headquarters in Thessaloniki.
Its main goal will be to support regional state governments through research, implementation of European research and development programmes, training and implementation of modern public service technologies.
Under an initiative to increase Macedonia's birth rate, every woman under the age of 40 will have the right to three attempts at artificial insemination.
The government will pay for the procedures, at a number of clinics authorised by the state, Macedonian Health Minister Imer Selmani said on Monday (January 21st).
The Montenegrin government and US software giant Microsoft will jointly establish an "Innovation Centre" aimed at developing an IT society and Microsoft Centre for educational support at the University of Montenegro, government officials and Microsoft official Vahe Torossian, announced on Thursday (January 24th).
Albania's third mobile company, Eagle Mobile, is preparing to launch operations in early March.
The company, which will compete on the local market with AMC and Vodafone, will start technical preparations in February in a country with 1.9m mobile users.
A team of Romanian medical specialists led by Professor Irinel Popescu successfully removed a hepatic tumour from a woman using a new robot-driven technique Saturday (January 19th).
The new technique significantly reduces post-surgery recovery and almost eliminates the risk of complications.
Serbia's first national programme on cervical cancer prevention kicked off on Monday (January 21st) as Europe began a week dedicated to the illness.
Deputy Health Minister Goran Ilic said Serbia has the highest number of cervical cancer cases in Europe and that under the programme, about 2.3 million women between the ages of 25 and 69 could receive free exams.
(Various sources – 21/01/08 - 28/01/08)
