19/06/2013
By Menekse Tokyay and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Istanbul and Belgrade -- 19/06/13
Turkey and Serbia are building on 36 million euros in agriculture trade through co-operation in production, marketing, infrastructure and technology.
The effort is spearheaded by the Turkish International Co-operation and Development Agency (TIKA), which has donated agriculture and processing equipment as well as implemented projects in the dairy and livestock sectors. 
Recently TIKA supplied 20 greenhouses to municipalities of Novi Pazar, Rashka and Priboy in Serbia's predominately Muslim Sandzak region.
"The agricultural projects, especially the greenhouses, have attracted lot of attention in the country," said Sabina Paçariz, a spokeswoman for TIKA in Belgrade.
With unemployment in some rural areas as high as 45 percent, Pacariz said such projects aim to create jobs.
Speaking to SETimes, Aleksandar Medjedovic, the head of the Turkish Foreign Economic Relations Board's (DEİK) Turkey-Serbia business council, said co-operation between Serbia and Turkey will continue to be mutually beneficial.
Serbia exports a large amount of food and agricultural products to Turkey, but Medjedovic said co-operation should not be limited to trade.
"There are many fields where the two countries can co-operate on cultivation and production. 
For instance, Serbia has a rich fruit and vegetable industry which is ready to export large volumes, but also it is in need of new technologies and investments. 
Turkey with its large population needs to secure its food supply for the future. 
There can be a kind of mutual investments in joint production and cultivation," Medjedovic said.
There is also the potential for agricultural co-operation by providing Serbia with access to third-country markets in the Caucuses and Middle East through Turkey, or by dealing with Turkish re-exporters to those regions. 
Many Serbian agricultural producers have halal certification, giving them an added advantage in Muslim markets.
Miladin Sevarlic, a Belgrade University professor and the president of the Serbian Association of Agricultural Economists, said TIKA's donations are part of expanding bilateral relations and an effort to boost employment in the region.
"Each donation is welcome especially when it comes of investments in agriculture and rural development in the municipalities that belong to the underdeveloped areas in Serbia," he said.
"It would be desirable that the funds from such donations are joined with the funds from the Republic of Serbia, which will achieve a synergy of joint investments to more quickly develop those regions, especially in the field of agriculture and the food processing industry," Sevarlic told SETimes.
In late May, Turkey hosted a tripartite summit with the president of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency members. 
The Ankara Summit Declaration adopted at the conclusion of the meeting cited the importance of agricultural co-operation between the countries.
"As the chairman of the Turkish-Serbian Business Council, it is now up to us, as business people, to make those agreements work. 
Our challenges are a lack of awareness in Serbia, which trade, but also investment opportunities, exist in and with Turkey," Medjedovic said.
Turkey and Serbia signed a free trade agreement in 2009, but some restrictions remain on agriculture. 
Bilateral trade volume between Serbia and Turkey hit approximately 450 million euros in 2012, of which agricultural trade accounted for about 36 million euros. 
The agriculture sector accounts for about 17 percent of the Serbian economy.
In what other sectors can Turkey and Serbia co-operate? 
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
