17/12/2012
By Ana Lovakovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 17/12/12
World AIDS Day was marked in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) this month with a number of activities throughout the major cities, in line with the World Health Organisation's efforts to promote the battle against AIDS.
Information about HIV and AIDS, prevention and sexually transmitted diseases, as well as confidential counseling and testing for HIV and hepatitis was readily available to citizens.
According to Jelena Ravlija, chief epidemiologist at the FBiH public health institute, poor socio-economic conditions, high unemployment, lack of education, crime and drug abuse increase, prostitution, human trafficking and other risk factors are contributing to the spread of HIV in the country.
"In the first 11 months of this year, 24 new HIV cases were reported, four diagnosed with AIDS, but that's 9.5 times lower than the EU average.
Currently, 108 people live with HIV [in the country]," Ravlija told SETimes.
Zlatko Cardaklija, federal co-ordinator for HIV and AIDS, thinks it's encouraging that among the European countries, BiH has the lowest HIV epidemic due to government and entity investments, public health institutes and NGOs.
He explained that in the last decade a highly active anti-retro viral therapy was introduced in BiH, which stabilised the condition of a number of AIDS patients.
"Croatia has eight times, and Serbia 20 times more infected people than BiH, but these are still countries with a low epidemic level [compared to the EU]," added Cardaklija.
It is estimated that there are about 34 million infected with HIV worldwide, of which 2.5 million are newly infected in 2011, and 1.7 million died of AIDS.
In the last two years, BiH has had an average of 26 HIV-infected citizens, according to UNAIDS data.
From 1986, when the first HIV infection was registered, until November 2012, BiH has registered 221 HIV-infected citizens and 120 with AIDS.
In the Balkans, however, many are still not informed enough about HIV and AIDS, so stigma and discrimination against infected people persists.
"Because of the stigma and discrimination, people sometimes do not tell anyone they are HIV-positive.
But we all must be active, inform, and educate about HIV and AIDS," Vedrana Frasto, public relations officer from Sarajevo-based CURE foundation, told SETimes.
Lack of information on how the virus is transmitted often leads to isolation and discrimination against HIV-infected persons.
"They are often excluded from the society, lose their job, are deprived of basic human rights and education," Tatjana Preradovic-Sjenica, psychologist at Viktorija NGO in Banja Luka, told SETimes.
Rusmir Mesihovic, federal health minister, agrees that additional efforts are needed to reduce the stigma and discrimination against HIV.
"Everyone can use voluntary, free of charge, confidential counseling and testing at 13 locations in the Federation, and seven in Republika Srpska.
All HIV-infected can receive general treatments … in line with world-recognised guidelines, at clinical centers in Sarajevo and Tuzla," Mesihovic said.
