28/08/2007
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic and the former UN special envoy for Kosovo, Martti Ahtisaari, attended a two-day conference on EU enlargement, held in Bled, Slovenia.
It brought together around 400 government representatives, politicians, EU officials, private sector leaders and senior representatives from think tanks and NGOs to examine the key challenges that confront Europe.
Montenegrin Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic met in Beijing with the chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, Jia Qinglin.
They agreed to work to reduce Montenegro's large trade imbalance with China, and to boost co-operation in a number of areas.
The EU cannot resolve the Cyprus issue on its own, says Portuguese Foreign Minister Luis Amado.
His country currently holds the rotating EU chairmanship.
However, he added, the bloc can help improve the negotiations process between the Turkish and Greek communities on the divided island.
His comments came after two days of talks with Cypriot officials last week.
Macedonia and Russia should step up co-operation, especially in economic relations, the two countries' foreign ministry delegations said during talks in Moscow on Thursday (August 23rd).
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Titov met with the Macedonian delegation, led by the state adviser with the foreign ministry, Svetlana Geleva.
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Presidency Chairman Zeljko Komsic, is visiting the United States, where he will meet with representatives of the Bush administration, and members of congress.
Komsic met with UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon on Monday (August 27th) to discuss the social and political situation in BiH and the region.
Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku said during a meeting with EU envoy for the talks on the future Kosovo status, Wolfgang Ischinger, on Thursday (August 23rd) that the forthcoming negotiations should be aimed at the establishment of "good neighbourly relations between Kosovo and Serbia".
Ceku said his vision as prime minister of the province was that Kosovo should be an "independent and sovereign, democratic, multiethnic, secular and functional state".
Ischinger also met with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu.
(Various sources – 21/08/07-28/08/07)
