15/04/2013
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 15/04/13
Macedonia and Turkey are strengthening their strategic partnership as Turkey pledged to provide expert assistance in forest protection, agriculture and irrigation, in addition to other investments in Macedonia.
A Turkish delegation led by Rustem Kiris, director of the office of planning at the forestry administration, and Macedonian Agriculture, Forestry, and Water Economy Minister Ljupco Dimovski agreed on the deal earlier this month.
"The biggest issue Macedonian agriculture faces is flooding to prevent rivers overflowing to the fields.
Turkey's experience with the latest irrigation technologies will help address this problem," Veljo Tantarov, president of the farmers' association of Macedonia, told SETimes.
Tantarov said that learning Turkish experiences in drip agricultural irrigation systems will be useful, since meteorologists forecast temperature increases in the future.
The Turkish International Co-operation Agency (TIKA) last month also signed a protocol with Macedonian Agricultural Ministry on a project to improve quality of rice.
Speaking to SETimes, Mahmut Cevik, TIKA's Skopje co-ordinator, said the project is aimed at developing the rice industry in Macedonia using modern technology.
"We will donate a total of 30 tonnes of rice seeds to Macedonia under this project.
The work will start as of April 16th… Out of 30 tonnes, 4 tonnes of seeds will directly go to farmers for experimental purposes, while 26 tonnes will be used for production," he said, adding that Turkish side will also provide academic support for Macedonia’s Kocani Rice Research Centre.
A total of 200,000 euros will be spent by TIKA on the project.
Turkish companies also intend to carry out three other projects in Macedonia -- raising cattle, growing black cherries and producing milk and milk powder.
Turkey's largest diary producer, SUTAS, will restart production at the formerly bankrupt Macedonian dairy company Swedmilk next month, after investing 10 million euros, Cevik said.
"Our main goals by doing all of these projects are a contribution to the local economy, support for the local communities and promotion of deepening the Turkish-Macedonian friendship," he said.
"We will continue doing more projects to be able to address the challenges in our brother country."
Three new Turkish investors will also enter the Macedonian market.
Matek will invest 15 million euros in Macedonia and hire 200 employees;
Iskrem Medical will invest 20 million euros and hire 250 people;
and Total will invest 15 million euros and employ about 250 people.
"All three companies deal with medical technology and will invest in the industrial zone of Bunardzik, near Skopje," Visar Fida, director of the agency for foreign investment and export promotion for Macedonia in Ankara, said.
Turkish-Macedonian trade totalled 390 million euros last year, of which Macedonia imported Turkish goods worth 323 million euros and experts said there is room to increase trade and investment.
Turkish investment in Macedonia from 2010 to 2012 was 150 million euros, but analysts expect a substantial increase.
"The two countries' strategic partnership also rests on their cultural similarities, and the fact that several million Turkish citizens are of Macedonian origin, many of them businessmen," Ljubica Nuri, advisor for the board of directors of Macedonia's chamber of commerce, told SETimes.
Nuri said that an important element in developing the partnership is the countries' geostrategic position.
"Macedonia is a gateway to Europe, while Turkey is a gateway to the Middle East, the Caucasus, and Asia," he said.
"The chamber views Turkey as a strategic partner, and a partner to launch Macedonian products and services to third country markets, while Turkey views Macedonia as a partner on its path to the EU market," Nuri said.
In Turkey, Orhan Dede, a Balkan researcher at the Wise Men Centre for Strategic Studies (BILGESAM), an Istanbul-based think tank, said there is large co-operation potential.
"Being a country that is trying to join the EU, Macedonia is a very decent partner that Turkey should invest in," he told SETimes.
"Macedonians need Turkey, while their country is also a door that opens to Europe… Now that Greece can’t really go there for trade or investment due to the recession, Turkish-Macedonian relations have accelerated," he said.
Besides agriculture and food processing, production of automotive components, information and communication technology, pharmaceutical industry and medical devices, tourism and infrastructure are spheres for possible Turkish investments in Macedonia.
In what other areas can Turkey and Macedonia strengthen their partnership?
Share your opinion by commenting below.
Correspondent Alakbar Raufoglu contributed to this report.
