18/06/2013
By Igor Jovanovic and Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Tuzla -- 18/06/13
The events at a recent football match in Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) put a smile on many fans' faces, and has been hailed as a step toward positive relations in the region.
At the June 4th match, Bosnian fans shocked the Serbian team's players and coaches when they applauded the Serbian national anthem. 
Link to Youtube video:
Previously, football matches in the region have been a source of controversy, serving as venues for displays of nationalism and often resulting in fan violence.
Radovan Curcic, the Serbian national team selector, expressed satisfaction over playing a match against the national team of BiH.
"I thank the hosts in Tuzla. 
This game will open more options for our national teams, so we can play more often in this city," Curcic told SETimes.
Former football player Mitar Mrkela said he was thrilled with the reaction of the crowd in Tuzla.
"I congratulate the audience in Tuzla. 
I congratulate the Bosnians and Herzegovinians. 
They've passed a great test. 
I'm happy that everything went perfectly. 
I want to tell everyone in this region, fans in the entire region, loud and clear: follow Tuzla's example," Mrkela told Anatolia news agency.
"If the war started with riots in the 1990s, then such conduct of the domestic audience could be a hint at the possibility that sports will finally return to their original identity. 
It is nice that Tuzla made this move first," according to a statement from Truth, Justice, Reconciliation, a foundation that advocates justice since the BiH conflict.
"Once again we prove that we are not a city that spreads hate speech or chauvinistic nationalism. 
There is no doubt that the culture of tolerance and respect grown in Tuzla is unusual for some, but we have set the bar for all sports fans in the region in the future. 
Let the good vibrations start with us," fan group Fukare from Tuzla said in a statement.
Sociologist and University of Belgrade professor Dejan Vuk Stankovic told SETimes that this was an extremely positive move, although it is too soon to tell whether it is a turning point in the relationship between people who were at war 20 years ago.
"It's difficult to say whether this is an incidental situation or an indicator that things are changing for the better. 
I think it will take a lot for people who waged war against each other to truly reconcile. 
For a start, it would be enough to set the goal of mutual tolerance, and I think this is an excellent step in that direction," Stankovic said.
The Football Association of Serbia has, however, taken certain steps in that direction.
The selector of Serbia's senior football team, Sinisa Mihajlovic, told his players to applaud the opposing team's anthems, regardless of fan reactions, which are usually quite contrary.
The Serbian players applauded the Croatian anthem prior to a recent match in Zagreb.
"What is the difference between a match with Croatia and a match with some other team? 
Football players shake hands before a match and what is the problem with applauding the rival team's anthem? 
That is how we will behave," Mihajlovic said.
Citizens also perceive the events in Tuzla as positive.
"I would like to see something like that happen in Belgrade. 
I think it's very rude to whistle and boo someone else's anthem. 
But there is a lot of anger and frustration, hence it will take a long time. 
So, kudos to the people of Tuzla," Nikola Jevtic, 45, from Belgrade told SETimes.
Would you applaud the national anthem of another regional country at a football match? 
Let us know what you think in the comments section.
