17/06/2013
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 17/06/13
A special law on the Nabucco gas pipeline project, passed by the Romanian parliament in May, was enforced following a Bucharest meeting of the Nabucco Committee.
The project is a major EU energy effort to diversify gas supply routes for Eastern and Central Europe, and decrease the dependence on Russian resources.
The new law aims to fast-track necessary work in Romania, which is part of implementing the Nabucco project.
For Romania, the project bears a crucial significance.
"The gas pipe will bring strategic and commercial advantages for Romania and will lead to an increase of the energy security of both Central and Southeast Europe and the whole EU," the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement to SETimes.
"Nabucco is primarily promoted by Romania and the principal project within the EU's Southern gas corridor, an initiative which aims to diversify energetic sources and transport routes within the EU. 
The new law represents the expression of the political will of the Romanian authorities to actively participate in fulfilling this project," the ministry statement added.
Nabucco has to vie with another similar project, the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline, which will cross Greece and end in southern Italy. 
But experts say Nabucco has several advantages.
"Nabucco is important for the EU. 
It may be more expensive than [the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline], but it brings gas to more European markets and, consequently, solves more problems. 
Moreover, it creates an [energy] alternative for east European countries that exclusively depend on Russian gas," Otilia Nutu, an energy specialist with Expert Forum, a leading Romanian think-tank, told SETimes.
The Shaz Deniz consortium, which operates the gas fields in Azerbaijan, will decide this month which project to join, but the final word belongs to the Azeri government. 
If the decision is for Nabucco, the construction will effectively start in 2015, Reinhard Mitscheck, executive director of Nabucco Gas Pipeline International, said at the meeting in Bucharest.
The two major gas pipeline projects also overlap a heated debate on shale gas in Europe.
According to a recent report from the U.S. 
Energy Information Administration, Romania holds more than 1,400 billion cubic metres of shale gas deposits, the third-most in Europe after Poland and France.
Bucharest has already issued exploration licenses to the U.S. 
company Chevron in Vaslui and Constanta. 
Bulgaria has decided to introduce a moratorium on shale gas prospects.
But the two realities do not exclude each other, Nutu said.
"For the time being, shale gas raises a lot of questions. 
These are uncertain resources. 
We only deal with assessments, we don't know yet if we have the technology to exploit it or how dangerous it is," she said.
"Romania should instead focus on finding financial resources for the about 17 percent contribution it has to the Nabucco project," she said.
Do you think the Nabbuco project will be realized? 
Share your thoughts below.
