16/05/2013
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/05/13
Criminal charges against one of Serbia's most influential businessmen, Miroslav Miskovic, increases support for the government's efforts to prosecute fraud and shows the rule of law is beginning to work, analysts said.
"Many were skeptical and thought Miskovic would not be indicted.
But now something that many had found unthinkable up until just a few days ago has happened.
However, we should wait for the trial to begin, to see how the indictment is written and whether it will survive in court," Vladimir Radomirovic, editor of the Pistaljka (Whistleblower) anti-corruption website, told SETimes.
The Serbian Prosecutor's Office for Organised Crime charged Miskovic with tax evasion and causing financial damage to road companies.
Miskovic and his son Marko, along with 10 other people, are accused of causing about 160 million euros worth of damage to the companies and another 4.7 million worth of damage to the Serbian budget.
They face up to 10 years in prison if convicted.
Miskovic's lawyer Zdenko Tomanovic said the charges against his client are political.
"The hasty pressing of unfounded charges against Miroslav Miskovic and his placement in custody over his alleged escape are not the result of an investigation and existing evidence, but rather the poorer part of the judiciary's courting of the new political elite, which probably isn't even asking for that," Tomanovic told Belgrade news agency Beta.
Cedomir Cupic, a member of the Anti-Corruption Agency, said the indictment is an indicator that the rule of law is starting to work.
"I assume there is solid material evidence if charges have been pressed, otherwise this would compromise the prosecutor's office and the entire legal system," Cupic told SETimes.
Radomirovic said the indictment may serve as a catalyst to further support the country's ant-corruption efforts.
"High-level corruption cases have long been sitting in police and prosecution desk drawers.
Now one gets the impression that serious work is being done, with the most important factor being political will, as well as the independence of the police and prosecution from political influence," Radomirovic said.
He agreed with the assessment that the fight against corruption began with the engagement of First Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic, but said that the political will now must be used to build strong institutions.
"Not everything should depend on one man, and we are still far from a strong system for combating corruption.
It will not even be created if the citizens are not convinced that they can report corruption without fear, and if the media are not free to report on all irregularities," Radomirovic said.
According to the Belgrade media, a financial investigation is also in progress against Miskovic.
His property and assets have been frozen until the completion of the investigation.
The Miskovic family is presumed to own 75 companies, as well as high-end real estate in Belgrade, London and Los Angeles.
The property whose origin they are unable to prove, and which is in disproportion to their revenues, can be seized.
Serbian citizens believe the arrests are good for the state.
"It's good when even the richest, once thought to be untouchable, end up in jail.
If that can happen to them, that means no one is protected, hence they will think long and hard before they steal from the state," Ivan Zoric, a salesman from Belgrade, told SETimes.
Student Tanja Ognjanovic told SETimes that cases like Miskovic's satisfy citizens' sense of justice.
"How did some people amass enormous wealth while the state sank deeper into ruin?
It seems that they took the money meant for hospitals, schools…" she said.
"That's why it's important for such people to end up in prison, so that the people can see there is justice."
Will Miskovic's arrest make a significant difference in Serbia's anti-corruption efforts?Tell us what you think.
