15/12/2012
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 15/12/12
Romania is headed to another political standoff after the current left leaning ruling coalition, the Social Liberal Union (USL), an alliance of the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the Liberal Party (PNL), headed by acting Prime Minister Victor Ponta overwhelmingly won the parliamentary elections on December 9th.
But analysts warn new political infighting may prove disastrous for Romania.
The resounding victory is set to reignite a long feud between the prime minister and President Traian Basescu, amid repeated warnings launched by the head of state that he will not nominate Ponta again as head of the government, even if USL made clear he is the sole candidate for this position.
Basescu, whose term ends in 2014, has the constitutional prerogative to appoint a prime minister within 20 days after the final official results are published.
USL received 60 percent of the votes, almost three-fifths of the seats in the new 588 strong bi-cameral legislative, while ARD, a rightist alliance grouped around Basescu's democrat-liberals, secured 16 percent of votes. 
The newly founded populist party, headed by a controversial television owner Dan Diaconescu, came in third.
Basescu recently said he would opt for a head of government with a Euro-Atlantic profile, alluding that he would not designate Ponta whom he called a "mythomaniac."
Ponta said he hoped "the civil war" is over, but warned Basescu to heed the will of the electorate and not seek to appoint another prime minister.
Ponta was one of the main political figures behind last summer's impeachment of Basescu, who was accused of overstepping his authority. 
The president was reinstated after a referendum for his removal failed to reach the constitutional turnout. 
The political upheaval in Bucharest drew the ire of the West, which accused the current ruling coalition of encroaching on the rule of law.
The political crisis this summer paralysed the country for months, cost Romania its accession into the borderless Schengen Area and sparked concerns of international investors at a time when Romania endeavors to recover economically.
"A new crisis would prove disastrous," Septimius Pirvu, deputy director of Pro Democratia, a leading Romanian think tank, told SETimes. 
"The European Commission may react even more sternly this time."
A new crisis would also hamper talks for a new deal with the IMF that is meant to replace the current agreement which expires early next year.
"Experience has shown there is little concern among the politicians about the impact of such political games on the country’s economy," Raluca Alexandrescu, a political science professor at the University of Bucharest, told SETimes. 
"Let alone Romania does not have … a budget, which worries both domestic businessmen and foreign investors."
Cristian Preda, a Euro-lawmaker of Basescu's Democrat-Liberal Party (PDL), also said a new political crisis is the last thing Romania needs.
"Romania cannot afford something like that under any circumstances. 
A sustained political effort is now required in order to avoid this. 
Or else the spiral of distrust and hatred will lead to uncontrollable social effects," he told SETimes.
