17/06/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 17/06/13
The number of high-level politicians in Kosovo who do not declare their assets in accordance with the law is concerning, experts and international officials said.
Democratic Party MP Berat Buzhala, who did not declare his real assets, is now being reviewed by state prosecutors.
Agron Behrami, the head of the division for the declaration of the assets in Kosovo's Anti-Corruption Agency, said that Buzhala violated the law on the declaration of the wealth and the country's penal code.
Besides missing dozens of public officials' declarations, the agency found changes to the wealth of nine public officials since they have occupied their positions in the amount of millions of euros, Behrami said.
Ibrahim Rexhepi, executive director of the Kosovo Centre for Strategic and Social Research, said the main issue is not that senior officials hide or do not declare their wealth, but the fact that they don't obey the law.
"I do not exclude the possibility that someone does not want to declare how rich [he or she] has become while having a political and public position," Rexhepi told SETimes, "but even more concerning is the lack of the implementation of the law that strengthens the opinion that the law cannot do anything against those that have strength and power.
Therefore, it is a legalisation of the illegality and Kosovo citizens pay the cost for it."
According to Merita Mustafa, an anti-corruption expert with the Kosovo Democratic Institute, asset disclosure as it is done now in Kosovo can be "absolutely" contested.
"We, as a state, have not managed yet to build up such mechanisms that would verify if the declarations of the asset disclosures of the senior officials are real," Mustafa told SETimes.
"The government is missing the will to build such mechanisms that would have done a much more convincing and much more qualitative verification, which would have been different from the verification done from the anti-corruption agency."
According to Kosovo legislation, an official can be sentenced from 3 to 5 years in prison for declaring false figures of their wealth and can be fined from 1,000 to 2,500 euros for not following the law.
However, the problem is not in legislation, but in the implementation of the anti-corruption laws and sanctioning of non-compliance, international monitors said.
"The big problem is the lack of independence, and at times capacity, of those institutions, particularly oversight bodies, which are mandated to enforce the legislation," Tinatin Ninua, regional co-ordinator for Transparency International in Southeast Europe, told SETimes.
According to Transparency International and anti-corruption experts, the ineffective application of asset disclosure requirements by senior officials and political interference in institutional responsibilities and operations hamper Kosovo's integration into the EU and NATO.
"One of the key criteria EU looks at during the accession process is the fight against corruption," Ninua said.
"If corruption in the public sector remains prevalent in a candidate country, that is likely to have a negative impact on the accession process."
"Before EU accession, future members should have mechanisms in place that prevent all forms of corruption as an important safeguard against economic crisis," Jana Mittermaier, director of the Transparency International liaison office to the EU, told SETimes.
How can Kosovo fight high-level corruption?
Let us know in your comments.
