14/05/2013
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 14/05/13
Mirko T, 42, from central Serbia has been crossing Serbia's borders with Macedonia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) via illegal border crossings for the last seven years. 
Due to criminal charges in his past, he doesn't have a passport, which leaves alternative border points as his only way to travel.
Every year, countries in the region prevent thousands of people from using unofficial border points. 
It is not known how many travelers and smuggled goods successfully cross borders at such locations, but governments are working on closing them.
"There are villages that are partially in one and partially in another country. 
Crossing from one side of the village means crossing from one country to another. 
There is no or little control. 
Even if there is a control usually you can cross by paying a small amount of money," Mirko told SETimes.
BiH intends to close 22 illegal crossings along the border with Montenegro, including those located in towns, known as side crossings, and those in remote uninhabited areas, known as wild crossings. 
Closure of wild crossings is one of the country's obligations outlines in the Progress Report of the European Commission.
"We've already closed all side crossings and wild crossings on the border with Croatia, 116 of them. 
There are six remaining with Serbia but they are along the Drina River and they are not of a high priority," Bakir Dautbasic, secretary of the ministry of security in BiH, told SETimes.
Many of the wild crossings are in border villages. 
These points will have a gate with locks and the key will be given only to residents of the villages. 
Others, such as forests paths and mountain passes, will be blocked by collapsing the soil or putting concrete blocks on the road.
It is estimated that BiH has lost millions of euros due to the smuggling of high-tariff goods across the wild crossings, roads and paths. 
It was estimated that between 160 and 180 such crossings are on its borders with Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro.
"As countries in the region are becoming closer to EU accession, the need for fully controlled borders is a must. 
We plan similar initiative with other neighborhood countries and we expect to start tackling this issue in the near future," Tamara Popovic, spokeswoman of the Montenegro police department told SETimes.
Other countries in the region do not have specific information on number of unofficial crossings, since smugglers constantly seek to diversify their access routes between countries. 
But officials acknowledge the problem exists, listing cigarettes and drugs among the most common smuggled items.
In Croatia, the most affected part of the border is one with Slovenia. 
Dozens of illegal immigrants were caught in 2012 near the villages of Mucici, Permana, Sapjane and Rupe, near the border.
According to Turkey's Interior Ministry, the state generated 96 million Turkish lira from the sale of seized goods smuggled into the country between 2002 and 2012. 
The army said there were 562 incidents at illegal border crossings, resulting in the arrests of 32,517 people between January 1st and April 24th of this year.
Controls are especially important to Turkey in the wake of the strife in Syria, which shares a 800-kilometre border along the country's southern side.
Regulation of the border is crucial as the country combats terrorism and extremists.
Serbia's border with Macedonia is used as a regular route for immigrants on their way from Greece to EU member countries and Hungarian and Croatian border villages. 
In 2012, Serbian border police stopped 13,897 people attempting to cross at unofficial border points.
"It is impossible to put fences or provide 24/7 control of every single metre of the border. 
From our experience we know that police activities and control on a specific border point usually results in the temporary closure of that point, but then smugglers move to another location less controlled," Dragoljub Filipovic, head of the department for control of the border crossing in Serbia's Ministry of Interior, told SETimes.
Romania is the main gateway for illegal immigration on the route coming from Turkey-Greece-Macedonia/Albania-Kosovo-Serbia-Romania and ending in Hungary. 
Co-operation between Romanian and Serbian authorities led to the closure of several unofficial border points between the two countries.
Romania has invested heavily in its border protection in recent years amid efforts to join the Schengen area.
"We aimed at fulfilling our tasks within the commitments Romania has assumed in order to join Schengen, developing and implementing policies and managerial concepts meant to bring the institution to the communitarian level modernisation so it can ensure a high level of security along the Romanian border," Fabian Badila, spokesman for the Romanian border police, told SETimes.
Correspondents Kruno Kratus in Osijek, Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest, Menekse Toykay in Istanbul and Klaudija Lutovska in Skopje contributed to this report.
What steps should governments take to reduce the flow of immigration and smuggling via illegal border crossings? 
Share your thoughts in the comments section.
