14/05/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 14/05/13
On May 18th 2011, Diana Kastrati was murdered by her husband after her request for emergency protection against domestic violence was refused by the Pristina Municipal Court. 
The Constitutional Court ruled that the authorities had failed to protect her. 
She was killed 5 months after she divorced her husband.
After SETimes reported about the ruling of the Constitutional Court, many blamed the victim – not her husband – for her own death, saying she should have followed a more conservative Islamic lifestyle. 
Such beliefs are misguided, experts told SETimes.
"Killing … has never been our religious tradition," said Dr Musa Vila, a lecturer at the Faculty for Islamic Studies in Pristina and member of Kosovo's Islamic Community. 
"Islam severely condemns murder. 
This is mentioned in the Qur'an and the Prophet Muhammad has also opposed killing people, Muslim or any other faith."
"We often know why the killings occurred, courts have come to their decisions, and again there was a misunderstanding or misinterpretation and ill information to the public through the media giving these killings a religious background," Vila said.
He urges people to read the Qur'an to see how Islam condemns murder.
"The Qur'an even stated that 'the murder of a man is killing the entire humanity, while the rescue of a man is like salvation of all mankind'," Vila said.
Vila said that religious motivation should not be mentioned unless there are facts to back it up.
"I urge not to give religious backgrounds to these killings, these murders come as a result of personal frenzies and personal whims, and by faith we say under the influence of Satan," Vila said.
Liridon Krasniqi, an researcher at the Kosovar Centre for European Policy Studies, told SETimes that faulting religious beliefs tends to justify the crimes in people's minds.
"I don't blame religion for this, but I can't ignore the fact that some religious clerics in Islam, and also in other religions, abuse their position and mislead people, especially when they belong to different schools of thought," Kasniqim said.
Citizens agree that religion should not be used as an excuse for crimes and killings.
"I don't think that religion is a reason or motivates people to kill or do crimes, because all religions urge the contrary of it," Shqipe Ukaj, a Pristina resident, told SETimes.
Mehmet Gashi, a retired teacher from Pristina, told SETimes that while media should be careful what they report and transmit, religious communities should play a role in supporting institutions to fight crimes in the country.
"They can do this by having more discussions and lectures in their community how religion can be used for good. 
But also they need to have more control over irresponsible individuals they might have, who might say something wrong to believers," Gashi said.
Why do people look to religion for criminal motives? 
Let us know your thought in the comments.
