24/07/2007
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis arrived on Monday (July 23rd) for a one-day official visit to <b>Bosnia and Herzegovina</b> (BiH). 
Karamanlis, who met with BiH counterpart Nikola Spiric, said Greece supports BiH's progress towards the EU and NATO, and Greek authorities will continue to assist their BiH colleagues in reaching the goal of Euro-Atlantic integration.
***
Romania's Defence Minister Teodor Melescanu was in Croatia on Monday (July 23rd) at the invitation of Croat counterpart Berislav Roncevic. 
Melescanu said Romania expects Croatia to receive a NATO membership invitation at the next Alliance summit, to be held in Bucharest in early April. 
The two ministers discussed bilateral military co-operation and regional efforts to fight terrorism and organised crime.
***
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Russian Duma Speaker Boris Gryzlov met in Villa Bokeljka, Serbia, on Wednesday (July 18th). 
They agreed on the Kosovo status issue, saying "the principled, common policy related to the process of finding a solution for the future status of Kosovo is based on respect of international law, UN Charter and Resolution 1244". 
Gryzlov also met with Serbian President Boris Tadic and Parliament Speaker Oliver Dulic.
***
Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki made a three-day visit to the People's Republic of China last week. 
He met with officials of the Council for Promotion of International Trade and ZTE, one of the China's leading telecommunications equipment manufacturing companies, to discuss bilateral relations and co-operation. 
Milososki met in Beijing with his Chinese counterpart, Yang Jiechi, on Thursday (July 19th). 
The talks focused on ways to boost economic co-operation and potential Chinese investments, especially in the areas of IT and communications.
***
A delegation from the Croatian Ministry of Defence -- with Minister Berislav Roncevic at the helm -- was in Portugal as part of bilateral defence co-operation. 
Relations were evaluated as good and free of any unresolved issues, the ministry said. 
Roncevic and his delegation met with Portuguese Defence Minister Nuno Severiano Teixeira on July 17th. 
Teixeira voiced satisfaction with Croatia's accomplishments in armed forces reforms, and said he hopes Croatia will become a member of NATO and the EU soon.
***
Macedonia will adopt the complete set of laws from its EU partnership action plan before the set deadline, Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said in Brussels on July 17th, after meeting with EU security chief Javier Solana and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. 
The three also discussed implementation of economic and judicial reforms.
***
Serbia's Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovic and Austrian counterpart Norbert Darabos met in Belgrade on July 17th to discuss Kosovo and bilateral military ties. 
They agreed that it is crucial to preserve security and stability in the region, while resolving Kosovo's final status. 
Darabos stressed Austrian support for the plan proposed by former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari but said his government considers Serbia's active participation in resolving the issue as crucial.
(Various sources 17/07/07-24/0707)
