13/05/2013
By Ben Andoni for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 13/05/13
The recent killing of an elderly Muslim man in Albania highlights the growing trend of pinning religious motives to crimes, an action that goes against moderate Islamic beliefs, experts said.
The suspect, who was apprehended by police, said that the old man was praying according to Albanian-Muslim tradition, not the Afghan prayer tradition, according to authorities.
"This crime must be brought to justice.
All believers in our mosque received similar threats," Tomor Borici, mufti of the Lushnja region, where the murder was committed, told the Albanian media.
Agron Hoxha, director of public relations at the Muslim Community of Albania, attempted to distance religion from the crime.
"It was not a murder that occurred for religious reasons.
The police made a statement said that the [suspect] had other problems," he told SETimes.
Aqif Maçi, a Tirana resident, told SETimes that killing is contrary to Islam teachings.
"To take a human life, especially inside the mosque, is something that has no connection at all with Islam.
[Muslims] have lived together for centuries with all other religions in peace and this should also be applied within the Muslims."
Arlind Novi, who runs a library-cafe in Tirana, said it is unacceptable to have clerics or believers punished for how they pray.
"It goes against the principles of Islam.
It is unacceptable by law," Novi told SETimes.
Elton Hatibi, a former history teacher, who has a mamsers degree in culture and religion, said the Islamic laws do not allow punishment or execution because of freedom of speech.
He said that in the history of Islam, there has been no entity that has the privilege of a precise interpretation, "to say this is Islam and done."
Hatibi underlined that in the Islamic world, it is only among the Shia in which the interpretation of an Ajatollah is obligatory.
Albania does not belong to that branch.
"There is no fixed interpretation among the Sunni Muslims," he said.
Muslims in Albania follow two streams of belief.
After the fall of communism, Arabic and Turkish Islamic teachings gained ground in the country.
Albanian Muslims debated which religious tradition to follow:
The Turkish tradition observed in Albania since the Ottoman times, or the Arab religious tradition that was brought to the country in the 1990s.
"None of us Muslims come out to say we belong to this trend or that group, but those who say so are the same ones who write and speak like parrots, either secretly against Islam and Muslims in Albania, or publicly state they want to weaken the Islamic faith," Arben Halluni, theologian and assistant to imam Muhammad Sytari, a Skodra mufti, told SETimes.
Hoxha denies that they are tensions within the Muslim community.
"The community is unified.
Of course, since it is the largest community in the country, it is impossible to treat all believers as soldiers.
They are free men and their individualities.
However, religious harmony in Albania is highly vulnerable and has ups and downs," Hoxha said.
Correspondents Linda Karadaku and Erl Murati in Tirana contributed to this report.
Why are religious beliefs brought into criminal offenses?
Let us know what you think.
