13/12/2012
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/12/12
The arrest of influential Serbian tycoon Miroslav Miskovic could be very important in the fight against corruption, an analyst told SETimes.
"If, as some say, the richest man in Serbia has been arrested, that may be a sign that all are equal before the law and that no one is protected," Nemanja Nenadic of Transparency Serbia said.
Serbian police arrested Miskovic and his son, Marko, on Wednesday (December 12th) on suspicion of involvement in illegal privatisations of 10 road maintenance companies.
Miskovic began building his empire during the regime of Slobodan Milosevic. 
After the democratic change in October 2000, Miskovic kept enlarging that empire and stayed close to every government that followed.
Miskovic's company, Delta Holding, employs more than 7,000 people in Serbia.
Police arrested eight other in the probe, and their questioning has been taken over by Miljko Radisavljevic, the state's organised crime prosecutor. 
Radisavljevic said in a news release that the Miskovics are suspected of having appropriated 20 million euros worth of property from the privatised road companies. 
Their scheme, according to the report, lasted from 2005 to 2010.
Aleksandar Vucic, Serbian deputy prime minister in charge of the fight against corruption, said that those were not the only accusations against the powerful businessman. 
According to him, Miskovic's alleged manipulation involving land in Belgrade and the sale of major retail chain C Market are also being investigated.
"Nobody has and nobody will beat Serbia, and that includes Miroslav Miskovic," Vucic said on his Twitter and Facebook profiles.
Soon after the arrest, Vucic's security was increased. 
Miskovic has allegedly threatened that the deputy prime minister "will not live to see tonight's show on Radio Television Serbia." Although Miskovic's lawyers said no threats had been made, Vucic said police had informed him of the matter.
"It is far more important to me to ensure there are no protected and untouchable people in Serbia, as well as that the state is stronger than any individual," Vucic said.
Nenadic said the report against Miskovic showed the issue at hand was an economic offence. 
"It is very important for the fight against corruption to investigate Miskovic's connections to the state authorities. 
If that happens, it could be a big step forward in cracking down on corruption in Serbia," Nenadic said.
He also said he did not believe there would be any shockwaves in the ruling coalition over Miskovic's arrest, even though he is believed to be extremely well connected to all parties.
Djordje Milicevic, spokesman of the ruling Socialist Party, said that the ruling coalition is gathered around the principles that include the fight against corruption and crime.
"As long as those principles are being realised, there is no danger of the government collapsing," Milicevic told SETimes.
Miskovic's arrest was also welcomed by the opposition. 
"Crime and corruption seriously jeopardise Serbia. 
Miskovic's arrest is a decisive moment in the fight against corruption," Democratic Party of Serbia spokesperson Petar Petkovic told SETimes.
