12/04/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 12/04/13
Several Balkan airports that have been deserted for decades will soon be back in service.
Officials and analysts said that cheaper prices and convenient flights will increase air traffic and make travel more affordable for people in the region.
"Air traffic infrastructure is a crucial element in the development of some areas [in the region]," Almer Kalac, deputy of the Montenegro's parliament committee for Economy, Finance and Budget, told SETimes.
"If we want to sell something, if we want to invite someone to come here, we need to provide the opportunity for that."
The international airport in Tuzla, northeastern Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), will start operating this summer at full capacity with new low-cost flights to Malme, Sweden and Basel, Switzerland, low-budget airline Wizzair announced last week.
Enver Jukanovic, director of the Tuzla's Airport, said that the reactivation of the airport will contribute to greater regional development and prosperity.
"I am sure that people from the region of Slavonia, Croatia and Macva, Serbia, will travel from Tuzla, which will contribute to further connection of the Balkan states," Jukanovic told SETimes.
"This way, we will increase tourism revenues because this region is well known for its natural beauty.
Balkans should forget their differences and work together to make their economic [connection] stronger."
Tuzla Airport was used for military purposes in the past, but now it will serve the public.
Nedim Kurbalija, 29, from the municipality of Lukava, near Tuzla said that he was delighted with the news.
"I have a brother living in Malme and I called him and told him that I'm coming to visit him first thing in summer," Kurbalija told SETimes.
"The ticket costs less than 100 euros and this is a great chance for everybody who has relatives in Sweden to visit them with very small amount of money."
Ponikve Airport, near the town of Uyice, Serbia, also served as a military airport and has been out of commission for years.
In 2009, the Serbian government adopted a decision to pass the airport to local authorities.
Officials are responsible for equipping the airport for civilian flights by the end of this year.
Representatives of the Turkish company Limak recently visited Berane, northern Montenegro, where they met with the municipal authorities and discussed the possible revival of the airport in the city.
The former military airport has been out of service for decades.
Vuka Golubovic, the head of the Berane municipality, said that the Turkish investors "were satisfied with what they saw, and the investment in the revitalisation would be between 10 and 15 million euros."
"That would be a huge economic step forward, not only for this city but for the whole region," Golubovic told SETimes.
"This area has over 100,000 … diaspora [living] in countries across the world.
A great tourism potential that this region has would then be available for people from the whole Europe."
"Berane Airport would certainly be a great asset not only for the entire north of Montenegro, but also for all the border countries:
Serbia, Kosovo, BiH," Kalac said.
Experts said that Balkan nations are losing money by covering the debts of national airline companies, and should restructure the companies to keep the airlines flying.
"Banja Luka, for example has a very unprofitable and unused airport.
Only one flight a week," Svetlana Cenic, an economic analyst and former RS finance minister, told SETimes.
"Authorities should offer low-cost [airlines] and cargo companies to operate out of the airport, and this will probably be the best solution, to let some big players enter into the market.“
Will flight in and out of smaller airports increase the number of tourists in the region?
Share your thoughts by commenting below.
