13/06/2013
By Erisa Dautaj Senerdem for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 13/06/13
Anti-government protesters in Turkey are drawing broad support from the European community, while leaders warn that heavy-handed police tactics in Istanbul could be a new obstacle toward Turkey's longstanding goal of joining the EU.
"Against this background, Turkey's path to the EU remains uncertain. 
This is not because the EU has not lived up to its promises, as Turkish officials often argue, but because Turkey has not yet decided if it wants or if it can fully join the European Union," Georgios Koumoutsakos, a vice chairman of the European Parliament's EU-Turkey delegation, said.
He and other EU officials said Turkey would have to follow EU values towards human rights.
"In particular, it should respect the fundamental principle to respect human rights, notably the freedom of speech, assembly and press, including the expression through social media, and the responsibility of democratic, good governance," Koumoutsakos said. 
"These last days have shown that Turkey's path to EU accession is long and steep."
In a speech on Wednesday (June 12th), EU policy chief Catherine Ashton urged EU officials to increase their involvement with Turkey and influence its government to find a peaceful resolution to the demonstrations.
"We need to make the most of all the tools we have and of course Turkey needs to work with us," Ashton said.
Ashton, who also serves as the Union's high representative for foreign affairs, urged Turkey's leaders to demonstrate the level of statesmanship they showed in the recent peace initiative with the PKK.
Demonstrations that began two weeks ago in Istanbul began as a peaceful "occupy" movement in Gezi Park in opposition to the government's plan to redevelop the green space. 
Police used water cannons and tear gas in an attempt to break up the demonstrations, which rapidly grew to include tens of thousands of people in nearby Taksim Square.
As the protests swept to dozens of cities in Turkey, protesters barricaded the roads leading into the square and kept police at bay for days. 
Riot police used massive amounts of tear gas and water to reclaim the square on Tuesday, and hundreds of protesters were injured.
"We were hoping to get a positive response [by the government] since the very beginning. 
It is 13 days now and we did not get a single positive word. 
We have lost our hopes," Sahra Kınay, a 45-year-old theatre player who lives in Istanbul, told SETimes Wednesday.
"They said [police] would not attack into the Gezi Park yesterday, but did not keep their word," Kınay said, adding that she had lost her trust in institutions.
Throughout Southeast Europe, dozens of demonstrations have shown support for Turkish protesters. 
Demonstrations included Turkish students attending universities in Sofia; Greek workers in Athens who attempted to march to the Turkish embassy and a demonstration outside the Turkish embassy in Sarajevo.
In Belgrade, activists gathered June 4th outside the Turkish embassy while holding signs reading "resistance is not terrorism" and "Resistanbul."
Katarina Pavlovic, spokesperson for Green Youth Serbia, drew parallels between the Gezi Park occupation and environmental concerns in Serbia. 
"Driven by profit, not the public interest, the government [in Serbia] allows big companies to build commercial buildings on the public space ... 
Quality of life in the big cities is decreasing, people are forcibly moved out from their homes … violating human rights and ignoring democratic principles," she told SETimes.
In Skopje, protesters assembled to demonstrate against the police crackdown in Istanbul.
Human rights activist Xhabir Deralla, leader of NGO Civil, wrote an open letter to Turkey Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan protesting the excessive use of force by the police and supporting the protesters.
"The terror on the streets in Turkey must stop immediately! 
This has revealed the true face of your regime," Deralla wrote.
Protests in Bucharest included a demonstration outside the Turkish embassy, where demonstrators carried signs that read, "Istanbul, hang on, we're at your side," and "Don't give up, hang on."
About 50 protesters signed a letter addressed to Turkish authorities and submitted it to the embassy, but the document was rejected. 
Protesters then sent the message by fax.
"Freedom of expression is a fundamental human right and therefore the aggressions against demonstrators in Turkey are to us attacks against all the signatories of the European Convention on Human Rights. 
The statements of the Turkish authorities regarding the supposed manipulation of the demonstrating citizens are an offense to the protesters and the actual manipulation as to the real reasons that pushed the Turkish into the streets," Irina Zamfirescu of the NGO ActiveWatch told SETimes.
Correspondents Drazen Remikovic in Sarajevo, Biljana Lajmanovska in Skopje, Svetla Dimitrova in Sofia, Harriet Salem in Belgrade, HK Tzanis in Athens and Gabriel Pretescu in Bucharest contributed to this report.
How will the Istanbul protests affect Turkey’s bid to join the EU? 
Make your opinions known below.
