26/10/2007
Serbian incumbent Economy and former Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic won recognition as "2006 Finance Minister of the Year" from the leading financial and banking magazine Euromoney.
According to the announcement Monday (October 22nd), Dinkic was honoured because his "uncompromising approach was crucial to the revival of his country's economic fortunes".
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) average net wage growth rose to 10.2% year-on-year in August, the BiH Statistical Office reported on Monday (October 22nd).
In July the net wage in BiH increased by 9.6% year-on-year.
The average net wage stood at 333 euros in August, while the gross wage amounted to 492 euros.
Serbia is asking the World Bank to return 150m euros that Serbia paid for servicing Kosovo's external debt, according to a proposal presented by Serbia's Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic on Monday (October 22nd).
He insisted that the proposal has nothing to do with the Kosovo status issue, but is logical because Serbia has no fiscal revenues from the province.
Greek wind power generator Terna says it plans to invest 1.5m euros by 2012 in construction of wind energy parks and other facilities for production of electric power using renewable energy sources in Greece, Southeast Europe and China.
Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister Zoran Stavrevski opened on Wednesday (October 24th) the second International Business Forum in Skopje.
The two-day forum -- organised by the Macedonian Foreign Investment Agency -- was attended by approximately 150 state institution and company representatives from 20 countries.
The European Commission notified Bulgarian authorities of its official investigation of unsolicited state aid in the concession for the Trakia highway.
The country's major southern roadway is to connect the capital with the seaside to the east and the Bulgarian-Serbian border to the west.
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha on Tuesday (October 23rd) invited German businesses to invest in Albania, saying it is one of the most secure investment destinations in Europe.
He was speaking at a conference marking the 20th anniversary of the establishment of economic relations between Germany and Albania.
(Various sources – 19/10/07-26/10/07)
