12/06/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 12/06/13
Protesters were forced out of Taksim Square on Tuesday (June 11th) so the government could reassert control over a high-profile site in the centre of Istanbul, analysts said.
Observers also suspect the square will be used to stage a rally in support of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) in contrast with nearly two weeks of anti-government demonstrations triggered by the demolition of a popular park.
"The government waited to re-take the square until Tuesday morning because there were very few people there, especially compared with the hundreds of thousands over the weekend," Sabine Freizer Gunes, an Istanbul-based political analyst from Atlantic Council, told SETimes.
"The government did not want it to appear as though Turkey's most important square was no longer under their control and that is why they decide to 'clean' it this morning. 
Unfortunately again excessive force was used and the police operation has continued into the evening rush hour, affecting a huge number of Istanbul residents." Clashes between protesters and police occurred throughout the day.
Tuesday's violent crackdown appeared to largely spare protesters in Gezi Park, adjacent to Taksim Square and the object of preservation efforts, though there was at least one confrontation.
"Police did not attack Gezi Park directly, but it does not mean that we are not affected by gas," protester Kuzey Celik told SETimes. 
"We are stuck in Gezi Park." In a speech to AKP members on Tuesday, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan appeared to signal that the park may not be left alone much longer. 
He also said protesters should leave the park.
"I am sorry but Gezi Park is for taking promenades, not for occupation," he said.
Erdogan also defended police, who have been harshly criticized for brutality and indiscriminant use of tear gas and water cannon against tourists and others not associated with the protest movement.
"What did the protesters expect; that we would kneel down before them?" he said.
The protests began May 31 when police violently removed a small group of environmentalists seeking to protest Gezi Park from development into a shopping complex. 
Massive demonstrations against the police and the government followed in Istanbul and several other cities.
At least three deaths have been confirmed by the government and an estimated 5,000 people have been hurt.
The simmering frustration reflected in the protest movement could be eased with more openness in Turkey's work to draft a new constitution, Gunes also said.
"Clearly there is a large segment of the population which does not feel that it can express itself politically based on the current institutional set up and had instead chosen the street," Gunes said.
Correspondent Evrim Kurdoglu in Istanbul contributed to this report.
Why do you think the government cleared Taksim Square? 
Share your thoughts in the comment section below.
