12/04/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 12/04/13
Republika Srpska Prime Minister Zeljka Cvijanovic said that her government plans to focus on economic reforms, including employment and the business environment.
"Any initiative that provides employment will have our support. 
We will consider disburdening employers [of taxes] who want to hire new workers with an obligation to prevent layoffs of existing workers. 
These and other measures will be taken after a detailed analysis of the taxes that businessmen need to pay," Cvijanovic said in an exclusive interview with SETimes.
"We have formed this government under very complex financial conditions," Cvijanovic recently told the members of parliament. 
"This government will carry out the necessary reforms to improve the business environment and convince all potential investors that their investments will be safe here."
RS Prime Minister Aleksandar Dzombic and his cabinet resigned last month after not being able to combat the impact of the global financial crisis and the unemployment rate increase in the country.
Cvijanovic took over after serving as minister of economic relations and regional co-operation.
She said that the priority will be to restore order in public companies, which are currently operating at huge losses and have large resources available. 
It is important that large public systems, like Elektroprivreda RS, the state electricity company, work independently as investors to provide new work places and employment, she said.
"Public administration will have to fully respect the deadlines and be absolutely at the service of anyone ... 
starting a business. 
This year, the government will allocate 12.7 million euros for employment and 10 million euros for economic development," Cvijanovic told SETimes.
She also expressed concern about the arrangement with the IMF, which she said is threatened due to chaos in the Federation of BiH.
"A number of problems also exist at the state level, from the unadopted laws, the distribution of money from indirect taxes, the uncertain help to the farmers ... 
This is not a characteristic of the current political situation, but a permanent mark in the country which fails to find answers for it," she said.
But Mladen Ivanic, president of the opposition Party of Democratic Progress, said the new government will not change anything significant in economic terms.
"It's practically the same people from the same party, for eight years of their ruling, they shown what they know. 
And they only knew to bring the RS to the brink of economic ruin. 
The new government talks a lot, but works very little," Ivanic told SETimes.
Milanko Bajatovic, 55, a construction worker from Prijedor, said that the new government has announced changes but he has doubts.
"Every government has so far announced a better life for the citizens, however little has been done. 
Everybody talks about hiring, but people lose their jobs every day. 
They should be more concerned with the economy and less with politics," Bajatovic told SETimes.
What economic reforms would you like to see implemented? 
Tell us in the comments.
