12/06/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Ljubljana -- 12/06/13
A criminal verdict against former Slovenia Prime Minister Janez Jansa is being called historic in curbing political corruption in southeast Europe.
The District Court in Ljubljana sentenced Jansa to two years in prison for corruption last week.
Jansa called the verdict "a farce" and said that he would appeal against what he called a "political process."
Judge Barbara Klajnscek ruled that Jansa and two others sought a 2 million-euro bribe from Finnish firm Patria in order to help it win a military supply contract in 2006.
Under the 278 million-euro deal, Patria was to supply Slovenia with 135 armoured personnel carriers. 
The deal was scrapped after the corruption allegations surfaced. 
The two other defendants were each sentenced to 22 months in prison. 
All three were each fined 37,000 euros.
Prosecutions in connection with the case are taking place in Finland.
Uros Luben, one of the members of the All Slovenian Rebbelion movement, said that the verdict against Jansa is historic.
"It is a sign that the judiciary is improving. 
We can say that the demands of the citizens who were protesting against corruption managed to succeed," Luben, who is also a professor of philosophy in Novo Mesto, told SETimes.
Experts said that countries in the region need to focus on officials' property.
"What is going to deter officials and politicians in Southeast Europe from taking bribes is confiscation of their illicit enrichment. 
There does not need to be a proof of a criminal act. 
The sheer fact that they possess assets beyond their salaries and other legal means, is a reason enough to confiscate assets for which they cannot prove to have gained legally," Natasha Srdoc, executive director of Adriatic Institute for Public Policy, a Croatian think tank, told SETimes.
Dejan Cabarkapa, a 27-year-old athlete from Velika Gorica, Slovenia, said that the sentence against Jansa was expected.
"I welcome this decision of the court. 
It can serve as a doctrine to other Slovenia's politicians, but also to the politicians in the Balkan countries as well. 
After Croatia's Sanader and our Jansa, I think that every official shall think twice before he decides to do some acts of corruption. 
We should serve as an example to other countries on how politicians should behave," Cabarkapa told SETimes.
Still, according to Srdoc, there are a large number of government officials in the region that commit corruption and have not been prosecuted.
"Deutsche Telekom settled for $95 million with the US authorities for bribing government officials in Montenegro and Macedonia via their company in Hungary. 
Daimler Chrysler, Siemens and Pfizer also settled for huge amounts in the US for bribing government officials, including in Southeast Europe, however the perpetrators in the region are on the loose," Srdoc told SETimes.
Jansa was prime minister from November 2004 to November 2008, and again from February 2012 until March 2013, when his centre-right government lost a confidence motion in parliament after smaller parties left the coalition led by his Slovenian Democratic Party.
As well as facing allegations about corruption and tax irregularities, Jansa's government also struggled to impose an austerity agenda amid one of the deepest recessions in the eurozone.
Will Jansa’s conviction deter politicians in Southeast Europe from fraud? 
Share your thoughts in the space below.
