26/02/2008
Montenegro is in a constructive period of development, its economy is growing at a rapid pace and the political situation in the country is stable, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said on Monday (February 25th) after talks with Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic in Brussels. 
Kosovo's declaration of independence was a key topic of discussion.
***
EU Justice Commissioner Franco Frattini, who is also vice president of the European Commission, arrived in Podgorica on Thursday (February 21st) to officially open talks on relaxing the EU's visa regime for Montenegrin citizens. 
Frattini told Prime Minister Zeljko Sturanovic that Montenegro has made commendable progress in meeting the criteria, and that the regime could be liberalised by the end of this year.
***
Croatian President Stipe Mesic met for an hour with Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi at his tent outside the city of Sirt, around 500km east of Tripoli on Monday (February 25th). 
They agreed that bilateral ties are excellent. 
While on his three-day visit to Libya, Mesic also met with the former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who is the official envoy of the Quartet on the Middle East, composed of the UN, EU, United States and Russia.
***
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha received a delegation from the Kosovo parliament, headed by Speaker Jakup Krasniqi Monday (February 25th). 
Krasniqi thanked Berisha for Albania's support of Kosovo's independence.
***
The EU could sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) by as early as April, as long as the police reform package is approved. 
This was the message delivered by Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel to his BiH counterpart, Sven Alkalaj, who was on an official visit to Ljubljana Monday (February 25th).
***
Albanian Foreign Minister Lulzim Basha met on Thursday (February 21st) in Tirana with his Latvian counterpart, Maris Riekstins, to review bilateral relations. 
Basha expressed gratitude for Latvia's support of Albania's bid to join the EU. 
He noted that Latvia was the first EU country to ratify Albania's Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU.
(Various sources - 19/02/08 -- 26/02/08)
