11/12/2012
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 11/12/12
In its latest initiative to stem unemployment, Macedonia's Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management has launched a programme that turns state farmland over social assistance recipients for them to farm, with financial assistance, for a period of five years.
Recently, the ministry chose 34 applicants for land out of the 41 it received.
"They will receive additional financial assistance from our ministry in order to be able to start work on whatever they produce," Zoran Konjanovski, deputy agriculture minister, told SETimes.
The individuals will be registered as farmers and will continue to receive social assistance over the next year.
The government will particularly strive to reduce the number of socially disadvantaged families by subsidising them, Aleksandar Gjorgjie, a government spokesman, said.
"Preference is given to people with low qualifications and age older than 55.
Individuals will receive financial compensation from 7,600 denars per month, and will be insured in the event of an accident at work or occupational disease.
Individuals also retain the right to health insurance," he told SETimes.
The ministry plans to eventually turn land over to 6,000 to 8,000 unemployed Macedonians.
The unemployment rate in the country currently stands at about 33 percent.
Agriculture, according to experts, could help not only the unemployed, but the country's economic standing as well.
"Agriculture is the biggest sector in the Macedonian economy which is expected to employ a massive number of new people, and is gaining an increased importance for exports given the global trend of ever lower yields," Ognen Orovcanec, agricultural engineer at Agrounija in Skopje, an enterprise that creates and produces new crop varieties, told SETimes.
"Beginning next year, the world markets will not ask about prices, but whether there is wheat, corn, sunflower, sugar palm, etc, at all," Orovcanec said.
The initiative comes under the framework for economic and social measures passed by the government in June.
The government allocated 13 million euros for the measure.
The ministry will hold another announcement for land applications this month.
"We start with the preparation of new land that will be available to all, and … there will be an announcement for the new plots," Konjanovski told SETimes.
Macedonia is the only state in the region with a programme like this one.
In Serbia and Montenegro, the government will subsidise farmers who own land, but without the ownership, there is no assistance.
"This is a great opportunity, when there is no work for us, at least we can begin to struggle for our own living.
I cannot say whether we will succeed or not, because we are now at the beginning.
We will grow hazelnuts;
that is our plan, and we'll see how it develops," Dane Kostoski, one of the 34 picked in this round, told SETimes.
