11/06/2013
By Selena Petrovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 11/06/13
Ongoing negotiations between the European Commission and members of the Central European Free Trade Agreement are focused on allowing Croatia to continue the trade regime it has had as part of the free trade agreement after the nation enters the EU on July 1st.
When the accession date arrives, Croatia's food products will be testing the EU market, while also trying to maintain strong footing in the region.
The negotiations involve maintaining preferential customs tariffs, which would prevent increasing prices on Croatian food products exported to non-EU free trade agreement countries.
The new protocols would represent an adaptation to the existing agreements the EU has with Central European Free Trade Agreement states.
Denis Redzepagic, economic and trade advisor for the EU delegation in Croatia, told SETimes that "overall work [negotiations] is advancing well with all countries [in the region], while progress has been slow with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)."
In cases where negotiations are not concluded by July 1st, "there are provisions for retrospective application of protocols," Redzepagic said.
Goran Buturac, senior research associate at the Institute of Economics in Zagreb, told SETimes that "for Croatia, the most important [Central European Free Trade Agreement] market is the one in BiH.
In 2012, 63 percent of Croatia's total [free trade agreement] exports went to BiH, and about 55 percent of its overall exports from [free trade agreement] countries came from BiH."
In the past several months, there have been repeated warnings in the local media that Croatian companies might relocate significant portions of their production BiH to avoid import-export issues.
However, the only official confirmation of such activities that SETimes has received came from the Gavrilovic Meat Company.
The meat processing giant will move production of its leading articles on the BiH market to Citluk, southern BiH.
Goran Grbac, Gavrilovic's commercial sector manager, told SETimes the move was necessary so the company, which has loyal customers all over the region, does not find itself in dire straits.
Grbac said more than 50 percent of the company's total exports are marketed in BiH.
Gavrilovic's production activities in BiH will be performed in partnership with local GIPI Holding.
Commenting on media observations that his company will be contributing to employment numbers in Citluk rather than in Petrinja, its Croatian headquarters, Grbac told SETimes that after July 1st, "Gavrilovic will get the opportunity to export its leading products, such as zimska salama (winter salami), to the [European] market of 500 million people.
If we are successful, we will create new jobs in Petrinja too."
Other major Croatian food producers SETimes has contacted said that for the time being they have no plans to relocate their production.
Many of them already have facilities in BiH.
Among such companies are Kraš, with a production facility in Prijedor;
Franck with a production facility in Grude;
Podravka with branch offices in Sarajevo, Široki Brijeg, and Banja Luka;
and Dukat, the subsidiary of Lactalis Group, which has production capacities in Gradačac and Tuzla.
"Some Croatian businesses long ago opened their plants or representative offices in BiH and other [free trade agreement] countries in order to boost their competitiveness, and not because of the EU entry.
Their primary reasons were cost reduction, raw material proximity, availability of cheaper labour, cheaper product distribution and marketing, existing trade and business relations, etc.," Buturac said.
Adin Fakic, director of Milkos, one of the largest BiH dairy producers, told SETimes that because of the global market, big dairy companies have been present in BiH for years.
The flip side of the issue is how BiH businesses will deal with the increasing expense of exporting to Croatia, more competitors from the EU on the Croatian market, and EU food safety and quality standards.
Fakic said his company conforms to the Union's standards, and he hopes to get the "EU number" soon.
But, he pointed to a complicated institutional structure in BiH.
"EU should have one number, one institution in BiH, that it can call and ask 'can you give guarantees for this dairy company?' But the EU first has to call the entities, Federation of BiH or Republic of Srpska, and then they contact the state authority to inquire about it."
Fakic, whose company sends 50 to 60 percent of its total exports to Croatia, said no one can say with certainty what July 1st will entail for region's dairy industry.
"Decreased exports to Croatia will definitely have some effect.
This is why we have taken several steps, including stronger presence on other [free trade agreement] markets," Fakic said.
He said it will not be easy for regional milk producers to compete on the EU market.
The Turkish market as well as the Caucuses and Arab markets, represent a promising opportunity for regional dairies, he said.
Buturac said there are various possibilities facing Croatian businesses on the European market, including the chance to join large multinational companies.
But there also is the prospect to "[explore markets] in countries that have free trade agreements with the EU, such as Mexico, South African Republic, Korea."
What are your thoughts about companies that relocate operations abroad in order to avoid increased trade tariffs?
Share your opinions in the comments section.
