10/04/2013
By Kruno Kartus for Southeast European Times in Osijek -- 10/04/13
Snjezana and Mladen Solcic's farm in the village of Patkovca, Croatia, has a modern appearance.
It is equipped with the latest devices and inhabited by more than 500 animals of quality dairy breeds.
Along with nine employees, the Solcics work 100 hectares of land, producing food for livestock.
Cows give thousands of litres of milk a day.
Since 2004, Mladen Solcic has invested 2.6 million euros in the farm.
But the price of milk has fallen for months, the costs of running the farm are rising, and the state discontinued aid through a capital support programme, which paid 25 percent of his investment.
Worse, said Solcic, is that each month they must repay the bank loan.
Croatian loan rates range from 3 to 8 percent.
Snježana and Mladen are trying to avoid low industry prices by selling directly to consumers through a vending machine they placed at a market in the nearby town Bjelovar.
Each day, Snježana pours milk into the machine, which charges about 0.8 euros for a litre.
Selling milk through the dairy industry pays them 0.33 euros per litre.
"The problem is that the vending machine sells very small quantities.
To earn a decent day's profit we should sell at least 1,000 litres, but we cannot reach that level," Solcic said.
Solcic's farm produces about 15,000 litres per day, but sells only a few hundred litres per day through the vending machines.
In Croatia there are only 15 such vending machines.
The trend is more developed in Slovenia, which has 150 machines, and in Romania, which has 335 machines.
In 2010, Romanian farmers founded the Association of Farmers Who Use Vending Machine to Sell Unprocessed Milk, which is comprised of more than 130 members.
A well-placed vending machine can sell 400 litres of milk per day, the equivalent of the production of 10 to 15 cows.
The price of one litre of milk at the vending machines is about 0.68 euros, significantly cheaper in comparison to the price of milk in a supermarket.
In 2012, Romanian farmers sold 7,500 litres of milk with an average per machine of 100 litres per day.
The advantages of such a system are the control over direct sales, a better price per litre of milk and the immediate income.
"I think that the milk vending machines are a very good selling solution that exposes the offer of the real producers to the demands of the consumers to have access to natural, unprocessed products," Sorin Sut, director of Pro Automatic, a Romanian manufacturer of milk vending machines, told SETimes.
Croatian company Letina recently started producing vending machines.
Company director Mladen Letina said interest has steadily increased.
"Farmers producing milk will increasingly want to be independent.
So beside vending machines we will produce small cheese processing plants and vending machines that will be able to sell cheese in the same way as milk," Letina told SETimes.
Igor Rešetar, a member of the Croatian Association of Milk Producers, said vending machines can only provide an additional source of income to farmers, and larger issues facing the industry must be addressed.
"Investments are high, and the payoff is only after several years.
But milk production in Croatia is in the structural problems that the state must solve," Rešetar told SETimes.
In 2002, there were 58,000 dairy farms in Croatia.
According to the Croatian Agricultural Agency, in February 2013 there were only 11,900 milk producing farms.
More than 80 percent of farms were shut down.
Branko Bobetić, director of Economy-Interest Association Croatiastočar (Croatia Farmer), said the number of milk producers has declined in almost all EU countries, "but our farmers have loans with higher rates, poor subsidies and lower productivity than in the EU.
That is why restructuring [of the dairy industry] happens faster than in the EU."
By the end of 2012, the agriculture ministry decided to assist farmers to repay loans, but the price of milk declined as a result of negotiations between farmers and industry.
Since the spring of 2012, Croatian milk prices have been calculated according to average prices in surrounding countries -- a move that has left farmers dissatisfied.
The Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development plans to restructure commercial bank loans, which farmers requested during protests about the dairy industry's difficult circumstances.
The ministry allocated 22.2 million euros to provide grants to farmers.
Agriculture Minister Tihomir Jakovina told the media that the market, not the ministry, dictates the price of milk.
"We do a good framework through reforms, funding, market regulation, regulation of the subsidy system, to assist the sector," Jakovina said.
Correspondent Gabriel Petrescu in Bucharest contributed to this story.
Should more Croatian dairy farmers sell milk via vending machines in order to supplement their incomes, or should the state do more to support them?
Share your thoughts in our comments section.
