10/06/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 10/06/13
Turkey's crackdown on protesters drew sharp criticism from the European Commission and Parliament and could increase opposition to the nation's efforts to join the European Union, experts said.
EU member states and accession candidates must be committed to fundamental values of freedom of association and respond to demonstrations with measures appropriate to the circumstances, Hannes Swoboda, European Parliament's Socialists' and Democrats' group president, told SETimes.
"I am indeed worried that, as some have already begun, the right-wing in Europe that has always rejected the accession of Turkey to the EU will use the police force as an argument why Turkey is not ready to join the EU," he said.
Police across Turkey have responded aggressively to recent peaceful anti-government protests with widespread deployment of tear gas in an indiscriminant manner, water cannons and other means of excessive force. 
The police response triggered violent confrontations and protests in cities beyond Istanbul, where the first protest was held.
Problems with police brutality in Turkey are nothing new, Swoboda said.
"It has for a long time been my impression that the Turkish police is still not sufficiently trained or able to efficiently deescalate and meet demonstrations with the appropriate constraint," Swoboda said. 
"The fight against torture in Turkey has in the past primarily been a fight against torture within the police forces."
Turkey's envoy to the EU has responded to the criticism by urging officials to not misunderstand events in the country.
"The EU should take excessive and disproportionate statements into account and be sensitive when they express opinion," Egemen Bagis, Turkey's EU minister and chief negotiator, told reporters recently.
The feelings of EU officials on Turkey's treatment of protesters appear strong.
European Union Commissioner for Enlargement Stefan Füle arrived in Turkey on Thursday (June 6th) to attend a conference organized by the Turkey's European Union Ministry that was scheduled months ago. 
He specifically addressed how Turkey's government has responded to the demonstrations.
"Peaceful demonstrations constitute a legitimate way for groups to express their views in a democratic society. 
Excessive use of force by police against these demonstrations has no place in such a democracy," he added.
Fule called on Turkey to investigate the actions by police and hold those who used excessive force accountable.
"We recall the importance of guaranteeing fundamental rights, including freedom of expression and freedom of assembly," the European Commission said in a statement. 
"Any limitations should be strictly within the limits as defined by the ECHR and the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights."
The European Parliament, referring to its previous resolutions on Turkey, recalled the need for continuing the reform process in order to safeguard freedom of expression, of assembly and of association in line with the EU values.
"After having taken its eye off Turkey in recent years, the EU must pay closer attention to the events in the candidate country," Dany Cohn-Bendit, co-president of the Greens in the European Parliament, said in a statement. 
"Opening accession negotiations with Turkey on the crucial chapters concerning justice and fundamental rights would be particularly relevant and timely to this end."
Speaking to SETimes, Claudia Roth, member of the European Parliament and co-chairman of the German Green Party, said Turkish security forces applied an unacceptable use of violence towards peaceful demonstrators.
"The extremely wide spread use of tear gas, pepper spray and rubber bullets constitutes a massive violation of civil rights," Roth said. 
"Demonstrating against governmental policies is a democratic right given by the constitution. 
The duty of the police is foremost to protect exactly these civil rights and to guarantee the security of the citizens."
Roth acknowledged excessive force has been used by countries within the EU but that it was followed by political and personal consequences.
"In the European Union we have better standards and norms that nevertheless should be implemented also by countries that want to join the EU," Roth said. 
"The accession of Turkey to the EU is closely connected to the compliance with the Copenhagen criteria."
For Roth, although there could be some violators among otherwise peaceful demonstrators, the police forces need to persecute them under the rule of law, and to protect the other citizens to exercise their civil rights.
There is no an EU ban on the use of tear gas or water cannons, but the general rule is they are a last step, not a first response, even in the face of violent demonstrations, Roth said.
"Water cannons and tear gas must only be used as a last resort to stop violence and when the justification is legally credible," she said. 
"During the current events in Turkey the police criminalised the demonstrators from the very beginning and treated them as convicts without rights. 
It has lost any sense of proportion and acted completely out of scale."
Hélène Flautre, co-chairwoman of the EU-Turkey joint parliamentary committee, said the situation endangered historic opportunities for Turkey's government.
"The massive peaceful demonstrations in Turkey, the silence of the Turkish mainstream media and the excessive use of force by the Turkish police are symptoms of wider problems within the political system in the country," she said.
Andrew Gardner, Amnesty International's researcher on Turkey, told SETimes that the organisation is concerned that police violence is increasing in other cities across Turkey.
"The use of tear gas has been excessive and abusive," he said. 
"If tear gas is used it should be done in a way that is proportional to the risk encountered and not in a way that risks the lives of demonstrators by firing canisters directly at them but by throwing the canisters at the ground."
There were cases where police have covered up their identification numbers on their helmets, a protection brought in to prevent abuses taking place and allow those responsible for the abuses to be brought to justice, Gardner said.
"Television footage has been showing individuals armed with clubs beating up protestors and apparently operating next to uniformed police. 
This disgraceful situation must be put to an end by politicians at the highest level and fully implemented by senior law enforcement officials, and perpetrators should be immediately identified and brought to justice," Gardner said.
Should the Taksim Square protests affect Turkey's negotiations with the EU? 
Please join the debate by leaving a comment.
