09/05/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 09/05/13
Kosovo's Forensics Agency has become one of the 265 labs in more than 40 countries that are using CODIS, the Combined DNA Index System, to manage a database, a move that experts said will revolutionise the country's fight against crime.
"I hope that the … system installation and application of the DNA method, which enables secure identification of persons through his traces, through bits of skin, bone parts, hairs and even traces of dry blood or sperm traces, found at the crime scene, would mark a radical turn in fighting and preventing any form of criminal activity," Kole Krasniqi, a Fama University security science professor, told SETimes.
The application of the DNA method in the identification of persons based on his/her genetic trace marks a positive turn in fighting crime in general and especially in investigating and prosecuting unsolved crimes.
The new DNA platform is considered very important for the law enforcement agencies. 
The system is a database in which the DNA profiles are placed and can be automatically compared and exchanged with other countries.
The new system will enable the establishment of an advanced national database for DNA profiles, an automatic comparison of the DNA profiles and automatic exchange of data with the regional and EU-member countries.
Arsim Gerxhaliu, the director of the department of forensic medicine under the ministry of justice, told SETimes that the system will allow for faster and more precise reports on criminal cases, which are delivered to the prosecutors.
"This is very important for forensic medicine. 
We had a lot of problems with the analysis on crimes of sexual violence and other crimes. 
Kosovo needs it, it could have been done earlier, but it is still in the right time for the law enforcement agencies in our country," Gerxhaliu told SETimes.
Blerim Olluri, Kosovo Forensics Agency director, told SETimes that when it comes to the exchange of information with regional or EU partners, it becomes a political issue.
"The platform offers the technical possibilities for the exchange of information, the exchange of the DNA profiles, but an inter-state agreement is needed [in such cases]," Olluri said.
Olluri said the agency aims to become more professional by using more forensic methods of expertise, which requires modern equipment and programmes as well as trained and specialised staff.
"Further steps towards professionalism will be the implementation of the law on the Kosovo Forensics Agency; the increase of capacities to make forensic expertise of audio, voice, soil, gunpowder, glass; and the increase of quality-accreditation methods according to international standards," Olluri told SETimes.
The agency started DNA analysis in 2009.
Will the new DNA database help solve more crimes in the region? 
Tell us what you think in the comments.
