25/02/2008
The Romanian Aeronautics and Cosmonautics Association was selected to participate in the competition for the new Google Lunar X Prize, Google announced on Thursday (February 21st).
Nine teams will complete for a 13.5m-euro prize for the first private robotic mission to the moon that can rove 500m and send a "mooncast" back to Earth.
The number of organ donors in Greece is constantly decreasing, according to data published by the Ta Nea newspaper on Tuesday (February 19th).
Only 6.2 out of every 1 million people in the country donated organs last year, compared to 8 out of every 1 million the year before.
Hilal Atici from the Turkish Greenpeace warned in a written statement to the Turkish government on Tuesday (February 19th) that a planned nuclear power plant would be gambling with the country's future.
Atici said nuclear energy has not been used as frequently worldwide because it is "expensive, polluting and very dangerous".
Macedonian pharmaceutical company Alkaloid launched a 9m-euro project Wednesday (February 20th) to build the Institute for Research and Quality Control of Medicines.
The institute, which will employ around 60 people, is expected to begin operating early next year and will research the production and control of generic drugs to increase safety.
The first meeting of the inter-parliamentary council of Turkish-language countries was held on Thursday (February 21st) in Antalya, Turkey.
The council is tasked with establishing joint legislation to facilitate exchanges of experience and implementation of joint projects by its members:
Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan and Turkey.
Only 33% of Bulgarian students and 39% of Bulgarian university graduates have high-level skills using computer programmes for the office, according to the results of Hewitt Associates' first national study of the professional orientation and motivation of students.
The survey included 12,477 students from 37 universities in Bulgaria.
(Various sources – 18/02/08-25/02/08)
