09/04/2013
By Drazen Remikovic and Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Ljubljana and Pristina -- 09/04/13
Slovenian police launched an extensive investigation into damages inflicted on Telekom Slovenije by the company management from 2006 through 2010, and experts said the police action complements domestic and regional efforts to confront high-end corruption.
"The police arrested seven individuals for abuse of office and economic crimes [conducted] in the case of the telecom.
They are suspected of causing 25 million euros in losses.
After analysing the confiscated data, we will present the criminal lawsuit to Slovenia's state prosecution against them," Drago Menegalija, press relations officer in the Slovenian police, told SETimes.
If convicted, the suspects face eight years in prison.
Slovenian Economy Minister Matej Lahovnik issued a statement saying Telekom Slovenije's investments in Kosovo's Ipko and Macedonia's Cosmofon mobile operators will be reviewed because of suspected irregularities should the company's own supervisory board does not.
The Slovenian government is the largest shareholder in Telekom Slovenije, owning 52 percent of the operator, 75 percent of Ipko and it owns Cosmofon entirely.
Telecom Slovenije invested 19.5 million euros in the original Ipko-Net in 2006, which was then only an internet provider, while investing 190 million euros to acquire Cosmofon in 2009, the biggest Slovenian investment abroad that year.
"The media reported that operators in Kosovo and Macedonia are also involved, but we must be honest and say that EU companies ...
consider that Balkans a corruptive area and act that way when they come in to do business," Davor Djenero, professor at the Faculty of Political Science in Zagreb, told SETimes.
The Slovenian media reported the former Telekom Slovenije head, Bojan Dermeli, and the others arrested, are suspected of usurping 10 million in bribes in Kosovo to obtain a license as a mobile operator.
"Such sum of money allegedly used for bribes, makes this a high-level corruption case implicating senior state officials," Merita Mustafa, programme manager at the Kosovo Democratic Institute/Transparency International, Mustafa told SETimes.
"The arrests in Slovenia should serve as a starting point for our state and its institutions to follow this case further and punish those who have been involved in such a big corruption affair," Mustafa added.
Slovenia has done more to root out corruption compared to other Balkan countries, though it lost 10 billion euros to corruption in the past 20 years, according to Goran Klemencic, president of Slovenian Anticorruption Commission.
"But is surely important for regional countries to co-operate to further reduce it.
We have not established transparency and mechanisms of law, which is the only way to effectively combat corruption in small states and closed economies like Slovenia," Klemencic told SETimes.
Alban Kastrati, public relations director of Kosovo's IPKO Telecommunications, denied the company is under investigation contrary to the claims by the Kosovo media.
"[We remain focused] in growing the business, consumer care, new services and creating values for the environment in which we operate," Kastrati told SETimes.
Kastrati explained the official Telekom Slovenije announcement stated Slovenian investigators are interested in legal operations dating back to 2006.
"These are not related to the work of the actual management in Slovenia or Kosovo," he said.
"With regard to these cases, we always contact the authorities in specific countries to exchange information to bring the investigation to a 'well done' level.
I cannot officially confirm whether Slovenian police requested assistance from Kosovo and Macedonia ...
because the investigation is not completed yet", Menegalija said.
What should the Slovenian government do to stem corruption in dealing with the rest of the Balkans?
We’d like to like to hear your ideas in the comments section.
