08/04/2013
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 08/04/13
Though children are becoming a recognised part of migrants throughout Serbia, state protections are still minimal, according to a recent report by several NGOs.
The Children on the Move report was conducted by Atina, Grupa 484, and Fund for Open Society, three NGOs working in collaboration with Norwegian Save the Children and Save the Children for North West Balkans.
"The study was conducted between September and December 2012 and is the first such report in the region focusing on the children on the move," Aleksandra Galonja, Atina activist, told SETimes.
"Children on the move" is a UNICEF-recognised term inclusive of all child migrants who are threatened by exploitation, human rights violations, violence and trafficking.
"The reasons why children leave home and are on the move, with or without their families, are multiple and complex. 
In some cases, it may offer a way out of poverty or open opportunities, such as access to education or other services that would not be available otherwise. 
Also, migration may be a way to safety, because of violence in the community or at home, or because of conflict, or natural disasters," Galonja told SETimes.
There are no official data on the number of children that enter, leave, or pass through Serbia every year, for which it is hard to document all the problems they face and provide them the aid they need.
"The numbers we have are about children involved in some sort of social protection, while there are many who are invisible who never seek or get any help," Galonja said.
According to Galonja, the report is the first step toward an institutional protection that she said all children on the move must have.
"Often, they move from one category to another. 
Since each category has its own social protection scheme, sometimes it is hard to fit children in only one category, and as a result they don't get any help or if they do, they do not get appropriate one. 
That's why we suggested to state institutions to accept 'children on the move' as a special category that includes all children groups who view Serbia as their new home or transit place," Galonja said.
Professionals emphasise that a key step in providing help to the children is to include them in education, health, and social protection systems, and make their adjustment to the new country easier.
"Interaction with adults, peers, and the community is mandatory for their survival and social interaction in the new environment. 
Understanding, respect, and support from the community where they move to is important in building children's shelter, temporary or not, family or collective, and their sense of belonging. 
Besides the state support which is mandatory, individual support is equally important and can strongly impact children's development," Bojana Skorc, psychologist, told SETimes.
The report showed that the state does not do enough to recognise and care for these children, so many do not get support or protection, though they have the right to it.
Jasmina Ivanovic, advisor at the Ministry of Social Policy, said the ministry follows children who belong to vulnerable groups such as trafficking victims, returnees in the process of readmission, refugees, and internally displaced, unaccompanied children, according to their gender, age, groups and their family and social protection measures.
"In 2011, there were 40 child trafficking victims, 1,580 in the readmission process, 1,220 refugee children, and 24 unaccompanied children of foreign nationality. 
We intervened by providing them with social protection from violence, neglect, and exploitation, and provided them with shelter or allocation to a foster family -- depending on the category they belong to," Ivanovic told SETimes.
On April 1st, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BIH) started a children on the move study, which will last five months, and is aimed to map out children on the move in these two countries, the problems they face, and governmental and nongovernmental platforms for their protection.
"Since this is a first attempt to define children on the move in Serbia, Montenegro and BiH, there isn't much we can do for now, but make visible the children's position and suggest possible solutions. 
We hope to see more countries in the region do more to recognise this category of children and provide them the necessary protection," Nevena Milutinovic, program co-ordinator in the Save The Children North West Balkans, told SETimes.
What are some efficient ways to assist children on the move? 
Let us know what you think by leaving a comment.
