08/04/2013
By Igor Jovanovic and Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 08/04/13
EU Commissioner Catherine Ashton is leaving the door open for an agreement between Serbia and Kosovo over the status of northern Kosovo, even as the two sides ended negotiations on April 2nd without reaching a deal.
"The gap between the two sides is very narrow, but deep. 
They will now both go back and consult with colleagues in their capitals, and will let me know in the next several days of their decision," Ashton said.
Ashton said this is the last time the two sides will meet formally for EU-brokered talks.
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said Serbia has asked for more time to conduct additional consultations.
"Despite all the actual difficulties, we cannot proclaim the process is closed or failed. 
We hope that Serbia will reflect, accept reality and, with this, the agreement as well," Thaci said.
Thaci outlined the main points of the agreement. 
First, the association of municipalities with a Serb majority will not have executive or legislative powers, and Kosovo's justice system will be unified on its entire territory. 
Kosovo's police's chain of command will function based on Kosovo laws.
Second, the illegal security structures will be disbanded and freedom of movement of people and goods throughout Kosovo guaranteed.
Finally, local elections will be organised and managed in Kosovo's northern municipalities by the OSCE and certified by Kosovo's central electoral commission.
Serbian officials called the situation disastrous and expressed concerns over the two possible solutions the country faces. 
Belgrade can reject what it views as a very unfavorable agreement, thereby postponing EU integration, or it can accept the agreement and continue EU accession.
"All citizens must know that rejecting the plan will mean Serbia's closing to the world and less money for our budget and economy, that it will be impossible to persevere on the political scene amid various sorts of pressure from all sides, and if we accept a very poor solution, the question is how our people in Kosovo will take it and how the other part of our people will react as well," said Serbia's First Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic.
Prime Minister Ivica Dacic visited France on April 4th to seek support after Serbia's proposals for broader autonomy for the Kosovo Serbs were rejected.
"This puts Serbia in a situation where it is in quicksand and every year we sink deeper and deeper," Dacic said.
Belgrade has until April 9th to make a decision, Dacic said.
Serbian Finance and Economy Minister Mladjan Dinkic was the first to suggest Serbia accept the Brussels proposed solution because otherwise it cannot survive economically if it is isolated.
Many in Serbia, however, disagree the situation is as dramatic as suggested.
"Talk of doors shutting for Serbia is pathetic and untrue, because isolating Belgrade now is in no one's interest," Aleksandar Mitic of the Centre for Strategic Alternatives told SETimes.
"Belgrade would make a big mistake if it accepted any compromise resembling what it is being offered now because nothing dramatic will happen if it turns down this plan," Mitic added.
Meanwhile the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) demanded that Serbia declare political neutrality and drop plans for EU membership.
Some experts, however, argued Serbia will indeed face a dramatic decline in living standards, more difficult conditions for conducting business as well as a possible reduction in its credit rating.
"It would make it more expensive for Serbia to get loans since it depends on foreign sources of financing, which would jeopardise regular debt servicing and additionally tighten the debt noose, bringing us closer to the Greek crisis," Sasa Djogovic of the Institute for Market Research told SETimes.
There is reason for optimism and the talks should continue by any means, said Petrit Selimi, deputy foreign minister of Kosovo.
"But delays in the process will also damage Kosovo because the prolonged status-quo will have security and economic implications all over the Balkans," Selimi told SETimes.
Selimi explained Kosovo remains committed to the EU integration as its only option.
"[If Serbia refuses to accept the proposed agreement] Kosovo will continue the independent journey to becoming a responsible state, integrated in the international community."
Should the EU continue its role in brokering an agreement between Serbia and Kosovo? 
Join the debate by making a comment.
