07/11/2012
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Time in Skopje -- 08/11/12
In an effort to reduce large unemployment numbers, which are growing due to the economic crisis, several Western Balkan countries are focusing on retraining programmes to get citizens back into the workforce.
The programmes serve to educate the unemployed about careers that are in demand.
In Macedonia, where the unemployment rate is 32 percent, the measures, which are implemented through the education and labour and social policy ministries, aim to reduce the mismatch of supply and demand in the labor market, improve competitiveness and create new jobs.
With a 2012 budget of 180,000 euros, the programme offers retraining for up to four months to those who are unemployed.
"I graduated from the law faculty 10 years ago, but could not find a job as a lawyer. 
Last year I decided to be a part of government programme of prequalification, and finished retraining for hairdressers. 
Then I opened my own hairdressing salon and it was the real choice for existence," Skopje resident Silvana Ristevska, 40, told SETimes.
This year, 183 people have completed the retraining and 23 have been hired so far.
Electro-installers, accountants, automotive diagnostics, business secretaries, machinery repair people, cooks and hairdressers are some of the main professions that companies are seeking in Macedonia.
"Verified prequalification programmes … are realised over a period of three months. 
Then the candidates [are trained in] practical work with employers for … one month. 
People gain a degree qualification," Spiro Ristevski, minister of labour and social policy, told SETimes.
However, the programme has yet to catch on in the country.
"Some of the people who will apply for further prequalification in just a few crowded hours of training are giving up. 
Especially in those cities where the unemployment figure is very large," Vlatko Popovski, state employment agency director, told SETimes.
Some, such as Ljindita Kjezimi, director of the Centre for Adult Education, said that the programme is stalled because the majority of the public does not know about the benefit.
"We should work to raise awareness of people about what are the benefits of prequalification and retraining as an opportunity for employment," Kjezimi told SETimes.
In Serbia, where unemployment stands at 24.7 percent, the programme has had more initial success.
Last year, more than 1,600 people took part in the initiative, which includes courses on starting a business, training programmes, further education, career planning, and programs for the disabled. 
About 30 percent of them have been hired.
"I started as a hobby with making cakes, first for their children, and for the birthdays of friends and family, and then people began to order," Maja Denic, a Belgrade economist, said. 
When she failed to find work as an economist, she and her sister took a retraining course in pastry. 
"When we complete the course, which has 160 hours of practical training, I plan to open my own shop."
Most of them were retrained as accountants, automotive diagnostics, business secretaries, machinery repairers and heating technicians. 
Serbia has a retraining budget of 2.5 million euros in 2012.
"Prequalification and retraining, according to the experiences of the National Employment Service of Serbia, is the only way to get a job in the near future," Nevena Letic, head of the state Department for Work, told SETimes.
"Our goal was to boost employment in the least developed regions in Serbia," Dejan Jovanovic, director of the National Employment Service, told SETimes.
SETimes correspondent Biljana Pekusic in Belgrade contributed to this report.
