07/11/2012
By Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Pristina - 07/11/12
EULEX agrees with the majority of a recent report by the European Court of Auditors that concluded that the mission's assistance to Kosovo is not sufficiently effective.
Officials have already addressed several of the recommendations, according to Blerim Krasniqi, mission spokesperson.
"The mission has been renewed until 2014 and reconfigured to improve resource allocation and co-ordination," Krasniqi told SETimes.
According to the report, assistance to Kosovo's judiciary and police has achieved only modest success.
"Levels of organised crime and corruption in Kosovo remain high. 
The judiciary continues to suffer from political interference, inefficiency and a lack of transparency and enforcement," it said.
Krasniqi argued, however, that the mission continues to investigate and prosecute senior officials, former wartime commanders, businessmen and intelligence services.
"Hundreds of ongoing investigations, over 300 verdicts in criminal and civil cases, 23,000 solved conflict-related property claims, and over 300 human remains of missing persons returned to their families also attest to the mission's impact," he said.
"[EULEX also] has acted as a deterrent and preventative actor, defusing situations which would have otherwise erupted into conflicts," Krasniqi added.
But Betim Musliu, of the Kosovo Justice Institute, said the report adequately assessed EULEX's key shortcomings.
"There is ambiguity over the objectives of the EULEX mission in Kosovo ... 
its actions sometimes are considered political, far from promoting European standards," Musliu told SETimes.
Widespread corruption and organised crime in Kosovo cannot be successfully fought by establishing a dual system, local and international, having a Kosovo state prosecutor and EULEX prosecution, he said.
"First they arrest people, afterwards they start investigations and in the end fail to secure sufficient evidence," Musliu said about what he considered to be EULEX's main shortcoming.
Kosovo's limited capacity to protect key witnesses and the difficulties relocating witnesses abroad are important shortcomings, the report said, and noted there has been almost no progress in establishing rule of law in northern Kosovo.
The report offered six recommendations including the need for specific benchmarks for the rule of law objectives for Kosovo, a EULEX exit strategy, policy dialogues among EU and Kosovo institutions focused on strengthening the rule of law, and linking to incentives and priority conditions.
"ECA hopes its conclusions and recommendations will make their way into the conclusions of the December 14th European Council [meeting]," Palubinskas added.
Kosovo is the largest per capita recipient of EU financial aid in the world, having received nearly five billion euros since 1999.
