06/06/2013
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 06/06/13
Countries in Europe and Asia are required to freeze their hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) consumption to a baseline this year, and achieve a 10 percent reduction by 2015 under the Montreal Protocol.
HCFCs are used as a refrigerant and propellant in aerosol cans, and have been found to contribute to ozone depletion in the upper atmosphere.
"The Montreal Protocol aims to protect the ozone sphere, which is the protective factor of the planet earth from radiation. 
The situation is alarming, but big results have already been achieved especially in the Balkan countries and EU member states of [the Regional Ozone Network in Europe and Central Asia]," Halvart Koeppen, regional co-ordinator of the UN Environmental Programme, told SETimes.
A recent conference in Ohrid, organised by the Macedonian Ministry of Environment and Urban Planning in collaboration with the Environment Programme of the UN, focused on ways that countries can achieve the mandate.
Participants included representatives from Albania, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia, Turkey and Turkmenistan.
The meeting focused on exchanging experiences in the implementation of plans for the elimination of HCFC compounds.
"States, especially those in the developing world have a big benefit from …. 
knowledge to improve the legislation and regulations, transfer of knowledge and training, funding for direct implementation in changing technologies and equipment," Koeppen told SETimes.
The main objectives of the meeting included establishing e-learning centres, enabling national ozone units to efficiently implement the phase-out management plans and strengthening national refrigeration and air-conditioning associations in the region as key actors in achieving the decrease.
"The establishment of the network is of multiple importance for the network's member states. 
Macedonia opened an office for the protection of ozone in 1997, but with our initiative to establish a network as a state, we became a trainer and navigator to provide the other countries to have access to opportunities and benefits of Montreal protocol," Marin Kochovski, head of the Office of ozone in Macedonia, told SETimes.
According to Marco Gonzalez, the UN Environmental Programme secretariat for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, Macedonia met the obligations of the Montreal Protocol earlier than expected.
"Macedonia contributed by making technology changes in the industry with technology that is advantageous for the ozone layer. 
At the international level, fulfilling the obligations of the protocol is at a very high level," Gonzalez told SETimes.
According to the UN, four countries in the region reduced their HCFC consumption dramatically. 
Moldova reduced its consumption by 43 percent, Croatia by 40 percent, Turkey by 34 percent and Turkey by 34 percent from 2007 to 2009.
The EU phased-out the use of HCFCs beginning in January 2010, and Croatia is hoping for a complete phase-out in 2016, 14 years ahead of the Montreal Protocol schedule.
How difficult will it be to phase out the use of HCFCs in your home? 
Tell us by leaving a comment.
