05/04/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic and Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Istanbul -- 05/04/13
New efforts, including a free trade agreement, are being made to boost bilateral trade relations between Serbia and Turkey, which have been growing since September 2010.
"The legislative framework for economic co-operation between Serbia and Turkey is already set, including the visa regime, [which was] abolished in December 2010.
Politicians on both sides gave their full support and well-prepared grounds for businessmen," Filip Sanovic, economy advisor at Serbia's Consulate General in Istanbul, told SETimes.
Although the two countries share similarities in business culture, only 34 Turkish companies are on the Serbian market now, employing 500 people.
Serbian International Trade Association and Turkish Confederation of Businessmen and Industrialists, in co-operation with the Belgrade Chamber of Commerce, are trying to boost co-operation by organising business forums and meetings, such as the recent Serbian-Turkish Business Forum held on March 26th in Belgrade, which gathered 35 Turkish and 200 Serbian businessmen.
"Often, business launching requires time and we had such situation in the past when companies needed almost a year to start co-operation.
We are positive and sure we'll have concrete results soon.
Since Turkey has the longest production tradition, we expect first results in this sector," Omer Simsek, confederation chairman, told SETimes.
"If Turkey economically, in tourism, management and export, becomes a world superpower, their industry in the Balkans could be applicable to Serbian economy also too.
Work methods and employee pay are similar," Milan Jankovic, president of the Belgrade Chamber of Commerce, told SETimes.
He said Turkey's support of businessmen via subvention programmes could be a good example for Serbia.
"Turkish educational system can serve as a good example.
Turkey yields not only highly educated personnel, but personnel for some tertiary occupations," Jankovic said.
"Serbia has a great business environment, tax policy, geographic and geostrategic position as well as CEFTA benefits," Jankovic added.
He pointed out that political and business climate are good with many opportunities.
"Three months ago there were no Turkish banks in Serbia but one, finally, opened, and more will follow the current business relations, which would be a significant step ahead," Jankovic said.
Stevan Nikcevic, state secretary at the Serbian Ministry of Foreign and Internal Trade and Telecommunication, said the main potentials for co-operation now and in the future are mostly in trade, but also in joint efforts in the so-called third markets.
"There are numerous sectors like agriculture, textile industry, metal, manufacturing where competitiveness already exists and where both countries have space to enforce economies and partner relations, but significant number of free trade agreements that Serbia has are a huge for co-operation improvement and a route for both Serbian and Turkish investors toward the so-called third market, which is quite a big market with several hundred million consumers," Nikcevic told SETimes.
Those markets are Russia, Belorussia, Kazakhstan and other countries with which Serbia has free trade agreements.
Erhan Turbedar, foreign trade policy analyst at the Ankara-based Turkey Economic Policies Research Foundation, agrees.
"Turkish businessmen should look into big opportunities to establish more advantageous trade ties with third world countries, which in total has around a billion people, through Serbia as an intermediary," Turbedar told SETimes.
Nikcevic noted there are numerous natural businesses and cultural bridges between Serbia and Turkey, which should be maintained as an important base for further co-operation.
The Turkish side holds a similar view, according to Turbedar.
"Although there is no common border between Turkey and Serbia, Turkish authorities often say they consider Serbia as their neighbour.
For Ankara, Serbia is a key country in preserving peace and stability in the Balkans, and for that reason Turkish businessmen show an unprecedented interest in investing in Serbia, though the effort is still small."
In 2012 Turkish export to Serbia was 297 million euros (688 million Turkish lira), while Serbian export to Turkey remained at 160 million euros (371 Turkish lira).
The joint effort is to increase the current trade of almost 600 million euros to 1 billion euros.
Turkey is Serbia's 17th trading partner, currently not able to compete with other players like Germany, Italy and Slovenia.
What other sectors can Turkey and Serbia boost co-operation in?
Tell us what you think in the comments.
