05/11/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 05/11/12
Four years after Kosovo officials acted to address poor school safety, conditions have improved and authorities are turning their attention to social issues that can lead to disruptions in school security.
The presence of narcotics and weapons, among other problems, led Kosovo's interior and education ministries to sign an agreement in May 2008 pledging to make schools safer.
Kosovo police spokesperson Baki Kelani told SETimes that the initiative has helped reduce incidents in schools.
"Cases reported to the police are mainly cases that occur in areas outside the school building or school yards around the school.
The cases that have occurred in school buildings are very rare," he said.
Kelani said two people were found with narcotics in schools during the first half of this year.
"Kosovo police mostly have to deal with cases like breach of public order, slight bodily harm and theft cases reported by school representatives," he said, adding that school staffs ultimately are responsible for maintaining order.
"The police have a very good co-operation with representatives of the schools and also with regional departments of education … to prevent incidents in schools and create a safe environment," he said.
Arbër Morina, chief of staff to the minister of education, told SETimes that the ministry has taken measures to sanction those involved in school violence in compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other international instruments relating to human rights.
The ministry, UNICEF and civil society groups are finalising the protocol against violence in schools, which the government is due to approve by the end of the year.
"Beside the integration of human/children rights topics, gender, trafficking and health issues, the ministry has also made a series of trainings for teachers for the prevention of violence," Morina said.
Kelani said close co-operation between parents and school officials has added to school safety.
At the Sami Frashery Gymnasium in Pristina, director Osman Beka said parents requested and provided financial support for increased security measures.
The school includes more than 2,800 students in 67 classes.
"We have installed some 42 security cameras that observe the schoolyard and corridors, and as a result of this we are trying to make clear to the children not to get involved in any kind of incidents," Beka told SETimes, adding that support from parents also allowed for the hiring of security staff.
Suzana Tahiri, who has three school-aged children, said she is concerned about keeping children safe from inappropriate content on the Internet and other social problems they may encounter.
"Many live in poverty and this directly influences the children who come from poor families," Tahiri said.
"On other hand, today I think more attention needs to be paid to the safety on the Internet.
This is really a concern for me."
