15/05/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb- 15/05/06
After a lengthy period of stagnation, Croatia's film industry is starting to take off. 
Films from the Balkan republic have been starting to reap awards at prestigious international film festivals, and Chicago's Gene Siskel Centre recently hosted a series that pronounced Croatian cinema "Eastern Europe's rising star".
The Croatian film industry enjoyed considerable success prior to 1991. 
Before conflict broke out in Yugoslavia, Croatian filmmakers made a number of cult films that are still popular today.
The Croatian films of the 1980s were filled with humor, nostalgia, political provocation, sexuality and love, and they won the appreciation of audiences. 
All that changed, though, after the collapse of Yugoslavia. 
After the war, money for filmmaking was scarce, and the films that were made focused on dark themes -- war and depression. 
Co-operation with Bosnian and Serbian colleagues came to an end, while many celebrated Yugoslav-era directors retired from the scene.
On the other hand, with the formation of an independent Republic of Croatia, the Croatian movie industry also gained independence and a chance to develop. 
Over time, a new generation of directors -- known as the "Young Croatian Film" group -- injected new enthusiasm into the industry with films concentrating on everyday life, social themes, historical subjects and the war. 
The new situation in the country has opened up space for Croatian filmmakers to broach subjects that were taboo in the former Yugoslavia -- for example, the relations between Croatians and Serbs, or the WWII-era fighting between communist Partisans and the fascist Ustashe.
In recent years, Croatian film has begun to shake off its reputation for poor quality and heavy-handedness, delivering a series of refreshing new offerings, with a markedly more appealing tone. 
This year, Croatia has scored a major film success with "What Is a Man Without a Mustache?", a comedy about young widow who falls for the priest in a bankrupt parish. 
Its star, Zrinka Cvitisic, won the Best Actress Award at the 2005 Sarajevo Film Festival. 
The movie also won the audience prize at the Zagreb Film Festival and has been a hit with audiences in countries as diverse as Greece and Korea.
This unprecedented success is probably due to a combination of factors: better actors and production values, more skillful marketing, and the movie's spicy humor and outgoing style. 
At the very least, the film is a welcome sign that Croatian films can improve.
Also making waves this year was Ognjen Svilicic's "Sorry for Kung Fu", which deals with ethnic prejudice, xenophobia and conflicts between old and new ways of thinking. 
Daria Lorenci plays a young Croatian refugee who returns to her village from Germany, unmarried and pregnant. 
From the point of view of her family and neighbours, that's bad enough -- but then she shocks them further by delivering a child with Asian features. 
The film was a selection at the Berlin and Vancouver film festivals, and won Grand Prize at the Warsaw Film Festival.
Despite the higher international profile, Croatian movies are still the underdog when it comes to the domestic box office. 
On the whole, audiences in the country seem to prefer films from elsewhere in the region, perceiving them as better produced and better acted, and featuring more interesting themes. 
The Serbian film "We are Angels 2" and Macedonina's "Balkankan" both brought in more viewers than the average Croatian production. 
Movies from Serbia have achieved popularity despite lingering antagonism between the two neighbours -- possibly because they are seen as "forbidden fruit". 
Bosnian films, too, are acclaimed for their liveliness and spark. 
Croatian movies, meanwhile, are stereotyped as lacking in humor, undermined by bad acting, and presenting a false sense of reality.
US films have been an even more important source of competition, especially in the early 1990s when the biggest box office draws were movies like "Pretty Woman" and "Dead Poets' Society". 
Croatians flocked to these Hollywood offerings, while avoiding the clunky domestic productions of the Tudjman era.
In short, Croatian film has been caught in a double bind. 
Unable to pull in viewers, it has not been able to count on profits from theatre tickets. 
At the same time, the state has not provided adequate funding to enable the industry to gain traction. 
Despite these formidable obstacles, though, Croatian film is slowly but steadily managing to increase its quality. 
Meanwhile, the Pula Film Festival -- a cultural landmark in the Yugoslav era -- is being revived, some degree of subsidisation is resuming, and political interference has become less of a problem. 
And in a further sign that the period of isolation is ending, co-operation has resumed between Croatian moviemakers and their counterparts elsewhere in the region.
