25/04/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 25/04/05
Four years ago, six Southeastern European (SEE) countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria, Croatia, the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Macedonia signed a Memorandum of Understanding on liberalising trade in the region. 
The document, brokered by the Stability Pact for South East Europe, called for signatories to negotiate Free Trade Agreements, refrain from imposing restrictive trade practices, review existing agreements to ensure they are in line with the goal of EU integration and simplify customs procedures.
Since that time, 28 bilateral agreements have been signed, but free trade remains an elusive goal. 
SEE countries have chosen the hard way -- instead of acceding to a single multilateral agreement, they have created a network of bilateral, unharmonised contracts. 
The steps taken so far have encouraged foreign investors to expand in individual Balkan countries. 
But a 55 million-strong regional market is more alluring than any single national market, and that would require harmonisation, experts say. 
Only with the adoption of a unified document can a free trade zone be legally defined. 
A regional ministerial conference, scheduled for June, is expected to address the prospects for signing such an agreement.
Harmonisation would pave the way for all SEE countries to join the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), which already includes Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania. 
CEFTA encompasses a basic multilateral document and separate bilateral lists of sensitive products, which vary from country to country.
Serbia-Montenegro has signed free trade deals with seven other countries, with the aim of facilitating more efficient bilateral operations and a quicker exchange of goods, people, services and capital. 
In this way, the region as a whole will become more attractive to foreign investors, while the door to the EU and the WTO will be opened further. 
Under the agreements, all obstacles to integration should be removed by 2007. 
While the process has been all but completed in the services sector, grave problems remain in the agricultural sector.
The most serious problem that has arisen so far concerns Serbia-Montenegro's bilateral agreement with BiH. 
After unilaterally pushing back the implementation deadline, authorities in BiH then imposed import tariffs on prime agricultural products from Serbia-Montenegro. 
Montenegro then decided to levy temporary import duties on flour, while BiH subsequently scrapped the zero customs duty on flour and beer from Serbia-Montenegro. 
Podgorica lifted the import duties on 11 March, but BiH decided two days before that to introduce import tariffs on Serbian agricultural products eligible for export incentives.
The government in Sarajevo says it has valid reasons for reintroducing tariffs, arguing that the move is in response to unfair policies adopted by Belgrade. 
"The Serbian government passed a direct decision in April last year to subsidise the country’s exports. 
We have alerted the Serbian government and asked it to invalidate the measure, but no steps have been taken for a year," said Bojan Zec Filipovic, an advisor to Adnan Terzic, the chairman of the BiH Council of Ministers. 
For his part, Terzic insists his government's move was a necessary measure. 
"Between the good neighbouring relations and our farmers, we had to choose our farmers," Terzic said.
Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic says his government is ready to negotiate. 
"At the moment, no one needs a trade war. 
It would bring losses to all sides," Dinkic said, adding that BiH has been an important trade partner. 
The Serbian government will amend its decree on agricultural export incentives if BiH scraps tariffs on Serbia’s agricultural products and pledges not to impose similar safeguard measures in the future, according to federal Assistant International Relations Minister Dejan Jovovic. 
Unless the two countries find a solution, Serbia-Montenegro will call on the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe to help enforce the free trade agreement, Jovovic warned.
Serbian President Boris Tadic has joined efforts to settle the tariffs issue. 
He agrees with BiH Prime Minister Ahmet Hadzipasic that the political will exists to resolve the customs regime issue. 
Economic delegations of the two former Yugoslav republics, gathering 100 Serbian and 50 BiH firms, met in Belgrade on 23 March to discuss implementation of the troubled agreement.
The federation’s representatives concluded that the problem does in fact stem from Serbia’s agricultural export incentives, which they said place BiH producers in a "non-market position". 
At a news conference following the meeting, Tadic said he would direct an interstate commission to begin settling the issue as soon as possible. 
At the same time, he claimed that his sources indicate Serbia is directing only $2m in subsidies for goods exported to the neighbouring country.
BiH is Serbia’s largest foreign trade partner, accounting for 17 per cent of local exports. 
In 2004, the level of bilateral exchange jumped 65 per cent year-on-year, reaching $893.2m. 
Tadic and Hadzipasic agreed that the two Balkan states could successfully co-operate on arms production in the future and achieve significant exports to the world market.
The message that Tadic brought from his recent visit to Brussels is that the region’s common goal of joining the EU would best be achieved in unison. 
If nothing else, Tadic said, BiH, Serbia and Croatia have one thing in common -- insufficient co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal as the main impediment on the road to EU membership. 
"The tribunal in The Hague has not only moral, historical and legal dimensions -- it also has an economic dimension, which no one should neglect," the Serbian president said.
The economic dimension impacts the quality of life of every person living in the region, and opponents of co-operation with the tribunal are in fact saying that "we should not work to improve citizens’ lives", Tadic added.
