I. LEGISLATIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE 
A. Fisheries legislation 

Please describe the main elements of your national legislation concerning fisheries. 
The entire fishing in the Republic of Macedonia is performed in freshwater fishing areas and compounds. The legislative framework on fishing in the Republic of Macedonia refers to usage, management and protection of fish stock in waters designated for fishing, and it is contained in the following laws and secondary legislation:   Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93)   Law on Concessions (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 25/02, 24/03)   Law on Nature Protection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 67/04) Rulebook on the Minimum Necessary Equipment for Basic Hydrological and Ichthyologic Analysis (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94); Rulebook on Hygienic-Technical Conditions at Fishing Departure and Return Centres (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94); Rulebook on Methods for Implementation of Fish-keeping Service and Identification Form for the Fish Stock Keeper (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94); Guideline on the Fish Size under which Fishing is Forbidden (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94); Order on Fishing during Night Hours (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94); Order on Closed Season for certain Fish Species and other Useful Fish Stock Animals by Fishing Areas and Compounds, as well as Fishing Limits during Closed Season (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94); Guideline on Issuance of Sport Fishing Permit and its Form (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94); Guideline on Commercial Fishing Identification Form (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94); Order for Types of Fishing Gear to be Used in Commercial and Sport Fishing, as well as Limitations related to the Use of Certain Fishing Gear for Commercial and Sport Fishing (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 33/99); The Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93) regulates the usage, management and protection of fish stock in waters designated for fishing. The term “usage of the fish stock” within the context of this Law, assumes fish reproduction and fishing fish and other useful animals in a way that secures sustainable reproduction and protection. The fishing can be commercial, for recreation-sport, and fishing for scientific and research purposes. The fish stock in open fishing water for commercial fishing (Lake Ohrid, Lake Prespa and Lake Dojran) as well as water accumulations approved by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for commercial fishing, are assigned for usage upon approval (concession) to a domestic legal entity, and for sport fishing it is assigned to domestic sport fishing associations or other domestic legal entities, for a period of five years. This exploitation is granted only after previously submitted five-year plan for improvement, protection and usage of fish stock, and only if the relevant legal requirements are fulfilled. Sport fishing is allowed based on a permit issued to the user by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. The user of the fish stock is required to perform direct protection and improvement of the fish stock, as well as to undertake measures for prevention and eradication of fish diseases and pests. Fishing for scientific and research purposes is performed by scientific institutions and in cooperation with the concession grantees, and after previously obtained permit.  B. Administrative structure 

1. Provide an organigramme describing the organisation of the fisheries administration and the fisheries inspection. Describe the relations between these bodies and the hierarchy in the system. 
The fishery administration and inspection is organized in the following way: There is a Sector of Agriculture within the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, responsible for development, proposal and implementation of legal regulations, as well as for managerial and technical issues of the fisheries. During the process of drafting and promotion of legal regulations, this Sector consults and coordinates other responsible/competent governmental bodies, as well as relevant scientific institutions and users of fish stock. This Sector is managed by the Head of the Sector of Agriculture, in the scope of which is the Livestock Unit and 33 agricultural units in local municipal units, with respective heads. The State Agriculture Inspectorate is an entity within the Ministry for Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, which is directly responsible for monitoring of the implementation of the provisions of the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93).  The State Agriculture Inspectorate is managed by a Director. Within the Inspectorate, there is a Unit for agriculture with respective head of unit and 23 state inspectors, responsible for inspection surveillance over all waters designated for fishing in the Republic of Macedonia.  During some instances of control, it is necessary to have the bodies of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to intervene (independently and/or in cooperation with the State Agriculture Inspectorate), and their relations are regulated by the Law on the Organization and Operation of the State Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 58/00). 4/17 