III. MEANS OF CONTROL AND CONTROL ACTIVITIES 
A. Financial means 

1. What budgetary means have been allocated for fisheries control (in €)? Are these means increasing or decreasing? 
The State Agriculture Inspectorate is responsible for performing the fishery control and supervisory activities. These activities are financed by the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia. The funds are disbursed through the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. Specific analysis with regards to the amount of funds allocated to the fisheries control is not maintained.                                                 
2. How have these means been allocated? 
The funds are disbursed on the basis of the volume of the planned budget of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the planed activities and the number of engaged inspectors.                                                                                                                                  
B. Human resources 

1. How many personnel are involved in fisheries control? What is the distribution of personnel among the relevant authorities? Are resources increasing or decreasing? 
The inspection surveillance includes 26 state inspectors of agriculture. Special activities are performed by inspectors in the municipal units where fishing areas are located (Lake Ohrid, Lake Prespa and Lake Dojran), as well as accumulations designated for commercial fishing. In accordance with the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93), the fish stock beneficiaries are required to perform physical protection through their security fish keepers. The number of these fish keepers varies and it can be up to 35 keepers, depending on the needs of the beneficiaries/concession grantees on all fishing waters cumulatively. The inspection surveillance is also performed by appropriate staff within the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Given that there is no special staff for fishery control, the number of persons engaged in performing control at any given time depends on the current needs at that time.                                                                                                       
2. What is the working schedule of fisheries inspectors (full time/part time, hours etc.)? How many are directly involved in actual fisheries control (inspections)? How many are administrators? If officials have different tasks, what proportion of their time is spent on fisheries control? 
The state inspectors of agriculture and fish keeping staff work on a full-time basis, and if necessary they could be additionally engaged. A total of four inspectors are directly involved, and others are included when there are special action controls. There is one administrator in the State Agriculture Inspectorate. The special staff of the Ministry of Internal Affairs is included in these actions if necessary.                                                                                 
3. What is the educational background of the control personnel? Is training provided, and what does it consist of? 
In accordance with the Law on Agricultural Inspection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), all agricultural inspectors have completed university education – graduated on the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Food. There is no special training for the inspectors. Professional development and technical upgrading are attained through seminars or training sessions.                                                                 
C. Powers of control 

1. Where are inspection powers defined? 
The inspection competences are defined in the Law on Agricultural Inspection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), and in the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93), as well as in their respective secondary legislation.                                                                                                                              
2. Describe the powers of control available for each type of control personnel. 
The state agriculture inspector, besides the general authorizations, and in accordance with the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93), is also authorized for the following: perform monitoring of the fishing process, the fish catch and the fishing tools used for the fishing process, review the permits for commercial fishing, as well as the permits for sport fishing;                                                                                                     supervise the facilities, sites, business premises and books/records on the fish catch of the fish beneficiaries that have been using the fish stock and trade fish;                temporary confiscation of the fish catch, the permit for performing commercial fishing and permit for sport fishing, as well as fishing tools/equipment, and                                 surveillnace of the fish stocking process on the open fishing waters.                                     The fish stock beneficiary/concession grantee, in accordance with the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93), is required to establish a fish keeping service for direct protection of the fish stock, which would function in accordance with the Rulebook on the Functioning of the Fish Keeping Service and Identification as Fish Stock Custodian (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/94).                            
3. Do inspectors have a clear notion of the extent and the limits of their powers? 
Inspectors have a clear vision of the domain and limitations of their competences. All inspectors must be familiar with and know the laws based on which they perform supervision, as well as their own authorizations according to the applicable regulations.      
D. Control equipment 

1. What control equipment is available for control activities? How is the equipment distributed among the different authorities? 
The state agriculture inspectors, for the purpose of performing the control activities, operate 20 official vehicles, property of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. For supervision of the fishing areas, they use the vessels of the concession grantees/beneficiaries, and those of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.                                                                               2. What is the state of the control equipment? How old is it? Are there plans for renewal of the equipment? 
The equipment, property of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy (the vehicles) are in satisfactory condition, with an average vehicle age of 6 years. The renewal of the vehicles is performed depending on the availability of funds in the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia.  The condition of the vessels, property of the beneficiaries is not satisfactory, and their replacement is dependent on the financial condition of the beneficiaries of the fish stock.                                                               
3. Is the equipment adequate for the tasks to be carried out? Describe the needs. 
The equipment available for implementation of the tasks is insufficient. For successful implementation of tasks, it is necessary to obtain vessels, measuring instruments and protective equipment, for which a detailed need analysis should be made.    
 4. What is the level of computerisation? 
The computerization level is very low. Only part of the state inspectors operate a personal computer. They are not networked among each other and have no internet access.   
E. Collection of data 

1. How is the collection of fishing data organised? 
The fish stock beneficiaries are required to submit a report on the implementation of annual programmes, which contain information on implemented fish catch (quantity of fish catch by species) to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, no later then two months after the time period for which the report is made.                                                  The data on fishery statistics is reviewed by the Unit for Agriculture, Forestry, Hunting, Fishing and Environment within the Sector for Business Statistics in State Statistical Office, for freshwater fishing only. For that purpose, they implement an annual research “Annual Report on Frashwater Fishing – -62”, carried out throughout the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. Fishing companies and fishing cooperatives act as monitoring units, as well as registered natural persons, the associations and unions in municipalities where there are sport fishermen. For determination of the reporting units, they use the National Classification of Activities (NCA), which is based on the classification NACE 1. Rev.1.  Out of this classification, they use the section B/05 of the NCA, which covers the field of fishery. The annual report on freshwater fishery is implemented for legal entities and natural persons that perform fishing on open, frash water (rivers, lakes, channels, water accumulations etc.), or for legal entities or natural persons that are registered for production of freshwater fish and other freshwater organisms.                                                                                                  The State Agriculture Inspectorate performs the control of data in the reports submitted to the Ministry, and there is no control of data quality, which is processed by the State Statistical Office. There is a records keeping of questionnaires – blank ones or filled out, but their content is not evaluated, i.e. the answers to the questions.                                                   
2. What scientific data is collected and who utilises it? Is scientific data used for stock management? 
Institutions that perform scientific research in fishery are the public scientific institutes “Institute of Hydrobiology – Ohrid” and the “Institute for Livestock – Skopje”, the Faculty of Agriculture Sciencies and Food and the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine. Scientific projects primarily refer to availability of some of the significant fish species (Ohrid Trout, Carp, Belvica). Besides independent fishery projects financed by the Ministry of Education and Science, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy and various foreign donations, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy developed a Strategy for Approximation of the Agricultural Food Sector to the Common  Agricultural Policy (CAP), which also elaborates on the fishery section, with several scientific projects, analysis and expert input.                                                                                                                           Depending on the received information, certain measures are undertaken, and they normally refer to the quantities of fish catch by fish species. Also, based on the received information, fishing in certain fishing area could be prohibited.                                                                    The received project data as well as future projects, are in function of management and improvement of the fishery, and they are used by all relevant institutions.                                                                                     
3. Does your country have quotas and if yes, what data are collected for quota management and verification (logbooks, landing declarations, sales notes, auction data, transport data, buyers information)? How is this data used for control purposes? 
In accordance with the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93), submitting of a five-year plan with planned fish catch quota by fish species and by year of operation is a condition for being granted a concession. The five-year plan is prepared by the concession grantee/beneficiary, and is returned back with a prior revision performed by an appropriate scientific institution. Before the beginning of a calendar year (no later then month of November in a current year), the concessionaire submits an annual plan for improvement, protection and exploitation of the fish stock from the fishing area to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, for which the Ministry issues an approval.                                                                                                                    The State Inspectorate for Agriculture performs supervision over the implementation of the five-year plan and the annual programmes, respectively.                                                                                   
4. Are there any instruments or procedures for cross-checking of data? 
The State Agriculture Inspectorate performs control of records based on the planned fish catch, reported fish catch volume and supervises the financial documentation on the sold fish quantity in relation to the submitted five-year plan and the annual programmes for improvement, protection and exploitation of the fish stock from fishing areas.            
F. Inspection activities 

1. Provide statistics for inspections carried out. 
Overview of performed inspection supervision for the period 2000 through 2003                                                         Year              Controls             performed            Minutes         prepared          Decisions made on         removal of irregularities  Submitted requests for misdemeanour procedure  2000     424 301 18 256 2001     386 278 21 232 2002     335 260 20 232 2003      296 265 18 257 Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry  and Water Economy  Prepared by: State Agriculture Inspectorate  
2. What officials are responsible for carrying out inspections? 
The state agriculture inspectors are responsible for inspection performing.                    
3. Is there a strategy in place for inspection activities? How are the targets set? 
The State Agriculture Inspectorate prepares an annual Operation Programme. The objectives are determined based on monitoring of the situation in the previous/preceding period, submitted reports by legal entities, natural persons and civic associations, as well as based on a request from  appropriate service within the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy.                                              
4. Are there guidelines issued for how inspections are to be carried out? 
The inspection is carried out on the basis of the legal regulation and working instructions issued by the Director of the State Agriculture Inspectorate.                                      5. What does an inspection consist of? What is the methodology and the strategy as regards inspections? 
Inspection is performed over the implementation of all provisions in legal regulations related to the field of fishery, as well as over the implementation of the five-year programmes and annual plans submitted by the fish stock beneficiaries for commercial and sport fishing. Control is performed on the fish catch, compliance with the regulated closed season, fish stocking, allowed fishing tools, control over the permits for commercial and sport fishing etc.                
6. Are inspections documented and, if so, how? 
The State Agriculture Inspector prepares a report on the performed supervision/control, according to the Law on Agricultural Inspection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04). If he detects irregularities in the adherence to the legal regulations, he subsequently makes a decision for removal of this irregularity, and in case of non-adherence to this decision, he submits a request for initiation of a misdemeanour procedure, in accordance with the Law on Misdemeanours (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 15/97 and 35/97) or a report for criminal procedure, according to the Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 37/96 and 60/99).                                                                 
7. What is the level of practical inspection capability and skills? What is lacking? 
The inspectors of the State Agriculture Inspectorate are familiar with the legal regulations of the Republic of Macedonia. They need to be professionally upgraded in order to be better acquainted with the fishery standards and legal regulations of the EU. There is a shortage of human resources and technical equipment for the purpose of implementing the activities.        
IV. LEGAL PROCEDURES FOR SANCTIONING INFRINGEMENTS 

1. What is the legal framework for sanctioning infringements? 
Penalties for commited violations are stipulated within the following laws: The Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 37/96 and 60/00); Law on Misdemeanourss (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 15/97 and 35/97); Penalty Provisions of the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93) and the Law on Agricultural Inspection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04).                                                            2. Is sanctioning based on criminal or administrative procedure? What authorities have the powers to impose sanctions? 
In accordance with the current legislation, sanctioning is performed by criminal procedure and administrative procedure.                                                     Administrative procedures are performed by the state inspectors and they determine appropriate measures.                                                      Criminal procedures (misdemeanor and criminal) are performed by the competent courts which determine penalties.                                                        
3. What administrative sanctions are available? 
If irregularities are detected, the State agriculture inspector can temporarily suspend the exploitation of the fish stock by means of a decision in accordance with the administrative procedure, and can further order elimination of these irregularities within a specified period of time. If the concessionaire does not act according to this decision, the State agriculture inspector proposes to the competent service of the Ministry to initiate a procedure for withdrawal of the right for the fish stock management.                                                                                               
4. What are the levels of fines to be applied? What are the actual sanction levels? 
According to the Law on Misdemeanours (“Official Gazette of RM No.15/97 and 35/97), the Law on Agricultural Inspection (“Official Gazette of RM No38/04) and the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM No. 62/93), and depending on the type of the misdemeanor, the fines range from 15.000 denars to 300.000 denars. For natural persons from 15.000 to 50.000 denars, and for legal entities they range from 50.000 to 300.000 denars. Apart from the fine for the legal entity, the responsible representative of the legal entity is fined in the range from 20.000 to 50.000 denars. The fines in reality are at the lowest possible level for a certain misdemeanor.                                                                           5. What are the possibilities to seize catches and gear? To what extent are catch and gear confiscated? 
In accordance with the Law on Fisheries, (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93), besides the fine, it is possible to apply a protective measure – confiscation of the fish catch and fishing tools with which the misdemeanor has been committed. The confiscated fish catch and fishing tools are delivered to the competent courts, which are competent for further procedure.                                                                                
6. What means of appeal exist? 
The administrative procedure is performed by the State Agriculture Inspectorate, and in accordance on the decision and the legal advice related to it, the party has a right of appeal to the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, or to a Second Instance Commission for Agriculture, Forestry, Water Economy and Veterinary Medicine within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. If the party is dissatisfied by the decision of the second instance bodies, it has a right to file a lawsuit to the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia. The decision of the Supreme Court is final.                                                                                               
7. What are the requirements as regards evidence? Is it necessary to prove intent? 
The State agriculture inspector is obliged to apply the provisions of the Law on General Administrative Procedure (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 47/86 – revised text) and the Law on Agricultural Inspection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04). The inspector can not make a decision related to an administrative procedure if he has not previously determined and proven the facts for existence of a certain irregularity. The proof for intention is necessary and it affects the decision on the penalty, and depending on the misdemeanor, it also affects the scale of the penalty.                                       
8. Provide statistics on sanctions imposed for fisheries infringements. 
Review of statistical data on penalties for misdemeanors in the field of fishery.                    Year Number of submitted requests for misdemeanor procedure                      Number of processed requests                  Number of processed penalties                         Processed fines          2000 256 265 15 426.100 2001 232 113 74 188.300 2002 232 146 73 213.600 2003 257 133 96 471.900 Total 977 657 258 1.299.900 Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry  and Water Economy Prepared by: State Agriculture Inspectorate  
Comment: The submitted requests for initiation of misdemeanor procedures have a legal timeframe for processing of two years. Decisions made on submitted requests refer to the current and previous year. The difference between the number of processed requests and the number of processed penalties (399) is explained with cases of requests that have been rejected, given a reprimand or warning, for which the State Agriculture Inspectorate does not maintain  specific analysis.                                     
V. STATE AID TO THE FISHERIES SECTORS 

Please provide information on state aid given to the fisheries sector over the last three years. 
Since the fishery as a branch of economy falls within the agriculture sector, the state aid is implemented through annual programmes for fostering of agricultural development prepared by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. The funds are allocated within the  Budget of the Republic of Macedonia. During the last three years, there have been funds disbursed for fish stocking of the fishing areas and fishing compounds with indigenous fish species. The funds are paid out for implemented fish stocking with young fish stock from own production or outsourced young fish stock of certain fish stock. Besides the above, certain funds have been allocated for some scientific projects during the last years.                                                                                         
Review of the financial assistance by years and actions:                                                     Funds allocated as financial assistance in the field of fishery    (in MKD)                                                     Description of action 2001 2002 2003 Financial assistance for fish stocking of natural lakes             5.000.000 5.000.000 3.200.000 Financial assistance for fish stocking of fishing compounds   400.000 300.000 Financial assistance for selection and development of salmon-based fish species in the Lake Ohrid                          300.000 - Financial assistance for development of technological solutions for the eutrophication of the water accumulation “Strezevo” – Bitola                         300.000 - 
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry  and Water Economy Prepared by: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry  and Water Economy 


VI. INTERNATIONAL FISHERIES AGREEMENTS 

1. Is your country a contracting party to any international fisheries agreements? If yes, please indicate the number of vessels and the volume of fish concerned by these agreements. 
There are no international agreements in the field of fishery, regarding the number of vessels or the volume of  fish. There is an international cooperation only regarding determination of specific and exact period of closed season for fishing, during the fish spawn period. For this purpose, fishing experts from the Republic of Greece, the Republic of Albania and the Republic of Macedonia meet once annually at ad-hoc meetings, determine the fishing closed season timing and propose it to their respective governments, so that they can further make a legal decision for its implementation.                              