Ministry of Internal Affairs

Unit for Registration of Entities Performing Agricultural Activities  Farming and Gardening Unit Grape and Fruit Growing Unit  Agricultural Land Policy Unit Unit for Organic Agricultural Production  Organogram of Fishery Administrative and Inspection Bodies 2. Are there plans to introduce other bodies or otherwise change the organisational structure in the short or medium term? 
There are no specific short-term and mid-term plans to change the organizational structure of the fishery in the Republic of Macedonia. Possible changes related to introduction of new entities may result from development and enacting of Law on Fisheries (IV/2007), which is expected to cover aquaculture, besides the usage of fish stock in the open fishing waters. 
3. Describe the decision-making process and how competencies are delegated. 
The laws and the relevant secondary legislation are prepared by the Livestock Unit, following prior cooperation with the relevant scientific institutions in the fishery area, as well as with the users of the fish stock. In their final stage, the draft provisions are submitted for comments to all relevant stakeholders in the area of fishery. The drafted laws in their further processing have to pass through governmental and parliamentary procedure. The secondary legislation provisions are enacted by the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. In the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Head of the Sector of Agriculture is directly responsible to the Minister, and the Head of the Livestock Unit is in charge of the implementation of activities and their coordination, and reports to the Head of the Sector.  4. Describe the information flow between authorities. Are there cases where the information flow is not working properly? What is being done to counteract these deficiencies? 
Within the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Sector of  Agriculture and the State Agriculture Inspectorate have direct cooperation, which is regulated in the Law on Fisheries (“Official Gazette of RM” No.  62/93). The administrative procedure is managed by the Sector of Agriculture, and the surveilance by the State Agriculture Inspectorate. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy is in close collaboration with other responsible bodies and institutions within the area of fishery. The information flow is burdened due to insufficient staffing, as well as insufficient technical equipment of the staff. In order to overcome the weaknesses in the information flow, an IT strategy is currently being implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, for functional network connection of its services. It is expected to be finalized within the next three years, depending on the available financial resources. The first phase will end in 2005, and it is financed under the CARDS programme. 
5. Describe the administration in place for market policy (notably as regards control of the implementation of common marketing standards, in ports and on wholesale markets, and of consumer information; control of quantities that are withdrawn from the market; collection of market information in the NUTS regions; collection and transmission of data concerning the price reference regime; application of the recognition conditions for producer organisations). 
The State Agriculture Inspectorate is responsible for control of the application of standards at the fishing departure and return points, as well as for the delivery of collected fish. The Ministry of Economy and the Ministry of Health are responsible for common market standards at the ports and wholesale markets, as well as for information dissemination to the consumers. The Veterinary Directorate, the State Market Inspectorate and the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate are responsible for control over products withdrawn from markets.  The State Statistical Office is responsible for collection, processing and dissemination of market information and price regime information on agricultural and food commodities.  The Nomenclature on Territorial Units for Statistics – NUTS in the Republic of Macedonia was enacted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, in April 2001, and published in the Official Gazette of RM No. 31/01. In the Republic of Macedonia, there are still no statistical data on market information and information regarding price regime on agricultural and food commodities by NUTS regions.  In accordance with the provisions of the Law on Civic Associations and Foundations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 31/98), there is a possibility for establishment of associations.  
6. Is there any structural policy specifically for fisheries? If yes, information on the competent authority and a short description of the procedures should be provided. 
Fishery as a branch falls within the sector of agriculture. At this moment, there is no special structural policy on fishery.  As far as fishery is concerned, the state aid is planned in the annual programs for improvement of agricultural development, prepared by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy (Sector for Agriculture). Fishery measures aim at its improvement, through fish stocking of fishing areas and compounds. The financial support is intended for production of indigenous fish species by registered producers, as well as for obtaining young fish stock of certain fish species intended for fish stocking.  In order to be eligible for financial support, the fish stock beneficiary submits a request to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, along with appropriate documentation and data on the obtained or produced young fish stock, as well as data on performed fish stocking. Transfer of the funds is performed through the Sector for Agricultural Support and Rural Development, and the supervision and control are performed by the State Agriculture Inspectorate. The following table represents an overview of realized funds intended for fishery:  Funds  paid by years in MKD,  Year 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Fish stocking of fishing areas 3.200.0003.000.000 5.000.000 5.000.000 3.200.000 Fish stocking of fishing compounds 300.000 600.000 400.000 _ 300.000 Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry  and Water Economy Processed by: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry  and Water Economy 
7. How would your administration administer structural aid to the fisheries sector? 
Within the frame of the Strategy for Approximation of the Macedonian Agricultural and Food Sector to the Common Agricultural Policy of the EU, adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (on 29.11.2004), it has been foreseen that a Strategy for Rural Development in 2005, as well as a Government Program for Agricultural and Structural Policy and Development of Rural Areas in 2006 respectively, to be prepared. These documents will constitute basis for implementation of national policies approximated to the Common Agricultural Policy of the EU, with a special emphasis on building a national system for administration of the structural funds of the EU.                                                        