III. INTEGRATED TRANSPORT SYSTEMS 
A. Transport infrastructure 
Maps of the national network 
1. Maps of the national long distance transport network (road, rail, combined transport and airports) should be provided. The long distance network will be identified on the basis of the criteria laid down in the draft Community Guidelines for the development of the Trans-European Transport Network (see Decision n° 1692/96 on Ten-T guidelines). 
Maps are given in Annex, see 09 _Annex _04
Public expenditure and investments 

2. Data on public expenditure and investments should be provided by completing the tables in Annex 2. 
Data on public expenditure and investments are given in the tables in Annex, see 09_ Annex  _02
Regional cooperation 
3. What steps have you taken to implement the Memorandum of Understanding of the South East Europe Core Regional Transport Network? 
After the Memorandum of Understanding on Core Regional Transport Network of Southeast Europe was signed in Luxemburg, June 2004, a High Level Transport Group was established, in which the Republic of Macedonia has its own representative. The HLG (High Level Group) held its first and second plenary meeting in Brussels on 18-19.10.2004 and on 29.11.2004, respectively. The first regional meeting was held on 10-11.01.2005. Proposals, submitted to the European Commission by the Republic of Macedonia, will be analysed and decided upon on the following meetings. The High Level Transport Group will meet monthly, as per an agreed programme, on plenary and regional meetings. The Republic of Macedonia is a part of the group of Western Balkans countries, which due to their specific needs, have been appointed distinctive treatment by the European Commission. The final report of this High Level Transport Group is foreseen to be completed in October 2005. The signatories to the Memorandum of Understanding, as well as the financial partners obliged for implementation of the MoU, met in Paris on 25-26.10.2004. The Republic of Macedonia complied with the obligation from this meeting and submitted the nominations for representatives of the Steering Committee to the relevant institutions. The MoU signatories will co-operate through the Steering Committee and the Secretariat. The establishment of SEETO will assist the Steering Committee in the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding. The SEETO Observatory is already established and the consultants have been organised in Belgrade. Their engagement commenced with the signing of the Agreement with the European Commission on 27.09.2004, and will be concluded on 31.12.2007, with a total budget of 1.820.000 EUR. The inception report of the SEETO Observatory is completed and the first meeting of the Steering Committee is expected to be held in February 2005. Transport infrastructure development in the Republic of Macedonia has achieved significant results in the previous period; however, a level of development that will meet modern society requirements and the economic requirements of passenger and goods transport has still not been achieved. Completion of Corridor X is of key importance for the Republic of Macedonia and the entire region. The section "Border Crossing Tabanovce" – Kumanovo (7,3 km), as a bottleneck of the Corridor X, is planned to be financed with World Bank funds, in the frame of the future Trade and Transport Facilitation in Southeast Europe II Program. However, negotiations on the project have still not commenced. The section Demir Kapija – Smokvica is the last section of the Trans-European Corridor X, which passes through the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, and is considered to be a serious bottleneck. Projects and tender documentation for this section were prepared at the end of 2000 through the Phare Cross Border Co-operation Programme between Republic of Macedonia and Republic of Greece. This Project was proposed as a priority Project in Brussels by a representative of the High Level Transport Group, and efforts are currently being made so as to justify it and place it as a priority in the HLG report. In order to speed up and facilitate trade, the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia has signed Memoranda for Co-operation with the customs administrations of all neighbouring countries (Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Serbia and Montenegro and Kosovo), which will provide for exchange of information concerning trade with high risk goods (excise goods and goods that are subject to high taxes). The information exchange contributes towards a higher level of co-operation between the customs administrations of the region. 
Legal framework 

4. What are the procedures applicable to the development of a transport infrastructure project? Are there differences according to the mode of transport concerned? 
Public Investment Programmes, covering a three year period, are being prepared on a State level, and are updated on an annual basis. Special parts of these programmes are the road infrastructure investments. The basic rules for determining the investments in roads are the priority, feasibility (traffic) and existing reasonable financing opportunities. Taking into account that the actual needs are considerable, and the financing opportunities limited, these investments are either delayed or reprogrammed. In general terms, the Trans-European road Corridors VIII and X have the highest priority. PE “Macedonian Railways”, within the frame of their restructuring, have prepared a draft Midterm Plan for the period 2004 – 2008, separately for the infrastructure and operations development. Within the air transport field (the part referring to aviation provision of services), the requirements for aviation development, provision of technical means, equipment, devices and facilities for aviation services provision (flight control), are being evaluated. 
5. What is the project cycle? How are local and/or regional authorities associated with transport infrastructure projects? 
The Project cycle for important road infrastructure projects generally consists of the following phases: project identification, project potential and feasibility, financing suitability, preparation of all levels of the necessary project documentation, public debate, closing of the financial construction, public procurement (international/local) and implementation phase (construction). There is appropriate legislation, technical regulations and standards regarding the design and construction of road infrastructure. The following legal regulation refers to project implementation: Law on Physical and Urban Planning (Official Gazette of RM No 08/96, 28/97, 18/99, 53/01 and 45/02); Law on Construction of Investment Buildings (“Official Gazette RM” No 15/90, 11/91, 11/94; 18/99 and 25/99); Law on Public Roads (“Official Gazette of  RM” No18/99,  40/99; 96/00, 29/02 and 68/04). A new text of the Draft Law on Construction – Phase II, is currently in preparation. The text has been prepared and has entered governmental procedure. The Law is expected to be adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia in the first quarter of 2005. The implementation of road projects is a responsibility of the Investor, which is as follows: - For national and regional roads the Investor is the Fund for National and Regional Roads, - For local roads and streets, Investors are the Local self-government bodies, and - For the vital road network in Skopje, the Investor is the City of Skopje. Projects for the national and regional road network are implemented on the basis of Annual Programmes adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. Railway projects have a project cycle stipulated in the internal regulations and procedures of PE “Macedonian Railways”. The local authority participates in railway infrastructure projects through discussions in the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia during the enactment of strategic documents on a State level, as well as by direct participation in connection with planning and implementation of infrastructural requirements of the local rail, and by decision-making concerning the railway passages on the local roads. The Project cycle (in the part referring to the aviation provision of services) depends on the project type, size and complexity. The authorities (regional and/or local) are involved since the initial project cycle phase in the following activities: determining the project feasibility, provision of necessary permits and approvals and compliance with environmental standards. 
6. Is there legislation on: a) environmental impact assessment, b) rules of competition, c) public procurement? 
a)  The procedure on “Environmental Impact Assessment” (EIA), according to the Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion (Official Gazette of RM No 13/03, consolidated text), is only partially regulated.  Pursuant to the Law, the investors are required to prepare an Environmental Impact Assessment Study regarding projects which could endanger the environment and people’s health. The Environmental Impact Assessment Study consists of a project impact assessment related to the environment and people’s health. The Study is an integral part of the technical project documentation, and is to be prepared during the planned project preparation procedure, which means before the issuance of construction permit or issuance of another type of permit. In accordance with the Law on Construction of Investment Buildings (Official Gazette of RM No 15/90, 11/91, 11/94, 18/99 and 25/99), the investor is obliged to submit an Environmental Impact Assessment Study together with the request for construction of the building if such Study is necessary for particular projects pursuant to special conditions prescribed in certain laws (ex. Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion) or acts. The Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, upon a request from the responsible body, decides which projects require a preparation of such studies. In case it is assessed that the project might have a significant impact on the environment, the investor is obliged to prepare the Environmental Impact Assessment Study. After the Study is submitted, the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning approves or rejects the project implementation. In the existing Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion the environmental impact assessment procedure is only partially implemented. In order to harmonize the existing legislation with the EU legislation, the new Draft Law on Environment, currently in Parliamentary procedure and envisaged to be adopted in the first quarter 2005, completely transposes the Directive amending the Council Directive 337/85 on assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (97/11) and the ESPO Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Trans-boundary Context. The Draft Law on Environment contains a special chapter on Environmental Impact Assessment, which describes the procedure for environmental impact assessment (further in this text EIA). The draft Decree to be verified by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (currently in preparation) shall determine the projects for which the EIA procedure is mandatory, as well as the criteria for generally specified projects regarding which the EIA procedure requirement shall be on an individual basis. Concerning all other projects not covered by the above-stated Decree, an environmental impact assessment document will have to be prepared. According to the Draft Law on Environment, the investor who plans a project is obliged to submit a Letter of Intent to the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning concerning the purpose of the project as well as an opinion about the necessity of EIA. After receiving the Letter of Intent, the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning notifies the investor with a Decree about the need of environmental impact assessment. According to the type of the project, the Ministry determines the volume of the study of environmental impact assessment. The Opinion should contain the alternatives which should be considered, a basic overview and the necessary examinations, methods and criteria used for prediction of impact assessment, measures for improvement which should be considered, a list of legal entities which should be consulted during preparation of the EIA study, the structure, contents and volume of environmental information. If projects require EIA, the investor is obliged to prepare a Study on EIA and submit it to the body competent for environmental issues. Upon reception of the study, the competent body prepares a report on relevance of the EIA study. The report may also be prepared by a person authorised by the competent body. The Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning on the basis of the EIA, the report, a public discussion and received public opinions brings a decision on approval or disapproval of the Project. The brought decision causes legal effect in a period of two years after its adoption and its validity period may be prolonged if there are no significant changes occurred during a modification of the project, as a result of the conditions in the affected area, new information in connection with the basic content of the study or development of new technology which might be used in the project. The body responsible for Project Implementation may not issue a decision/permit for implementation of the project without decision on approval or disapproval of the Project issued by the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning and submitted by the investor. In addition, the body which issues permits for implementation of the project is obliged to notify the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning if an application for projects without EIA was submitted. During the whole EIA procedure, the competent body consults the local self-government units on whose territory the project is implemented, as well as the public, the non-governmental organisations from the area of protection and promotion of the environment through providing necessary documentation, announcing and organizing a public debate and publishing on the web page of the Ministry. In the Decision, the Ministry should state the opinions which were considered during its adoption, as well as an explanation on the opinions which were not considered.  Pursuant to the Law the duration of EIA procedure is 120 days, not including the time necessary for preparation of the EIA study (the foreseen periods are reduced to a minimum). It is necessary to mention that the EIA procedure which will be conducted before issuing the approval for construction, as a separate procedure conducted by the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning.  b)  Taking into consideration that the Republic of Macedonia has been using credit funds for implementation of road projects from International Financial Institutions for more than thirty years, the basis for implementation of those projects was and remains to be competition, or more precisely, procurement under market competitive conditions. The competition is still not promoted in maintenance of national and regional roads, which according to the existing Law on Public Roads (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 18/99, 40/99, 96/00, 29/02 and 68/04) is a responsibility of a Public Enterprise Makedonija pat. The preparation of the Study relating to the road sector in the Republic of Macedonia, with special emphasis on the introduction of competition in the field of road maintenance, shall commence in 2005. The funds for this Study preparation are provided by EBRD through a donation from the Republic of France. c)  Depending on the financing sources, the procurements for road infrastructure projects are based on the following:   international procurement, if credit funds for the projects are provided by International Financial Institutions such as the World Bank, the European Investment Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and grants (EU: PHARE, CARDS and other donors). The procurement procedures are prescribed by the creditors, i.e. the donors. Within the period from 1998 to date, more than 15 road projects were implemented, or are currently being implemented, with a total cost of approximately 250 million EUR.   in case the funds are provided by local sources, the procurement is carried out pursuant to the new Law on Public Procurement, enacted in March 2004 (Official Gazette of RM No19/04). This Law promotes procurement procedures in line with European ones. The Law introduces compulsory international procurement for projects which cost more than 1.000.000 EUR.  
B. Transport research 

1. Are there any research programmes on national transport operations? 
There are several development studies on a regional level which deal with transport research. The TIRS, REBIS and SBDI studies were prepared in the previous period. On the local level, transport research programmes are prepared only for the development of specific projects that are to be implemented. One of the legal obligations of the Fund for National and Regional Roads is to calculate the traffic on the national and regional roads, which represents the basis for preparation of diverse studies for development and financing. So far, traffic was tallied with obsolete automatic counters that did not have the capacity to perform classification of vehicles. In 2004, with credit funds from the World Bank, modern counters were procured, which will provide for the improvement of the transport database quality. The research programmes (in the part referring to provision of services in aviation) are financed with donations from international institutions which the Republic of Macedonia is a member of (ICAO, EUROCONTROL), as well as the CARDS Programme I and II phase (Project for Aviation Safety and Air Traffic Control in the Western Balkans) 
2. Does research in the field of transport benefit from public and/or private funding, and if yes, what level of funding is allocated to transport related research? 
A limited amount of funds, foreseen for specific infrastructure projects, are being used for research programmes on the state level. Private funds have not been applied. In the previous period, for the preparation of research programmes, funds were used from donations, out of which the following were within the framework of road infrastructure:   Funds from the European Union for the TIRS and REBIS studies;   Funds from the United States Trade Development Agency (US TDA) for preparation of the SBDI (South Balkan Development Initiative) Study, which covers the development of road and railway transport, as well as the oil pipeline of the European Corridor VIII, within the period until 2020. This Study covers the Republic of Macedonia, the Republic of Albania and the Republic of Bulgaria.   TDA funds for preparation of a Study for exploring the opportunities for road infrastructure investments by the private sector through concessions or PPP. As regards the railways, a donation of EUR 400.000 from the World Bank contributed to preparation of the following studies:   William Henessy Study, September 2001 - Internal Profit Centre for Freight and Passenger Transport   Victor Alalouf Study, September 2001 - Development and Calibration of Traffic Costing Models   Wilbur Smith Study September 2001 - Restructuring, Economic and Technical Rehabilitation of P.E “Macedonian Railways”   TDA - Regional Railroad Interconnectivity Project, March 2003   David Burns, April 2001 - Infrastructure Assessment and Development of Investment and Maintenance Plan for P.E “Macedonian Railways”   Petrovski Study, March 2000 - Constitute a Program for Restructuring of P.E “Macedonian Railways” over a three year period. Air transport: Local implementation plan and development (LCIPD) – the purpose of this programme is implementation of plans and programmes which are prepared and supervised by EUROCONTROL and refer to Flight Control. CARDS Programme – Project for Aviation Safety and Air Traffic Control in the Western Balkans. The priority of this programme is building capacity of/between state institutions and preparation of regional solutions for transport/infrastructure related problems, foreseen to be completed by 2006. In European terms, the air traffic control systems' safety is of high priority. The reforms in Eastern Europe, as well as intensified air-way communications, have contributed towards raising the issue of adapting air traffic control systems in the region according to European standards. This programme is implemented by EUROCONTROL through our representative. Proposal – Project concept for the Project for Separation of the Regulator and the Navigation Service Provider in the Republic of Macedonia, which is to be completed by the end of 2005.   Four (4) Feasibility Studies have been prepared in the last ten years:   Wilbur Smith – 1996, financed by the Public Enterprise for Airport Services Macedonia – Skopje, amounting to 200.000 USD, which served as a basis for the development planning by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia;   Prsons – 2000. Donation of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia;   Development Study for the Skopje Airport, financed by Public Enterprise for Airport Services Macedonia – Skopje, and implemented by Studio Ajvar – Skopje;   Scott-Wilson – 2004 European Commission EC (REBIS) – the consulting company was hired to prepare a Project for Modernization of the Skopje Airport within the framework of the Transport Project Preparation Facility, amounting to 230.000 EUR. 
3. What are the national priorities for transport related research? 
The national transport research priorities follow the findings and recommendations included in the Transport Infrastructure Regional Study (TIRS) and the Regional Balkans Infrastructure Project (REBIS - Transport). A Memorandum of Understanding on the development of the South East Europe Core Regional Transport Network, indicating the consent of the Stabilisation and Association Process countries to co-operate in infrastructure development, was signed in Luxembourg, June 2004.  As one of the signatories of the MoU, the Republic of Macedonia, has agreed to co-operate in the carrying out and financing of further infrastructure development and/or operation studies and also develop and implement an annual and multi-annual action plan in joint effort with the other signatories. The new Transport High Level Group, initiated and established by the DG Energy and Transport, is expected to prepare its final report in October 2005. The process of selection of projects that comply with the specified criteria according to the determined methodology will commence in February 2005. The implementation progress of the SEETO (South-East Europe Transport Observatory) Project, introduced with the before mentioned MoU, which should support CARDS beneficiary countries in their establishment of Transport Observatories, as well as in the defining of their activities, was presented at the Fourth High Level Meeting was held on 25-26.10.2004 in Paris. This Project foresees monitoring of projects from the regional transport network defined in the REBIS Study (Core Network). The main task of the Transport Observatory is to support collection of data, preparation of multi-annual indicative plans and coordination with the existing task forces or transport observatories on specific transport corridors. In addition, a Steering Committee was established and its members consist of representatives from countries-beneficiaries of the European Commission and representatives from International Financial Institutions. The first meeting of the Steering Committee is planned to be held in February 2005, when SEETO will officially commence with the activities. The Transport Project Preparation Facility (TPPF), funded by the European Commission shall provide the necessary input that will allow launching effectively as many projects as possible among those that are mature for financing. The Facility will provide for the developing of feasibility and other studies in close cooperation with the countries and the international financial institutions. 