II. COMPLIANCE WITH TREATY PROVISIONS 

1. How do you assess compliance by your country of those Treaty provisions (see table in Annex) concerning countries with a derogation from introducing the euro? 
Adjustments to the regulations, free capital flow 
With the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the European Union in 2001, and in accordance with the European Union White Book recommendations, the Republic of Macedonia committed itself to conduct gradual liberalization of the flow of goods, services, people and capital. Its commitment to liberalization was proved with the enforcement of the Law on Foreign Exchange Operations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 34/01, 49/01, 103/01, 54/02 and 51/03) in October 2002, envisaging gradual, i.e. liberalization of the capital transactions in stages. Firstly, the direct investments, the commercial credits, the long-term and the short-term financial loans and credits and partially, the portfolio investments were fully liberalized in the first stage of the SAA. After the expiration of the first stage of the SAA, full liberalization of the portfolio investments, the investments of residents in real estate abroad, as well as the deposits operations will be performed (for more details see 04_I_1). Ban on direct financing of the public sector (NBRM) and ban on privileged access 
Pursuant to Article 51 of the Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia ("Official Gazette of RM", No. 3/02, 51/03, 85/03 and 40/04), the ban on crediting and financing the state authorities and government administration bodies has been explicitly stated. The National Bank does not give guarantees on the assumed liabilities by the state authorities and the government administration bodies and it does not directly purchase their debt instruments. The exception from the limitation on financing the state authorities and government administration bodies is stipulated in Article 52 of the Law and it pertains to the approval of credits or loans with maturity of up to one day, without the possibility of being renewed and extended. Independence of the central bank 
Regarding the independence of the central bank, and related to Article 108 of the Treaty of the European Union and Article 7 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks (hereinafter: ESCB) and the European Central Bank (hereinafter: ECB), in Article 4 of the Law on the National Bank it is defined that when performing its functions, the National Bank and the members of the decision-making bodies will neither require nor get instructions from the central government and the government administration bodies. Adjustment to the regulations 
In order to be in compliance with Article 109 of the Treaty of the European Union, revision of the Draft of the Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia is underway (which will enter into procedure in the Parliament in the second half of 2005), envisaging a special chapter pertaining to the regulation of the relations between the National Bank and the European Union. This chapter will regulate that on the day the Republic of Macedonia joins the European Union, the National Bank will become an integral part of the ESCB, performing all the tasks prescribed under Article 43 of the Statute of the ESCB and ECB valid for the member-states with a derogation and the National Bank will cooperate with the ECB pursuant to the Statute of the ESCB and ECB regarding the recording, collection, processing and publication of data and information.  Economic policy, main objectives, coordination of the economic policies, economic policy guide, surveillance, participation in the Council - consultations with the ECB, participation in the economy and financials  
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the European Union defines the policies and the modalities of cooperation and exchange of information, i.e. possible coordination in the application of the EU directives related to the defining of the economic policy. The Republic of Macedonia and the EU will facilitate the process of economic reform through the cooperation intended for improving the foundations of their economies and implementation of the economic policy in the market economies. With the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the EU, the possibility for the following types of cooperation is envisaged:   exchange of information on the macroeconomic results and projections, as well as on the development strategies; and   joint analyses of the economic issues of mutual interest, including also the defining of the economic policy and the instruments for its implementation.  Simultaneously, the Stabilisation and Association Agreement envisages that if requested by the Republic of Macedonia, the EU may provide assistance in supporting the efforts of the Republic of Macedonia to introduce full convertibility of the Denar and gradual adjustment of its policy to the policy of the EMU. The cooperation in this area will include informal exchange of information that refer to the principles of functioning of the EMU and the European System of Central Banks.  Since the Republic of Macedonia and the European Union signed the SAA, representatives of the relevant ministries of the Republic of Macedonia have been participating in the operations of the Economic and Financial Committee, where the current macroeconomic situation in the country, as well as the future projections are presented.  Fiscal discipline, Ban on excess deficit 
The Law on Budgets (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 46/00, 11/01, 93/01, 46/02, 24/03, 85/03 and 96/04) sets the procedure of preparation, adoption and execution of the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, the budgets of the local Government units and the city of Skopje and the budgets of funds. The budget document, representing a Law, sets the limit on the deficit of the general Government, as well as the annual increase in the total current debt for covering the budget deficit. The legal framework pertaining to the fiscal discipline, and hence the control on the deficit consists of several laws, such as the Law on Budgets, Law on the Execution of Budget, Law on Limitation of Source Revenues for Financing Public Needs, as well as other by-laws regulating the area of treasury operations.  Besides that, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopts a three-year fiscal strategy on annual basis, determining the projected revenues and expenditures and the level of the deficit. This strategy, and especially the deficit level is in line with the macroeconomic projections for the following years, set together with the International Monetary Fund, with the quantification of the deficit depending on the projected deficit in the balance of payments, as well as on the maintenance of the indebtedness at the level of 40% of the GDP. The deficit of the general Government consists of the deficit of the central budget and the deficit in the budget of the Road Fund, while the remaining extra budgetary funds and the local Government units should not present deficit in their budgets.  The adopted Budget represents the maximal amount of expenditures for the budget users, above which no assumption of liabilities and execution of payments is allowed. According to the Law on Budgets, the budget users are responsible for spending of the approved funds rationally and for the prescribed purpose. The Budget is executed through the established treasury system, which represents a control mechanism for spending the budget funds appropriately and for the prescribed purpose. The concept of a Single Treasury Account (STA) is completely implemented. The STA has been opened with the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, and it is managed by the Treasury operating under the umbrella of the Ministry of Finance. Actually, the Treasury is responsible for the payment operations of the Budget and the budget users, i.e. it is a kind of "quasi bank" with approximately 3000 accounts (in the Treasury's General Ledger) of the budget users, accounts for collection of public revenues and other special accounts of the Government, which means direct collection of public revenues and centralized execution of the expenditures. Pursuant to the Law on Budgets, only the Government of RM is entitled to take loans from natural persons and legal entities from the country and abroad in compliance with a law, for the purpose of covering the budget deficit, and to give guarantees for repayment of the liabilities on the basis of the loans taken for that purpose. The Government will decide on taking loans and giving guarantees upon proposal of the Minister of Finance. The Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia guarantees for the liabilities of the public enterprises and trade companies with predominantly state-owned capital, on the basis of obtained domestic and foreign credits, which is in accordance with a law. The agreements for taken loans and for guarantees given to the public enterprises and trade companies with predominant state-owned capital from the country and abroad are concluded by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on behalf of the Parliament. Funds for the repayment of principal amounts and interests maturing during the fiscal year, based on previously concluded agreements and issued securities are provided in the Government Budget for the current year.  The local Government units prepare their budgets independently, on the basis of the macroeconomic aggregates and the instructions by the Ministry of Finance. Their budgets are balanced, i.e. they must not have budget deficit.  The local Government units may borrow from the financial institutions in the country and abroad. The local Government units may borrow abroad only if prior approval from the Government of the Republic of Macedonia is obtained, on the basis of opinion of the Ministry of Finance. The local Government units may take long-term credits in order to finance capital assets and investments, only if the repayment of the debt is made in equal or decreasing annual installments approved by the council of the municipality after prior public discussion in the municipality. The total amount of the annual repayment of the debt based on long-term credits may not exceed 15% of the total revenues of the current operational budget of the municipality in the previous fiscal year. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia may guarantee the liabilities based on long-term loans of the municipality, including also the public services established by the municipality, only in case the liability is assumed according to a law.  The municipality can guarantee and assume liabilities based on long-term loans of the public enterprises established by the municipality, upon a decision of the council. Stability and Development Pact 
The Law on Budgets and the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia for the current year regulates the amount of the deficit of the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, encompassing the central budget and the budgets of the funds and the agencies. The objective of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for 2004 was registering a deficit of the Central Government in the amount of 0,80% of the GDP. Analyzed by years, the realized and the projected deficit of the General Government is the following: 
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 plan 0,00%  1,80%  -7,00% -5,50% -0,60% -1,90% The projection for the deficit of the Central Government in 2005 equals 1%, the deficit of the general government is projected at -2,30%. The deficit is calculated in Denars/current prices of the GDP in Denars. The deficit is presented pursuant to the IMF's accrual methodology, the so-called GFS 1986. Referring to the amount of the public debt as a percentage of the GDP, it equaled 47,80% as 31.12.2003, while it is projected not to exceed the limit of 43,80% in 2004.  Financial assistance and assistance to the balance of payments, protective measures - problems with the balance of payments The legislation of the Republic of Macedonia envisages a possibility of introducing special protective measures in case of a danger from larger disturbances in the balance of payments, but there has been no need for their implementation so far.  The possibility for introducing protective measures is regulated in Articles 37, 38 and 39 of the Law on Foreign Exchange Operations ("Official Gazette of RM" 34/01, 49/01, 54/02 and 53/03), according to which, in case of threat of significant distortions in the balance of payments and destabilization of the financial system of the RM caused by substantial outflow of capital from, or larger inflows of capital in the Republic of Macedonia, the NBRM can introduce special protective measures which must not be applied for a period longer than six months. Also, pursuant to Article 43 of the Law on Trade  ("Official Gazette of RM" 16/04), if a distortion in the balance of payments occurs due to the increased import of certain goods, the Government of RM may introduce protective measures in the form of limiting the quantity, or the amount of the import of those goods.  Such legal provisions are in full compliance with Article 65 paragraph 2 of the Stabilization and Association Agreement between the RM and the EU, according to which the Republic of Macedonia is enabled to adopt restrictive measures referring to the import, which are limited in time and they are strictly intended for improving the balance of payments, and which is in compliance with Article 120 of the Treaty on the Founding of the European Union.  Pursuant to Article 100 paragraph 2 and Article 119 of the same Agreement, after becoming a full member of the European Union, the Republic of Macedonia could use the measures intended for additional support to the balance of payments by the European Union, which will surely improve the current position of Macedonia regarding this issue. Monetary policy, adoption of the primary and other price stability objectives and other objectives Article 3 of the Law on the NBRM prescribes that "main objective of the National Bank is to maintain the price stability and that the National Bank supports the economic policy of the country and the financial stability of the country without jeopardizing the realization of the main objective, and adhering to the principles of the market economy", which indicate of high level of harmonization with this segment of the Treaty. Nominal convergence 
The macroeconomic performances of the Republic of Macedonia point to a relatively high level of nominal convergence. -  Accomplishing high level of price stability; this can be seen through a rate of inflation which is close to the average, or it does not exceed the average of the three member states registering the best inflation performances. Common feature of the Republic of Macedonia are the exceptionally favorable inflation performances. Thus the average rate of inflation in 2002 and 2003 equals 1,80% and 1,20%, respectively, indicating a high level of convergence in this domain.  Sustainability of the financial position of the country; this can be seen in a budget position without excess deficit, pursuant to Article 104(6). In 2003, the Republic of Macedonia registered a rate of deficit of -1,00% of the GDP, and it is projected that the rate of deficit in 2004 will equal -1,40%, while it is projected that in 2005, 2006 and in 2007 it will not exceed -1,50% of the GDP, pointing to the sustainability of the financial position of the Republic of Macedonia.  Having regular fluctuation bands in accordance with the exchange rate mechanisms of the European Monetary System, for at least two years, without devaluation against the currency of another member-state. Since October 1995, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia has been applying a monetary strategy of de facto Denar exchange rate targeting relative to the Deutsche Mark (i.e. relative to the Euro), with the exchange rate fluctuations being negligible. During this period, the only devaluation was made in July 1997. Thus there is full compatibility with the requirements within this segment. Durability of the convergence achieved by the member-state and of its membership in the exchange rates mechanism of the European Monetary System reflected through the level of the long-term interest rates. The development of the financial markets and the diversification of the financial instruments regarding the introduction of longer-term instruments in the Republic of Macedonia is in its initial stage, with no long-term rate comparable with the appropriate interest rate within the Monetary Union existing at the moment.  Regarding Article 1 and Article 45 of the Protocol (ESCB/ECB Protocol), the Draft of the Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia envisages a provision stipulating that from the day the Republic of Macedonia joins the European Union, the Governor of the National Bank will become a member of the General Council of the ECB.   Exchange rate policy 
Competent institution for establishing and conducting the Denar exchange rate policy in the Republic of Macedonia is the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 10 of the Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia). Having in mind the current regime of de facto pegged rate of the Denar relative to the Euro (previously relative to the Deutsche Mark), the Central Bank maintains the stability of the nominal exchange rate through interventions on the foreign exchange market. Through these interventions, the Central Bank reduces the fluctuations in the Denar exchange rate relative to the Euro. If the movement of the Denar exchange rate relative to the Euro is monitored, (previously relative to the Deutsche Mark), after the devaluation in July 1997, the exchange rate fluctuations are negligible, and they are within the limits prescribed under ERM 2. Having in mind the current policy of the Denar exchange rate, the monetary policy framework, as well as the environment and the orientation, the participation of the Republic of Macedonia in the ERM 2 would not be a problem and no amendments to the legal framework are needed.  2. What are the major reforms needed in order to comply with these Treaty provisions and the possible timetable for adoption? 
A reform in the area of fiscal policy, by adopting the Law on Public Debt, is planned for the beginning of 2005. The Law on Public Debt will set the manner and the procedure for the indebtedness of the Republic of Macedonia, the types and the purpose of the public debt, as well as its recording and management. The adoption of this Law will finalize the legal framework in this area, ensuring more precise definition of several key issues for successful public debt management, including the debtors and the issuance of guarantees. The Law will provide centralized approach to the debt management, which will practically mean concentration of the competencies regarding the management, i.e. the monitoring of the public debt with one institution, i.e. in the Ministry of Finance.  The legal framework regulating the foreign exchange operations is, to a certain extent, in compliance with the Treaty on the Founding of the European Union. The Law on Foreign Exchange Operations prescribes that the current international transactions are free. Besides the current transactions, the direct investments, the long-term and the short-term credit operations are free as well. Pursuant to Article 59 of the Stabilization and Association Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia with the European Union, envisaging gradual liberalization of the capital transactions regarding the portfolio investments, the investments of the residents in real estate abroad and the deposits, the Law on Foreign Exchange Operations contains transitional provisions which completely incorporate the gradual access prescribed under the SAA. The cooperation between the Republic of Macedonia and the European Union is regulated by the Stabilization and Association Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the European Union. The Republic of Macedonia will establish a close cooperation with the EU in order to contribute to the development and the growth potentials of the Republic of Macedonia. Such a cooperation will strengthen the existing economic ties on the broadest basis, and for the benefit of both parties.  Having in mind the continuing successful maintenance of the price stability, its explicit setting as the ultimate monetary objective, as well as the high level of compliance with this criterion of nominal convergence, no special reforms in the domain of price stability are envisaged. However, the monetary policy will continue to be directed towards successful realization of the main monetary objective. From the aspect of the exchange rate policy, its current setting completely corresponds to this segment of the nominal convergence criteria, where the possible changes in the exchange rate policy would not differ from the set criteria (for more details see 11_I_D_9). The reforms towards further development and deepening of the financial markets, as well as further diversification of the securities portfolio will contribute to achieving gradual compliance with the interest rates criteria. The future steps are directed towards the introduction of longer-term Government securities, with the development of the long-term securities market also meaning a creation of a long-term interest rate, as a variable through which the meeting of this criterion will be monitored.  One may argue that there is a high degree of legal harmonization of the Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia ("Official Gazette of RM" No. 3/02, 51/03, 85/03 and 40/2004) with the Treaty of the European Union and the Statute of the European System of Central Banks (hereinafter: ESCB) and the European Central Bank (hereinafter: ECB), especially in the part pertaining to the price stability, the independence of the National Bank; ban on financing the state authorities and the government administration bodies and ban on privileged access of the state authorities and the government administration bodies to the funds of the National Bank.  Revision of the Draft of the Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia is underway (which will enter into procedure in the Parliament in the second half of 2005), envisaging: the right of the Governor, Vice-Governor, or external member of the NBRM Council after the final decision on their revocation to require legal protection in court procedures. This provision will enable the National Bank to be in full compliance with the provisions of the Treaty of the European Union and the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB in the part of personal independence.  -  special chapter regulating the National Bank - European Union relations. This part will regulate that on the day the Republic of Macedonia joins the European Union, the National Bank will become an integral part of the ESCB and it will perform its tasks pursuant to Article 43 of the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB valid in the member-states with a derogation, the Governor of the National Bank will become a member of the General Council of the ECB and the National Bank will cooperate with the ECB in accordance with the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB regarding the recording, collection, processing and publishing of data and information.  



