



STATISTICS 





1. Please describe the compliance of the statistical system of your country with the requirements as stated in the latest version of the Compendium, especially as concerns:      a) the current situation b) steps being taken to comply with the requirements (legislative and other measures to be taken, such as the implementation of the Quality Declaration of the European Statistical System, deadlines to achieve compliance) c) major obstacles to be solved before being fully compliant This description should be provided for the following main statistical themes:  
Description should be provided of the main statistical topics: A. statistical infrastructure B. classification C.  agriculture, forestry and fishery D. multi sector statistics E.  demographic and social staitstics F.  regional level statistics G.  macro economic data H. business statistics I.  monetary, financial, trade and balance of payment statistics The State Statistical Office monitors the EUROSTAT Compendia on a regular basis, studies and implements the novelties which are consistent with the level of development and alignment of the national statistical system.  All official statistical research in the Republic of Macedonia is carried out in compliance with the Law on State Statistics (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 54/97) as well as with the Programme of Statistical Research for the period 2003-2007 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 69/03). (Law on State Statistics, see 12_Annex_01(Programme of Statistical Research for the period 2003-2007, see 12_Annex_02The extent of harmonisation of the national statistical system with the Compendium 2004 is described further in the text, with special emphasis on the measures of further harmonisation and the main problems which need to be solved to achieve full harmonisation. 
A. Statistical infrastrucutre 

18. STATISTICAL COORDINATION   

1. Module 18101 Statistical coordinatio 
Current situation There is basis for statistical coordination in the State Statistical Office, according to the EU module, but so far it has not been fully implemented. Under the Five year Programme for Statistical Research (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 69/03), business statistics research is carried out on a monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, annual and multi-year basis. Data users such as government institutions, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, scientific institutions, business people, data providers and other entities take part in the definition of such research.   National statistical classifications, nomenclatures and standards (National Classification of Activities, National Nomenclature of Industrial Products, Custom Tariff Nomenclature, Classification of dangerous goods, Standard Goods Classification for Transport Statistics and Classification for Buildings and Construction works), in compliance with the European and international standards, are applied when research is carried out. The processed data are published in Releases available on the website of the State Statistical Office.  Data with a higher level of detail are published in annual statistical reviews with longer data series, while users are notified of the publication via the website of the State Statistical Office. Also, data users are informed on a regular basis when there are larger scale statistical activities under way, as well as when new methodologies are applied. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of annual statistical research carried out by the Business Statistics Department with the EUROSTAT structutral business statistics;    Harmonisation of short term statistical research carried out by the Business Statistics Department with the EUROSTAT short term statistics, short term statistical standards and structural business  statistics (the methodologies) and harmonisation of classifications with the European standards; and    Establishment of a single data base of short term and structural data. 
25. DATA SECURITY AND STATISTICAL CONFIDENTIALITY   

1. Module 25100 Data security and data protection 
Current situation Individual data on business entities, as well as personal data, including sensitive data on naturtal entities collected for statistical purposes are classified as strictly confidential data to be used only for statistical purposes and scientific research in accordance with the Law on State Statistics (Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia No. 54/97) and the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos.12/94, 04/02, and 07/05). The following measures have been taken at the State Statistical office to protect the statistical data against unauthorised access or physical destruction: Statistical research micro data are hosted on the central server in a room where access is controlled with smart cards and closed circuit TV. Access to the data bases is selective, requiring user name and password to gain access to the Unix Servers, with DB2 privileges. A procedure has been defined at the State Statistical Office with respect to the daily  back-up of statistical research data input, while the remaining data back-up is done prior to and after the update. Also, a procedure has been defined for archiving data and their applications after the completion of each individual statistical research. Archived data and data back-up are kept in a fire proof locked safe keeping case. WindowsNT domain principle is applied to ensure network access protection, whereby each member of staff is allocated a user name and a password to gain access to selected network resources – data, printers etc. A procedure has been defined for a regular system back-up of servers, as well as a policy of user name and password allocation for authorised access (administrators, operators, users). MS Proxy server is used for employees’ access to the Internet, which means that none of the computers linked on the local network has direct access to the Internet. Symantec Antivirus - Corporate Edition, installed on a separate server and updated regularly, is used to ensure virus protection.  Further EU Harmonisation measures Continuous improvement of data security with technology upgrade (hardware, software) and protection rules. Introduction of SDC methods and relevant software applications. Main problems which need to be solved to ensure full harmonisation In the near future the State Statistical Office is planning to develop Web focused data bases to provide better quality and faster access to statistical data. Major efforts will need to be made to provide their protection against hackers and viruses.
2. Module 25200 Coordination for statistical confidentiality – Statistical confidentiality Committee 
Current situation Coordination of statistical confidentiallity is implemented in compliance with the Law on State Statistics (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 54/97), the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 12/94 , 4/02, 07/05) and the Rulebook on the measures and techniques of protection of individual data collected for statistical purposes (SSO internal document). The coordination of statistical confidentiallity in the statistical system is carried out by the State Statistical Office (SSO) and the authorised agencies (administrative bodies and institutions which carry out statistical research as part of the official statistics production).  The State Statistical Office and the authorised agencies must ensure the protection of individual data on business entities and natural persons collected and processed for statistical purposes.  Individual data collected by reporting units or taken from administrative sources for statistical purposes may be used for statistical purposes (carrying out statistical research specified in the Programme of Statistical Research).  With collected data the State Statistical Office is authorised to establish separate data files with identification data (e.g. selection of sample). Individual data on legal and natural persons may not be accessed before ensuring that the identity of the entity to which the data pertains cannot be revealed, unless the said entity has given his/her prior consent to that effect. The exception refers to individual data on business entities which may be published only if obtained from publicly available and universally accessible data files. As an exception, individual data collected for statistical purposes are made available to scientific institutions, without identification data and in compliance with the Law on State Statistics, to be used for scientific purposes. Access to data to be used for scientific puposes requires that a request in writing be filed with full description of data requested and the purposes for which they are to be used. Each request is evaluated and an agreement in writing is made, containing information on the data provided, purposes for which the data shall be used, data protection obligations and in particular the obligations pertaining to data destruction after the completion of the work, as well as sanctions in cases of breach of data protection clauses. Individual data collected for statistical purposes is made available to another agency authorised to conduct statistical research if such data are requested for statistical reseach specified in the Programme of Statistical Research. When individual data are transferred from one authorised  agency to another, a written agreement is signed which stipulates the data purpose of use and the data protection obligations.   All persons with access to individual data are subject to the data protection obligation, which takes effect when knowledge is gained of individual data and remains in effect after employment in the State Statistical Office has terminated, or after expiry of the contract, if such persons work on a contract basis. A Data Protection Commission, including a president and two members, with their respective delegates, has been established in 2004 in the State Statistical Office in accordance with the Rulebook. The Commission monitors the protection of individual data, looks after the implementation of regulation pertaining to individual data protection, puts forward protection enhancement  measures, inspects the catalogues and the methods in which protection is effected, and reports to the directors as to the current situation. The commission produces an annual report of its activities. As of 2005, separate Rulebook compliant catalogues of collections of individual data will be maintained in the State Statistical Office. The Catalogue will provide data on the title of data collection, the time frame for keeping data,  the legal basis for collection of data files, individual data maintained, entities with access to the data collection, period of data life, restrictions for using of data collection and other data.   Protection of data collected by the population census is further regulated with the Law on the respective census. For the purposes of protection of data from the 2002 Population Census, a Rulebook on measures, techniques and the manner of ensuring security and confidentiallity of personal data and the results from the Census of the Population, Households and Dwellings in the Republic of Macedonia was issued in 2002. Further EU harmonisation  measures   Coordination of activities aimed at harmonisation of the Law on State Statistics  with the EU regulation (listed in Module 25300);   Analysis of measures and techniques which need to be deployed to ensure the  protection of data lined up for publication at a lower level to meet the municipal needs (which are expected to grow over the coming period as a result of the decentralisation process in the Republic of Macedonia), and implementation of such measures and techniques against a backdrop of decentralisation;    Individual data will be encrypted when they are transferred via communication devices (planned to be introduced at the beginning of 2005);     Improvement of microdatasets preaparation methods;    Study of SDC methods (Statistical Disclosure Control). Key problems which need to be solved to ensure full harmonisation    Additional training and SDC software packages.  
3. Module 25300 Legal aspect of confidentiality 
Current situation Statistical confidentiallity is regulated with the Law on State Statistics enacted in 1997 and published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 54/97. The law is published in both Macedonian and English on the website of the State Statistical Office. With respect to data protection, the Law on State Statistics is harmonised with:   Council Regulation No: 322/97/EC of 17/02/97: OJ: L052 of 22/02/97 Act on Community Statistics;    Council of Europe, Convention 108, (81)  For the Protection of Individuals with regard to automatic procesing of personal data;   Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council - of 24 October 1995 - on the protection of individuals with regard to personal data  processing and free movement of such data, Official Journal of the European Communities, No. L 281/31;   Council of Europe, Recommendation No R(97) 18. The Law on Personal Data Protection expressly applies to certain segments of personal data protection („Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 12/94, 4/02, and 07/05) as general regulation.  Confidentiality is one of the basic principles which provide the foundations for the state statistics in the Republic of Macedonia (in addition to the confidentiality principle, the Law on State Statistics also defines the principles of impartiality, objectivity, professional independence and rationality). The law defines the meaning of individual, identification, personal and sensitive data, with a special section of the law dedicated to a full elaboration of protection of such data.   As regards data protection, the Law on State Statistics contains provisions on:   Institutions and bodies which may collect individual data for official statistical purposes:     State Statistical Office; and    authorised agencies - state bodies and institutions which carry out statistical research under the Law and the Programme of Statistical Research;     Purposes for which individual data may be collected:    The State Statistical Office and the authorised agencies collect individual data (on legal and natural persons) for the purposes of statistical research implementation as specified in the Programme of Statistical Research (either directly or by way of obtaining data from the existing data collections);   individual date which have not been collected for statistical purposes may also be used for statistical purposes;    Purposes for which individual data may be used:    individual data collected for statistical purposes may be used solely for the purposes set out in the Law and being individual, they may not be used for compilation of data files used for non-statistical purposes, and they may not be used under any circumstances for making any decisions concerning the data subject  to whom such data pertain;   The State Statistical Office may use the identification data collected from various sources to create data files for sample selection and the like;   Ensuring information on data protection for the data subject:   when data are collected directly, the data subject is informed about the data protection. Where data collection is indirect, information is provided in an appropriate manner, unless it is impossible or entails unreasonable efforts;   Data protection obligation:   persons with access to individual data collected for statistical purposes are under the obligation to keep the data classified as an official secret;   the obligation remains in effect after the termination of employment, or after the completion of the engagement of the contracted party;   Violations of the data protection provisions are subject to monetary fines;   Access to individual data:   third party access to individual data collected for statistical purposes is not allowed save for statistical purposes (by the State Statistical Office to authorised agencies and vice versa);   as an exception, access to individual data without the identification data is granted for scientific purposes. Data is provided on the basis of a previously concluded agreement in writing;   Data protection when data are published or made available to users:   access to statistical results is granted only when care is taken to ensure that the data subject to which data are related cannot be identified through the results, unless such data subject has given consent to that effect;   as an exception, individual data on business entities collected from publicly available and universally accessible data files may be published;    Provisions of the Law on State Statistics and the Law on Personal Data Protection apply to the international statistical cooperation in the area of data  protection;   Time frames within which individual data are kept:   after having been processed, the individual data are stored and kept until final results are published;   as an exception, they may be kept beyond the final results publication or until the purpose for which they are kept has been attained (e.g. sample selection etc). Provisions of the Law on State Statistics and the Law on Personal Data Protection apply to the cross-border transfer of individual data.  Cross-border transfer may only be made on the basis of international agreements and treaties or statistical cooperation agreements. Provisions of the Law on Personal Data Protection apply to the rights of entities on which data are collected for statistical purposes. Under the Law, the rights of the entity with respect to personal data (inspection, changes, court protection) do not pertain to data collected for statistical purposes. Individual data protection measures and techniques (unauthorised access, provision or any type of unauthorised processing, as well as measures aimed at preventing data destruction, loss, change, abuse or unauthorised use) are specified in a rulebook.  Provisions of the Law on State Statistics and the Law on Personal Data Protection apply to protection of data from censuses regulated with stand alone laws (e.g. Population census, Agriculture census etc), and, when necessary and in certain aspects, they are further regulated with the Law on the respective census. Measures and techniques for data protection collected by the population censuses carried out in 1994 and 2002 were regulated with special rulebooks. Further EU harmonisation measures 
  Adoption of regulations pertaining to data protection is monitored in the country and opinions and proposals as to their full harmonisation with EU regulations is provided (eg. An opinion was provided on the draft Law on personal data protection in the Republic of Macedonia, which was adopted by the Parliament on 25.01.2005 and published in Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05;  proposals were made for the draft laws regulating the establishment of data files containing individual data with respect to the access to such data for statistical purposes and subsequent data protection).   Needs are identified by a comparative approach in monitoring of the practical implementation of the Law in the Republic of Macedonia against EU requirements with respect to further regulation of the issue of statistical confidentiality by introducing amendments to the Law on State Statistics.   For the purposes of full harmonisation with the EU regulation pertaining to the area of statistical confidentiality, EU regulations passed after the enactment of the Law on State Statistics are being studied. As regards statistical confidentiality, the plan is to fully harmonise the Law on State Statistics in 2005 with the following EU regulations:     Commission Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data. (OJ L 8, 12.01.2001);   Commission Regulation (EC) No 831/2002 on implementing Coincil Regulation (EC) No 322/97 on Community statistics, concerning access to confidential data for scientific purposes (OJ L 133, 18.05.2002). 
B. Classification 

11. CLASSIFICATION 

1. Module 11100 Classification of products (CPA) and economic activities (NACE) 
National Classification of Activities-NCA Current situation The National Classification of Activities of the Republic of Macedonia was adopted in 1998 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 20/98) and has since been harmonised up to the forth level of classes with the NACE Classification of economic activities, Rev 1. A new group and a new class have been included so that national needs could be met (73.30-research and experimental development in multi disciplinary sciences) and new subclasses have been introduced at the level of five digit code (the total number of subclasses is 602). The National Classification of Activities – NCA is applied in the collection, analysis, publication and dissemination of data generated in the statistical system of the Republic of Macedonia in 2000, and in certain segments data series have been restored to be made consistent with NCA (1997 national accounts, 1995 business entities, 1998 industry etc. The Law on the National Classification of Activities of the Republic of Macedonia was adopted in 1998 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 7/98), which lays down the procedure for distribution of business entities according to their main activity in accordance with the NCA. Further EU harmonisation measures  Preparations are under way with respect to the amendments and supplements to the National Classification of Activities for revision and harmonisation with NACE Rev 1.1, and the plan is for a piece of primary legislation to be enacted towards the end of 2005 to allow for the implementation of the NCA. Upon enacting of the primary legislation, the plan is to apply and use NACE Rev.1.1 in 2005 with respect to data collection, analysis, publication and dissemination. On an ongoing basis the State Statistical Office keeps up with the activities of international organisations in preparing the National Classification of Economic Activities NACE Rev.2. Classification of products by activity - CPA Current situation The State Statistical Office applies the CPA - classification of products by activity issued with the EU Decision in October 1993 and amended in July 1998. It is used as a Central Classification of Products (goods and services) with a one-to-one correspondence with activities specified in the National Classification of Activities. Separate classifications in the following statistical fields have been developed on the basis of this Classification:  industry;  agriculture;   Gross fixed capital formation  construction;   trade and commerce (classification is in preparation stage). Further EU harmonisation measures   CPA 2002 harmonisation is planned for 2005, when it is planned to introduce CPA as a national standard.    On an ongoing basis the State Statistical Office keeps up with the activities of international organisations during the preparation of CPA 2007, and the harmonisation is planned after it has been adopted. 
2. Module 11600 Classifications for trade in goods statistics 
Combined nomenclature Current situation As for 2002, the Customs Tariff Nomenclature of Products (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.104/01) has been in use in the Customs procedure for the purposes of imposing product tariffs, harmonised with the Combined Nomenclature of the European Union up to an 8 digit level, while the National Nomenclature is up to 10 digits. The same Nomenclature is used in statistical data processing and data release. Up until 2002, the National Customs Tariff Nomenclature had been in use, aligned with the Harmonised System of Titles and Codes up to a 6 digit level. Further EU harmonisation measures On-going monitoring of changes in the Combined Nomenclature.  Classification of Countries Current situation With respect to foreign trade, the Classification of Countries is applied according to the standards of the International Standards Organisation ISO - 3166  alfa-2 code, accepted as the national standard. The numerical code of the same standard, is also applied to other types of statistical research. Further EU harmonisation measures   Ongoing monitoring and application of modifications in the Geo-nomenclature which is in  practise in EU.  
C. agriculture, forestry and fisheries; 

61. LAND USE AND LANDSCAPE  

1. Module 61101 Land use and remote sensing 
Current situation The State Statistical Office collects data on land use in the frame of statistical research of agricultural production. Such data are based on the cadastre data and reports provided by external associates, so called estimators. The State Statistical Office does not conduct research of land use supported by satellite imaging.   EU alignment steps undertaken The overall Eurostat methodology of the referent subject matter is studies. Simultaneous to that, possibilities are explored for the implementation of the LUCAS research in the Republic of Macedonia as a pilot project under some of the projects which are in development phase. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation There has been no project established as yet to work on the research of land use supported by satellite imaging. In addition, competencies of institutions which are likely participants in the relevant research have not been defined. 







2. Module 61300 Rural development statistics 
Current situation There are possibilities in the State Statistical Office for the implementation of rural development statistics, although it has not yet been fully implemented.  Numerous statistical research activities are carried out in the State Statistical Office under the approved programme of operations on a monthly, quarterly, annual and multi-year basis. Such research activities provide relevant statistical data on employment, transport, education, infrastructure and other relevant indicators. Further EU harmonisation measures   Analysis of the situation pertaining to the rural development statistics from the point of view of EU requirements and identification of accurate indicators which provide the basis for the rural development statistics;   Full integration of different parameters and indicators which define rural development;   Study of methodologies which cover the area of rural development statistics. 
62. AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES  

1. Module 62102 Agricultural structure 
Current situation The structure of agriculture is monitored mainly by the data provided from the Census of the population, households, dwellings and agricultural holdings carried out in 1994. In addition, some of the data required for the module (labour force and number of livestock) have been generated by the 2002 Census of the population, households and dwellings.  The State Statistical Office monitors Agricultural statistics through the Department of Agriculture, Forestry, Water Management, Hunting, Fishing and Environment on the basis of the following statistical research:     Crop production statistics which covers data on areas planted in the autumn and spring seeding seasons, harvested areas and early and late crop yields;   Livestock production statistics which covers data on number of livestock by category, slaughtered livestock and livestock production (meat, milk, eggs, honey). EU alignment steps undertaken Data on the structure of agriculture will be provided by the Census of Agriculture which will be conducted in October 2005. Final preparations are  in the State Statistical Office with respect to the implementation of the Census of Agriculture which will generate data on agricultural land and arable land, livestock inventory, agricultural production, agro-technical measures, machinery and equipment, commercial facilities, forestry, fishing and labour force. A trial census of agriculture was carried out in December of 2003 and on the basis of the findings and analysis, the stock analysis methodology has been defined and census instruments developed (census forms, guidelines for surveyors, check lists and the Census implementation methodology). Field activities will be carried out in 2005. The text of the Law on Census of Agriculture, 2005, has been drafted, aligned and approved and the next step is the adoption of the Law. Data obtained form the Census will provide the basis for the establishment of the Farm Register. In line with the time framework and the long-term statistical system on agricultural development, the first structural farm research will be carried out in 2009, and the subsequent one three years thereafter. The plan is to update the Farm Register with data obtained from structural research to ensure sustainable high quality, as well as a good background for sample preparation for statistical research in the areas of crop and livestock production. 
63. AGRICULTURAL  MONETARY STATISTICS  

1. Module 63101 Agricultural accounts and prices  
Current situation Economic accounts in agriculture have been calculated on the basis of data on agricultural production and expenditure in the period 1998-2003, in line with the methodology applied by the European Union member countries. The Office has thus far had no activities concerning the economic accounts in forestry. With respect to the agricultural price statistics, until the end of 2003 the official output price indices had only been calculated by use of the methodology which was not consistent with the one applied in the EU member countries.  Also, until the end of 2003 absolute agricultural prices had not been followed. As of January 2004, calculations are made of the experimental price indices of agricultural output and input, harmonised with the methodology prescribed by EUROSTAT. Further EU harmonisation measures The State Statistical Office keeps up to date with all novelties in the area of economic accounts and agricultural prices. With respect to economic accounts in agriculture, there are activities under way aimed at improving  the EAA system and implementing the new European Union regulations. Additional information concerning agricultural economic accounts is provided in Module 63101-1.. and Module 63101-1.c. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation The system of associations of producers, chambers and exchanges has not yet been developed to such an extent that may provide relevant data on price index calculation. 




2. Module 63101 - 1.a. Economic Accounts for Agriculture (EAA) and Forestry (EAF), including the statistics on Agricultural Labour Input (ALI) 
Current situation Economic Accounts for Agriculture are produced by the use of administrative data sources as well as data obtained from the following types of research:   Crop production from early crops   Crop production from late crops   Purchase of agricultural products from individual farmers-monthly   Selling of agricultural  products from own production to  agricultural  enterprises and agricultural cooperatives- monthly   Sample survey for number of livestock as on 15.01 for individual agricultural households   Annual  survey  for livestock of agricultural  enterprises and agricultural cooperatives   Quarterly  survey on slaughtered livestock    Monthly  survey on agricultural products sold on the market   Quarterly survey on purchase prices of intermediate goods, operating assets and services in agriculture. Such research generate quantity and quality data on: actual output by agricultural product, own account production, purchase from individual producers, livestock number in the reference year, data on slaughtered livestock as well as data required for calculating intermediate consumption. During 2003, a current account audit was carried out for  EAA (1998-2001) and calculation of  EAA for the period 2002-2003 in accordance with the Manual for Economic Accounts for Agriculture,  EAA 1997 (Rev 1.1).  The National Classification of Activities, harmonised and comparable with the European classification NACE Rev.1 for the sector  – Agriculture, is used to prepare the accounts.  The State Statistical Office, has not started any activities concerning the economic accounts for forestry.  Labour force input data are collected by the department of Labour Market and Standard of Living. In line with the EUROSTAT recommendations (Manual for Economic Accounts in Agriculture, ЕСЗ 1997.-Rev 1.1), the data obtained are used to calculate the annual  work units which are in turn used to calculate the nominal and the real factor income (by using the GDP price deflator) per labour unit. The questionnaires designed for the upcoming Agricultural Census, 2005, contain question sets pertaining to the labour force.  Data are collected at the level of product on the basis of the Nomenclature for Agricultural Products and Services developed by the SSO. This Nomenclature has been developed on the basis of the Classification of Products by Activity (CPA) which has been harmonised with the List of Typical Agricultural Products in the Manual for Economic Accounts in Agriculture, ЕСЗ 1997 (Rev 1.1). Further EU harmonisation measures 
  Harmonisation of calculations of output and intermediate consumption in accordance with EUROSTAT recommendations;    Harmonisation of all available data sources in line with EU recommendations;   Improvement of book keeping records at farm level (individual agricultural holding) by the Agency for the Promotion of Agriculture Development. 3. Module 63101 - 1.b. Income of the Agricultural Households Sector (IAHS) 
Current situation The State Statistical Office collects relevant data on the total Income of Agricultural Household Sector. The calculations of the Total Income of Agricultural Household Sector for 2002-2003 are experimental and made by virtue of applying a broad definition of agricultural households. Observed variables: Net income from agricultural activity, fees from non-agricultural activities, property income, social benefits received, current transfers, and social transfer. Further EU harmonisation measures Harmonisation of all available data sources in line with EU regulations and keeping abreast of all novelties. 4. Module 63101 - 1.c. Agricultural price statistics (APS) 
Current situation With reference to agricultural statistics and specifically regarding the price statistics, the following statistical research of quantities, qualities and average prices is carried out:   Purchase of agricultural products from individual farmers-monthly    Actual own account production by agricultural holdings and agricultural cooperatives- monthly   Quarterly, purchase prices of intermediate goods, operating assets and services rendered in agriculture. On the basis of data obtained from monthly statistical research, a monthly calculation is made of agricultural producer price index within 40 days from the last day of the reference month (agricultural output price index). Although such indices are methodologically correct, they are not comparable and are inconsistent with the methodology applied in the EU member states. Producer prices have thus far been calculated on the basis of data on quantities and qualities of products purchased from individual producers and sale of own account production by agricultural holdings.  When indices are calculated, baseline prices are previous year's average prices. Weights are prepared once in every five years, though they are adjusted every year for the amount of the previous year’s price increase.  SSO does not follow the prices of land lease in agriculture. In 2003 the State Statistical Office commenced a process of harmonisation of the methodology of calculation of agricultural price indices with the methodology applied in EU member countries.  In January 2004 a process was started of experimental calculation of price indices by monitoring the so-called “pure“ prices. Data on prices on product level are collected on the basis of the Nomenclature of Agricultural Products and Services. The Nomenclature has been developed on the basis of the Classification of Products by Activity (CPA) and adapted for national use, in effect since  October 2003 . Agricultural output price indices had not been calculated until the beginning of 2004 . Further EU harmonisation measures For the period 2005-2006, the plan for the experimental price indices of agricultural output and input price indices is to become official and published. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation A consistent application of the index calculation methodology requires stable reporting units for a minimum period of 5 five years following their introduction into the index list. Given that Macedonia is a small country, it is very difficult to secure respective reporting units for each product included in the index list. Problems stemming from the level of development of Macedonia’s economy, or more precisely, product typing: Products offered on the market are not selected - classified by type, quality and size as required by the Manual for Agricultural Arice Statistics published by EUROSTAT. Data obtained from economic accounts to be used to develop the weightings are aggregated on the level of product groups, and there are product level data missing on a high number of products . There is no system in place to monitor agricultural land lease prices. As the new agricultural input-output indices will be prepared on the basis of 2003=100 under the new methodology, there will be problems with re-working the base 2000=100. 
5. Module 63501 Modelling 
Current situation The State Statistical Office has thus far not used data from the database of the Agriculture Information system (AgrIS). Statistical data on agriculture which we send to EUROSTAT can be found in the database of NewCRONOS. Further EU harmonisation measures With respect to economic accounts in agriculture, there are table preparation activities under way. These tables should then be sent to New CRONOS by the use of COSA product codes. For the needs of EUROSTAT, data on price indices and absolute agricultural prices will be sent with the use of PRAG product codes. The increased volume of activities with respect to the implementation of new calculation methodologies of economic accounts in agriculture and input and output price indices will be accompanied by the increasing need for exchange and use of data from the NewCRONOS data base. 







64. CROP PRODUCTION 

1. Module 64100 Crop production statistics 
Current situation The State Statistical Office, through its Department of Agriculture, Forestry, Water Management, Hunting, Fishery and Environment carries out six times per annum a research of land under crops in the spring and autumn seeding seasons and of the expected  production from early and late crops and fruit orchards. The research is with full coverage of business entities through reports which enterprises fill in on the basis of bookkeeping records and forward via mail. With respect to individual agricultural holdings (family farms), data are collected by the land area and production estimate method.  Data are collected on: land area, total production and production per hectare, by crops, six times per annum, by municipality and by product.  Data are published at the level off NUTS 5 and NUTS 2. Further EU harmonisation measures Following the implementation of the Census of Agriculture and the establishment of the Farm Register, the plan is to modify the method of data collection and to start the application of data evaluation and verifications.  2. Module 64100 - 1.a. Crop production statistics 
Current Situation In the Department of Agriculture at the State Statistical Office, land areas and crop production are monitored by 6 statistical surveys, out of which 2 are with reference to the expected production. Crop production from autumn and spring seeding seasons harvested early and late crops are monitored on an ongoing basis.  Research of business entities is done based on reports that enterprises fill out from their bookkeeping records and forward via mail. Data collection fully covers the Republic of Macedonia. As to the individual agricultural holdings (family farms), data are collected by the method of visual estimates of the land area and production, as well as on the basis of the opinions obtained from the local authorities and farmers from respective regions. Data collection fully covers the Republic of Macedonia. International and national classifications are not used in the of crop production Data are collected six times per year, by municipality and by product. Data are published at the level off NUTS 5 and NUTS 2. In crop production research national crop production methodology is used. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of methodological instruments with EU standards – deadline-end of 2007/2008;    Implementation of those activities specified in the project SIDA, which refer to the sub-project of crop production - deadline: end of 2007/2008. 
3. Module 64100 - 1.b. Crop production supply balance sheets 
Current situation Crop production balance sheet data are calculated indirectly from the economic accounts for agriculture and are experimental for 2000-2003.  Balance sheets are incomplete. Data are missing on: initial stocks, own produced capital goods, final stocks, and imports, as the preparation of accounts do not require such data (they are not covered).  Data available by sources are the following: total production, losses and usable output.  Regarding uses, the following data are available: intra-unit consumption and use for purposes other than intra-unit consumption. Intra-unit consumption includes the following items: seed and planting stock feeding stuffs and other. Uses for purposes other than intra-unit consumption include the following items:  processing by producer( separable activities), own  final consumption and sales (domestic and abroad). Further EU harmonisation measures 
  Harmonisation of  output and  uses accounts with the applicable European Commission regulations;   Harmonisation of all available data sources in line with applicable European Commission  regulations;   Improvement of book keeping records at farm level (individual agricultural holding) by the Agency for Promotion of Agriculture Development. 
4. Module 64100 - 1.c. Harvest forecast (AGROMET) 
The State Statistical Office does not make any harvest forecasts by use of agro-meteorological data, nor by time series. No harvest forecasts have been planned under the Programme for Statistical Research 2003-2007 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 69/03). 
5. Module 64100 - 1.d. Statistics of viticulture 
Current Situation At the Department of Agriculture of the State Statistical Office, grape and wine production is monitored by 3 statistical surveys, one of which is on expected production. The same research is used for the monitoring land area and crop production. Experimental collection of data on areas and production of wine and table grape is under way. International and national classifications are not used in the research of wine and grape production Data are collected three times per year, by municipality and by product, and published at the level of NUTS 5 and NUTS 2. National crop production methodology is applied in the research. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of methodology with the European standards and commencement of activities for applying the International Classification – deadline: 2006. 6. Module 64100 - 1.e. Statistics of fruit growing 
Current Situation At the Department of Agriculture of the State Statistical Office, fruit production is monitored by 5 statistical surveys, 2 of which are on expected production. The same research is used for the monitoring of land area and crop production. International and national classifications are not used in the research of fruit production Data are collected 5 times per year, by municipality and by product, and published at the level of NUTS 5 and NUTS 5. The National Crop Production Methodology is applied in the research. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of methodology with the European standards and commencement of activities for applying the International Classification – deadline: 2006.  
65. ANIMAL PRODUCTION  

1. Module 65101 Livestock and meat 
Current situation The State Statistical Office monitors livestock and meat statistics through the Department of Agriculture, Forestry, Water Management, Hunting, Fishery and Environment under the Business Statistics Sector. Livestock number and weight, slaughter and livestock production (meat, milk, egg, wool and honey) are determined by the following types of research:    Livestock number survey for individual agricultural households;   Annual research of livestock breeding for legal persons and parts of legal persons(constituent units);   Quarterly research for slaughtered livestock;   Monthly research of sale and purchase of agricultural products. Data obtained from such research provide the basis for analysis, forecasts and agricultural policy making. The National Classification of Activities is used (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No 20/98), based on  classification NACE 1.Rev.1. Area A of this classification is used, covering agriculture, hunting and forestry. The data are adjusted to the Nomenclature of Agricultural Products and services. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of methodological instruments with EU standards - deadline end of 2008;   Implementation of these activities specified in the project SIDA, which refer to the subproject livestock breeding - deadline: 2007/2008;    Publication of data at the level NUTS 5. 2. Module 65101 - 1.a. Livestock survey 
An annual research is carried out by the State Statistical Office of the livestock number in individual agricultural holdings as a Sample Survey by use of the household owner interview method. Interviews are conducted by contracted service providers - interviewers, who are specially trained for this purpose by experts employed at the State Statistical Office.  In the 2002 Census the Sample Selection framework included the households which reported a certain level of agricultural activity. The Sample was designed as a random stratified cluster sample. The sample included 4900 households in 700 clusters, which accounted for about 4% of all households in the Republic Of Macedonia. These are households which reported in the 2002 census that they had worked on a minimum of 10 acres of land or have had a minimum of one head of livestock. The sample presents all variables at the national level.   Statistical research of livestock breeding for legal persons and parts of legal persons (constituent units) is carried out on an annual basis. Observed variables (annual data) are presented by the total weight of: horses, cattle, pigs, sheep, goats, poultry and bee-hives. 
3. Module 65101 - 1.b. Meat production 
Meat production statistics is monitored by statistical research described in Module 65101 –1Data are collected on an annual and quarterly basis and refer to the number and weight of slaughtered cattle, pigs, sheep and poultry. 
4. Module 65101 - 1.c. Eggs and poultry 
Poultry and eggs statistics is obtained by the statistical research described in Module 65101. Data are collected on an annual,  quarterly and monthly basis and refer to: poultry number and weight, number of laying hens, production of eggs and number and weight of slaughtered poultry of all types, as well as the number, quantities and value of poultry and eggs purchased. 
5. Module 65101 - 1.d. Supply balance sheet of meat 
Meat supply balance sheet is not prepared at the State Statistical Office. Based on the statistical research data (described in module 65101), the Ministry of Economy, for internal needs, prepares and uses the balance sheets on separate types of meat, although such balance sheets are not published. 
6. Module 65101 - 1.e. Balance sheets of eggs 
The State Statistical Office does not prepare balance sheets of eggs. 
7. Module 65101 - 1.f. Feed balance sheets 
The State Statistical Office does not prepare balance sheets for livestock foodstuff. 
8. Module 65202 Milk and dairy products statistics 
Current situation The State Statistical Office monitors milk and dairy products statistics through the Department of Agriculture, Forestry, Water Management, Hunting, Fishery and Environment under the Business Statistics Sector. The data obtained by this research provides the basis for determining the nutritional needs of the population, as well as for the analysis, projections and agricultural policy design. Data on the production of cow, sheep and goat milk are obtained from surveys of the number of individual agricultural households and the Annual Report on livestock breeding by legal persons and parts of legal persons (constituent units) described in Module 65101, while the data on sale nd purchase of milk and dairy products are obtained from the monthly reports on sale and purchase of agricultural products. Data on the of number of dairy cows, milk ewes and milk goats, as well as data on quantities of cow, sheep and goat milk are obtained annualy. Data on purchased cow, sheep and goat milk, butter, cream cheese, soft and hard cheese and other diary products are obtained monthly. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of methodological instruments with EU standards - deadline end of 2008;   Implementation of activities specified in the project SIDA, which refer to the sub-project livestock breeding – deadline: 2007/2008;    Publication of data at the level NUTS 5.

66. AGRO-INDUSTRY STATISTICS  

1. Module 66101 Agro-industry statistics 
Current situation Data on agro-industrial statistics are collected by the State Statistical Office in a decentralised fashion. Production data are collected by separate statistical departments, i.e. by the Industrial Statistics Department and the Agricultural Statistics Department. Each of the mentioned statistics uses specific concepts, definitions, methods and classifications according to which data are collected as described in the required module. Data are available and published in relevant publications. Further EU harmonisation measures   Analysis of the situation pertaining to agricultural statistics from the point of view of EU requirements and identification of accurate indicators which provide the basis for agricultural statistics. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Undefined competencies regarding this specific statistics.  
2. Module 66200 Food safety statistics 
Current situation Relevant indicators to allow monitoring of the quality of food have not been determined.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Analysis of the situation pertaining to food quality statistics from the point of view of EU requirements and identification of accurate indicators which provide the basis for food quality statistics;   Study of methodologies which cover the area of food quality statistics. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Lack of relevant criteria and along those lines by-laws and guidelines with clearly defined standards for separate categories of food products, with simultaneous definition of competencies for those specific statistics.  
67. COORDINATION AND REFORM OF AGRICULTURAL STATISTICS  

1. Module 67101 Training action plan for agricultural statistics (TAPAS) 
Neither the State Statistical Office, nor any other institution in the Republic of Macedonia, is involved in the Training Action Plan on Agricultural Statistics (TAPAS), which is why there are no activities under way for the mentioned Action Plan. 
2. Module 67150 Improvement of agricultural statistics (other) 
Data obtained by various surveys in the area of crop and animal production, hunting, fishing, water management and prices of crop and animal products are continuously adjusted and monitored based on international recommendations. The improvement of statistics in the mentioned areas is main objective of the long-term project - Improving Agricultural Statistics in the Republic of Macedonia which the State Statistical Office is working in cooperation with the Swedish Statistics. The project is funded by the Swedish International Development Agency - SIDA.   The first phase of the project has been successfully completed, and the second phase activities are under way. 
3. Module 67200 Agricultural Statistics Committee 
Given that the objective of the Committee for Agricultural Statistics is the management of the European agricultural statistical system, the State Statistical Office, i.e. the Republic of Macedonia, not being a an EU member, does not take part in the activities of the Committee and does not attend its working meetings.
4. Module 67301 Agroenvironmental statistics 
Current situation There are grounds at the State Statistical Office for the implementation of agro-environmental statistics, although they have not been fully implemented yet. Under the adopted Statistical Research Programme (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia  No.69/03) statistical research is carried out on a monthly, quarterly, annual and multi annual basis, and the implementation of those programmes provides the relevant statistical data on artificial fertilizers, plant protection substances and other relevant indicators. Further EU harmonisation measures   Analysis of the situation pertaining to the agro-environmental statistics from the point of view of EU requirements and identification of accurate indicators which provide the basis for the agro-environmental statistics;   Study of methodologies which cover the area of agro-environmental statistics (Guidelines on the research of pesticide use). Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Poorly developed organic farming and lack of a network of sustainable agriculture indicators. 
5. Module 67500 Standing Agricultural Statistics Committee 
In light of the fact that the Republic of Macedonia is not an EU member state, it does not take part in the activities of the Standing Committee on Agricultural Statistics.  
68. FORESTRY STATISTICS  

1. Module 68101 Forestry statistics 
Current situation The State Statistical Office monitors forestry statistics by use of information from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry, Water Management, Hunting, Fishery and Environment on the basis of the following statistical research: production, sale and stocks of forest ranges in the state owned forests – monthly; and changes in forest areas, forestation, timber harvested, forests damages, machinery and transportation facilities in forests and game shot-annual. All data on production from state owned forests are recorded on the basis of book keeping records of subsidiary offices of PE “Macedonian forests“ and the national parks which are also legally liable of forest management and protection. All data on privately owned forests are obtained by way of estimates of subsidiaries of PE “Macedonian forests“.  The definitions and statistical research have been adjusted and revised in line with the applicable EC regulations. Import and export data are consistent with the Customs Tariffs (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.104/01) which has been harmonised with CN – 8, with two additional digits at national level. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of forestry statistics with the EUROSTAT methodologies and with EFICS (European Forestry Information and Communication System);   Development of new data collection methods for the private sector;   Application of new technologies and methods for collected data quality control. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Conduct forests inventory and provide missing data. 69. FISHERIES STATISTICS  

1. Module 69101 Fishery statistics 
Current situation The State Statistical Office monitors data on fishery statistics by use of information from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry, Water Management, Hunting, Fishery and Environment within the Business Statistics Sector. Only fresh water fishery is monitored on an annual basis.  The annual report on fresh water fishing covers legal and natural persons fishing in open fresh waters (rivers, lakes, canals, water accumulations etc.), or legal and natural persons registered for fresh water fishing and catching other fresh water organisms, whereby data are obtained on vessels and equipment, total and commercial capacity and fish farm areas, the total production of young fish stock, fish progeny stock purchase and production, consumption fish, total catch (rivers, lakes, canals etc.), fish food consumed and current year’s balance sheet of fish production . Fish balance sheet covers the following categories: opening stock, production catches of fresh water fish consumption and purchase of fish progeny stock.  Statistics of fishing fleet There is no significant fishing fleet in the Republic of Macedonia, while data on vessels and equipment are collected from commercial fishing enterprises and cooperatives. 1.b Catch statistics is described above. 1.c  There is no collected data for annual fish stock flow and storage  1.d Aquaculture production statistics There is no aquaculture production in the Republic of Macedonia.  1.e Data on socio-economic activities in the Fishery Sector The data on socio-economic activities for the Fishery Sector are collected and processed based on several regular surveys conducted by the State Statistical Office. 1.f Sustainable fishing indicators  At present there are no clearly defined indicators that would monitor the sustainable development of fishing. Further EU harmonisation measures On-going harmonisation with FAO and EUROSTAT recommendations. D. multi-domain statistics; 70. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  
1. Module 70100 Sustainability and pressure indicators 
The development of a National Sustainable Development Strategy with and Action Plan (NSDS with an Action Plan) has been planned in the National Strategy for integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union, as well as in the European Partnership Action Plan. In the process of National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS), indicators will also be developed to monitor the implementation of the strategy.  Current situation At present, data are collected in the Republic of Macedonia for the indicators to be used for monitoring the implementation of the National Sustainable Development Strategy with Action Plan (NSDS, with the Action Plan). Under the Compendium, data required for this module are: 
 Greenhouse Gas Emission. The Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning put together the First National Communication under the UNFCCC, under which an inventory of green house gas emission and absorption has been developed for the following gasses: CO2, CH4 and N2, for the period 1990 - 1998 where the baseline year is 1994. The inventory has been developed in line with the methodology of the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change. 
 Urban air quality.  The Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning monitors the quality of ambient air with an automatic monitoring network, with measuring stations in 15 towns across the country. Parameters monitored are: CO2, nitrogen oxides, suspended particles with 10 micro meters, CO and ozone. The National Institute of Health Protection monitors: CO2, smoke, air sediment, concentration of lead in the air and other ions. The Hydro-Meteorological Directorate monitors CO2 and smoke.  
 Municipal waste collection, disposal and incineration. The State Statistical Office conducts research on collection, disposal and incineration of municipal waste only, with data collected on a bi-annual basis. Data are collected on: recycled, incinerated and disposed municipal waste, quantities of refuse and the number and total space of landfills, conditions and number of vehicles, street area cleaned and cleaning schedules, number of employees by type and activity. Also, the State Statistical Office collects data on recycling industrial waste and import and export of waste by type and quantity.  
 Transport (transport volume, modular division). The State Statistical Office conducts research in the area of transport and communications, described in details in Theme 48. 
 Biodiversity indicators (fish stock, protected areas). With respect to fish stock data, it is provided by annual research of fresh water fishing carried out by the State Statistical Office.  The data on protected areas are obtained from administrative sources. Under the Spatial Plan of the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia  no 39/04), adopted in 2004 there are 74 protected areas in the Republic of Macedonia. U alignment steps undertaken   In the period December 2004 – March 2005 priorities will be defined with respect to further harmonisation and improvement of environmental statistics in line with the European Standards.   Data collection on industrial gas emission and air quality will be carried out by the end of 2007 by special research programmes. 2. Module 70200 Integration of environmental concerns into sectoral policies 
No analyses has been carried out in the Republic of Macedonia with respect to a description of driving forces and integration of environmental components in the socio-economic statistics with special emphasis on transport, agriculture and energy.  With respect to the sales and use of pesticides, the State Statistical Office collects data on pesticide wholesale and retail sale by species (herbicides, fungicides, insecticides and other means of protection), with data collected from major companies, while for the individual sector, estimates are made based on sales.  
71. ENVIRONMENT STATISTICS  

1. Module 71200 Waste and recycling statistics 
Current situation The State Statistical Office conducts on collection, disposal and incineration of municipal waste only, with the following data collected on a bi-annual basis.   business entities performing utility services ,   number of vehicles,   vehicle condition and capacity,   street cleaning area and cleaning schedule,   number of employees by type of activity,   number of apartment buildings which dispose waste,   quantities of waste disposed,   number and area (in 2) of landfills and method of waste disposal. The latest official data refer to 2001, while 2003 data are being processed at present. Also, the State Statistical Office produces data on recycling of industrial waste on a monthly basis and import and export of waste by type and quantity.  The Basel Convention on cross-border transport of hazardous waste was ratified by the Republic of Macedonia in 1997 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 49/97). The Ministry of environment and physical planning has assumed a reporting obligation under the Convention as a focal point for collection of data on hazardous waste.  In the Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning, activities are under way with respect to the development of a Cadastre of solid and hazardous waste polluters, under which relevant data will be collected about the quantities of waste generated in the Republic of Macedonia. Thus far about 60% of the anticipated solid waste polluters have been identified. The process however is slow due to the difficulties with provision of information. Further EU harmonisation measures  The plan is for the research in this subject area to be organised on an annual footing by 2007, so that municipal waste statistics can be monitored on a more regular basis. 2. Module 71301 Statistics on air pollution, water use, discharges to water and hazardous materials 
Current situation Air Regular and harmonised statistical data on air pollution, water use, water discharge and harmful substances are some of the fundamental elements which will be helpful in the identification of the situation pertaining to the pollution of the environment. With regards to statistical data on development and production of indicators of the green house gasses emission and other air pollutants, there are data obtained through the development of the First National Report on Climate Change. The Report provides an inventory of greenhouse gasses consistent with the methodology of the International Panel on Climate Changes (IPCC), and it covers the three basis green house gasses, carbon dioxide (SO2), methane (CH4) and bi-nitrogen oxide (N2O). 1990 -1998 is the period analysed, whereas the baseline year is 1994. Data are collected and processed by the Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning, Office for Climate Changes. The data will be presented in the next year’s statistical yearbook.  The Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning (MESP) has available data on air quality obtained from the HMD (Hydro Meteorological Directorate, the National Institute for Health Protection and the national network of MESP. The Macedonian environmental information centre at MESP collects and processes data on the quality of ambient air, i.e. concentration of polluting substances present in the ambient air, such as SOand smoke. Data are collected by the measuring networks of the Hydro Meteorological Directorate and the Republic Institute for Health Protection, as well as by the automatic network for environmental air quality control of the MEPP, for pollution substances such as SO, NOx, CO, PM10. and ozone. In the Republic of Macedonia identification has been made of the quantities of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide and dust emissions in the air on annual basis, though they are not fully complete with data by all other sectors which produce emissions into air.  The further stages of completion of such quantities of emission fall under the Cadastre of Air Polluters and Pollutants at the level of the Republic of Macedonia, which will be completed towards the end of 2005.  It is necessary to broaden the statistical data and the development air indicators. Water  With regard to water resources data collection, the use and treatment at a regional and national level, the State Statistical Office conducts annual research of settlements related to the total waste water discharged, waste water and treated water from populated areas which have public sewerage, waste water discharge, waste water discharge in river basin areas, sewerage network , mechanical waste water treatment devices, chemical waste water treatment, biological waste water treatment, abstraction and method of canal water drainage and use of water resources by type and quantity. At the Ministry of Environment and Spatial planning, data are collected on the hydrological and quality status of water flows in the Republic of Macedonia.  As to the quality status of rivers in the Republic of Macedonia, data are collected from the measurements made by the Hydro-Meteorological Directorate. The data refer to the following parameters: hydrological parameters, physical and organoleptic indicators, mineralisation, oxygenic indicators, indicators of eutrophication and hazardous and dangerous substances. As to the quality status of the two natural lakes, Ohrid Lake and Prespa Lake, and of the confluent rivers and streams, data are collected from the Public Scientific Institute of Hydro-Biology. The data refer to the physical, chemical and biological monitoring. The water quality of Ohrid and Prespa lakes is determined by the measurements carried out in the pelagial part of a vertical cross-section. The following parameters are monitored: temperature, transparency, (), total alkalinity, free 2, oxygen (diluted and saturated), bio-chemical consumption of oxygen, organic substances by consumption of permanganate, compounds of nitrogen (ammonium, total organic nitrogen by Kiel Dahl, nitrites and nitrates) and total phosphorus.  The biological monitoring covers: phytoplankton and chlorophyll A. The monitoring of the above mentioned indicators is an obligation stipulated in the framework Water Directive, and as of next year, it will be incorporated in to the Statistical yearbook. Hazardous substances Thus far there has been no official specification of a single procedure for data collection and risk assessment of hazardous substances, although there are some data available on pesticides, collected and processed by the SSO. EU alignment steps undertaken The plan is for the data on air and quantities of emission at national level to be published in the 2005 Statistical Yearbook . 
3. Module 71401 Environmental accounts and environmental expenditure statistics 
Current situation  The State Statistical Office has available data on actual investment made in the area of environment protection, obtained by a regular annual statistical research of investment. Such data pertain to actual investment/current expenditures incurred for the protection of the environment, both total and by individual segments such as: waste, water, noise, air, soil and flora and fauna.
4. Module 71501 Periodical integrated reporting and management of database 
Current situation  The Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning is the agency responsible for maintaining data files and providing data on the status of the environment and nature, and in that light, it is the agency responsible for all statistical research in this subject area.    The Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning disposes with relevant data on the environment organised in databases of:  1. Air  a.  national automatic network for monitoring ambient air quality,  b.  the network of the RIHP (regional/city health protection offices),  c.  the network of the HMD (Hydro-Meteorological Directorate) d.  data on self monitoring of major industrial facilities e.  data on emissions of pollutant by individual polluters 2. Water a.  HMD- data on hydrological (river flow, water level of Ohrid, Prespa and Doyran Lakes and water level and quantity of artificial lakes) and quality status of water flows in the Republic of Macedonia referred to in the RYMSIS Progamme,  b.  HBZ - data on the quality status of Ohrid and Prespa Lakes   c.  Central laboratory - data on measurements of industrial waste water d.  Data on the self monitoring of major industrial facilities e.  Vranishta-waste water treatment station f.  RIHP- data on sanitary compliance of water 3. Noise: a.  National network of the RIHP b.  Central Environmental Laboratory The Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning has been cooperating since 1998 with the European Environment Agency (EEA). It provides data to the five thematic centres; water, air, soil, waste and nature and biodiversity. The table bellow provides an overview of the methodology of water and air data provision. The State statistical office submits data on the environment to EUROSTAT on the basis of Joint EUROSTAT /OECD Environment Questionnaire. 
73.  SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY  

1. Module 73100 R&D statistics 
Current situation R&D statistical data are collected on a regular annual R&D statistical research basis.  In 1998 (1997 data) this research was conducted in line with the European Standards, i.e. with the Frascati Manual OECD 1993. Ever since the data has been collected, processed and published with respect to three sectors; the business sector--Business entities in the field of economy, government sector and higher education sector. The Macedonian Academy of Arts and Sciences also participates in the research. Further EU harmonisation measures   Further harmonisation of research with the EU standards;   Coverage of privately owned business entities;   Larger scale processing and publication on a regional level. 2. Module 73200 Innovation statistics 
Current situation In 2001 the Community Innovation Survey-3 was carried out as a pilot research. The next survey is planned for 2005. Further EU harmonisation measures   Further harmonisation of research with the EU statistics; 
74. GEOGRAPHICAL AND LOCAL INFORMATION 

1. Module 74200 Geographical information system (GISCO) 
Current situation In light of the fact that GISCO is also a reference data base of the European Commission, this module is at present not relevant to the State Statistical Office and the Republic of Macedonia in general, although we believe that it is important to mention that in the Republic of Macedonia various public administration institutions, public enterprises (national and local) and private enterprises  have available digital data in vector and raster format,  the quality and accuracy of which meets their need. There is, however, no coordination between the parties mentioned.  The State Statistical Office also has a set of digital data at their disposal: generalised boundaries at regional and local level, as well as NUTS regional centres, municipalities and settlements. The quality and accuracy of such data meet the needs of:   the desktop mapping application which provides production of quality thematic maps for visualisation of  spatially dependant statistical data.   a pilot internet application which provides an on-line connection of statistical and geometric data It was for the first time that for the purposes of the 2002 population Census, maps of statistical and enumeration districts of two cities were developed with GIS tools and digital data in vector format with accuracy which is suitable for maps with 1:1000 ratio. They were provided as a result of an active co-operation with the State Authority for Geodetic Works. Further EU harmonisation measures   Launching of an initiative for defining the rules and standards for the establishment of infrastructure of spatial data;   Designation/establishment of an institution/body  that will define the standards, coordinate activities at a national level and cooperate with other national and international organisations with reference to standards, regulations, policies and the legal and organisational aspect of data exchange and distribution; Main obstacles Provision of digital data is a long - term process which depends on the current plans and priorities of relevant authorities. 2. Module 74300 Infra-regional information system (SIRE) 
Current situation In 1990, a Spatial Unit Register has been established under the State Statistical Office. It contains alpha numeric data on municipalities, settlements, cadastre municipalities, statistical districts, with records of streets and house numbers. At present, there are 123 municipalities and 1795 settlements in the Republic of Macedonia. The country is covered with a network of 2856 statistical and 7712 enumeration districts. The Register is a source of classification data. The State Statistical Office does not have an integrated data base of spatially dependent statistical data, though there exist elements to allow establishment of such a database:   classification of NUTS regions and local administrative units (NUTS 4, NUTS 5 and settlements)   statistical data from censuses. Steps to be undertaken to ensure harmonisation with EU   The existing elements should be united under a single, SIRE compatible database. At the initial phase, a limited, 2002 census data set should be separated.   Due to the frequent changes of administrative units, a mechanism should be put in place to ensure management of changes in classification.  
E. demographic and social statistics; 

31. POPULATION  

1. Module 31101 Demography and census 
Population statistics or demographic statistics in the Republic of Macedonia is based on data from the Population Census and data on natural and mechanical migration of the population, both monitored by statistical surveys of vital statistics and migration statistics. Current situation Data on births, deaths and marriages are collected on the basis of registration into the relevant Register books maintained for the respective area. . Data on births, deaths and marriages are filled in the relevant Register Book by place of occurrence and processed by the mother’s place of residence for live births, by the place of residence of the dead person for deaths, while for the marriages by the place of residence of the bridegroom.  Data on divorces are collected from the courts of first instance of competent jurisdiction, and they are processed according to the last mutual place of residence of the divorcing spouses. Data on deaths according to the causes of death are processed in accordance with the International classification of diseases, injuries and causes of death (Rev. 9), while the responsible institution for the quality of data is the Institute for Epidemiology and Biostatistics with information technology in medicine.   Data on vital statistics are collected on a monthly basis and processed on an annual basis with full coverage of the reporting units.  Population estimates are produced on a mid-year and end-of-year basis, at national level and by municipality, gender and age, and they are based on the data obtained by the Census of the population, households and dwellings and data on the natural and mechanical population increase.  The latest Census of the population, households and dwellings in the Republic of Macedonia was carried out in the period November 1-15, 2002 in accordance with the Law on the Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in the Republic of Macedonia, households and dwellings in the Republic Of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia  Nos. 16/01, 37/01, 70/01, 43/02).  Law on the Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in the Republic of Macedonia, households and dwellings in the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 16/01, 37/01, 70/01, 43/02), see 12_Annex_03With this Census, population data were collected by demographics, social, ethnic, educational and economic features, as well as the number and structure of households and families and the size and status of dwellings in the Republic of Macedonia. The UN Economic Commission for Europe and EUROSTAT’s recommendations concerning the implementation of censuses of population and households in ECE region countries for censuses around the year 2000 were applied to the 2002 Census. Census data were published in 12 books within a time frame specified in the law, and all publications will be made available on CDs.  Further EU harmonisation measures Definitions used in the vital statistics and the Census are in accordance with international recommendations. Further harmonisation should aim at:   data collection methods, i.e. development and application of Registers;    methods of calculating demographic and social indicators;    keep up with the changes in the international recommendations concerning population censuses. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation Problems arising in the demographic statistics may be categorised into two groups: 1. Problems with reporting units  Poor coordination among  ministries (Ministry of Health, Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Justice), difficulties with the introduction of new standards and classifications in their operations by State Statistical Office which  is coordinator of the statistical system in the country. 2.  Methodology problems   Published data, primarily data on live births and deaths, entail the contingent of events occurring abroad. Such practice is a continuation of the system of vital statistics of the former SFR of Yugoslavia, and as of 1991, in particular following the 1994 Census; there were no possibilities to distinguish between the contingent of events (within the country and abroad). The problem was particularly emphasized with the 1994 Census, when the definition for total population has changed, but such changes could not be made with respect to the vital statistics. In order total population and vital statistics data to be compatible, it was necessary to obtain the following data for vital statistics (on events abroad): length of stay in a foreign country (of the parents or of the dead persons) and the reason for the stay, which in practice was not feasible. In 2004, the content of the questionnaires on births and deaths was changed. 2. Module 31201 Population projections 
Current situation In the Republic of Macedonia population projections have been made at national level, by gender and age, covering the period 1996-2020. Data obtained from the 1994 Census of the population households, dwellings and agricultural holdings served as the basis. The projections were developed in order to follow the future demographic development and its impact on the socio-economic development in the country. For the purposes of development of projections up to 2020, the analytical method was applied with the use of three variants: constant (high), low and mean, and application of hypothesis for each individual component of the demographic development. Further EU harmonisation measures The State Statistical Office is planning to develop population projections for the period 2002 -2050. Such projections would be made on both national and regional level (NUTS 3). For that purpose, it is necessary to monitor the process of revision of Census recommendations, and also to monitor UN/EUROSTAT activities with regards to the methodologies for developing population projections (for smaller territorial units). 3. Module 31300 Migration and asylum 
Current situation Statistical research of migrations (immigration and emigration) in the Republic of Macedonia is carried out by the State Statistical Office on the basis of data obtained from the Ministry of Interior, which in essence acts as a reporting unit. This type of research covers all the citizens of the Republic of Macedonia and foreign citizens who have registered their stay with the Ministry of Interior, as well as all citizens and foreign nationals who have registered their departure from the place of residence. Statistical research is carried out in accordance with the national legislation and is partly consistent with international standards (Recommendations on statistics of international migration), though also, national specifics are observed such as the Law on Reporting of Dwellings and Lodgings of Citizens (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 36/92, 12/93, and 43/00) and the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02), which regulate the obligations to register a dwelling or a place of residence and departure from a dwelling or a place of residence, as well as the time frame required for a definition of short and long term migration.   Therefore, the State Statistical Office, in conjunction with the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, as well as with other scientific and educational institutions, has put forward a proposal to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia as to a new method of collecting migration data which will be obtained through exchange of electronic data collected at border crossings. Data obtained in this manner would be complemented in the State Statistical Office with data obtained from other available sources.  In 2003, a new Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 49/03) was enacted. This law contains the general principles prescribed in the relevant international documents. The Ministry of Interior is the competent body. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of the method for monitoring migration and asylum seekers and the application of new methodology will be effected with full consideration taken of the applicable EC regulations and the statistical standards and recommendations of the UN (Recommendations on statistics of international  migration Rev.1, UN,1998);    Commencement of new annual data collection on legal migration and stay of non-EEA /EU citizens. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   From  observations hitherto of international migration, we cannot speak of full coverage (legislation is not respected completely). This renders a true picture of international migrations impossible. Hence a picture of a positive migratory balance.  
32. LABOUR MARKET  

1. Module 32100  Employment and unemployment 
Current situation Employment and unemployment data are collected from two separate sources:   administrative sources, which provide data only on individuals in formal employment; and surveys (Labour force survey) which provide data on the situation of the formal and informal labour market. Data from administrative sources are collected by the Employment Agency (registered unemployed), and the State Statistical Office (persons in employment). Labour force survey Labour force survey has been carried out in the Republic of Macedonia since 1996. Up until 2004, the survey was carried out on an annual basis, and since 2004 it is a continuous quarterly survey.  The labour force survey is carried out in accordance with the methodological recommendations made by the International Labour Organisation (ILO), adopted at the 13. International Conference of Labour Statisticians and upon EUROSTAT recommendations. The survey is carried out on a sample basis, which in 2004 was increased from 7200 to 10000 households, which accounts for 1,8 % of the total number of households in the country. The sample is two stage-stratified. The stratification is at three levels with a total of 32 strata. The stratification was made in line with NUTS 3, two contingents each - urban and rural and two groups of enumeration districts according to the number of households. Selected households are interviewed twice a year. The survey provides data on all categories of the working age population, i.e. employed, unemployed and non-active population. Under the Labour Force Survey, ad hoc modules were also implemented: The Ad hoc module Life Long Learning – research of life-long learning in 2003, and in 2004 in the second quarter of the year, the d hoc module „Work and working hours arrangements “. The survey is carried out in a classical fashion, face-to-face interview with questionnaires. Input is in BLAISE, while processing in SAS.  When data are processed, international classifications ISCO-88, NACE Rev.1 are applied. Until the end of 2003, data were collected and published annually. However, as of 2004, it has been done on a quarterly basis, with data disaggregated to NACE Rev.1  17. Further EU harmonisation measures The Labour Force Survey will continue to be carried out in line with EUROSTAT recommendations. Under the said recommendations, it is necessary to :   publish data at regional level , starting from the first quarter of 2005 , for 2004 ;   redesign questionnaires on an ongoing basis;   forward the data to EUROSTAT for trans-codification of the national LFS with the EU LFS ;   establishment of a permanent network of interviewers, their training and provision of portable computers for field work. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Provide information via public media on the Survey, so that significance be attached to the data collected with the Survey;   Offer financial incentives to households to ensure that they would be more responsive;   Lack of a permanent network of interviewers. 
2. Module 32200 Earnings and labour costs 
Current situation Statistical research of labour costs was carried out for the first time in 2001. The research provides data on total staff costs paid by employers .  The research was carried out in accordance with the EUROSTAT methodological recommendations, with full respect to the national specifics and on a bi-annual basis. A trial research has already been carried out following the rules described in the Council Regulation No. 530/1999 of 9 March 1999 concerning structural statistics on earning and labour costs.  Statistical Observation units are business entities and their constituent units (local kind of activity). Further EU harmonisation measures   Following EUROSTAT recommendations ;   Samples at NUTS 3 level. 
3. Module 32300 Time use and reconciliation of work and family life 
Current situation The Time Use Survey was carried out for the first time in October 2004 with a sample of 2000 households. It is fully consistent with the Eurostat methodology. The sample is stratified to urban-rural and 8 NUTS3 regions, with a total of 16 strata. Within the strata, enumeration districts and households are selected on a random sample basis. Data is collected with personal visits of an interviewer to the households, whereby the interviewer records data into questionnaire forms (in print), and by the diaries filled in by the households. Input is in BLAISE 4.2, while processing in SAS. The plan is to publish the data by the end of 2005. Further EU harmonisation measures The Time Use Survey will be developed in accordance with the EUROSTAT’s recommendations. 
33. EDUCATION  

1. Module 33100 Education statistics 
Current situation In the Republic of Macedonia statistical research which provides data at all levels of education granted in formal institutions (state owned and private) is carried out and data are collected on all enrolled pupils and students and also for pupils and students that have completed their education, the personnel in education, as well as the capacities of the educational system. The statistical research in education carried out by the State Statistical Office does not provide data on financing of education. The responsibility for the provision of such data belongs to the Ministry of Education and Science. The UOE questionnaire is filled in and submitted on a regular basis to UNESCO, OECD and EUROSTAT. Further EU harmonisation measures Following and harmonisation on a regular basis all novelties proposed by EUROSTAT, and in this context, as of 2006, the research of students enrolled on post-graduate studies (MA) and students applying for admission to doctoral studies (PhD) will commence.  
2. Module 33200 Vocational training and lifelong learning 
Current situation The educational statistics does not cover the informal vocational training provided by culture centres, workers' universities, houses of pioneers and other business entities (both state and private) which are not constituent elements of the educational system. The Life Long Learning ad hoc module was carried out under the 2003 Labour Force Survey. The sample survey was the same as the one in the Survey.   Further EU harmonisation measures Keep abreast with the applicable EC regulations.  Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation It has still not been decided which will be responsible institution for this research in the Republic of Macedonia. 



34. CULTURE  

1. Module 34100 Culture statistics 
Current situation Data pertaining to culture are obtained through regular statistical research with different periodicity:   Annual statistical research on:  theatres, philharmonic orchestra and symphonic orchestra, professional folk dance and music ensembles, organised fine art exhibitions, organised fine art colonies, books and brochures published,newspapers published, magazines published, audio and video recordings released, radio, television, cinema theatres, production of movies, import-export of movies and movie sales;   Three yearly statistical research on: libraries, museums, archives and culture centres (workers' universities, cultural centres, house of pioneers and other);    Five yearly statistical research of culture- artistic associations. The research is consistent with the national legislation.  Reporting units are the institutions of the system which perform activities in the cultural and audio visual sector. In essence, this type of institutional approach allows for the production of:   general data (number of institutions, attendance rate, as well as data on other relevant categories);   data on employees by determined categories;   data on sources of financing, revenues and expenditure are obtained only with respect to a small number of such research, though the competent institutions of the government do have at their disposal the data on financial indicators in culture;   part of the data with respect to participation in culture. Some statistical indicators in culture are obtained by the Household Budget Survey which is representative on the national level, so data about culture expenditure are collected – by household and by household member. Some of the relevant indicators of the European standards (particularly in the audiovisual sector) are also collected with the Time Use Survey. Further EU harmonisation measures    Observing and applying the European standards and recommendations so that the statistical methodology in culture could be made consistent and upgraded. At present it is bellow the level which could be considered satisfactory. Thus, the content of research pertaining to participation, employees and financial indicators in culture, as defined in accordance with the EU standards, could be expanded;   More intensive cooperation with the Ministry of Culture and the business entities which are reported units;   Broadening the scope of research with business entities which perform a given activity in the field of culture, although their principal activity may not be culture, as well as identification of secondary sources of financing in culture.  For more details see 20_I_23 and 20_II_835. HEALTH AND SAFETY   

1. Module 35100 Public Health Statistics 
Current situation The system of health statistics in the Republic of Macedonia is managed by the following legislation:    Law on Health Care (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.46/93 and Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.10/04);   Law on Healthcare Records (Official Gazette of SFRJ Nos. 22/78, 37/79, 18/88) and (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 15/95);   Guidelines on the Method of Healthcare Record Keeping (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 21/85). The ten Health Protection Institutes in Bitola, Veles, Kumanovo, Kocani, Ohrid, Prilep, Strumica, Skopje, Tetovo and Shtip collect all data from healthcare organisations: medical centres, healthcare centres, the Clinical Centre, general hospitals, specialised hospitals, institutes and private health organisations. In the Republic of Macedonia, data on the following types of records are collected: 1. Records on general and periodical medical examinations of the population; 2. Records on the situation and protection measures for environment improvement; 3. Records on deliveries and termination of pregnancy; 4. Records on family planning; 5. Records on health visits, health care services, diagnosed disease, health status and injuries; 6. Records on infectious diseases; 7. Records on drugs consumption; 8. Records on receipt and prescription of opiates; 9. Records on staff in health care organisations. In addition to the above mentioned records, under the Law on Healthcare Records” Records (Official Gazette of SFRJ Nos. 22/78, 37/79, 18/88) and (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 15/95); the following records are also maintained in the system of health care records:   Malignant diseases;  Diabetes;   Ischemic heart   diseases;   Kidney  insufficiency;  Psychoses;   Alcoholism and other addictions;  Professional diseases;  Rheumatic fever;  Intoxication (poisoning);   Car accident trauma;   Funds available for mandatory healthcare;   Funds available for healthcare of workers, working population and citizens of the Republic of Macedonia receiving treatment abroad;  Investments;   Medical devices and instruments. Records serve as data sources for statistical research in the field of healthcare of interest to the entire country, as well as for monitoring and studying the health status of the population as well as to allow measure to be undertaken in the area of health care, they serve the needs of scientific research, the defence needs, information provided to the general public, enforcement of international obligations pertaining to healthcare and other official purposes. The method of maintaining records as well as the instruments which secure the provision of data is regulated in the Guidelines for Maintaining Healthcare Records published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 21/85).  Collection of data on health status is provided through prescribed forms specifically on: 1.  Registration of malignant neoplasm - Form no.3-35-86; 2.  Individual report on diabetes- Form no. ZS – 02; 3.  Individual report on ischemic heart  disease – Form no.ZS-03; 4.  Individual report on kidney insufficiency – Form no. ZS - 04; 5.  Individual report on psychoses – Form no. ZS – 05; 6.  Individual report on alcoholism and other addictions – Form no. ZS – 06; 7.  Registration of professional disorders and individuals suffering from or damaged by a professional disorder- Form no. 3-36-86; 8.  Individual report on rheumatic fever – Form no ZS – 08; 9.  Individual report on intoxication –Form no ZS – 09; 10. Individual report traffic accident trauma- Form no. ZS-10. The procedure of health care records is also regulated by the: Law on State Statistics (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 54/97) and the Statistical Research Programme (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 69/03) in order to provide more precise definition of the type of research, scope and objectives encompassed by the research. On the basis of prescribed records, information, reports and registers referring to the above mentioned records are prepared and made available. Further EU harmonisation measures  For the purpose of ensuring that national data are comparable with the data from the countries in the region and the world, a list of National Indicators for three hundred health indicators has been put together and submitted to the Regional WHO Office. In cooperation with WHO, the Ministry of Health and the National Institute For Health Protection are running for the drafting of a law on maintaining healthcare records which will be compatible with EU legislation and the WHO health statistics. Under the project Health Sector Reforms, activities have started for the establishment of an integrated health information system and information technology centre which will be hosted by the National Institute for Health Protection. It will provide a fast and efficient data collection and analysis. NIHP is involved in activities carried out and coordinated by the State Statistical Office for the purpose of approximation of the system of EUROSTAT public health statistics. There are activities under way aimed at improving the methodology of health statistical data collection and processing, so that the degree of applicability of such data be improved, both for the needs of the country, and for the needs of other international organisations and institutions. 
2. Module 35200 Health and safety at work 
Current situation  Two key indicators in the area of health and protection at work:  a)  Injuries at work; b)  Occupational diseases; a) Injuries at work; In the Republic of Macedonia, injuries at work are defined in accordance with the applicable 1999 WHO definition as injuries that occur at work or in the course of performance of occupational duties. They are typically characterised as harm done to body, illness or death. They are regulated with the Republic of Macedonia’s Law on Protection at Work, (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 13/98,33/00, 29/02 ). Accidents at work are reported on a form -8 (individual report - registration of injury at work), in line with the Law on Labour pertinent records (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.16/04) which under Article 5 of the Constitutional Law on Implementation of the Constitution is enforced as a piece of national legislation). The filing form contains data which are filled in separately by the employer, the labour inspector and the physician that examined the patient first. The filing form contains 55 variables, including data on the causes, time, source, injury, location, circumstances and contact which resulted in the accident and what effects were produced by the accident, use of personal protection means, the economic activity of the employer, type of activity, age structure, type of injury and injured body part, geographic location, date and time of accident.  Data on the size of enterprise, as well as ethnic background of the injured person and the employment status are not filled into the accident filing form.  Under the Law on Protection at Work (art. 41), the employer is under the obligation to maintain a list of injuries at work (without specifics as to whether it is an injury at the place of work the consequence of which is the loss of working capacity of the worker for a period longer than 3 days).  The employer (Article 42 of the Law on Protection at Work) is obliged to notify the labour inspection service about all cases of death, mass accident and severe injury at work not later than 24 hours following the event. Also, the employer is obliged to report the injury at work suffered by the worker to the relevant service of the Health Insurance Fund, and then to the NIHP as the national institution responsible for health statistics.   Data on the number of working days lost, i.e. permanent loss of working capacity, as well as any case of death of the worker are collected by the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund in line with the provisions of the Health Insurance Law (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 25/00, 34/00, 96/00, 50/01, 11/02, 31/03) and the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance  (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 80/93, 3/1994, 14/95, 71/96, 32/97, 49/97, 24/00, 96/00, 50/01, 85/03 and 50/04), as well as with the secondary legislation issued on the basis of the above mentioned laws.  b) Occupational diseases; The “Rulebook of the List of occupational diseases” (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 88/04) determines the diseases which are considered as occupational, pursuant to the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No 50/04), as well as the conditions and criteria for recognition of occupational diseases according to the Rulebook.  The List of occupational diseases of the Republic of Macedonia is prepared in line with the latest Commission Recommendation of 19/09/2003 concerning the European schedule of occupational diseases (2003) 3297, whilthe Institute for Labour Medicine, being the highest advisory body in the area of labour medicine, has developed detailed conditions and criteria for verification of occupational diseases on a national level.  Occupational disorders and individuals suffering from or damaged by an occupational disorder are reported on a filing Form No. 3-36-86; Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.10/04) filled in by a doctor specialist in occupational medicine.  The filing form contains 17 variables, including data on the insured persons, data on the position, total years of service, extent of damage risk at the specific position, diagnosis of the occupational disease under the ICK 10, findings verifying the diagnosis and assessment of working capacity. Once filled in, the filing form (individual report) should be sent immediately to the National Institute for Health Protection, and under the Law on Keeping Healthcare Records, the NIHP is responsible for maintaining, amongst other things, records on occupational diseases in a register of occupational diseases. Such register should refer to verified occupational diseases, while occupational diseases render one eligible to compensation (under the insurance system’s List of Occupational Diseases) are under the authority of the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, i.e. the relevant Committees of the fund responsible for working capacity assessment.   At present, relevant statistical data on occupational diseases are missing in the Republic of Macedonia, with the exception of cases reported on random basis. The Register of Occupational Diseases is not operational, the reason being inappropriate verification, registration and records of occupational diseases, as well as the poor organisational and functional set up of labour medicine, where all baseline data should be generated – diagnosed occupational disease. Also, there is no consistency with the recommended EODS statistics of EU.  Hence we do not have an accurate picture of the situation, as the unregistered occupational diseases cannot be identified on the basis of their absence from the specific morbidity table of the Republic of Macedonia. Further harmonisation measures a) Injuries at work; With respect to activities which are currently under way at European level as regards the harmonisation of statistics of accidents at work (ESAW project), we believe that it is necessary to open a legislative process of adoption of ESAW statistics in the Republic of Macedonia. Through complete harmonisation with the ESAW methodology, provisions will be made available for the national statistics to operate with quality and comparable data. The individual report as it is now – reporting an injury at work – in the Republic of Macedonia contains by and large the required 23 variables, though it is necessary to ensure its compatibility with the ESAW methodology with a view to its approximation to the EUROSTAT system. It entails procedures, collection, processing and dissemination of ESAW statistical data. This procedure necessitates cooperation between the State Statistical Office, the National Institute for Health Protection, the State Labour Inspectorate, the Health Insurance Fund and the Institute for Occupational Medicine. The Institute for Occupational Medicine, the WHO collaboration centre for occupational medicine, has assumed an obligation, being a member of the network of WHO collaboration centres, to ensure that activities are introduced to lend assistance to this harmonisation process. b) Occupational diseases; Since the new List of occupational diseases has been published in Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 88/04 in December 2004, with which the Commission Recommendation of 19/09/2003 concerning the European schedule of occupational diseases has been accepted, a modification is foreseen of the remaining segments in the monitoring methodologies of occupational diseases: reporting, recording, and registration of occupational diseases, as well as compliance with the EU statistics in this domain – EODS methodology. Activities are underway on the preparation of the new design of the Register of Occupational Diseases in the Republic of Macedonia, which is responsibility of the Institute for Labour Medicine as the WHO collaboration centre, with planned activities within the two-year cooperation between the Regional Office of WHO and the Ministry of Health of the Republic of Macedonia, for 2004-2005. The plan is to upgrade the form for reporting occupational diseases by expanding the data with additional elements: data on the size of the enterprise, i.e. number of employees; the sector of economy and the principal activity of the enterprise, use of means of personal protection for workers and other. All of the above gives rise to a need to harmonise data collection methodology on occupational diseases for each individual case as required by EODS (European Occupational Diseases Statistics). Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation a) Injuries at work; The key problem to be resolved is the problem with adequate data collection and analysis, acceleration of harmonisation of the legislation with the EU legislation, development of IT system in this field and inter-departmental cooperation.   We believe that one of the possibilities for a faster harmonisation is the pilot implementation of ESAW, consistent with the EU methodology.  b) Occupational diseases; The key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation are to award relevant functions, define the scope of operations and organisational set up of occupational medicine services under the national network of public health institutions, supported by assistance in terms of expertise and methodology, and coordination of the Institute for Occupational Medicine through specific solutions pertaining to the ongoing reforms of the health sector in the Republic of Macedonia, thus ensuring appropriate provision of baseline data on occupational diseases. It is necessary for the Institute for Occupational Medicine to acquire the role of a national centre for data collection on occupational diseases as the WHO collaboration centre, (as per World Health Organisation - WHO recommendations), thus ensuring that there are adequate links with the NIHP, the State Statistical Office, the Health Insurance Fund, The Pension and Disability Insurance Fund of the Republic of Macedonia in a wider context of inter-departmental cooperation. At the same time, it is necessary to ensure harmonisation of legislation with the EU and development of an IT system in this field. We believe that one of the possibilities for a faster harmonisation is the pilot implementation of EODS, consistent with the EU methodology. 
36. DISTRIBUTION OF INCOMES AND LIVING CONDITIONS  

1. Module 36100 Household Budget Survey 
Current situation Monitoring the income and expenditures of households is made possible by the Household Budget Survey (HBS), which is carried out in line with the EUROSTAT’s methodology “Household Budget Surveys in the EU, Methodology and Recommendation for Harmonisation 1997”. The survey serves as the basic source of data on calculating the poverty line, as well as for the development of the weighting structure for compiling the Consumer Price Index.  COICOP/HBS classification is used to define the structure of personal consumption.   In 2002 this survey was fully revised, which provided better quality instruments for its implementation, a shorter reporting period and a sample increase. Household Budget Survey is carried out on an annual level. Data on household expenditures are collected through the diaries on an ongoing basis in 24 fifteen-day intervals, while data on income levels are collected retroactively for quarterly periods.  Data are processed on a quarterly, and published on an annual level. For such purposes a two stage stratified sample has been developed (5040 households).  Data collected enable to understand the level and the structure of household expenditure, both in total and by household category.  Further U harmonisation measures   HBS will continue to be developed in accordance with the guidelines and recommendations of EUROSTAT.   The survey is used as a basic source of data for poverty line estimates, so there is a need for its continuous improvement in terms of quality, sample increase, sample redesign at the level of NUTS 3, establishment of a permanent network of interviewers, their training and equipping with handheld computers.   The plan for the period 2005-2007 is to start with the poverty line estimates on the income side which requires a redesign of instruments used to collect data on sources and level of income. Introduction of additional modules in the area of healthcare, education and social protection will enable for a provision of data on social exclusion.  
2. Module 36300 Income, poverty and social exclusion 
Current situation Data for the level of disposable income of households and poverty indicators are provided by the Household Budget Survey. The State Statistical Office, in cooperation with the World Bank, was carrying out the sub-project on social welfare under the Social Reforms Project. The objective of the sub-project was to determine the methodology of assessing the poverty line and the development of a poverty monitoring system. EUROSTAT’s definition is the starting point for the definition of poverty. The State Statistical Office calculates two types of poverty line.  relative  subjective The relative poverty uses a relative standard of sustenance defined as the necessary level of expenditure. Namely, informal economic activities undertaken in a transition context usually warrant that income data are concealed. Hence the expenditure, being a more stable category over a period of time, is believed to be a more realistic indicator of welfare. In all that, account is taken of all expenses which constitute personal consumption, including consumption from own production. Expenses which are not part of the sustenance budget are excluded. The primary unit for measuring poverty is the household, i.e. household’s personal consumption measured by the Household Budget Survey. The differences in the size and composition of households are corrected by using the OECD equivalent scale. The poverty line is set at the level of 70% of median equivalent consumption calculated by equivalent adult.  On the basis of the poverty line, estimates are made for the percentage of households with expenses bellow the set level. Two poverty line indices are assessed: Head Count Index and Poverty Gap Index. The said indices are calculated both in total and by given basic profiles: place of residence, rural-urban, type and size of households, age, economic status and level of education of the head of household. Subjective poverty is interpreted as a subjective sustenance standard, defined in line with the opinions of the entire population at the level of income necessary to avoid poverty. Further U harmonisation measures   At present one of the challenges is the development of a new set of indicators in line with the international standards that may reflect the economic inequality and poverty.  With this in mind, the State Statistical Office, under the project Poverty Assessment, again in conjunction with the World Bank, is working on strengthening the capacity for monitoring poverty and the standard of living. To that end, amendments are being drafted to some of the questionnaires from the Household Budget Survey  for the purpose of obtaining data on social exclusion.   Once the HBS sample is redesigned on a regional level, the plan is to develop data on the existing indicators at the level of NUTS 3.   Also, another imperative is the development of Laeken indicators. Experimental assessments have been made in the area of poverty on the income side, though more in the sense of testing the sensitivity of the results obtained with the application of methodology. For more details see 13_VII_D_1
3. Module 36400 Community household panel 
The State Statistical Office does not conduct community household panel surveys. 
37. SOCIAL PROTECTION  

1. Module 37101 Social protection statistics: central system 
Current situation The State Statistical Office monitors data on social protection through annual research of:    nursery and kindergartens which operate as parts of elementary schools,    pupils' and students' hostels   users of social protection benefits, measures and services,   users of social financial benefit   social protection organisations,    organisations for professional rehabilitation    child benefit  The State Statistical Office independently prepares, organises, implements and publishes research results and has at its disposal the methodology and instruments of implementation. One exception is the research of child benefits, where data are obtained from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy.  The State Statistical Office does not collect data on funding social protection as it is done by the competent ministries. Social protection data are collected from all reporting units on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia.  The State Statistical Office receives data on people entitled to disability and pension insurance from the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund and publishes the data in the Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Macedonia International classification NCA which is compatible with NACE, Rev .1 and ISCED Classification of education is used in the research . Further EU harmonisation measures   Application of European statistical standards, classifications and instruments, so that international comparability is made possible. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Harmonisation of national legislation in this area with the EU legislation. 2. Module 37201 Development of a database on labour market policy 
Current situation  Definition and implementation of the labour market policy is in the area of competence of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. This institution uses labour market data in preparation of plans for improvement of the labour market in the country.  For the purpose of monitoring the labour market, and in particular for the purpose of ensuring that a relevant policy is put in place, the State Statistical Office, in cooperation with the international donor community, has made significant improvement with respect to labour market statistics through the Labour Survey.  Further EU harmonisation measures    For the purpose of ensuring that labour market policies are implemented, a key priority is to ensure that labour market policy monitoring indicators are defined. 
38. OTHER WORK IN THE FIELD OF DEMOGRAPHIC AND SOCIAL STATISTICS   

1. Module 38100 Housing 
Current situation Housing data, in terms of housing units, territorial distribution, whether they are occupied or not, how well they are equipped in terms of installations and fixtures,  auxiliary facilities  and durable consumer goods , are collected by the State Statistical Office through the Census of Population, Households and Dwellings, the Household  Budget Survey and the Time Use Survey. Housing data are collected through censuses. The first census which provided data was the 1971 Census of Population and Dwellings and all subsequent censuses (1981, 1991, 1994 and 2002). Methodologies are in accordance with the national needs and international standards.  Further U harmonisation measures   Participation in the development of future Census  in order to provide  timely harmonisation of the national methodology by 2010 .   Continued efforts with respect to following and harmonisation with international standards and recommendations concerning the Household  Budget Survey and the Time Use Survey.   Undertaking the activities aimed at the establishment of a Register of Dwellings so that conditions are created conducive to the application of modern methods and techniques of generating the relevant housing data. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation Lack of a Register of Dwellings and no possibilities to apply other methods in addition to the survey methods for the purposes of obtaining the data required. 



2. Module 38201 Social indicators and other social domains 
Current situation The State Statistical Office  calculates a high number of social indicators. In the area of labour force and standard of living: activity rates, employment rates, unemployment rates, long term unemployment rates; jobless households, poverty rates (poverty gap index and poverty severity), inflation rate etc. In the field of education: literacy rates, illiteracy rates, number of students per teacher, number of students per class etc. In the field of demography: total population growth rates, average age of population, natural population increase rates, birth rates, fertility rates, mortality rates, reproduction rates, life expectancy, probability of dying, probability of survival, mean age of women at child bearing, late foetal mortality rate, infant mortality rate, nuptiality rate, divorce rate, average age of marriage, net-migration , gender indicators etc. Further EU harmonisation measures Once the national needs and the harmonisation with the statistical system of the European Union are fully understood, a need arises for indicators, such as LAEKEN indicators relevant in the labour force and living standard , as well as a series of indicators in the filed of court statistics (average detention time, average time to case disposition etc.). 
3. Module 38300 Gender statistics 
Current situation The State Statistical Office follows the general aims of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia when it comes to its activities in respect of monitoring and promoting gender equality; it takes into consideration the following:   Beijing Declaration and  Platform of Actions (Beijing, 1995)   Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women   National action plan on gender equality   Actions and initiative aimed at implementation of the Beijing Declaration and the Action Platform (Beijing +5).  The State Statistical Office factors gender as a variable in all types of statistical research pertaining to the individual person (population, families and households, education, employment, crime rate, elections). The capacity for collecting, processing , analysing and disseminating gender data is well developed and upgraded on a continual basis. The State Statistical Office,  within its Programme for publication and dissemination  activities, has published two issues of the  edition  Women and Men in  Macedonia, one in 2000 and one in 2004 . Further U harmonisation measures   Broadening statistical areas or introducing new indicators with full  respect of gender dimension (in healthcare, violence against women, poverty, paid employment);    Implementation of new research/surveys;   Expanding the content of the publication Women and Men in Macedonia.  Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   So far,  the current statistical research has  not identified any major problems in the sense of difficulties with the provision collection of gender specific data.    There is no practice of  publishing data obtained from researches which is not carried out by the authorised agencies involved in statistics (such as non-governmental organisations or NGOs), even these data are interesting for public and covered aspects of everyday life. 
39.  CONSUMER PROTECTION  

1. Module 39100 Consumer protection 
The State Statistical Office does not conduct consumer protection surveys.  
F. statistics at regional level; 
72. REGIONAL STATISTICS  

1. Module 72000 Classification of territorial units (NUTS) 
Current situation The Nomenclature for Territorial Statistical Units in the Republic of Macedonia was adopted by the Government in April 2001 and published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 31/01. It is harmonised with the EU regulations from that period. According to this Nomenclature, at the level of NUTS 1 and 2, the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia is a single unit, at NUTS 3 level there are 8 units (statistical regions), at NUTS 4 level there are 34 units (groups of  municipalities) and at NUTS 5 level there are 123 units (municipalities). (The Nomenclature for Territorial Statistical Units in the Republic of Macedonia, see 12_Annex_04NUTS 5 level units are administrative, while NUTS 3 and 4 are not. Further U harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of the NUTS nomenclature with the new law on the territorial organisation of the local self government in the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.55/04) and with EU regulations  (1059/2003). 





2. Module 72101 Regional accounts 
Current situation Value Added and GDP data are produced and published at NUTS 2 (Republic of Macedonia level). NUTS 3 tables with A3 annual schedule are not produced. There are data in the data warehouse which are used for composing a set of regional accounts. At present, analyses are being made of data which are available for Value Added estimations at a regional level, and regional accounts items with missing data are identified.  Data on  Gross Fixed Capital Formation are published by municipality. They are obtained through the annual research of Gross Fixed Capital Formation.  Further EU harmonisation measures   It is necessary to make an analysis of the available data to see if they are representative at regional level.    Further analysis of data required for Value Added estimation at NUTS 3 level, as well as other data for  compiling the set of regional accounts by institutional sectors.   Implementation of bottom-up methods, top-down methods or mixed methods for regional accounts estimations.  
3. Module 72202 Regional indicators 
Current situation NUTS 3 indicator availability Collection, processing and publishing data at a level lower than the national is conducted in the following areas:   Social statistics    Population-census, vital statistics, migrations,   Social protection,  Education,  Culture,  Judicial system. Business statistics:   turnover, employees and  trade stores;   tourism and catering, all variables (number of tourists, number of overnight stays, turnover and other data) are available at a lower level;   transport data on the number of passengers in the urban and railroad transport, goods transport, telecommunication and postal parcels, data on local roads and bridges and number of passenger vehicles;   industry data on total output, sales and number of  employees.   agriculture and forestry regional data refer mainly to output, while for the time being there are no input data available.  This year a pilot project was launched to deal with calculation of indicators under LFS (Labour Force Survey) at a regional NUTS 3 level. Establishment of a database of regional indicators  Partially data base of regional indicators does not exist at present, though there are pre-conditions  for  its establishment. Above all, it is a document-oriented database on http://msed.stat.gov.mk, which is made up of about 1300 documents in Excel and Pdf format which contains over 400 NUTS 3 indicators, as well as higher NUTS 4 (statistical regions) level indicators and NUTS 5 (municipality). Data are classified into four areas:  social statistics  economic statistics  environment   municipality data  There is a set of metadata for each indicator: data source, institution, contact person, other references, methodological explanations, data collection methods, formulas used, measure units, methodology status (status of compliance with international standards) and  revision. The selection of indicators which this data base contains is made on the basis of Eurostat’s REGION  and SIRE database requirements, as well as the list of urban indicators (Eurostat’s Urban Audit project), assuming  the needs of the Republic of Macedonia for statistical data on the upcoming decentralisation process. Further EU harmonisation measures Concerning the provision of indicators   Calculation of regional unemployment, employment and activity rates using data obtained through  LFS   Development of a data base for the purposes of compiling agricultural accounts at a regional level    Analysis of the sample representativeness, as well as availability of all data on producing regional level statistics on energy;    Establishment of a database for regional environmental statistics  Methodology development   Amendments of the legislation on records keeping and statistics implemented by competent institutions (authorised agencies for statistical research or reporting units for some types of research) so that they would assume the obligation to provide data at a municipality level (when necessary, at a local level), in accordance with the applicable administrative and territorial organisation. Concerning the database    An output data base should be established on the basis of the content of the existing web-based database in the format suitable for keeping data in the form of Eurostat REGIO and SIRE databases.   An agreement should be made with the other authorised statistical research agencies with respect to the inclusion of indicators which are under the competence of the SSO database, and also, all databases should be interlinked in a single system. 
4. Module 72402 Development of regional statistics 
Current situation The development of regional statistics is closely linked with the development of the system of calculating regional accounts (as described in Module 72101). Analysis is made of the data quality of each regional indicator as part of the regular research.   PPP (Purchasing Power Parity) data are published only at the level of the Republic of Macedonia. Further EU harmonisation measures   Monitoring and analysing available data on regional level     Following the international recommendations and experiences of other countries in this subject matter.    Further development of regional indicators as input of data into the regional databases.   Temporal synchronisation of indicators for calculating basic categories of Gross Value Added on regional level.  
5. Module 72501 Urban statistics 
Current situation At the State Statistical Office there are grounds for the establishment of a database where indicators from all statistical research at the level urban-rural will be collected. Further EU harmonisation measures   Given the significance of regional development, and in particular in the context of decentralisation of the Republic of Macedonia, the State Statistical Office will undertake measures and activities aimed at available data presentation.   Monitoring of activities and results in preparation of EUROSTAT’s publications:  Urban audit, Portraits of the Region and Regional Yearbook. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation  Establish database. 
G. macro-economic statistics; 

40. ANNUAL ECONOMIC ACCOUNTS   

1. Module 40090 Statistical coordination and enlargement 
This module is still being developed by EUROSTAT, and there has been no binding regulation enacted to date. For these reasons, the State Statistical Office has not as yet undertaken any activities in this subject area.   
2. Module 40100 European System of Accounts (ESA) 
Current situation The State Statistical Office started implementing the System of National Accounts - SNA 93 and the European System of Accounts SA 95 in 1993. The first results of calculating the annual gross domestic product at current prices for the period 1990-1993 were made and released in 1995. Data conversion method was applied in the calculation of the annual gross domestic product, where data is converted to categories defined by the Methodology of National Accounts. When the gross domestic product was calculated under the production method at constant prices for the period 1990-1994, the individual extrapolation method was applied.  For the first time data on annual gross domestic product calculation under the production method for 1994 and 1995 were produced according to definitions and recommendations of SNA 93 and ESA 95.  The gross domestic product calculations were made by using the production and expenditure methods as independent methods. Independent gross domestic product calculation with the income method is not performed, though the calculation is based on the same data source as the production method. In 1994, activities commenced aimed at improvement of GDP calculations for the purpose of producing a more exhaustive coverage of national accounts and also coverage of informal economy. The annual gross domestic product calculation methodology with the expenditure method was fully implemented in 1996 as a result of the participation of the Republic of Macedonia in the project called European Comparison Programme (ECP)-1996. The implementation was coordinated by the Central Statistical Office of Austria. An assessment of expenditure aggregates of the gross domestic product according to the purchasing power parity was also conducted. Comparison was made of data obtained by the production and expenditure methods as two independent calculations and data for the period 1994-1996 were revised . Thus, both sides of the GDP were balanced and adjusted. When in 1998 the National Classification of Activities was applied, a change was also made to the classification of calculations of the gross domestic product under the production method, but with constant prices. On the basis of detailed analysis of current values of the gross domestic product, price indices and volume indices, methodological improvements in the calculations have been made with the first one introduced in 1998. The State Statistical Office, with the aim to allow an enhanced international comparability of data analysis, conducted a major data audit in 2000, covering data on gross domestic product assessment for the period 1997-2002.  Following the recommendations SNA 93 and SA 95, in 2002 the State Statistical Office raised to the level of National Standard, the Standard classification of institutional sectors grouped by type of production and by principal activity and functions which are taken as indicators of economic behaviour. The classification is broken down to five sectors with their respective sub sectors.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Improve the methodology for assessing the production for own final consumption;   Introduce business structural statistics for the needs of national accounts;   Allocate FISIM by institutional sector, calculate import and export of FISIM and calculate FISIM at constant prices;   Use data obtained from the pilot project for improving the agro-monetary statistics, in particular from the subproject for economic accounts in agriculture;   Improve the methodology for calculating net consumption by non-residents;   Introduce the methodology for monitoring the government financial policy by applying functional classification COFOG;   Improve the method of adaptation from cash to accrual accounting in the Government Sector;   Apply international standards to end-of-year accounts of state owned enterprises. 
3. Module 40200 National accounts: aggregates 
Current situation The State Statistical Office makes calculations of the basic aggregates of national accounts at an annual basis as follows;   GDP identity from the production side   GDP identity from the expenditure side    Gross value added on basic prices (aggregated to 17 and 60)   Compensation of employees (aggregated to 17 and 60)   Intermediate consumption at purchase prices (aggregated to 17 and 60)   Employees and self-employed  (aggregated to 17 60)   Final household consumption, including NPISH  Final public spending   Gross fixed capital formation    Change in stocks   Export and import of goods and services   Per capita GDP: in USD, in EUR (at annual average exchange rate) and by purchasing power parity (in USD)   Gross national income   Gross national savings    Gross national disposable income The resident institutional units which make up the entire economy are grouped according to the System of National Accounts and published by institutional sector. Further EU harmonisation measures   The State Statistical Office is planning begin with the GNP- Gross National Product calculations 
4. Module 40401 Accounts of institutional sectors 
Current situation The integrated set of economic accounts of the Republic of Macedonia was for the first time produced and published on an experimental basis in 1998 to cover the period 1994-1996. The set of accounts was put together for the entire economy and for the five sectors (financial, non-financial, households, non-profit organisations serving households and the government sector). They show the structure of integrated economic accounts with full observance of accounting principle applied in the System of National Accounts. Products are valued at basic prices, while in respect of intermediate consumption; they are valued at purchase prices.  Further U harmonisation measures   In the State Statistical Office, preparation is under way for the integrated set of economic accounts for the period 1997-2003.  Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   As a result of the need for additional research of data sources, accounts of volume and value changes in accumulation accounts and balance sheets have not been prepared as yet. 
5. Module 40500 Supply/use and input/output tables 
Current situation Work has started at the State Statistical Office to develop sample tables of supply and demand for 2000, at current prices with the use of available databases. Available value and quantitative data by activity and by product, obtained through statistical research for enterprises and through household surveys, are being researched and analysed.   Work has commenced with respect to input of calculated data by activity, in line with NACE rev.1, while data input by product is in line with CPA1996.  Methodological recommendations from the EUROSTAT Input-Output Manual and the United Nations Handbook of Input-Output Tables Compilation and Analysis and publications of statistical agencies of other countries are used in the above mentioned activities.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Adjusting the structural business statistics with indicators necessary for the development of supply /demand tables. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Lack of accounts by sector and product balances. 
6. Module 40600 Balance sheet accounts (including capital stocks) 
The State Statistical Office does not prepare balance sheets accounts. 
7. Module 40700 Statistical analysis 
Current situation Analyses of data on the main macro-economic aggregates from national accounts at quarterly and annual basis are published in the regular editions for the Gross Domestic Product of the Republic of Macedonia.  Additional analyses are carried out to serve the needs of governmental institutions and external users. Further EU harmonisation measures It is necessary to broaden the analysis published in regular reports and publications, in particular with respect to the improvement of the analytical part. Data and data combinations should be showed in a graphic form.  
41. QUARTERLY ACCOUNTS  

1. Module 41100 Quarterly national accounts 
Current situation In the State Statistical Office, quarterly  estimations  of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) are made only  by production method, at constant prices (base year every  previous year).  Estimations are based on short term indicators. By expenditure method, quarterly estimations of GDP are made only  for some of the GDP aggregates:  public spending, investments in machinery and equipment, import and export of goods and services, and all at current prices. Estimations are based on  ESA 95,  SNA 93, EUROSTAT’s  Quarterly National Accounts Manual, IMF (International Monetary Fund) Quarterly National Accounts Manual, EUROSTAT Manual of Price and Volume Measure.  In the State Statistical Office  quarterly  estimations of GDP began for the first time in 2000. The revision of published data on quarterly level has been done for all preceding years in 2001 as well as the extension of the series starting from 1997. The  revision was carried out for the purposes of changes in the classification of annual GDP calculations, at current and constant prices. Quarterly GDP data are published ninety days after the end of  each quarter (+90)  and are revised after each subsequent publishing of quarterly or annual GDP data.  Estimations are based on the method of single indicators (extrapolation). Data are obtained from regular monthly and quarterly statistical research. Quantitive data are mostly used for volume indices calculations using adequate weights. For agriculture, hunting and related service activities, where there are no monthly or quarterly data available, the annual weighted index for quantitative production is distributed by quarters with the use of BASSIE method.  For services where there are no other indicators available, number of employees is used as an indicator to calculate the Value Added.  As there are  more indicators available on an annual basis to calculate Value Added by sectors, and  because the calculation of GDP at current prices is only made annually, the assumption is that the growth rate obtained by annual GDP estimation at constant prices is more relevant.  When annual GDP data by production approach at constant prices become available, benchmarking procedure on quarterly data is used. Harmonisation is made in such way that the difference between the annual growth rates obtained in the two ways (annualy and quarterly) is distributed by quarters, according to the share of each quarter in the annual growth rate obtained as a result of quarterly GDP estimations (pro-rata method). The State Statistical Office conducts quarterly statistical research  for calculation of  Value Added and Gross Fixed Capital Formation  for non-financial business entities. The survey is conducted on the base on carried out on a purposeand random sample. The data obtained from this research are still not published, though they are used in the analysis of quarterly GDP estimations  by production method at constant prices.  Further EU harmonisation measures    Improvement of  estimations at as detailed level as possible;   Methodological improvement in the sense of leaving pro-rata method and using DENTON method;   Compilation of quarterly set of accounts. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Absence of indicators for Value Added estimations for some activities that need improvements in monthly and quarterly research;   A timeless obtaining of indicators for Value Added and GDP estimations on quarterly level in purpose to obtain the time limit according EUROSTAT recomendations. 
42. FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS  

1. Module 42100 Financial accounts (flows) 
Current situation The integrated set of economic accounts of the Republic of Macedonia for the period 1994-1996 contains an experimental draft financial account for the entire economy and by institutional sector.  Further EU harmonisation measures Financial development is monitored by the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia as the institution responsible for the monetary and financial statistics. The State Statistical Office, in cooperation with the National Bank and in line with the recommendations by international institutions, will develop the system of financial accounts for the period 1997-2003. To that  aim, SSO is at present working on providing some of the data necessary  for the compilation of the financial account in the established Data Warehouse. 
2. Module 42200 Financial balance sheets 
Current situation  The State Statistical Office does not prepare financial balance sheets. 
43. MONITORING OWN RESOURCES   

1. Module 43100 Monitoring own resources Gross National Income (GNI) 
Current situation For the purposes of calculation of the gross national income, the State Statistical Office uses gross domestic product data at market prices, and the net primary income data obtained from other countries by the National Bank of Republic of Macedonia. The gross national product calculations in the Republic of Macedonia were made by using the production and expenditure approach as independent methods. Independent gross domestic product calculation under the income approach is not done, although the calculation is based on the same data source as the production approach. The following is used in the calculation of the annual gross domestic product:   administrative data sources (Central Register, Ministry of Finance, Public Revenue Office, Health Insurance Fund and Pension and Disability Insurance Fund ), and   statistical research carried out by the State Statistical Office.  Further EU harmonisation measures   SSO undertakes measures of improvement of data sources to ensure that they are exhaustive for the purpose of full coverage of all economic activities so that better quality national accounts are obtained;   Special attention is paid to monitoring activities which may not be directly observed or measured, i.e. non-observed economy;    All ESA 95 changes will be followed. 
2. Module 43200 Monitoring own resources Value Added Tax (VAT) 
Current situation For the purposes of research and monitoring calculations of the weighted average Value Added Tax rate, the State Statistical Office may provide “flash“ calculations of the Gross Domestic Product on an annual level for the current year by the end of the year. Previous data on GDP may be provided 270 days following the end of the year. Further EU harmonisation measures   Providing annual GNP data in accordance with the EUROSTAT schedule and regulations pertaining to timely calculation of weighted average VAT rate. 
55. PRICES  

1. Module 55100 Harmonised Consumer Price Index 
Current situation The State Statistical Office does not make calculations of the  Harmonised Consumer Price Index.  Retail prices and cost of living movements are followed by:  Retail Price Index   Consumer Price index The starting point for the calculation of retail prices and consumer price indices is with the same monthly retail prices. The main difference between retail price and consumer price index comes from the content of the index list and source from which weights are derived. With respect to the retail price index, the structure of weights is determined by using the retail turnover, while in the case of consumer price index, Household Budget Survey (HBS) is used.  Retail price and consumer price indices are calculated on the basis of the Laspeyres formula with the weighted arithmetic mean: The index list includes products and services which account for the highest share of retail turnover and personal consumption. Consumer basket in the case of retail prices contains about 415 products and 117 services, while in the case of consumer price; it includes 398 products and 117 types of services. The list of products and services necessary for the calculation of indices is modified on an ongoing basis through to the end of each year. Retail prices are monitored once a month (from 1 to 21 of each month) in 8 cities, and 13.000 prices are recorded each month. For the purposes of calculation of the retail price index, a weighting is a structure of retail turnover from the last available year at the level of the Republic of Macedonia, with the exception of agricultural products, where the retail turnover from three previous years is under observation. For the purposes of calculation of the consumer price index, weights are obtained on the basis of the structure of personal household consumption. Weights are modified once every five years.  With a view to approximation towards the Harmonised Consumer price index, calculation and publishing of the consumer price index by COICOP classification has been done since 2002. 
2. Module 55200 Spatial price comparisons 
Current situation In conjunction with OECD, as of 1996 the Republic of Macedonia has been involved in the Pilot Projects for the European Comparison Programme. The methodology used by the State Statistical Office is fully compliant with the OECD and EUROSTAT methodologies. Submission of data to OECD is made in three-year cycles. Operating stages and respective deadlines are defined by OECD. The European Comparison Programme is based on the principles of conversion of expenditure aggregates of the respective Gross domestic products of countries from domestic currency to the single official value for comparison and under uniform recommendations and methodology. The activities undertaken by the State Statistical Office within the cycle of the European Comparison Programme 2002 have been completed and the processing and publication of results by OECD is currently under way. At present, activities are under way at the State Statistical Office concerning the cycle European Comparison Programme 2005, and market prices of products and services from the previously defined and harmonised list of products and services are continuously collected. Further EU harmonisation measures   The work process is in compliance with the OECD principles, and additional steps will be taken in accordance with the guidelines provided by OECD.  
3. Module 55301 Renumeration and contribution to the pension scheme of EC officials 
This module is at present of no significance for the Republic of Macedonia, which is not an EU member state. Hence it is not applicable.  

57. STATISTICS FOR BUSINESS CYCLE ANALYSIS   

1. Module 57400 Euroindicators 
The State Statistical Office does not have a special data base which would be a constituent element of euro-indicators. However, the State Statistical Office does have a certain pool of data which might potentially be included in the euro-indicator framework, such as: 1. Balance of payments: The balance of payment and the monetary statistics are under the competence of the National Bank of Republic of Macedonia, which prepares the indicators. Data prepared by NBRM are not de-seasoned, with a detailed description provided in the modules 52301 and 54100.  2. Business and consumer research: Data for euro-indicators are available with respect to business trends in the field of manufacturing processing industry, retail trade and construction. Research results are not de-seasoned.  3. Consumers prices Only data on the national cost of living index are available, disaggregated under the National classification of consumption. Data are not harmonised. (Module 55100) 4. Foreign trade Calculations are made of all indicators of total export and import. Data are used for the purposes of analysis, though they are not published. Calculations are made of the indices of the balance of trade exchange volume, or foreign trade deficit. Data are not de-seasoned. 5. Industry, trade and services (Module 44401) In the field of industry, calculations are made of industrial output indices as well as production price indices. Retail trade indices are calculated only as an aggregate. Indices of sales volume, deflation and household consumption are not calculated. In the field of construction, only indices of civil works completed are calculated.  Data are not de-seasoned. 6. Labour market (Module 32100) Statistical research of the cost of labour carried out by the SSO is fully consistent with the methodological recommendations of EUROSTAT. It is carried out on a bi-annual basis.  7.  National accounts (Modules 40200 and 41100) Calculations of basic aggregates at annual level are available at current and constant prices, while on a quarterly basis, they are available only at constant prices. Calculations for the government sector are part of the calculations pertaining to institutional sectors. They are available only on an annual basis. 
2. Module 57500 Eurotrend 
Eurotrend is a European Commission Development Project aimed at enhanced information flow and at present, and for these reasons, the activities of State Statistical Office will be defined further in future.  
H. business statistics; 
44. STATISTICS ON THE ECONOMIC ACTIVITY OF ENTERPRISES  

1. Module 44101 Periodic structural business statistics 
The State Statistical Office collects, processes and publishes structural statistical data in accordance with the Council Regulation on structural business statistics, No. 58/97. The data include annual value data from the C – K sections, the exception being the insurance section, at the level of class, in line with the National Classification of Activities. The basic objective is to ensure value data of high quality to obtain a clear picture of the economy structure, taking into account the demographic characteristics, enterprises size, number of employees, and data collected at both national and regional level. INDUSTRY Current Situation The State Statistical Office carries out an annual research of industry, which is partly harmonised, with the legislation of the structural business statistics.  Further EU harmonisation measures Inclusion of other variables (payments to agency workers, number of part time workers, number of full time workers) and full harmonisation of annual research with the structural business statistics,  by the end of 2007 .  CONSTRUCTION Current situation The State Statistical Office carries out an annual research of buildings which is partly harmonised with the legislation  of the  structural business statistics.  Distribution of buildings and construction works is made in accordance with the Nomenclature of Buildings and Constructions work, which has been implemented since 1999 and harmonised with the EUROSTAT Classification by types of construction. Further EU harmonisation measures Implementation of annual research of structural business statistics in construction with variables and definitions harmonised with the EUROSTAT, by the end of 2007 .  SERVICES  Current Situation The State Statistical Office carries out an annual research of the Hotels, Restaurants and Catering which is partly harmonised with the legislation of the structural business statistics.  Further EU harmonisation measures Implementation of annual research of structural business statistics in the Hotels, Restaurants and Catering with variables and definitions harmonised with the EUROSTAT regulations, by the end of 2007 . DISTRIBUTIVE TRADE Current Situation The State Statistical Office carries out quarterly research which contains some of the variables used in statistics of distributive trade: number of employees, number of stores, turnover by method of payment and municipality, retail sale premises.  Further EU harmonisation measures Implementation of Annual survey on structural business statistics in the retail trade section with variables and definitions harmonised with the EUROSTAT regulations by the end of 2007 .  
2. Module 44201 Development of structural business statistics 
The State Statistical Office permanently follows the changes in structural business statistics of EU in order to meet the requirements of data users, which is the top priority anyhow. 
3. Module 44401 Short-Term Statistics (STS) of enterprises 
The State Statistical Office collects, processes and publishes short term statistical data in accordance with the Council Regulation for Short Term Statistics, No.1165/98 including the main indicators such as: the index of physical volume of industrial production, producer prices of industrial products, construction, distributive trade and services. INDUSTRY Current situation The State Statistical Office carries out a monthly research of industry and  producer prices of industrial products. The basic data source are all business entities active in the area of the sections such as: Mining, Manufacturing industry and Electricity, gas and water supply, as well as operating units of enterprises active in other areas than industrial activity .   Coverage: All enterprises from the sections such as: Mining, Manufacturing industry and Electricity, Gas and Water supply which represent 93,0% of the total number of the employees in industry.    Base year: 2001  Further EU harmonisation measures   Inclusion of other variables (new orders received in industry and number of hours-worked in industry), by the end of  2007;   Seasonally adjusted time series according to the relevant method, by the end of 2007;   Index calculation of Turnover in industry, by the end of 2007;   Full application of EU methodology for short term indicators, by the end of 2007; and    Full harmonisation of weighting system, ongoing. CONSTRUCTION Current situation The State Statistical Office carries out a monthly and quarterly survey of short-term indicators in construction and semi-annual survey of prices of dwellings. Distribution of buildings and construction works is made in accordance with the Nomenclature of Buildings and Construction works, implemented since 1999 and harmonised with the EUROSTAT Classification of Types of Constructions.   Coverage: all business entities, which represent about 90% of the total construction works completed. In 2004, the coverage was increased by additional 80 new business entities in the area of construction, which have a small number of employees and are involved in construction of buildings of larger size and higher value. Further EU harmonisation measures   Monitor data on value of building by type on a monthly basis, by the end of 2007;   Monitor total number of persons employed in business entities, by the end of 2007;   Monitor data on wages, by the end of 2007;   Implement statistical survey of building permits, by the end of 2007;   Implement a survey on monitoring of output prices in construction, by construction item, by the end of 2007. SERVICES Current situation The State Statistical Office carries out a monthly research of hotels and other facilities for accommodation and quarterly research of catering units, total turnover and turnover by type of service, number of employees and number of seats, by type and category of business units. Data are also collected on the turnover and quantity of products and services. Quarterly, annual, three and five yearly research is carried out in the context of the HO-RE-CA.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation in line with EUROSTAT definitions;   Introduction of new variables (salaries for employees, operating costs and investments in catering) in the existing research. DISTRIBUTIVE TRADE Current situation The State Statistical Office carries out a monthly and quarterly research of short-term indicators in distributive retail and wholesale trade. The census of retail trade capacities was conducted in 2003. It provided a clear picture of the trade section in the country.  The sample of quarterly and bi-annual two-year research is established with the selection of all large and medium enterprises and 30% of small enterprises (random choice), selected by activity and their share in the total volume of trade, at the level of municipality.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Continued harmonisation efforts with inclusion of variables such as operating costs (salaries, supply of goods and services, taxes) and capital expenditure – investments;   Improvement of coverage and quality of data obtained;   Quality improvement through improvement of the sample method ;   Seasonal adjustment of all trade variables;   Use of the retail price index as a deflator.  
4. Module 44501 Production statistics of enterprises, Prodcom 
Current Situation The State Statistical Office collects, processes and publishes data on industrial products manufactured on an annual basis in line with the National Nomenclature of Industrial Products harmonised with the PRODCOM List 1998 – EC regulation no. 3924/91 since 2000.  The basic data sources are all business entities active in the sections such as: Mining, Manufacturing industry and Electricity, gas and water supply as well as Kind of activity units in industry, that belong of enterprises active in other areas than industrial activity. The research covers all enterprises from sections such as: Mining, Manufacturing industry and Electricity, gas and water supply and their Kind of activity units which represent 93,0% of the total number of workers in industry and 81,0% of  value added. Further EU harmonisation measures Updating with the latest version of the PRODCOM List (EU), 2003 version, by the end of 2005. 
45. ENERGY  

1. Module 45101 Structural statistics of energy 
Current situation This module covers the total energy balances of the Republic of Macedonia and energy balances by type of energy commodities on an annual basis. The State Statistical Office prepares energy balances.  Under EUROSTAT recommendations, energy balances (as part of the EUROSTAT pilot project titled Harmonisation of Energy Statistics - Phase 3), have been prepared by the State Statistical Office for 1998 and each subsequent year on an annual bases. Data sources are:   regular annual statistical research (14) in the area of energy introduced with the EUROSTAT pilot project called Harmonisation of Energy Statistics - Phase 3;   regular annual statistical research in other statistical areas (agriculture, forestry, water management, transport, trade) and surveys. Energy Statistics Methodology EUROSTAT F4, 1998 is used in the calculation of energy balances.  Definitions of all categories are harmonised with the set of annual questionnaires of: EUROSTAT, ECE/UN, IEA/OECD, specifically with respect to: electricity and heat, natural gas, oil, coal, renewable energy and wastes.   Energy statistics covers the following data by type of energy commodities in natural units of measure and converted into  and t (ton of oil equivalent), for:    production (primary and secondary),  import,  export,  stocks,   consumption by category of user as per NACE Rev.1.  Further EU harmonisation measures 1. Preparation of historical data for the period 1990-1997 in the form of annual energy balances – deadline the end of 2005;  2. Data on production capacities and capacities for consumption of energy commodities with extended data on capacities in the current annual statistical research – deadline end of 2007; 3. Extension with new types of renewable energy sources; 4. Ongoing monitoring of methodological and legislative changes at a national and EU level.  
2. Module 45201  Short-Term statistics of energy (M-1) 
Current situation This module covers data by type of energy commodities contained in the energy balances on a monthly level. The State Statistical Office prepares the monthly energy data and they have been operational as of 2003.  Data sources are:   regular monthly statistical research (12) in the area of energy introduced in line with the example of annual statistical research;   regular monthly statistical research in other statistical areas (forestry, trade) and estimates. Methodology used in the annual energy balances is used for monthly calculations, too. The monthly statistics covers the following data by type of energy commodities expressed in a natural unit of measure and converted in 
 (tera joule) and in тое (ton oil equivalent) for:    production (primary and secondary),  import,  export,  stocks,   consumption by category of user as per NACE Rev.1.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Completion and publication of monthly energy data for 2003 and 2004 – deadline middle of 2005 and end of 2005;    Analysis and forecast of monthly energy data – deadline regular monthly publication as of 2006 (+60 days);   Ongoing methodological alignment of monthly energy data with annual data.  
3. Module 45201  Short-Term statistics of energy (M-3) 
When it comes to this module, 45201 short-term energy statistics (-3), the same explanations as in module 45201 (-1) apply. 
4. Module 45401 Energy prices 
The State Statistical Office monitors:   Producer prices of industrial products, by type of energy commodity exclusive of VAT; and   Retail prices by type of energy commodity  including VAT. It is worth mentioning that retail prices by type of energy commodity in the Republic of Macedonia are set by a Regulatory Committee of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia responsible for setting Prices of Energy Commodity.
5. Module 45501 Special actions to support the new Community energy policies 
Current situation ) Effectiveness of competition and integration of electricity and gas markets. In light of the state controlled situation in the electricity and gas markets, there is no development in the Republic of Macedonia which warrants monitoring.  b) Renewable energy sources  This module covers the energy balances by type of energy commodity for hydro-electric power, heating wood and wood waste, geothermal heat and it is explained in details in modules 45101, 45201(-1). c) Energy efficiency Activities are under way with respect to calculation of available energy efficiency indicators.  d) Cogeneration processes  In the Republic of Macedonia there is no cogeneration production of electric power and heat. ) Emissions of carbon dioxide (CO) / Integration of energy and the environment in terms of production of reports covering these issues. The State Statistical Office calculates carbon dioxide emissions (CO) generated by the consumption of energy commodities by applying the IPCC methodology (1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories), and energy balances of the Republic of Macedonia are used as data source.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Study and follow EUROSTAT’s experiences;    See Module 45101, 45201 (3); 
6. Module 45801 Energy information system 
Current situation Annual energy balances of Republic of Macedonia (total in  (terra joules) and natural, by type of energy commodity in natural unit of measure and in ) are resealed in the publication of the State Statistical Office called Energy Balances of the Republic of Macedonia, the first one issued in 1998.  The total energy balance sheet of the Republic of Macedonia is also published in the Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Macedonia, published by the State Statistical Office. The State Statistical Office commenced the preparation of monthly energy data which are currently under construction. The starting year was 2003, and the data have not been published to date. Further EU harmonisation measures   Inclusion of the State Statistical Office in SIRENE and NewCronos, with a view to ensuring that energy statistics is disseminated across the EUROSTAT statistical system. 48. TRANSPORT  

1. Module 48100 Transport information system 
Current situation The State Statistical Office has all the data necessary for the transport information system available and the data are submitted to EUROSTAT each year in an electronic format. The data are fully harmonised with EUROSTAT/ECMT/UN/ECE Glossary for transport statistics.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Keep up with the novelties proposed by EUROSTAT.
2. Module 48200 Passenger mobility 
Current situation The State Statistical Office does not conduct this type of research, although there is data available for passenger mobility which comes from other types of research. Further EU harmonisation measures Special passenger mobility research is not  taken to be under consideration until 2007 according to the Statistical Research Programme. However, modifications and supplements proposed by EUROSTAT will be followed on an ongoing basis. 3. Module 48300 Transport of goods by road 
Current situation Goods road transport research is carried out by the State Statistical Office on a quarterly basis. The methodology and the forms are consistent with the applicable EC regulations. NGT is applied in the research: Standard classification of goods for transport statistics (EUROSTAT). Further EU harmonisation measures NGT revision in 2005. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation The key problem associated with the implementation of the research is the lack of possibility for a regular update of the directory of the Ministry of Interior, the low response rate (60%), partially completed questionnaires. 4. Module 48400 Rail transport 
Current situation The State Statistical Office conducts a monthly and annual research of railway transport. The research is fully consistent with the European regulations and is submitted on an annual basis to EUROSTAT. NGT is fully implemented in the research: Standard classification of goods for transport statistics (EUROSTAT), which provides an international data comparability.  Further EU harmonisation measures NGT revision in 2005.  
5. Module 48500 Sea and inland waterways transport 
Current situation The Republic of Macedonia is a landlocked country, which is why the State Statistical Office does not conduct such a research. As regards the inland waterway transport, the State Statistical Office does not conduct a research as the volume is negligible. 
6. Module 48600 Air transport 
Current situation The State Statistical Office conducts 5 types of research in the area of air transport on a monthly and annual basis. They entirely meet the data requirements prescribed in the EUROSTAT Manual on the ICAO Statistics Programme, 1994:   Monthly airport report    Annual airport report   Annual report of air transport companies   Annual report of aircrafts   Annual report of aircraft accidents The new research is fully consistent with the relevant EC regulations.  Further U harmonisation measures Keep up with the amendments and supplements in this subject area. 7. Module 48700 Intermodal freight transport 
Current situation The State Statistical Office does not conduct statistical research of this type. Further EU harmonisation measures Monitoring of all novelties and recommendations made by EUROSTAT. 
8. Module 48800 Transport safety 
Current situation The State Statistical Office does not conduct this only because the competent institution is the Ministry of Interior, which is where the State Statistical Office obtains all the data from and publishes them in the Statistical Yearbook and other relevant publications. It is worth noting that the research methodology is consistent with the applicable EC regulations. 

49. INFORMATION SOCIETY   

1. Module 49102 Statistics on the information society 
Current situation       The State Statistical Office took the obligation to implement the pilot research of information society in the Republic of Macedonia in 2004. The first steps that were made during the year were the following: acquire knowledge on the basic outline of the EUROSTAT methodology and EU questionnaires concerning the access and use of Information and Communication Technologies by enterprises (in particular financial sector organisations), households and individuals. Four questionnaires were put together, one for each category, along with explanations of the methodology, according to the EUROSTAT model questionnaires: the EUROSTAT Model Questionnaire on Community Research  for the use of ICT in enterprises, 2004, issue 10, the EUROSTAT Model Questionnaire on Community Research  for the use of ICT in enterprises from the NACE sector J, 2004, issue 6 and the EUROSTAT Model Questionnaire on Community Research  for the use of ICT by households and individuals, 2004“, issue 10.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Ongoing monitoring and application of EU regulations pertaining to the information society.    The plan is to carry out the research in 2005 for the reference period January-March 2005. 
2. Module 49202 Communications statistics 
Current situation The State Statistical Office conducts the research of telecommunication and postal traffic. The methodological guidelines and forms have been developed in accordance with the applicable EC regulations. The research is monthly and annual. The research also covers mobile telephony. Further EU harmonisation measures Keep up with the regulations in this subject area.  50. TOURISM  

1. Module 50102 Tourism statistics 
Current situation In terms of tourism statistics, the State Statistical Office conducts monthly, quarterly, three-year and five-year research. The research is consistent with the methodological recommendations according to the Council Directive on Tourism Statistics (95/57/EC). Monthly research of tourists and overnight stay The monthly research of tourists and overnight stay covers all business entities which provide accommodation facilities to their guests, tourists. In this report data the following are collected:   tourists, number of tourists and overnight stay by facility type and category and by country of origin,    capacity, number of facilities, number of rooms and beds by type and category of accommodation facility, and indirectly gross occupancy rate at accommodation facilities. The number of employees in tourism is obtained from the quarterly research in catering. Three-year foreign tourists survey The foreign tourists survey covers the number of tourists in the accommodation facilities. This survey data obtain the social-economic structure, the size and the structure of consumption, the mode and the purpose of stay, as well as the evaluation of the stay in the Republic of Macedonia. Three-year foreign visitors survey The foreign visitors survey covers the number of foreign visitors leaving the country at the boarder crossings. This survey data obtain the type of stay (one day visits, transit or overnight stay), size and structure of consumption and evaluation of the stay in the Republic of Macedonia. Five-year research of travels made by the local population The five-year research covers the number of households, i.e. all members in a selected household. This survey data obtains the structure of travel of the local population (annual vacations, business trips, one day visits or overnight stay), size and structure of consumption, the length of stay by types of localities, countries and type of facility. Inventory of capacities for accommodation in catering on a five-year basis   The inventory of capacities for accommodation covers all business entities which provide accommodation for guests-tourists. This report data obtain the total accommodation capacities, their technical and other characteristics which provide the level of comfort and the content of the tourist offer. The inventory was carried out for the first time in 2003. The inventory results were used for the purpose of making improvements with respect to the coverage of facilities which provided accommodation in 2004. Further EU harmonisation measures   Harmonisation of the accommodation capacities by type according to the directives and the national legislation, which is something that ought to be done in association with the Ministry of Economy’s Department of Tourism;   Introduction of variables for calculation of net occupancy rate of capacities;   Classification of the accommodation facilities by type and category according to the national legislation. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation Coverage of private accommodation, i.e. unreported sales in tourism.  
51.  BUSINESS REGISTERS  

1. Module 51100 Business registers 
Current situation The State Statistical Office is the body competent for maintaining the Statistical Business Register and Records of legal persons for statistical purposes. The Statistical Business Register is under development.   In 2002, the foundations of the Statistical Business Register were put in place and the content, variables (identification, demographic and stratification) were defined, as well as the data model and application.  A draft methodology of maintaining the Statistical Business Register was developed in line with the Council Regulation No: 696/93/EEC of 15/03/93: and Council Regulation No. 2186/93/EEC of 22/07/93:  At present, the Statistical Business Register has data available only on enterprises and local units which are active. The data has been obtained from the Records of business entities and the Data warehouse. Other variables that will be included in the Statistical Business Register are: turnover, number of employees, data on activity, gross and net wages paid, etc.  Administrative data sources for the Statistical Business Register are the following: Central register, Public Revenue Office, Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, , Central Depository and statistical . Records of business entities is a single collection of administrative data on all business entities in the Republic of Macedonia, with or without a status of legal person which have their main activity and constituent units defined.   Entry in the records and the distribution of businesses and their constituent units by main activity is carried out in accordance with the procedure specified in the Law on National Classification of Activities (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.07/98) and the Decision on the National Classification of Activities (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.20/98).  The following data on business entities is  entered into the Records: number of business entity, name of business entity (full and abbreviated), main office (name of municipality, settlement, street, house number, hallway, apartment, upgrade), organisational set up, form of ownership, origin of capital, main activity as per the National Classification of Activities, founder/s, manager/president, date of incorporation, changes in the Register number given by the competent body, external trade registration and any data changes. In this report, data on the following are collected: number of business entity a constituent part of which is the unit, name of business entity a constituent part of which is the unit, name of constituent unit, reference number of constituent unit, main office of constituent unit (name of municipality, settlement, street, house number, hallway, apartment, upgrade), principal activity as per the National Classification of Activities, and any data changes. Directories for statistical research are produced on the bases of data from the Records of Business Entities, questionnaires are mailed and it is also used for sample selection.   The basic identifier in the Records of Business Entities is the number of the business entity which is used by the State Statistical Office and by other administrative data files in the country. Further EU harmonisation measures   The administrative functions of the State Statistical Office will be transferred to the Central Register in 2005;   The Census of business  entities, which will serve for the purposes of update of data stored in the Statistical Business Register, is on the agenda for the period 2005 - 2006.  Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation   Transfer of administrative functions to the Central Register;   Problems with data from administrative sources (differences in the methodological approach and coverage of certain characteristics)   
I. monetary, financial, trade and balance of payment statistics 

52. MONEY AND FINANCE  

1. Module 52101 Government finance 
The Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Macedonia is responsible for the preparation of revenue and expenditure reports of the central and general government administration of the Republic of Macedonia. The reports are prepared in line with the International Monetary Fund methodology (GFS MANUAL, 1986). Adherence to international standards was the subject of observation in the Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs) in February 2004. The report was published on the IMF web site http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2004/cr04309 The reports on revenues and expenditure of the central and general government administration of the Republic of Macedonia are produced on a monthly base. They are expressed in D. Data are disseminated by not later than 25 days following the end of the referent month and published on the official web site of the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Macedonia (www.finance.gov.mk). The report on the central government refers to the actual revenue collection and expenditure from the central budget of the Republic of Macedonia. The report on the general government administration is consolidated and it refers to the collection of revenues and execution of expenditure from the central budget, as well as from the budgets of the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, Health Insurance Fund, Fund for National and Regional Roads and Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia. For the purposes of full harmonisation with the IMF methodology (GFS MANUAL, 2001), work will be undertaken with in the coming period aimed at the inclusion of data on revenues and expenditure of the local government. The plan is to have them fully incorporated in 2006.  When reports are put together, continuous care is taken in respect of improvements in data quality, methodology of data preparation and data comparison and adjustment with the monetary data.
2. Module 52201 Statistics on public deficit and debt 
At present, no statistical data are prepared on the public sector deficit and debt in the Republic of Macedonia. The Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Macedonia is responsible for the preparation of revenue and expenditure reports of the central and general government administration of the Republic of Macedonia (where in addition to the budgetary, extra budgetary funds are also included). The expectations are that in the course of 2006, such data will also be included, and the Ministry of Finance has already undertaken preparatory activities to that effect.    Concerning the statistics on the public debt of the Republic of Macedonia, there are two competent institutions for this subject area the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia (NBRM) and the Ministry of Finance. NBRM is responsible for monitoring and producing data in the area of the external debt of the Republic of Macedonia. These data are produced on a monthly basis, with USD used as the referent currency. Data on external debt are published 30 days following the end of the referent month, with the tabling done on the level of creditors and debtors, and data are also presented on debt repayment and obligations fulfilment. On the other hand, the Ministry of Finance is responsible for the monitoring and production of data on the internal debt of Republic of Macedonia. Though data are recorded on a monthly basis, they are not officially published. At present, there are preparations under the Ministry of Finance with respect to the preparations for establishing a new, public debt management sector, which should be set up by the middle of 2005. Commencement of operations of this sector means that relevant data on the country's public debt will be published on a regular basis.   
3. Module 52301 Monetary and financial indicators 
Current situation The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia (NBRM) is the only official institution competent for collection, processing and dissemination of data on monetary statistics. For the production of monetary statistics, data are collected from banks and savings houses on a monthly basis. On the basis of these data, the monetary review is prepared. At present, it also includes balance sheets of NBRM and the banks.  Monetary statistics in NBRM is prepared in accordance with the IMF Manual for Monetary and Financial Statistics. The most recent ROSC mission gave a positive assessment on the compliance of monetary statistics kept by NBRM with the recommendations given in the IMF Manual. NBRM is the only institution responsible for preparing the balance of payments and IIP (International Investment Position). Balance of payments is prepared in accordance with the 5-th edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual (BPM5).  In addition to monetary statistics, NBRM also prepares some financial indicators (interest rates on the money market, data on treasury bills, some stock-market indicators etc). In 2004 work began in terms of regular dissemination of data on Denar/Euro and Denar/Dollar exchange rates to EUROSTAT.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Incorporating the balance sheets of savings banks in the monetary review is planned for the next year;   At present only partial IIP is produced, and its update is planned for the next year with provision of all necessary data sources;   Regular dissemination of monetary aggregate data to EUROSTAT. 
53. TRADE IN GOODS  

1. Module 53102 Methodology 
Current situationThe fundamental principles, standards and procedures for the implementation of statistical research of foreign trade of goods are based on the UN recommendations on the Concepts and Definitions of Foreign Trade Statistics, on which the EUROSTAT’s foreign trade methodology is also based.  Source document The single customs document is the source document for monitoring import and export of goods. The content of the document is adapted for its multi-purpose use and is consistent with EU standards.  The content, form and procedure in which the single customs document is filled in are prescribed in the Rulebook on Single Customs Document and other Customs procedure documents.  Coverage: Data on foreign trade of goods are collected and processed  according to the principles of special trade.   Under the special trade principle, export covers all goods exported abroad and in Customs warehouses and free trade zones which originate from domestic trade of goods, facilities for internal refinement and free industrial zones.  Import covers all goods imported directly from abroad, from transit through Customs or from customs warehouses or commercial free zones. This means that import covers all goods which have been duty paid on through Customs and are free for exchange, internal refinement facilities and free industrial zones.  Definitions  Unit of observation In foreign trade statistics, unit of observation is any transaction of goods executed either in the context of export or import of goods which ought to be homogenous with respect to the type of goods, country of origin, purpose, method of payment and border-crossing time.  Territory The territory of observation in foreign trade statistics is the economic territory which in essence is equivalent to the Customs (state) territory, other than when the trade is carried out through free trade areas. Time of observation and processing  The statistical processing of import and export data is carried out on a monthly and annual basis. Import and export data are distributed by month of transaction, by the time of receipt of the single custom document form. Monthly data for the current year are supplemented and corrected regularly each month. Data which will additionally cover any corrections are included in the month of observation according to the date of receipt of the single Custom document. As a result, data are processed during the year on a year-to-date basis up to date of the publication of the definite annual data.   Classifications and nomenclatures The following classifications and nomenclatures are used in the foreign trade statistics:   Custom Tariff Nomenclature based on Combined Nomenclature;    Standard International Trade Classification SITC, rev.3;   Classification of Activities (NCA);   Classification of Countries ISO - 3166  alpha-2 code;   Classification of Goods by Economic Use;   Classification of Products by Degree of Processing;   BEC Classification of Broader Economic Categories. Further EU harmonisation measures   Further harmonisation with EU regulations;   Preparations for Intrastat. 
2. Module 53202 Quality, registers and new indicators Current situation Data are processed on a monthly basis with data quality control (the Customs Administration uses an ASYCUDA system for data collection and this system has a control filter which greatly contributes to quality checks), but also, the State Statistical Office makes additional visual control of data relevant for statistical processing of foreign trade of goods.  Registers are not used in the foreign trade of goods. The State Statistical Office conducts a research aimed at calculation of import export indices of unit value and volume of goods imported and exported. Data are published annually, with annual reports providing: monthly data on indices for sectors and sub-sectors as specified in the Standard International Trade Classification, rev. 3 and quarterly data on the sectors level as per the Standard International Trade Classification, rev. 3.  Further EU harmonisation measures Improvement of data quality by applying value thresholds of imported and exported goods and by applying automatic data control during 2005.  Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation Problems regarding the selection of products from the Custom Nomenclature which will provide the basis for index calculation.  
3. Module 53301 Analysis and dissemination 
Current situationData are processed on a monthly basis with their analysis in terms of accuracy and relevance, and are published in the Monthly Bulletin. There are also an annual publication, and the processed data are published in the Statistical Yearbook and other short term publications and bulletins issued by the State Statistical Office. The Monthly Bulletin is posted on the web site of the State Statistical Office. Data are e-mailed to large users in accordance with the content defined to serve their needs in advance.  
4. Module 53401 Collection and production for trade in goods statistics, Comext database  Current situation Foreign trade data are collected by the Customs Administration, which forwards the data to the State Statistical Office in an electronic format with data relevant for statistical monitoring of this form of trade. Since 1998, data have been sent to the COMEXT database on a monthly basis after having been processed in line with the statistical methodology.  Further EU harmonisation measures Monitoring and application of changes in rules pertaining to the preparation of the sequence for data input into COMEXT database. 
5. Module 53502 Cooperation Current situation The State Statistical Office maintains an active international cooperation in the area of foreign trade statistics of goods. Above all, the cooperation is ongoing within EUROSTAT through the CARDS programme for the Western Balkan countries, but also, there is an active bilateral cooperation with the countries from the region. In the context of bilateral cooperation, the State Statistical Office has lent assistance to the statistical institutions of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina in terms of defining the process of obtaining data form the national Customs administrations and their automatic statistical processing. Comparative (mirror) analyses have also been carried out with Serbia and Montenegro, Croatia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Greece, Slovenia and Germany.   Further U harmonisation measures Further comparative analyses with EU member countries and application of the measures appointed by EUROSTAT to overcome the big differences in the import-export data identified through such mirror analyses. 




54. TRADE IN SERVICES AND BALANCE OF PAYMENTS  

1. Module 54100 Quarterly balance of payments 
Current situation The National Bank of the Republic Of Macedonia monitors balance of payments execution. Data on balance of payments are compiled in line with methodology explained in the  5-th edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual (BPM5).  Data on balance of payments are compiled on a monthly basis. USD is the referent currency, the process of compiling the balance of payments in EUR is under way. Data are disseminated by not later than 75 days following the end of the referent month . For the time being, only aggregates are tabled, there is no dissemination by country, economic group or institution, though there is a possibility to introduce modifications in the programme solutions so that balance of payments current account data are disaggregated in line with the above criteria.  The questionnaire about the foreign direct investments allows for desagregation according to BOP (Balance of Payment) Vade Mecum. Data on reinvested earnings obtained from this questionnaire will be incorporated into the balance of payments data. In the Republic of Macedonia, no statistical data are collected on the trade between affiliated entities (FATS).   Further EU harmonisation measures   When balance of payments is put together, continuous care is taken in respect of improvements in data quality, methodology of data preparation and data sources used for compiling the balance of payments.   Data on foreign direct investments generated from the annual questionnaire are collected and will be published by the end of the first quarter of 2005 .  
2. Module 54200 Balance of payments of the Community institutions 
The answer to this module is incorporated in the answer to module 54100. 
3. Module 54300 Direct Investment and Foreign Affiliates Trade Statistics 
The answer to this module is incorporated in the answer to module 54100.
4. Module 54400 International trade in services and geographical breakdown 
 The answer to this module is incorporated in the answer to module 54100.
5. Module 54500 Methodology, meetings 
The answer to this module is incorporated in the answer to module 54100.





2. The Eurostat Work Programme 2003-2007 (Annex 1) as well as the Yearly Eurostat Statistical Programme constitute a valuable source to verify the way in which the acquis communautaire will develop until 2007. 
The State Statistical Office is pursuing in full the programme of statistical research for the period 2003-2007, which has been developed in line with the national needs and the EUROSTAT Statistical Programme The text further contains information on the areas of the National Statistical Programme compared against the EUROSTAT Statistical Programme which are not covered with the 2004 EUROSTAT Compendium. 
I. SUPPORT FOR STATISTICAL OUTPUTS, TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE  

10. QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND EVALUATION 
Current situation Special attention is paid to the quality of data during the entire process of data production at the State Statistical Office Methodologies and questionnaires are designed in such a way that they are functional, meaningful and comprehensible. Data collection is controlled via random field visits and with visual and logical controls of filled questionnaire forms. Data entry is controlled on-line. Tables with provisional statistical data are checked with comparisons against previous period (months, quarters, years), as well as with structure checks.  For major statistical research – censuses, independent post-census surveys are carried out to determine/measure the coverage and quality of data collected, and then evaluation reports are produced. In the case of sample based survey, the basic measure of the quality is calculated variance, i.e. coefficient of variance. The questionnaire  for certain types of statistical research ( HBS and LFS) also contains a form for non-response by reporting units which allows for a detailed analysis of non-response. When a five-year, or an annual statistical research programme is put together, meetings are held with the main users and data providers, and a general assessment is made of the existing data with proposals and opinions put forward as to their improvement. Efforts have been made to produce a quality report with the Labour Force Survey in line with EUROSTAT recommendations, and the conclusion drawn was that there were no measurable data available with respect to a given number of quality components.  One can say that with the given relevance, sample errors, timeliness, accuracy, accessibility and comparability as quality components, the State Statistical Office can produce the information available. It would be difficult to provide measurable data on non-sample errors, clarity, coherence, costs and burden, above all due to the sloppy registers and absence of meta-bases. Further EU harmonisation measures It is necessary to make provisions in the existing organisational set up and job classifications for a department that will be responsible for quality monitoring and development of the principle of quality management, as well as for implementing relevant activities aimed at securing quality statistical data by virtue of application and adherence to the principle of Total Quality Management, recommended by EU, and also, adopt the Quality Declaration of European Statistical System, recommended by  EUROSTAT. Also, it is necessary to have updated databases (registers) which would be used for the purpose of creating selection frames, but also, as information to be used for data comparisons. Implementation of these principles will contribute to a clear understanding of oversights and ensure that relevant measures are taken to overcome such oversights. 
12. STATISTICAL TRAINING   
Current situation Given that professional training of employees is one of the fundamental pre-requisites for carrying out statistical activities, the State Statistical Office pays a lot of attention to employee training. There are two levels of personnel training. They are as follows:   training delivered by the Civil servants agency and   training delivered by the State Statistical Office. The Civil Servants Agency (established by the Parliament) delivers general training for all employees in the public sector on the basis of the Annual Training Programme put together by the Agency to meet the needs of the public sector bodies. The training in question is in the area of human resources management, application of the Law on Civil Servants etc. The special, i.e. specific training for the State Statistical Office is organised by the Office itself with funds provided from the central budget of the Republic of Macedonia and with support from the international donor community. Staff training is delivered in the following formats:   Training on the implementation of statistical methods   Training on the use of modern information technology and statistical software packages   Foreign language training  The training on application of statistical methods is carried out mainly abroad and with financial support provided by the donor community. The table below provides an overview 

Year Total 20

In the country Abroad Total 20

In the country Abroad Total2001 In the country Abroad Number of participants 53 71 136 Total days of training  487 70  417 275 40  235 851 45  806 Business statistics 83   83 50   50 131   131 Social statistics 103 15 88 35   35 192   192 National accounts 104 10 94 45   45 163   163 Statistical registers 30 15 15 30   30 28   28 Information and marketing 72  72 4  4    Support for European integration  28   28 12   12 35   35 Legal maters and finance  33 30 3  43 40 3  45 45  IT support 2  2 25  25 105  105 Total duratn of training in dayand by areDevelopment 32   32 31   31 152   152 while foreign language training and training on the use of information technology and statistical software are provided mainly in the country. As a result of activities to date, the following may be concluded on the topic of training:   Employees have sound knowledge of modern statistical methods, implemented in a large part of the statistical system in the country;   Approximately 70% of university degree employees speak at least one foreign language;   All employees are trained to use the latest information technology available to the Office. Further EU harmonisation measures The State Statistical Office will put further efforts at training of employees over the coming period, and in particular with respect to keeping abreast with the novelties in the development and implementation of statistical methods: Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation Given that statistical training is fairly costly and mainly provided abroad with the financial support by the donor community, there is a realistic threat that if this line of support dries out, the State Statistical Office will not have the capacity to sustain the continuity.  
13. IT – INFRASTRUCTURES AND SERVICES FOR EUROSTAT   
Current situation As of 1996, the State Statistical Office has been operating in a networked environment. The network is based structurally with CAT5 cabling, and 10/100 Mbit-switches and hubs are used. LAN is installed in the State Statistical Office building and the 8 regional departments.  We can divide the WAN – into 2 parts: regional departments are linked with the main office in Skopje vie 64kbit/s FrameRelay. The other part is 128kbit/s Internet link.   Central files and print servers, domain controllers and Internet servers are based on standard Intel technology. All servers other than the servers located in regional departments are new generation servers. Mail and database servers are based on IBM RS6000 and IBM p-series servers, with AIX operating system. The State Statistical Office has a web site www.stat.gov.mk, available 24 hours a day. All workstations other than several Apple MacIntosh PC- are based on a standard PC hardware of Dell, IBM, Compaq of the more recent generation- Pentium4 and Pentium3. Each employee has their PC with Internet access /Intranet and their own e-mail account.  10 network printers used by all employees are installed in the main office. The basic operating systems in the State Statistical Office are WindowsNT, Windows2000 and WindowsXP for Intel platform and AIX4.3 and AIX 5L for RS6000 and pSeries platform. The basic RDBMS used in the State Statistical Office is IBM DB2 7.2 with AIX operating system, which hosts nearly all statistical data. DB2 is also the basis for the application SAS Data Warehouse for national accounts. The other central tools used in the State Statistical Office are Microsoft IIS, Apache Web Server, Lotus Domino Server, Microsoft Proxy Server, Symantec Antivirus Corporate Edition, and Sendmail. Almost all workstations have the package Microsoft Office installed for everyday office use. For the development of statistical research applications, in most cases Microsoft Access and Microsoft Visual Basic are used, while for sample, reports and statistical analysis, packages SAS and Sudaan are used. For the needs of the Publishing Department, Corel, Quark Xpress, Adobe and Macromedia are also used. Arc Info and Arc View for GIS and Carthema for Desktop mapping are also used on several workstations. Further EU harmonisation measures   Keep up with the up to date technologies and ongoing hardware and software upgrade   Further upgrade of applications for statistical processing and enhanced automation and independence   Follow and adopt EUROSTAT data exchange standards 
14. IT – NORMALISATION AND COLLABORATIVE INFRASTRUCTURES FOR THE EUROSTAT STATISTICAL SYSTEM  
Current situation Data are submitted to EUROSTAT regularly via e-mail. Also, data are submitted on CDs. CIRCA is used regularly for search and use of information available from EUROSTAT. Over the past period, under the regional statistical programme PHARE 98, foreign trade data have been submitted directly to the COMEXT database. The database is also used for direct data search. Attempts have been made with respect to the use of STADIUM for data provision, though it has not become a regular practice as yet. Within the frame of cooperation with EUROSTAT, regular data exchange is carried out via mail. The State Statistical Office fills in the questionnaires received from international institutions. Some questionnaires are filled in directly via internet web pages (on line). Further EU harmonisation measures   Large degree of engagement of the State Statistical Office in the transfer of knowledge on the application of standards and data transfer to EUROSTAT.    The State Statistical Office staff should be trained to use STADIUM for data exchange with EUROSTAT. Also, training and introduction of standardised EDI messaging is necessary.   Deadline for harmonisation: 2007 
15. REFERENCE DATA AND METADATA WAREHOUSES THE CURRENT SITUATION  
Current situation According to harmonisation and exchange data requirements on national and international level, implementation of Metainformation system is started.  Basic elements of metadata system are defined: metadatabase and classification database with their basic elements and attributes, which contain metadata for statistical processes. Development phases for the implementation of  meta database and classification database are defined. Meta database which includes entities with information about organisational structure, elements of statistical surveys and elements for publishing statistical surveys and elements for publishing statistical products are defined.  Unification and standardisation of statistical variables and their values should be realised according European recommendations and standards. The State Statistical Office also hosts a data base of statistical terminology. With the implementation of data warehouse on financial statistics the process of data transformation, processing, analyses and dissemination is automated.  Metadata system which contains data for input data sources, target data sets, and processes which describes transformation from inputs to outputs, is established. Statistical, reference and metadata are stored in IBM DB2 relational database and SAS MDDB multidimensional databases which use an AIX operating system. Further EU harmonisation measures   Development an application for feeding meta and classification database;   Extension of the metadata elements by inclusion of metadata resulting from data collections, its processing and assessment;   Development user applications for utilisation of reference data metadata to improve WEB oriented data dissemination;   Develop a classification database according  EU standards;   Develop thematic bi-lingual glossaries on the basis of the statistical terminology database;   Development additional metadata management tools and advance tools for efficient statistical data dissemination. Deadline 2007. 
16. INFORMATION  
Current situation  One of the basic functions of the State Statistical Office is objective, quality and timely provision of information to the general public in the Republic of Macedonia and abroad on the situations pertaining to the economic and social life in the country through statistical data.  In light of the fact that in addition to accuracy, timeliness is one of the key elements of measuring the quality of information provided, a Calendar of timeliness of releases is published on a regular basis. It is available on the web site of the State Statistical Office and premises in the State Statistical Office. All users file their requests for data and publications to the Information Department, which in co-operation with other departments in the State Statistical Office, ensures their dispatch to users in a timely fashion. Under the standards for provision of information of the State Statistical Office, each user is made aware of data availability within 24 hours, and if data compilation additional processing is required, they are distributed without delay.  Records and processing of data requests are automated with assistance from the Lotus Notes developed application. For the purposes of continuous improvement of services provided to users, the State Statistical Office has introduced the following forms of active co-operation with users over the past three years: 1.  Questionnaires are sent every once in a while to be used to measure the quality of a given product or service; 2.  Special corner of the State Statistical Office is dedicated to user questions; 3.  Annual fora where representatives of various user groups meet and discuss the co-operation with the State Statistical Office in terms of its products.  There is a functioning library at the Information Department, which has a huge stock of statistical literature, both national and foreign. Library users are employees and all external parties which have statistical data needs.  Further EU harmonisation measures  
  Keep regular track of the users’ needs on a regular basis and establish a system to evaluate user satisfaction.   Produce catalogues and upgrade the library stock with reference literature in the area of statistics and economy. 
17. DISSEMINATION  
Current situation The State Statistical Office has a respectful tradition of statistical data dissemination, and in 2001, it officially adopted a Strategy for Dissemination and Marketing of Statistical Products Under the said strategy, work is continuously done on improving availability of statistical data to the general public. For the completion of this task, the State Statistical Office has established a Dissemination Department under which there is a Unit for publishing and website. This Unit designs and makes technical preparations for over 50 (monthly and annual) publications which the State Statistical Office publishes regularly, as well as a number of periodic titles, in accordance with the annual publishing plan. A special issue has been introduced: Classifications, Methodologies and Standards, where all new or revised methodologies used by the State Statistical Office are published. Each title is published in two languages, Macedonian and English.  Publications and announcements are released to all users at the same time, and announcements (approximately 260 per year) are also immediately available on the SSO website (www.stat.gov.mk), which was fully redesigned in 2004. The content on offer was expanded, and the new design, from a technical point of view, is much more user-friendly and the navigation is adapted for different categories of users with various needs and interests. The latest software packages are used in the preparation of print issues and the website. Most of these come from the companies like Adobe (Photoshop, Illustrator, Page Maker, In Design, Acrobat) and Macromedia (Dreamweaver, Flash). Also, Harward Graphics is used for construction of graphs, while Quark XPress for DTP and ASP technologies for website programming. It is common practice for the employees working in the Publishing and Website Unit to attend courses where they learn about the latest versions of software packages mentioned above. Depending on the budget, the Office is making efforts to ensure that hardware resources of the publishing department are upgraded on regular basis.  Further EU harmonisation measures  
  Keep up with the novelties in the area of dissemination pertinent to European statistics;    Establish an output data base, which will help users concerning on-line tabulation;    Keep track of the needs of users on a regular basis, and strengthen the role of the dissemination sector with respect to design of products and services to match the users’ needs.    Enhance the State Statistical Office’s corporate image ;    Present a larger amount of data from other institutions-agencies authorised to work in the statistical system in the publications of the State Statistical Office.  
19. STATISTICAL COOPERATION WITH THE CANDIDATE COUNTRIES  
Current situation Cooperation with candidate countries is well developed and aimed at exchange of data and knowledge, with a special emphasis on the experiences gained in the process of harmonisation with the European statistical system. Croatia -  An agreement for cooperation in the area of development of statistics pertaining to legislation covering statistics, methodology of statistical surveys, organisation of surveys, establishment of business registries, trade statistics, statistics of transport, agriculture, construction, poverty line, household consumption, information technologies has been signed. A number of activities have been carried out in terms of study tours and consultations in both countries, in particular concerning economic statistics, migration, information technology, as well as the agriculture census, publication exchange etc. Romania-  the cooperation is based on the Memorandum of statistical cooperation signed by both countries which covers economic statistics, social statistics and statistical methodologies. Activities are carried out through exchange of experiences in the given subject areas, as well as in terms of data exchange. Bulgaria -  the cooperation is based on the cooperation agreement on the area of statistics.  The signing of this agreement meant that the operating programme was also set out. The programme covers data dissemination, agriculture statistics, registries, short term economic forecast, measuring government sector capital expenditure, foreign trade exchange, structural business statistics, national accounts, cross border trade, population census and organisation of operations of regional organisational units. Activities are carried out through study tours and exchange of experiences in respect of harmonisation of statistics with ECC.  There is an ongoing cross border cooperation project between Macedonia and Bulgaria. The fundamental objectives of this project are based on the common vision for development of prospects for this region, with a focus on the problems that warrant solutions and on existing implementation possibilities. This project is funded by the PHARE CBC/CARDS Programme. The State Statistical Office has submitted all requested data at its availability, and also, it has taken an active part in the work of all preparatory meetings on the joint programme document and its implementation .   Turkey – A Protocol for Cooperation in the field of statistics has been signed. It covers the following areas: national accounts, industry, prices, demography, labour and foreign trade. Through exchange of experts and knowledge, effected under the joint project financed by TICA, personnel has been trained in relevant areas, and the cooperation is still ongoing through exchange of experiences of statisticians from the two offices. Further EU harmonisation measures The State Statistical Office will pursue an intensive and active bi-lateral cooperation with the candidate countries, thus contributing to an accelerated process of approximation to the European Union.  
21. STATISTICAL COOPERATION WITH OTHER THIRD COUNTRIES  
Current situation For the purposes of exchange of experience and knowledge, the State Statistical Office has forged cooperation with third countries, and there are still a good number of countries with which cooperation is yet to be established.   Co-operation with countries which are in the stabilisation and association process Co-operation with countries which are in the stabilisation and association process is panned out on the basis of memoranda of cooperation signed, through exchange of experiences and support lent and received by the State Statistical Office, and provision and exchange of expert and methodological materials, accelerated in particular through the regional programme for statistics CARDS 2001. It should be noted that all requests sent to date by those countries concerning reference literature - harmonised methodologies, manuals on data collection and processing and legislation covering statistics have been met by the State Statistical Office free of charge and in all available versions.  Albania- Activities entail exchange of experiences in the process of harmonisation of statistical systems with the European statistical system. Bosnia and Herzegovina- concrete assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina has been lent in the form of provision of methodologies, research implementation manuals, as well as directly, through training and consultative study tour in the State Statistical Office on the topic of foreign trade statistics. Serbia and Montenegro - within the European Commission Project, an expert from the State Statistical Office delivered a two-week training on implementation of the household consumption survey in the premises of the Statistical Office of Monte Negro. Also, the State Statistical Office made a visit to the regional department of the Statistical Office of Serbia, in Leckovac, aimed at exchange of experiences with regard to organisational set up and activities of regional departments. Co-operation with other third countries United States of America- Joint activities of the State Statistical Office and the USA Census Bureau and part of the jointly defined project for support of census activities carried out by the State Statistical Office, financed by USAID. The main results achieved through this cooperation are: several training sessions for the State Statistical Office staff (improvement of data quality, media training, GIS workshop, demographic analyses), IT equipment has been procured and a media campaign carried out. Switzerland – Cooperation between the State Statistical Office and the Swiss Statistical Office was implemented through the Desktop Mapping Project (part I in 1999, and part II in the period 2001 - 2003), funded by EFTA. The main results achieved through this cooperation are: establishment of a system of cartographic presentation which allows for a mass production of printed thematic maps. Relevant equipment and software have been procured and the foundations for on-line web statistical data mapping have been put in place. 
22. STATISTICAL RESEARCH AND METHODOLOGY 
Current situation 
Statistical surveys and methodologies are practised by the State Statistical Office along the lines of harmonisation and implementation of EUROSTAT’s Compendia, in order to correspond with the level of development and harmonisation of the statistical system in Macedonia. Each expert department keeps up with the novelty in their respective subject area which is proposed by EUROSTAT, and makes pilot project proposals.  In this context, supply-use table construction is under way, as well as calculation of quarterly GDP, input-output agricultural product prices, and a pilot project for information-communication technologies.  A project is currently under way focused on improvement agricultural statistics. The benefit of this project will be the establishment of a farm register after the 2005 Census of agriculture.  Development of an up-to-date statistical business registry is a top priority for the State Statistical Office. There is a Department for Development, Statistical Research Programme, Sample and Time series at the State Statistical Office, working on the application of the sample in as high number of statistical survey programmes as possible.  Further EU harmonisation measures    Development of structural and regional statistics, which requires development of small region statistics.    Improvement of the national accounts system in terms of regional accounts and economic accounts in agriculture.    Development of meta-data base. 
VII. RESOURCES AND MANAGEMENT 

91. INTERNATIONAL AND INTER-INSTITUTIONAL RELATIONS  

1. International relations  
Current situation On of the functions of the State Statistical Office is also the international statistical co-operation. In the performance of international obligations, the Office works closely with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Sector for European Integration at the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. Co-operation with EUROSTAT The State Statistical Office first established international relations in the field of statistics in 1993. In that context, forging co-operation with EUROSTAT was a top priority. The basic goals of this co-operation are to:    introduce and implement Acquis Communitaire in the field of statistics;   transfer knowledge, experiences and skills and keep up with the latest developments and information pertaining to statistics;   provide necessary data on the process of stabilisation and association of the Republic of Macedonia;   integrate the statistical system of the Republic of Macedonia into the EU statistical system;   participate in pilot and other projects organised by EUROSTAT. The co-operation may be classified into three phases 1993-1995, 1995-1998 and 1998 -ongoing. In the initial period, priorities in the process of transformation of the Macedonian statistics and the methods and forms of implementation were defined. In this period, the 1994 Census of population, households and agricultural holdings was carried out.  It was funded and supervised by the European Commission and the Council of Europe. During the second period, the Agreement on professional assistance in priority areas of harmonisation with the European statistical system, made with EUROSTAT, was realised. Under this agreement, the initial results in the area of statistics harmonisation were achieved. In 1996, the General Cooperation Declaration was signed. It put in place the legal framework for a stronger and more enduring co-operation between the two institutions and foundations were created for the initial data dissemination for the needs of EUROSTAT and other European Commission bodies. The State Statistical Office took part in the national PHARE programme COP 1996 through which expert and technical assistance in several areas was provided. In essence, the content of this programme was geared towards preparing the State Statistical Office to be able to produce statistical data for the needs of the market economy.  As of 1998, the co-operation with EUROSTAT is effected in the following forms:   Participation in the national PHARE programme for statistics, 1998, which facilitated the implementation of COP 98 project.  The principle objective of this project was to improve the structure and processes in the statistical system. The implementation of this project commenced in 2000 and the project lasted until November, 2002. The main results achieved under the project were: the concept and the data model for the statistical business registry and the statistical population registry were designed, expert assistance was provided for agricultural statistics, labour market, foreign trade data, dissemination, meta bases, IT strategy, surveying system and healthcare statistics;    Participation in the horisontal PHARE programme for statistics, 1998, which made possible the following: participation in meetings, seminars and study visits to EUROSTAT and other statistical offices in the EU and foundations were put in place for defining partnership relations with EUROSTAT. In this period, some statistical standards were harmonised with EU standards and work is underway on the production of comparable data in the area of business statistics (foreign trade) and in the area of national accounts;   Participation in the national PHARE programme for statistics, 2000, which made possible the definition and commencement of the COP 2000 project. The implementation of the part of the project which covered the Population Census commenced towards the end of 2002, and the project ended in October 2004. The main result achieved was in that the Population Census was successfully organised, carried out and processed in line with international standards, while data were published within the required time frame. On the basis of the Memorandum of understanding signed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, The European Commission and the Council of Europe, international observation and monitoring of all phases of the Census was carried out for the purpose of verification of veracity of results obtained. The Census was evaluated as successful and professionally implemented. As to the part referring to the Census of agriculture, project tasks are being defined at present. Contracts with service providers should be made by the end of 2004 and payments made in full by the end of 2005;   Participation in the regional statistical programme CARDS 2001. The practical application of the programme gave rise to a number of training sessions, study tours, seminars, workshops, internships, expert assistance etc., which contributed to a greater degree of harmonisation of the Macedonian statistics with the EU statistics in a number of areas;    Participation in the realisation of several EUROSTAT pilot projects on: small and medium enterprise demographics, foreign trade statistics for the needs of negotiations with EU , the tariff system, harmonisation of energy statistics, phase 3,  agro-monetary statistics and statistical indicators for education;   Strategic planning - There is a project under way with the Irish Statistical Office (April-December 2004) the objective of which is to develop an adequate system of monitoring the performance of duties at work for the purpose of provision of reliable data;   Regular exchange of publications and provision of data about the Republic of Macedonia to EUROSTAT. Two general assessments of the statistical system of the Republic of Macedonia have been made to date; the first one in 2001, and the second in 2004 . The reports provide the basis for monitoring the progress of the official statistics in ice Republic of Macedonia and its approximation to EU. European Commission The State Statistical Office is directly involved in the implementation of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA). As a result of the high degree of compliance with the UN and EUROSTAT official statistics principles, the State Statistical Office, with the signing of the SAA and the Interim agreement acquired a dual role in the official statistics in the country. In the context of implementation of SAA, the State Statistical Office has assumed the obligation to provide objective, accurate and internationally comparable statistical data, according to the need, in all spheres covered by the SAA on the one hand, and on the other hand, the Office has been designated as the coordinator of the national statistical system of the Republic of Macedonia in the process of harmonisation with AQ in the area of statistics. The achievements are monitored annually. In the context of co-operation with the European Commission, the State Statistical Office holds regular meetings and provides information on the progress of activities to the EC delegation in the Republic of Macedonia and the European Agency for Reconstruction on an ongoing basis. Co-operation with other international institutions UN/ECE. The State Statistical Office maintains an intensive and direct cooperation with the Statistical Department of UN/ECE, with their main office in Geneva. Besides the direct exchange of publications and presence of data provided by the Office in the UN/ECE publications, the State Statistical Office also takes part in international meetings organised by UN/ECE. It was also the host of two joint working bodies of UN/ECE and EUROSTAT (one on the topic of Statistical Confidentiality – 2001, and one on Population Censuses in - 2003). The Council of Europe. Besides the direct exchange of publications and presence of data provided by the Office in the Council of Europe publications, the State Statistical Office is also involved in the working groups of the Council of Europe, and in 2000, it was also the host of the coordinating meeting on Censuses, co-organised by the Council of Europe and the European Commission, as well as the above mentioned cooperation in the area of population Censuses in the Republic of Macedonia. OECD – Joint activities of the State Statistical Office and the ECD are part of the European Comparison Programme (ECP) and date back to 1996. The project of measuring of exhaustiveness of the Western Balkan Countries’ national account is under way (Non - observed economy). It should be completed by January 2006. SIDA. Co-operation between the State Statistical Office and SIDA (Swedish International Development and Cooperation Agency), implemented through the Swedish Statistical Office, commenced in 2001.The Project for the Development of Agricultural Statistics in the Republic of Macedonia 2003-2006 (a two phases project) was defined, on the basis of the agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Government of the Kingdom of Sweden:   In the first phase, work was done on the preparations for the pilot - Agriculture Census (successfully implemented in December of 2003) and the Agricultural Census planned for 2005, and also forestry statistics and agro monetary statistics and FADN (Farm Account Data Network). English language training was funded, as well as participation in international activities.     With respect to phase II of the project, definition has been made of the sustainable agricultural statistical system in Macedonia (establishment of a statistical farm register, harmonisation of statistics on crop and livestock production, forestry and further development of agro monetary statistics). EFTA. Cooperation between the State Statistical Office and EFTA,  implemented through the Federal Bureau of Statistics of Switzerland, was implemented through the Desktop mapping Project (part I in 1999, part II in the period 2001 - 2003)   USAID. The Project for the support of Census activities is currently under way, implemented by the USA Census Bureau. It commenced in 2002.   World Bank  In 2001, the State Statistical Office brought the IDF-grant extended by the World Bank to a successful conclusion. The grant was in the field of statistics, and it started in 1998. The main results achieved are: expert assistance in the area of national accounts (supply and demand, quarterly national accounts), pilot research of agricultural statistics, statistics of industry, price statistics, training and procurement of equipment and software. The three-year programme on poverty assessment in the Republic of Macedonia is under way, implemented by the World Bank. It is expected that the Programme will generate several reports on key political decisions pertaining to poverty, inequality and social exclusions, contribute to strengthening the capacities for poverty analysis and monitoring and stimulate the local policy in making such decisions. At present, work is being done in the State Statistical Office, in conjunction with World Bank experts, on strengthening capacities for poverty monitoring and analysis. IMF    As a result of an ongoing cooperation with IMF, in the first quarter of 2004, the ROSC (Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes) mission took place. The general assessment made by the mission is that the State Statistical Office by and large applies and operates in accordance with international standards in making calculations and disseminating data.  At the beginning of 2004, the Republic of Macedonia officially joined the IMF GDDS standards. At present, work is being done on strengthening capacities at the State Statistical Office with respect to quarterly gross domestic products assessment and annual gross domestic products assessment at constant prices. Cooperation with other international institutions and organisations Over the past period, the State Statistical Office has maintained an active cooperation with the following international institutions, agencies and associations; the Central European Initiative, UNDP, ILO, UNESCO, FAO, ISI and other.  Bi-lateral cooperation In the context of bilateral cooperation, the State Statistical Office has signed 18 agreements and memoranda and protocols of cooperation with the statistical offices of the following countries. Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Greece, Denmark, Estonia, Latvia, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovenia, Serbia and Montenegro, Turkey, Hungary, Finland and Croatia. Cooperation with EU Member States The cooperation is maintained through provision of expert assistance and expert methodological materials. Sweden – The cooperation is by and large realised through the Project for the Development of Agricultural Statistics in Macedonia (described above). Slovenia – Active cooperation has been developed under which a high number of activities have been carried out: statistical registry of business entities, external and internal trade, time management survey, and also in the area of national accounts - purchasing power parity, which is an activity currently under way, managed jointly with OECD and EUROSTAT, as part of the regional programme for statistics CARDS 2001. Hungary- cooperation has been forged in the area of prices, economic accounts for agriculture and preparation of statistical terminology.  Italy- There has been cooperation in the following areas: administration of statistical registries, national accounts – Project for non-observed economy, and reference literature has been provided. Denmark – Bi-lateral cooperation has been established in the area of data protection during the drafting of the Law on State Statistics.  Finland- Intensive bi-lateral cooperation and cooperation under the PHARE programmes on statistics, 1996 and 1998. Greece- Cooperation in foreign trade for comparable statistics and human resource management programmes. Poland- Cooperation in the field of agriculture and organisational set up of departments for the European integration. Further EU harmonisation measures The State Statistical Office will continue to improve and promote international relations with a view to accomplishing the following objectives:   Provide necessary statistical data in the stabilisation and association process, including the negotiations of the Republic of Macedonia with EU;   Meet Acquis requirements in the field of statistics and provide harmonised and internationally comparable data;   Strengthen management capacities for planning, defining priorities, performance evaluation, quality management and efficiency improvement of the statistical system. The said goals should be accomplished through the following activities:   Establish and administrate a database for monitoring the harmonisation of statistics in conjunction with EUROSTAT for the purpose of easier monitoring of the process of harmonisation with the European statistical system as of 2005 ;   Expert assistance for strengthening institutional capacities at the State Statistical Office through the CARDS  programmes of the European commission and support by SIDA - the Swedish Government Agency;      Take advantage of TAIEX office services aimed at legislation harmonisation of legislation;   Develop and implement of annual programmes for cooperation for priority activities. 
2. Inter-institutional relations  
Current situation While performing its function as a coordinator of statistical system in the Republic of Macedonia, the State Statistical Office (SSO) is continuously engaged in the establishment and improvement of inter-institutional relations with the other bodies of the statistical system in the Republic of Macedonia.  With the aim of obtaining knowledge to meet the data needs by other institutions and other users and their involvement in the statistical production planning, the State Statistical Office initiated a number of activities associated with the drafting of the Proposed Programme for Statistical Research, 2003-2007:   it organised several debates and discussions with the authorised agencies of the statistical system of the Republic of Macedonia on the type and content of statistical research to be implemented by all agencies, on avoidance of data duplication, on taking away the burden from data providers by virtue of use of all available administrative data sources;   it organised public  hearings on the Programme with the major providers and users of statistical data concerning the content of the Programme, data needs during the referent period, availability of data on the part of providers and administrative data files, access to methodology, statistical confidentiality, territorial level of dissemination etc;   it organised a special discussion with the Statistical Council of Republic of Macedonia for the purpose of presenting its view on the proposals and give its proposals and opinions. In the frame of the ongoing inter-institutional co-operation, the State Statistical Office initiated the activity of more accurate definition of cooperation and exchange of individual data for statistical purposes with several institutions in the country. This activity is carried out along two lines:  1.  Exchange of data collected for statistical purposes between the State Statistical Office and authorised bodies and 2.  Use of data from administrative sources by the State Statistical Office for statistical purposes. The State Statistical Office has signed an agreement for cooperation and/or data exchange with the National Bank of R, the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, the Ministry of Interior (MI), the Central Register of RM, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (MLSP), the Central Depository and other institutions.   The State Statistical Office:   Realises and maintains cooperation with authorised bodies, but also with other institutions for the purpose of preparing statistical methodologies,  nomenclatures and standards, and proposals or amendments to the legislation covering statistics and its harmonisation with the EU regulations;   Realises and maintains cooperation with the competent institutions of the state for the purpose of improving the quality of administrative sources of data used for statistical purposes (ex. improvement of quality of administrative sources of data on external migration includes the SSO, MI, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and MLSP);   Realises and maintains cooperation with respect to dissemination of data by including statistical data from authorised bodies in the integral publication of the State Statistical Office  (Statistical Yearbook, monthly statistical reports etc.);     cooperates in the dissemination of data in line with GDDS ;   organises working groups focused on given areas, where members are representatives of providers and users of data from the government sector, businesses and universities so that expert opinions and recommendations can be provided for the development of official statistics in given segments. Further EU harmonisation measures   More intensive inter-institutional cooperation and expanded operations through working groups with the aim of streamlining and harmonising the statistical system of the Republic of Macedonia with EU requirements.    With the process of decentralisation, local institutions will become increasingly involved in the definition of statistical data production, so that their needs may be met (development of regional statistics).   
92. MANAGEMENT AND STATISTICAL PROGRAMMES  
Current situation The Programme of Statistical Research is the framework for collection, processing and dissemination of official statistics in the Republic of Macedonia. Under the Law on State Statistics, the Programme is approved for a five-year period, and amended annually. The Programme has been adopted by the government of the Republic of Macedonia. It is published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia. The basis of the Programme Proposal is the Strategic Development Plane of the State Statistical Office, Acquis Communitaire and the National Development Programmes of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, by subject area. The drafting of the Programme Proposal is coordinated by the State Statistical Office (it prepares the draft content, ensures alignment with the authorised bodies for research as to their areas of competence, organises discussions with the users and data providers, experts in science and from various ministries). The State Statistical Office submits the Programme proposal to the government: along with the written explanation of the contents, its position as to the proposals generated in the discussion and the opinion of the Statistical Council of the Republic of Macedonia. The schedule of the effective Programme of Statistical Research is congruent with the schedule of EU statistical research programme.  The State Statistical Office produces an annual report on the implementation of the Statistical Research Programme and submits it to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. Authorised bodies submit data to the State Statistical Office for the purpose of preparing the report. The Statistical Council of the Republic of Macedonia provides an opinion on the Report. The Statistical Research Programme is classified by agency and by area. It contains data on:   statistical research carried out in the referent period (periodicity, source of data, deadlines for data provision, contents, coverage, method and purpose for the  data collection and applicable standards);   level at which results are compiled and deadlines for publishing;   development projects planned for the referent period;   activities to be implemented in the referent period as regards censuses that will be carried out on the basis of stand alone laws. The Statistical Research Programme for for the period 2003-2007 is attached to the first question of Chapter 12.  Further EU harmonisation measures   Prepare a complete analysis of the degree of harmonisation of the Statistical Research Programme of the Republic Of Macedonia with the EU statistical programme - deadline: 2005;   Prepare a Draft a plan for a complete harmonisation with EU requirements - deadline: 2006;   Prepare a Draft a plan for improving the professional capacities of employees; personnel strengthening and technical equipping of the State Statistical Office so that the harmonisation plan can be implemented - deadline: 2006;   Adopt a new Statistical Research Programme for for the period 2008-2012   - deadline: 2007;   Harmonise elements in certain priority areas which will be effected through annual modifications of the effective programme for 2006 and 2007;    Organise intensive training in priority areas by ongoing projects and current training for employees in other areas of approximation and harmonisation. 
93. MANAGEMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES 
Current situation Under the by-law on systematisation of the State Statistical Office, a total of 269 positions are envisaged with 239 positions filled in at present. Out of the total number of employees, 164 are with university degree, 30 with polytechnics education, and 46 with secondary education. 167 (69%) of employees are female, while the average age of employees is 43,5. The average length of service is 16 years. The status of employees is laid down in the Law on Civil Servants (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 59/00, 112/00, 34/01, 103/01, 43/02, 98/02, 17/03, 40/03, 85/03, 17/04 and 69/04). The Law on Civil Servants regulates issues of employment, professional development, promotion, salaries and responsibilities of civil servants. According to the aforementioned Law, employees in the State Statistical Office have a civil servants status.  Hiring is done in accordance with the aforementioned Law and on the basis of a job advertisement and testing of applicants. The director of the Office selects the most successful candidates that have passed the test. All of State Statistical Office employees’ performance is assessed during the year by their immediate superior officer. The duty of the immediate superior officer is to monitor the employees’ performance on an ongoing basis. Promotion prospects and realisation of other rights are contingent upon the type of assessment. Employee promotion is done in line with the horizontal promotion principle. Employee job titles and internal organisation principles are set forth in the above mentioned Law, while the detailed job description and internal organisation are specified in the by-law on Systematisation and Organisation of Employees in the State Statistical Office. Salaries of employees in the State Statistical Office are set in the aforementioned Law (expressed in point-values), while point value is set by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on an annual level. It means that salaries of employees in the public administration with the same job title are the same. Further EU harmonisation measures The functioning of the management and human resource management is based on postulates set out in 1998 by a foreign expert appointed by the European Union. Future efforts of the State Statistical Office will be directed to the development of new methods of human resource management.  Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation The key problem faced by the State Statistical Office is staff turnover, low salaries of employees compared to other sectors and ever present restrictions imposed by the government with respect to hiring young and well trained staff. 
94. MANAGEMENT OF FINACIAL RESOURCES  
Current situation The State Statistical Office is planning the necessary operating funds by producing a draft calculation for each upcoming year so that it could perform its functions as set forth in the Law. The Ministry of Finance defines the maximum amount of the total budget expenditure for the State Statistical Office. On the basis of the draft budget, the State Statistical Office is obliged to put together an annual financial plan and quarterly plans broken down by months. The budget is executed on the basis of monthly disbursements. Due to the restrictions in the budget of the State Statistical Office reflected in the maximum amounts set by the Ministry of Finance, budget allocations are insufficient, either in terms of amount, or in terms of structure, for implementing of statistical activities. New hirings have been made difficult, as has in turn the performance of an increasing workload, as well as capital expenditure to allow for operational improvements. The Statistical Research Programme is adopted by the Parliament separately from the draft budget submission. The Statistical Research Programme does not offer any knowledge as to the amount of money required, or the titles of statistical research listed in the programme which do not constitute a priority in the event of paucity of funds. Large scale survey activities (Census) carried out on the basis of stand-alone laws are an exception. Own revenues generated by the State Statistical Office through the sale of publications and provision of services are much too low and are transferred to the treasury account of the State Statistical Office. The remaining funds are at the disposal of the Office, which decides as to the most appropriate use.  Further EU harmonisation measures When the draft budget submission is done, efforts ought to be made to ensure that it is consistent with the Statistical Research Programme. The Statistical Research Programme for the period 2008 - 2012 should contain an overview of necessary funds and priority. The Annual Statistical Research Programme, along with an estimate of the funds required to support it, should be approved prior to the approval of the budget for the respective year. The underlying reason as to allocating necessary funds and defining priorities are important for ensuring that decisions on the amount of necessary funds and the implementation of statistical activities are not made in isolation. Key problems to be resolved to ensure full harmonisation The Ministry of Finance sets the maximum amount of the total budget expenditure with no account taken of the Statistical Research Programme. The deadline for the completion of above-mentioned activities is 2008. 
95. MANAGEMENT OF LEGAL BASES  
Current situation Immediately after acquiring its independence, the Republic of Macedonia began work on adopting new legislation. With respect to the official statistics, the process began in 1993. While drafting the legislation pertaining to official statistics, use was made of expert assistance by experts from the European Union (Mr. Christian Engelage), the Federal Statistical Office of Switzerland (Mr. Migual Suares) and the Statistical Office of Denmark (Mr. Fin Specer) with respect to the Law on State Statistics, but also assistance lent by experts from EU, OECD and ILO in respect of other pieces of legislation relating standards. The regulation covering state statistics is very close to the regulation of countries which have become EU members, and also, it is to a high degree compatible with the EU regulation covering statistics. In the field of statistics in  Republic of Macedonia the following legislations have been adopted:   The Law on State Statistics (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 54/97);   Law on National Classification of Activities (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 7/98);   Law on the Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in 2002 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 16/01,37/01, 70/01 and 43/02);   The Programme of Statistical Research  for the period 2003-2007 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 69/03);   Decision on the National Classification of Activities (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 20/98);   Decision on Definition of Nomenclature for Territorial Units of Statistics (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 31/01/);   Decision on Definition of National Standard Classification of Institutional Sectors (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 53/02);   Decision on Definition of National Nomenclature of Industrial Products (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 47/00);    Decision on Definition of Classification  of Criminal Acts in the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 66/97);   Decision on Definition of the National Classification of Occupations (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 16/02);   Decision on Alignment of Data on the Educational System of the Republic of Macedonia with the International Classification of Education (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 33/02);   Decision on the Application of the Tenth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 65/95)   The Law on State Statistics is the basic legal framework within which state statistics is regulated. It is consistent with:   Council Regulation No: 322/97/EC of 17/02/97: L052 of 22/02/97:    Council of Europe, Convention 108, (81) on the Protection of Individuals With Regard to Automatic Personal Data Processing;   Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to Personal Data Processing and on the free movement of such data, Official Journal of the European Communities, No. 281/31   Council of Europe, Recommendation No. R(97) 18 Separate chapters of the Law cover the following elements in detail:    organisational set up of the state statistics and competencies of SSO as the coordinator of the principal activity, authorised bodies and the Statistical Council of the Republic of Macedonia as the expert advisory body;      definition of methodological bases;    the Programme of Statistical Research as the framework for the official statistics in the country.    use of data files for statistical purposes;   data collection, processing and storing;    data protection;    use and publication of data;    international statistical cooperation;    state statistics funding; and     penal and transitional provisions.    The state statistics is defined in the Law as a professional independent activity which on scientific bases provides data to government bodies, local self-government units, trade companies, public enterprises, the general public and other users in economy, human resources, demographics, environment and other areas.   State statistics is carried out in full observance of the principles of:  impartiality,  objectivity,   professional independence,    confidentiality and   rationality. All of the above is covered by the Law.  Under the Law, the principal agency of state statistics is the State Statistical Office, with some types of statistical research which are specified in the programme carried out by other government bodies and institutions (so called authorised bodies). The implementation of the Law has contributed to the development and approximation of the statistical system of the Republic of Macedonia with the statistical system of the European Union.   Respective results have been achieved in the areas of:   approximation of the Macedonian statistical system to the European statistical system;     professional independence on  responsible bodies for official statistics with respect to the selection of definitions and methodological basis for implementing statistical research specified in the Programme;     Freedom from all forms of political or business influence, or influence exerted by other lobby groups in the compilation of results;    access to administrative data source for statistical purposes and starting with the process of establishment of statistical registries;    allowing access to data collected for statistical purposes for scientific research  purposes;    ensuring confidentiality of statistical data collected for statistical purposes and population census data;     provision of information on legal basis, purpose of data use and data protection to data providers;   provision of information to users on sources, methods and procedures used in the preparation of results;   provision of simultaneous access to statistical data to all users;    improvenment of inter-institutional cooperation in the country in the area of design and implementation of programmes;   increased volume of international cooperation;   inclusion of the Statistical Council in the coordination of the statistical system as an independent expert advisory body; and   the status concerning the implementation of outstanding pieces of legislation and the degree of harmonisation is explained in the respective answers.    Preparation of regulations in the filed of statistics for  adoptions: As regards to the passage of regulations in the field of statistics in the Republic of Macedonia, as well as other regulation affecting statistics, the coordination is in the hands of the State Statistical Office. The State Statistical Office makes annual plans and before the end of each year (in October) it informs the government about the regulation proposed for adopting in the following year.  The State Statistical Office prepares the draft laws in cooperation with representatives from competent ministries and other institutions, and once concurrence is reached, it submits the draft law to the government who acts in the capacity of the official proposer of the draft law and files it to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia for adoptions. Throughout the entire adoption process, the SSO is included in the debates and discussions of the bodies of the Government and the Assembly. Concerning the standards which under the Law on State Statistics are issued by the Government, in most cases the State Statistical Office initiates proposals in cooperation with the other authorised bodies and subject matter experts (as and when needed, other ministries, institutions and some business entities are also consulted) and then refers the proposals to the Government for adoption. The proposed laws and standards, prior to being sent to the Government, are subject to  mandatory discussion at the Statistical Council, whose opinion is attached to the draft regulation. It is also mandatory to obtain opinions from the line ministries, on the basis of which differences are resolved and the Government is subsequently informed.  As of 2002, when draft regulation is referred to the Government, it is compulsory to state the degree of harmonisation of the draft regulation with the relevant EU regulations, and where the regulation is partial, i.e. not fully harmonised, the associated reasons are also explained. The State Statistical Office is involved by providing opinions on the regulations pertaining to other areas if it has a direct or indirect impact on official statistics (ex. in the drafting the Company Law , the Law on Personal Data Protection, regulation covering the establishment and administration of registries which may be used as data sources etc.). The State Statistical Office is under the Law  directly responsible for the adoption of secondary legislation (such as rulebooks, books of codes, code of conduct, methodological basis etc). Implementation of regulations covering statistics Being the main   body of official statistics, the State Statistical Office basically coordinates and implements  the relevant regulations. Under the law, authorised bodies are responsible for the implementation of provision of the law. In certain segments of coordination of the statistical system of official statistics (as for example, coordination with and between authorised bodies), it is planned to introduce additional amendments to the Law on State Statistics in 2005 .   Further EU harmonisation measures   Amendments to the Law on National Classification of Activities, which should ensure harmonisation of NCA with NACE Rev, are currently being drafted. 1.1     The plan is for the Law to be enacted in 2005.   Modifications are currently being made to the Decision on the national classification of activities so that it could be harmonised with NAVCE Rev. 1.1 COMMISSION REGULATION (EC) No 29/2002 of 19 December 2001 amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 on the Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community - OJ :  L 6 L6, 10.01.2002   The amendment is planned for adoption in 2005.   The Law on Census of Agricultural Holdings in the Republic of Macedonia is in the process of adopting, scheduled for enactment in 2005. The plan is for the Law to be enacted in 2005.   Amendments to the Law on State Statistics for the purpose of harmonisation with Commission Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data. COMMISSION REGULATION (EC) No 8 of 12.01.2001 December 831/2002 amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 322/97 on the statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community - OJ :    Amendments are scheduled for 2005.   CPA 2002 harmonisation is in the plan ;      The amendment is scheduled for 2005.   Harmonisation of the NUTS Nomenclature with the new regulation of EU enacted in 2003 and the new Law on Territorial Organisation of Local Self Government in the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 55/04);   To be completed by the end of 2005.   Adoption of National Classification COFOG for Statistics of Government Funds;   Scheduled for 2005.   Amendments of the National Nomenclature of Industrial Products from 2000 and harmonisation with the latest version of PRODCOM List (EU), version 2003, by the end of 2005;   Scheduled for 2005.   Adoption of the Statistical Research Programme for the period 2008-2012 (se also answer to theme 92 – management and statistical programmes):   Scheduled for adoption in 2007   Harmonisation of the National Classification of Activities with NACE Rev. 2     Scheduled for 2008, following the adoption of NACE Rev.2 by EU  in 2007;   Harmonisation with CPA 2007 after its adoption. 
  Scheduled for 2008, following its adoption by EU in 2007; 
96. AUDIT  
Current situation The State Statistical Office activities are audited in accordance with the national regulations of the Republic of Macedonia in the following manner:   Audit conducted by the State Audit Office;   Audit conducted by authorised personnel of the Ministry of Finance (financial supervision);   Audit conducted by international institutions with respect to projects funded by donations; The audit objective is to improve activity, protect assets, and revise the law enforcement, so that accurate and true information is obtained. Audit is conducted on an ongoing basis throughout the year and as and when needed, for the preceding period. Further EU harmonisation measures   Introduction of internal audit. Internal audit is planned on being conducted by authorised employees of the State Statistical Office. The deadline for completion of activities is 2005. 
97. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION  
Current situation The State Statistical Office (SSO) is an independent administrative organisation whose remit and competencies are regulated in the Law on Organisation and Operation of Administrative Bodies (as a general law) (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No.58/00) and the Law on State Statistics (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 54/97) The State Statistical Office has a status of legal person. The State Statistical Office is managed by a director who is appointed and dismissed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The director may have a deputy who is appointed and dismissed under the same procedure as the Director. Their term of office is 4 years. The director acts on behalf of the Office and manages the SSO, and reports on his/her work to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The deputy director stands in for the director of the State Statistical Office in cases of his/her absence, illness or other reasons, and reports on his/her work to the director and the government of the Republic of Macedonia.  Under the by-law for systematisation and internal organisation of the State Statistical Office (see 12_Annex_05), the director of the Office puts together a working team (collegium of experts) which lends assistance in the management and governance of the Office. Members of the working team are department heads (9) and state advisors (2). Department heads manage their basic organisational units (sectors), while state advisors are tasked to work in given areas of statistics and are directly responsible to the director of the State Statistical Office. Further EU harmonisation measures The principles of internal organisation of the State Statistical Office are set out in line with the generally accepted principles of statistical offices of European Union member countries. The State Statistical Office will keep up to date with all trends in EU countries and make necessary adjustments. 
99. DECENTRALISED MANAGEMENT  
Current situation Under the Law on State Statistics (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 54/97), the State Statistical Office is the principal agency of official statistics in the Republic of Macedonia. Within the State Statistical Office, in accordance with the principle of territorial organisation, eight regional departments operate as internal organisational forms. They are functionally connected with the State Statistical Office. A centralised system has been built where the key activities of official statistics, which are under the competence of the State Statistical Office, are carried out in the Central Office, while the regional departments collect and conduct primary statistical data processing. Further EU harmonisation measures With the recently enacted Law on Territorial Organisation of the Local Self-Government (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 55/04) of the Republic of Macedonia, which provides increased municipal powers, a need has arisen for the creation of a model of internal organisation of the State Statistical Office through delegation of some powers from the Central Office to the Regional Statistical Units, i.e. municipalities. Deadline for harmonisation 2007. 
3. Statistics might be collected by other institutional actors than the National Statistical Office. In order to provide an overall picture of the system of official statistics, please give a description of the institutional arrangements concerning data collection, production and dissemination of official statistics in your country. This should include a listing of the specific responsibilities of the various actors. 
The State Statistical Office is the principal agency of state statistics. Under the Statistical Research Programme for the period 2003-2007, the State Statistical Office is in charge of collection, processing and dissemination of data from statistical research in the area of: national accounts, economic statistics, household statistics, demographic statistics, labour market statistics, education statistics, foreign trade statistics, parts of crime statistics and environmental protection statistics.  Other official statistical service providers (authorised agencies) are:   National Institute of Health Protection:    Ministry of Justice    National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia.   Pension and Disability Insurance Fund    Hydro-Meteorological Directorate    Ministry of Interior    Employment Agency Within the official production system, authorised agencies perform the following work with respect to statistical research which they have been tasked with under the Statistical Research Programme for:   They define the methodological basis (and where they are not consistent with EU standards, they seek opinion form the State Statistical Office);   They carry out statistical research;   They release the results (results are largely released by the State Statistical Office in their integrated publications). Regularly, on a monthly basis, the National Bank of Republic of Macedonia publishes the results it compiles. Authorised agencies cooperate with the State Statistical Office in drafting of the Statistical Research Programme and submit data to the State Statistical Office in the annual report on Programme implementation. Authorised agencies carry out statistical research as provided in the overview bellow: 
Researched carried out by The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia. 
Monthly report on bookkeeping of banks and savings banks 2 Monetary base Report on MKD interest rates offered by banks and savings banks Report on MKD weighted MKD  interest rates offered by banks  Report on foreign currency weighted interest rates offered by banks 6 Exchange market Changes and balance of accounts abroad of residents who are not licensed banks. Changes and balance of sight accounts opened for the purpose of reconciliation of mutual claims and liabilities between residents and non-residents. Changes and balance of commercial claims filed by non-residents in year 1. Changes and balance of commercial claims filed against non-residents in year 1. Balance of payment of Republic of Macedonia 10 Foreign direct investments to and from the Republic of Macedonia 11 Securities operations between residents and non-residents 12 Balance of foreign currency accounts of residents-natural and legal persons 13 Foreign credits received 14 Credits abroad approved 15 Guaranties issued to non-residents Research carried out by the Republic institute of health protection : 
Report on reported cases of communicable diseases Report on reported cases of persons that have contracted brucellosis Report on reported cases of persons that have contracted HIV/AIDS Report on obligatory immunisation against communicable diseases Statistics of patients treated by the dispensary health care service 6 Abortion statistics Statistics of personnel, work and diagnosed diseases-situation in health care organisations Report on the situation regarding contamination and measure undertaken for protection of air, water and soil against ionizing radiation into the living and working environment which are hazardous to human health Report on health safety of food products and other items for general use 10 Statistics of alcoholism and drug addiction 11 Report on organisational structure and workforce 12 Quarterly report on accidents at work 13 Annual report on accidents at work 14 Newly born statistics 15 Monitoring of length of breast feeding of babies 16 Malignant neoplasm report form 17 Diabetes report form 18 Occupational disease report form 19 Report on use of drugs and medications 20 Report on safety of personal hygiene items and hygiene maintenance devices in households  21 Accident report form 22 Registration  ischemic heart disorder; kidney failure; psychoses; rheumatic fever; intoxication (poisoning); traffic grammatology 23 Statistics of transplantation of human body parts for medical treatment 24 Monitoring of malnutrition of groups of population with definition of anthropometric parameters 25 Monitoring of diet of particular population groups 26 Monitoring lifestyle in Republic of Macedonia 27 Keeping record and monitoring of the sanitary-hygienic status of water supply in populated areas 28 Monitoring the quality of surface water 29 Monitoring the quality of air in populated areas 30 Monitoring of drug compliance 31 Monitoring of hygienic safety of drinking water Research carried out by the Ministry of Interior 
Statistical research on fires and explosions Statistical research on traffic accidents Statistical research on the number of passengers and vehicles at the border crossings for international traffic Statistical research on the number and type of registered vehicles and first time registered  Research carried out by the Hydro-Meteorological Directorate 
Meteorological measurements and observations Quality of air and precipitations hydrological measurements and observations Quality of surface water 5 Soil temperature Researched carried out by the Pension and disability insurance fund of the Republic of Macedonia. 
Number of pension beneficiaries, by type of pension Inflow of new pension beneficiaries (gross and net) Number of pension users, age, sex, gender and number of years of enjoyment of rights  Average pension, by type Structure of pension beneficiaries by level and type of pension Data actual revenue and expenditure of the Fund Data on work-connected disabled persons with working capacity left,  and still a burden to the fund, and for whom payments are made from business entities Recipient monetary compensation for corporal detriment Number of policy holders by gender, age, profession, degree of education 10 Number of – natural persons-contributors and their employees  11 Number of contributors and employees on whose behalf pension and disability insurance contributions are paid 12 Number of contributors, number of employees and pension and disability insurance payment arrears Researched carried out by Employment agency of the Republic of Macedonia. 
Record on new employments Keeping records on unemployed persons Keeping records on unemployed persons-users of rights Research carried out by the Ministry of Justice 
Investigation and investigating activities 2 Criminal cases 3 Criminal cases Enforcement sanctions, criminal and misdemeanour Civil law cases  6 Commercial disputes Bankruptcy, liquidation and mandatory settlement  8 Executive proceedings 9 Probate proceedings 10 Out of course cases 11 Administrative=accounting cases 12 Title Deeds, intabulations of deeds 13 Petitions, criminal and civil 14 Statistical report on personnel in courts on lay judges  15 Criminal cases in third-degree proceedings 16 Request for protection of legality  17 Extraordinary -legal remedies with exception of petitions for protection of legality 18 Administrative disputes in first-instance  proceedings 19 Administrative disputes with enforcement orders  20 Statistical report on movement of minors and  adults for correction facilities and penitentiaries 21 Statistical report on petitions filed for parole of convicts 22 Statistical report on petitions filed for suspension  of sentence 23 Annual statistical report 24 Quarterly report Further EU harmonisation measures The Ministry of Finance is not part of the official statistical system despite its important role in the production and dissemination of official government statistics.  The tendency is for the Ministry of Finance to be involved in the Statistical Research Programme, as well as the Ministry of Environment and Spatial planning in the part of the research which covers environmental issues. 
4. Please describe the organisational structure, staffing levels and the level of independence of the National Statistical Office. How have these issues developed in recent years, and what plans are there for the future? Can the Government influence the (choice of) data published by the National Statistical Office? 
Description of situation In accordance with the Acts for systematisation and internal organisation of the State Statistical Office, issued in November 2003 and amended in May 2004, the Office is organised in nine sectors. Within the frame of the sectors, 32 departments are organised. Four sectors (National Accounts, Social Statistics, Statistical Registers and Business Statistics) are sectors where statistical data are produced. The remaining five sectors perform a support function for the other four sectors. In Addition to the Central Statistical Office in Skopje, there are eight regional departments of statistics in the Republic of Macedonia (Bitola, Veles, Kumanovo, Kocani, Ohrid, Prilep, Strumica, Skopje, Tetovo and Stip): A total of 239 people are employed in the Office, out of which 79 work in regional departments. The personnel structure is dominated by university degree holders (a total of 164) of which 85 are graduates of economics, 17 bachelors of law, 28 IT graduates and 34 natural sciences and mathematics graduates (detailed explanation is provided in section 93). The legal basis for the independence of the state statistics, as one of the basic principles, is set out in the Law on State Statistics. The State Statistical Office, which performs the basic tasks of state statistics, draws its independence from the Law and the good practices of consistent implementation of the Law. Namely:   The State Statistical Office is autonomous in making the selection of scientific methods and official statistics production techniques;   The State Statistical Office is autonomous in prescribing the methodological basis for statistical surveys;   Under the Programme, data compiled and resealed by the State Statistical Office and authorised agencies have the status of official data;   The State Statistical Office interprets statistical survey results;   It meets international obligations pertaining to official statistics in a direct and autonomous fashion.   Government influence Following the adoption of the Law on State Statistics and its implementation, the government does not have any influence on the publication of official statistical data. Further EU harmonisation measures As to the principle of independence, and in the context of the revision scheduled, the State Statistical Office will make the following proposals for 2005:    The principle of independence, being one of the fundamental principles of official statistics, will be defined in more detail;    Efforts must be made to ensure that the five-year Programme be the framework for statistical production, with annual programmes of implementation defined;   The role of the State Statistical Office as the coordinator of official statistics in the country should be reinforced;   More intensive work in making statistics and its fundamental principles better understood by the general public.  For the purpose of eliminating any doubts as to the possible influence which the government may exert on the State Statistical Office and its operations in whichever segment, proposals will be made for the amendments to the Law on State Statistics scheduled for 2005 as to the criteria on appointing and dismissing the director of the State Statistical Office and the duration of the term of office.   







