VI. EMPLOYMENT AND SOCIAL POLICY 
A. Employment Policy 

1. What is your overall view of the labour market situation in your country and the main issues/challenges? 
The essential characteristic of the labour market of the Republic of Macedonia is the high unemployment rate and the outstanding problems related to the high labour supply on one hand and the reduced opportunities for employment, on the other. The unfavourable condition of the labour market results not only from the magnitude of the unemployment, but also from the quality of available human potential outside the labour market. The potential is conditioned by the big changes in the demographic and socio-economic marks of the unemployed during the transition period. From the aspect of qualitative characteristics of the labour market, it can be concluded that there is unfavourable structure of the unemployed according to age, level of education, vocational education and occupation, and the duration of unemployment. The participation of the young (to 25 years) in the total unemployment is cut to half. There is a tendency of continued increase of the age group from 25-40 and those over 40. As to the level of education of the unemployed, there is a large number of unemployed with low level of education (unfinished primary education). Therefore, the number of unqualified and semi-qualified unemployed, and the ones without occupation, is quite high. As to the unemployed with higher level of education and vocational training, the number of the unemployed with occupation is not small, however, their occupations do not correspond to the labour market demand. As to the duration of unemployment, in the last decade, there has been an absolute and relative increase in the number of the unemployed seeking job for a longer period. As a result of the reduced opportunities for employment, today more than 4/5 (app. 85%) of the unemployed are looking for a job for more than a year, whereas 2/3 of the registered unemployed have been unemployed for three or more years. The problem of long-term unemployment exists with all categories of the unemployed regardless the age. The tendency in reducing the number of the young in the total unemployment is conditioned by the reduced flow of labour in the labour supply (by intensifying the process of demographic aging) on one hand, and the changes in the relative ratios due to the increase of the adult age groups. Thus, the employment of the young, including the ones with higher level of education, remains a serious problem. Their long-term unemployment is a great loss for the country, not only as human capital drain, but drain of the most vital part of the workforce. At the same time, the long-term unemployment is one of the essential determinants for the high increase of poverty.   The reasons for such unfavourable labour market conditions lie in the complexity of the influence of numerous factors when utilizing the total available workforce (economic, technical, technological, political, social, and other aspects) in the pre-transition period and during the social and economic transformation. The Republic of Macedonia entered the transition period with unemployment rate higher than 20%, i.e. app. 150,000 unemployed and the same number of over-employed because of administrative and unproductive employment in the previous period. Due to the insufficient economic development and terminated development trends, decline of the economic growth, difficulties caused by ownership transformation of social capital enterprises, bankruptcy procedures, structural, and other changes caused by the market-oriented economy, the labour demand significantly decreased. It primarily influences the employment problems, especially for persons looking for a job for the first time and the jobless as a result of company bankruptcy or over-employment. Today, unemployment is one of the most sensitive problems with numerous consequences and implications manifested in many areas. According to its origin and effect it can be characterized as developmental-structural unemployment. As such, it is a complex and very serious problem to solve. Therefore, the Republic of Macedonia tends to apply a multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral approach towards improvement of the unemployment condition.  Considering the character of unemployment, the unfavourable conditions could be alleviated only by intensifying the overall and the local economic development, and by encouraging creation of new jobs. Undoubtedly, there is a need to improve the institutional structure of the economy, the conditions and stability of the foreign investment regime. For creation of new jobs, it is very important to encourage entrepreneurship, then establishment and support of small and medium-sized enterprises, helping them to connect to the bigger and more successful ones, and encourage self-employment, micro and family businesses. Without increase in the labour demand the normal functioning of the labour market is almost impossible. The high presence of the informal sector – the grey economy - necessitates measures to reduce its dimension in order to avoid the unfavourable conditions in the normal functioning of the formal sector. This will also mean decrease of differences among the number of the employed in both sectors.  The challenge to eliminate the institutional rigidities on the labour market is not of less importance. Largely, this comes from realization of both previously specified goals. It should be taken into consideration that the social insurance of the unemployed, considering the amendments underway, can not be more important incentive for passive behaviour of the workforce on the labour market. The current quality of the available workforce imposes the need for continuing investment in human resources in compliance with the needs and developmental orientation of the country. Therefore the promotion and support of the life-long learning will be among the priorities making it compatible with the standards of the EU Member States.  The unemployment increase is expected to stop after the completion of the privatization process of the social owned enterprises.  This is expected to halt the trend of enterprise closure and to initiate a process of creating new small and flexible enterprises. Therefore, fast and efficient adjustment of the unemployed labour is necessary according to the labour market needs.  To alleviate the unemployment problem in the Republic of Macedonia, it is also very important to encourage spatial and occupational labour mobility, as one of the significant factors for labour flexibility increase. To support the SME development it is necessary to support the SMEs financially in order to increase the labour demand, i.e. for employment. In 2004, the labour market policy was directed towards creation of a new concept for active policy measures to generate new employment opportunities by complex, integral, synchronised, and coordinated work. The active labour market policy is directed towards creation of conditions and support for direct opening of new jobs, organisation of training programmes on job retention and modernisation of the information system. 
2. Please describe the institutional framework for employment policies in your country (main policy documents, main objectives of employment policies/strategies). 
The Republic of Macedonia does not have an employment strategy that includes broad range of measures and areas of intervention related to employment and labour market. Most of these measures and activities implemented so far have referred to labour market policies (the focus was primarily on the amendments in the labour legislation and passive policies, and later on active labour market policies), whereas only few have referred to the employment policies. These policies have been mainly implemented through promotion of relevant mechanisms for encouraging investments and creation of new jobs and through a series of labour market reforms in direction of creating favourable climate for its bigger flexibility.  To increase employment, as a fundamental goal of the employment policies, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopted a National Action Plan on Employment for 2004 and 2005 in accordance with the EU principles of employment policies and the instructions of the Council of Europe. The National Action Plan on Employment is mainly based on the following segments: active preventive measures for unemployed and inactive people; promotion of human resources development and life-long learning; creation of new jobs and promotion of entrepreneurship. The design and adoption of the employment strategy is planned within the CARDS programme of EU. Taking into account the developmental-structural character of unemployment when determining the employment strategy, the following factors will be considered: institutional assumptions and macro-economic conditions for the employment policy and the labour market on one hand, and the relation between the economic growth, the economic policy measures, and employment support, on the other. The strategy will pay special attention to the employment policy as an area of cross-sectoral policy. This will include policies of all areas that directly or indirectly have an impact on employment of the labour. The regulatory policies and macro-economic areas of the economic policies (financial policy, monetary policy and policy of the denar exchange rate, policy of salaries, and foreign trade exchange policy) are of equal importance, as well as the sectoral policies (industrial policy, agricultural policy, regional, policy on SME support, trade policy, policy of education/training, and social policy). Employment policy designed in this manner will have a positive influence on the current labour market condition, its adaptability and efficiency, and will create the necessary climate for job retention and/or creation of new jobs. Because the above mentioned areas of employment policy serve to other, or predominantly to other economic goals, a coordinated effort will be essential for all key players involved in its development. Explicit inclusion of the labour market policy directed towards improvement of the qualification structure of the workforce will also be important. The labour market policy will have a goal to improve the alternatives that are opening for the existing and the potential labour market participants and to improve its function. By implementation of the National Programme for approximation of legislation the Government will continue the activities in harmonization and alignment of the labour legislation to the EU legislation. Institutions competent for creation and implementation of employment policy are the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Education and Science, the Ministry of Transport and Communications, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Ministry of Local Self-Government, the Ministry of Interior, and other relevant institutions.  The Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia is an institution responsible for implementation of the labour market policy measures. Within the CARDS Programme of EU, the Employment Agency is actively involved in the implementation of the Project “Technical Assistance for Institutional Capacity Building as Support to the Employment Policy of Macedonia.” One of the Project components is strengthening the capacity and management of financial and human resources of the Employment Agency and the Employment Centres. This Project is also taking measures for modernisation of the Employment Agency in order to improve the organisation and its methods and work with priority of active labour market policy measures.  For the implementation of the employment strategy it is also very important to develop the co-operation between the social partners (based on tripartite structure).  It will enable creation of the necessary critical mass for positive application of the social and employment measures by the public. To integrate the youth in the overall social life, National Strategy for the Youth was developed and adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (December, 2004). Considering the problems which young people face in education and employment, the Strategy provides concrete measures directed towards: -  Harmonisation of the formal education system and vocational training with the needs of the labour market; -  Improvement of the quality and the system of re-training and additional training of young people and their vocational training; Support to employment in cultural sector; Support to business oriented young people; Institutional development of labour, etc. 
3. Does a public employment service (employment office) exist? If yes, what is its legal status and how is it organised? What are the main tasks/functions of the public employment service? What is its relationship with the Ministry of Labour? What are its resources and its staff? 
The Employment Agency is the only public institution in the Republic of Macedonia as a legal entity established by the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (Official Gazette of the RM No. 37/97, 25/00, 101/00, 50/01, 25/03, 37/04 and 04/05). The Employment Agency is managed by a Management Board of the Employment Agency which consists of 9 members, experts with knowledge or experience in employment, 5 of whom are appointed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, 2 from the organization of employers, and 2 from the organization of the majority trade union. The head of the Employment Agency is the Director who presents and represents the Employment Agency. The Employment Agency performs duties of its jurisdiction as the only technical service of the Central Service of the Employment Agency and the local offices, i.e., Employment Centres, who are established for the territory of one or more municipalities. There are 30 Employment Centres of the Employment Agency, covering the whole territory of the Republic of Macedonia. The defined policy of work, methods and techniques of the Employment Agency are being implemented through the Employment Centres which are in direct contact with the unemployed, the employers, and other organizations. Thus, the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia achieves its goals. The main tasks, i.e. functions of the Employment Agency are: keeping records of employers and their need for workers; -  receiving offers/advertisements for vacant positions by employers and identifying employers’ needs according to conditions stated in the expressed need for workers; keeping records of the unemployed according to their qualifications, skills and experience; -  comparison of the employers’ needs with the qualifications, skills and experience of the unemployed; providing information to employers and the unemployed about labour market; referring the unemployed to training, re-training, or additional training for employment; support the employers when employing the unemployed providing favorable conditions; providing special services for employment of the unemployed disabled persons; -  vocational orientation of the unemployed and other persons in order to select an occupation or employment by testing and discussion; monitoring of the expressed and not met needs of employers for workers; research, monitoring, and analysis of the changes and trends of the labour market; -  providing spatial and vocational mobility of the labour to balance the labour demand and supply in the Republic of Macedonia; establishment and maintenance of good relations and co-operation between the Employment Agency and the employers and the employment decision-makers.  providing rights deriving from the insurance in the case of unemployment According to the Law on Employment and Insurance in the Case of Unemployment,, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy decides in second instance on the rights determined by this Law in administrative proceedings. This Law also prescribes that the Employment Agency has an obligation to submit a report on its work at least once a year to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, informing about the conditions and problems in the field of unemployment and employment, as well as on other issues of its jurisdiction. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia appoints and dismisses the Director of the Employment Agency on proposal by the Minister of Labour and Social Policy. The Ministry of Labor and Social Policy is authorized to supervise the enforcement of this Law. Therefore it may stop the execution of a general act of the Employment Agency if it is not in accordance with the Constitution and this Law, and to initiate proceedings at the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia for evaluation of the constitutionality and legality of the act within 15 days. On 1 of October, 2004, there were 500 employees with the Central Service of the Employment Agency and the local offices, i.e., Employment Centres. 223 of them with university education, 91 with higher vocational college education, 140 with secondary education, and 46 classified as others. In gender terms, there were 307 women and 193 men. As for the ethnic origin 434 are Macedonians, 38 Albanians, 12 Serbs, 4 Turks, 3 Roma, 3 Vlachs, and 6 classified as others. 
4. Please describe the implementation of employment programmes and measures: legislative framework, responsible bodies, ways of financing, monitoring, follow-up etc. 
Employment Measures   The Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (Official Gazette of the RM No. 37/97), its amendments (Official Gazette of the RM No. 25/00, 101/00, 50/01, 25/03, 37/04, 04/05), and other laws and regulations determine the following measures for stimulation of employment. 
Measure 1 : Active labour market measures for the unemployed and job-seekers 1.1. Employment Counselling  Employment counselling provides services for the unemployed and other persons that transfer knowledge and techniques for successful job-seeking and employment. The goal of this programme that is being carried out by job clubs at the Employment Agency is to start up the initiative and the active attitude of the job-seekers to solve their problem of employment. In this way, their capacity of presenting themselves on the labour market, active job-seeking and employment will be empowered. Beneficiaries of the job club services receive counselling and information services concerning their rights and obligations, information about the labour market condition, education in various fields of employment, training through workshops with programmes for psychological assistance and support, training on successful presentation on the labour market (interview, CV, etc.), training in designing action plan for job-seeking, motivation and training on self-employment, etc. 
1.2. Vocational orientation Counselling on vocational orientation is provided to unemployed persons, pupils, students, employed, and disabled persons with an aim to help them choose their occupation and professional development. Vocational orientation includes the services of the Employment Agency to the unemployed and other job seekers on choice of occupation or employment by testing and interview, and also informs the job-seekers about the demand for particular occupations and employment opportunities. These measures include individual counselling for choosing an occupation according to the desires, interest and capability of the unemployed but are also connected with the opportunities and needs of the labour market.  Beside the vocational counselling and orientation as assistance in the choice of occupation and future employment of the unemployed and other persons, activities of the occupational selection are also directed towards employers as assistance during selection of candidates for training, re-training and recruitment for new jobs. 
1.3. Preparation of the unemployed and other persons for employment One of the rights of the unemployed is the right to preparation for employment (training and re-training). This measure enables acquiring new and supplementing the existing knowledge of the unemployed and other persons for their employment. Training and re-training of the unemployed and other persons is carried out for a known employer and it can last from 1 to 3 months. The employer has an obligation to employ 90% of the total number of the unemployed (workers included in the employment preparation) on an indefinite time and keep them employed for at least one year. During the preparation and after establishment of the employment relations, the employer can not reduce the number of employees on indefinite time for a year. The Employment Agency pays the unemployed person (the employee included in the employment preparation) a financial assistance in amount of 4.000,00 MKD per month, while the employer for whom, i.e., at whom the employment preparation is carried out, is paid participation for the expenses incurred during the employment preparation in the amount of 2.000,00 MKD per month for each unemployed, i.e., worker. The funds for this measure are provided from the contribution for employment of the Employment Agency. 

Year 
Implemented Programmes for employment preparation 
Number of unemployed included in employment preparation  
Number of employed persons after completion of employment preparation  2000 279 6.498 4.358 2001 286 4.978 4.049 2002 91 1.806 1.540 2003 88 2.770 2.092 30.06.2004 40 964 456 
Measure 2: Investment of the financial benefits To induce employment and encourage employers and the unemployed, this measure provides a possibility, upon request of the unemployed, for the unreimbursed part of the financial allowance to be paid in a one-off amount or in monthly instalments but not longer than 24 months, if the unemployed uses the allowance for establishment of employment relations on open-ended employment. The beneficiary of the funds is obliged to return the used funds to the Employment Agency if the employment relation of the unemployed is terminated not by his/her fault, prior to the expiry of twice the longer period than the period during which he/she used the funds, with bank interest on the funds at sight. The funds for this measure are provided from the contribution for employment of the Employment Agency. As this measure has been applied after adoption of the Law on Appending and Amending the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment on 22 June, 2004, only 8 persons so far have made use of it (state by 31 August, 2004). Considering the interest shown, it is expected that this possibility will be used by a great number of unemployed. 
Measure 3: Public Works Unemployed persons who report for registration at the Employment Agency are regularly engaged in public works. Public works are carried out on the basis of a public works programme developed by the organiser. Organizers of public works can be the local government units and the interested public sector employers. During performance of the public works, the organiser provides reimbursement for the performed work to the engaged persons, not less than the amount determined for salaries for the same type of works according to the collective agreement, transport or reimbursement for transport to and from the place of work, meals, insurance for accident at work, occupational disease, etc.  If the organiser of public works engages unemployed beneficiaries of financial reimbursement for public works for a period longer than 30 days, he/she has the right to a monthly reimbursement by the Employment Agency in the amount of the financial reimbursement of the engaged unemployed person, but not higher than the determined amount for salaries for the same type of works determined by the collective agreement. The funds for this measure are provided from the contribution for employment of the Employment Agency and the organiser of public works. 
Measure 4: Exemption from payment of personal income tax  This measure stimulates the employer who employs workers on open-ended employment over the existing number of employees on indefinite time on the date the Law on Employment and Insurance in the Case of Unemployment comes into effect. The employer is exempted from payment of personal income tax for a period of 3 years for the newly employed if he/she employs an unemployed person registered with the Employment Agency for at least 1 year. This measure also refers to employers who start up activities as sole proprietors or as founders of a trade company, and to natural persons carrying out an activity in accordance with the Law not being registered for doing activity before the beginning of activity performance. 
Measure 5: Law on Employment Promotion The Law on Employment Promotion was adopted in March, 2003 by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia within the framework of the macroeconomic policy of the Republic of Macedonia to reduce the unemployment. The goal of this Law was to directly encourage employment of the unemployed by labour costs reduction.  This measure provides the employer who employs an unemployed person on indefinite time over the existing number of employees, to be compensated for paying pension and disability insurance contributions, the health insurance contribution, and employment contribution for the newly employed for a period of 24 months after the employment. The target groups of this measure were: The unemployed registered with the Employment Agency for at least 1 year; The unemployed whose employment was previously terminated by a notice due to economic, technological, structural, or similar changes; The unemployed whose employment was previously terminated due to bankruptcy, and -  The unemployed, beneficiaries of social financial assistance, able to work and socially insecure. For the newly employed, the employer is compensated for the funds paid for salary contribution in a fixed amount of 4.206,00 MKD/month per employee, every 60 days, if the employer has paid the salary and the salary contribution.  Employers who employ unemployed persons, beneficiaries of financial allowance and social assistance, beside the right to reimbursement of the funds for paid contributions, have the right to reimbursement of three-month-amount of the funds in the amount of 25% of the average monthly net salary per employee in the Republic of Macedonia, i.e., three-month-amount of funds in the amount of the average reimbursed social financial assistance paid the previous year. The employer has an obligation to keep the person at job for at least twice the period during which he/she had benefited from reimbursement of the funds for salary contributions. This measure also encourages the unemployed from the target groups to self-employment if they start-up an activity as sole proprietor trade companies, or natural persons carrying out activity in accordance with the law, if prior to beginning of the activity he/she was not registered for performing an activity on his/her behalf or on behalf of his/her family members (spouse, children, or parents). The Law on Employment Promotion was in force from 16 April to 3 December, 2003. A total of 15.308 unemployed persons were employed during this period. According to the grounds of employment, the majority target group that was affected by this measure were those registered with the Employment Agency for more than 1 year (which in the total number of employed persons participate with 62.3%), then the unemployed whose employment was terminated due to bankruptcy (19%,), then unemployed due to technological, economical, structural, or similar changes (17%) and the smallest group represented the beneficiaries of a social assistance (1.7%).  Funds to attain the rights by this measure were provided by the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia within the planned funds for implementation of the Programme for Employment Increase and Labour Market Flexibility in the amount of 2 millions MKD.  
Measure 6: Exemption from payment of taxes in agriculture  The amendments to the Personal Income Tax Law (Official Gazette of the RM No. 8/01) from February, 2001 provide that the person registered as unemployed with the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia is exempted from payment of tax for agricultural activity for a period of 5 years if he/she has engaged in agricultural activity as basic activity for the first time. This measure also refers to persons who will return to the countryside and will reactivate as farmers, if they were previously registered as an unemployed. 
Measure 7: Voluntary Work The Labour Relations Law in force from July, 1990 to December, 1993 provided that a trainee could be professionally trained for independent performance of tasks and duties without establishment of employment relation (voluntary work) if the professional training  was determined by the law as a condition for independent performance of tasks and duties of the appropriate profession. This measure referred to trainees in law and medicine whose compulsory practice after graduation was carried out on voluntary basis. The trainee volunteer had a right to health and disability insurance for disability or physical damage caused by an injury at work or occupational disease, and a right to an appropriate financial reimbursement for performing tasks and duties in the amount of 70% of the average salary charged to the employment contribution funds of the Employment Agency. This measure has been established as of 1994 by the General Collective Agreement for public services, public enterprises, state bodies, the local government bodies, and other legal entities performing non-economic activity. Due to lack of employment contribution funds, this measure is not applied. 
Measure 8: Granting agricultural land in state ownership to usufruct    The Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopted a Decision on granting agricultural land in state ownership to usufruct to certain categories of socially insecure persons (Official Gazette of the RM No. 51/03) in July, 2003.  The following categories are deemed to be socially insecure unemployed persons: beneficiaries of social assistance able to work and socially insecure according to the Law on Social Protection; -  unemployed beneficiaries of financial allowance according to the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment; -  unemployed persons whose right to financial allowance has been terminated within 1 year from the termination of the right to financial allowance; persons registered as unemployed with the Employment Agency for more than 1 year; -  persons employed with an employer using state agricultural land for whom he the employer has not paid salaries and salary contributions more than 1 year, and socially insecure farmers without land of their own. Agricultural land for free usufruct is given by announcing a public advertisement in the local media in the region where the land offered for free usufruct is located. The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy signs a contract with the beneficiary of the right to free usufruct which determines the contract duration, the amount to be paid for using the land, and the assistance provided by the state for the start up the free usufruct. The contract duration on giving agricultural land for free cultivation cannot be shorter than 3 years nor longer than 5 years, and it can be renewed. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy has signed 173 contracts for free usufruct  
Measure 9: Employment of Disabled Persons The Law on Employment of Disabled Persons (“Official Gazette of the R M Nos. 44/00 and 16/04) in force from June, 2000 determines special conditions and privileges for employment and work of disabled persons who have difficulties in finding employment. This measure covers the disabled persons with damaged eyesight, hearing impaired, impediments in voice, speaking and language, physically disabled persons, persons with learning disabilities, persons with combined impediments and persons with psychoses who have specific needs for work due to the degree of disability. To finance this active measure, 15% of the total funds acquired from the existing employment contributions are set aside to a sub-account of the Employment Agency (Special Fund). These funds are used to finance the following: training of disabled persons on practical work on certain jobs in accordance with the needs of the employer and the disabled persons, and training of employed disabled not trained for doing certain jobs; -  employment of disabled person on indefinite time, for which the employer is reimbursed irretrievable funds in the amount of EUR 3.700 or EUR 5.600 per one employed disabled person, depending on the degree of disability, with an obligation to keep the disabled employee at work for at least three years from the date of employment; -  irretrievable funds amounting to EUR 5.600 are allocated for adaptation of the work place where the disabled person will work; irretrievable funds amounting to EUR 9.300 are allocated for supply of equipment necessary for employment and work of the disabled person; the funds can be given once in 3 years; irretrievable funds amounting to EUR 9.300 are allocated for extension and adaptation of the workspace for employment and work of the disabled person given once in 3 years. A total of 1,132 disabled persons have been employed after the Law was adopted (state on 1of October, 2004). After the adoption of the Law until October, 2004, a total of 318.997.783,00 MKD were allocated on all grounds.  
5. How do labour market policy delivery systems function? What are the registration rates of the unemployed? What is the registration share of men and women? What is the role of the official information services? What are the active labour market measures in place? What is the share of unemployed addressed by these measures? How is your active labour market policy funded? 
The activity of the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia is regulated by the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (Official Gazette of the RM No. 37/97, 25/00, 101/00, 50/01, 25/03, and 37/04). The Employment Agency's activities are directed towards: labour exchange in terms of providing services to employers, advice to employers on laws and other regulations and on their implementation, training and re-training of the unemployed and other persons, counselling of employers on employment of the unemployed under favourable conditions, services to the unemployed and the other job-seekers, vocational orientation of the unemployed and the other job-seekers, mediation for employment in the country and abroad, registration of employers and the unemployed, public works, and insurance in the case of unemployment. With the amendments to the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (Official Gazette of the RM No. 37/04), the Employment Agency expanded its active measures in the part of preparations of the unemployed for employment. These refer to: training and re-training prior to the termination of the employment relations, short-term training on employment for the unemployed, on-the-job training, and training for participation of the unemployed in public works. This amendment to the Law expanded the activities of the Employment Agency and the employment mediation agencies to employment in the country and abroad. The information exchange on vacant jobs and referral of the unemployed for employment among these institutions has improved.  The Employment Agency in its scope of activities, through actual programmes and measures, delivers the labour market policy planned within the National Action Plan for Employment for 2004-2005. (adopted in February 2004). The active labour market policy for 2004 expanded the scope of clients in the job clubs, through modernised forms of services in the process of mediation for the unemployed and the employers, but also in other manners. The planned active measures are being carried out according to determined priorities identified on the basis of a research on the size and structural characteristics of the labour supply and demand. The new organisational set up of the Employment Agency and its transformation, which was completed by the end of 2004, will enable establishment of measurement instruments for monitoring the effectiveness of the labour market active measures application as soon as possible. Work with the unemployed In 2004, in accordance with the amendments to the legal regulations, there was an increase in the number of labour market measures and instruments applied by the Employment Agency during its work with the unemployed. The goal was labour market flexibility increase. These refer to measures in the field of training of the unemployed (employment preparation) acquiring new, more flexible dimensions, and also to forms of employment mediation. These measures will be decreasingly administrative and technical, and increasingly active, by establishing Internet labour exchange in all job clubs of the local employment centres. The preparation of these centres for this purpose was completed in 2003. The counselling of the unemployed and the labour market information, the vocational orientation and other forms of services and assistance are expected to influence the reduction of the long-term unemployment, to meet the employers’ needs in a more qualitative way, and to increase the spatial and occupational mobility of the workforce. To facilitate the entire administrative process, new, simplified procedures (organisation of procedures) will be introduced in the moment when the services and institutions with which the Employment Agency co-operates (the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, the Health Insurance Fund of Macedonia, Social Work Centres, the State Labour Inspectorate, the Public Revenue Office, the State Statistical Office, registration courts, etc.) will be computer-connected. The services that Employment Agency delivers to the unemployed will be in compliance with the needs and priorities of the target groups in the future. To this end, the types of services will be more precisely defined, depending on the character of the needs of the unemployed or the (target) group of unemployed. The Employment Agency, as a modern service, during its work with the unemployed puts more emphasis on their active position in the employment problem resolution. By introducing new instruments and methods of work (for example, development of employment action plans) it works with greater intensity on motivation of the unemployed for self-assessment of their own working, technical and personal potential. This helps the Employment Agency staff to make better assessment of the knowledge, skills and other characteristics of the unemployed. This further contributes to more quality professional assistance and instruction for successful presentation of the unemployed on the labour market and employment of the unemployed. The new instruments and techniques (individual work, workshop approach, team work, etc.) also offer better selection of candidates for the employers’ needs, better overview of the total human resources base, planned and systematic preparation of the unemployed for job-seeking and employment, especially of the persons with reduced opportunities for employment. Work with employers For resolution of the unemployment problem, the Employment Agency directs its activities more towards strengthening of the co-operation with employers by improvement of the active measures and the analysis of the labour market situation. The frequency of their communication and co-operation is increasing, which enables more precise research of the labour market needs and the establishment of an active process for employment mediation. To this end, the Employment Agency plans development of new forms of co-operation with employers, whose needs will be actively and professionally determined in an organised manner. Thus, partner relations in employment will be established between the two parties, as well as techniques for better information exchange between the Employment Agency and the employers. The data on the number and the structural characteristics of the unemployed in the Republic of Macedonia is gathered by two sources:  Administrative, and  Surveys. The Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia collects and publishes administrative data (registered unemployment). The unemployment in Macedonia is registered continually since 1953. The survey data on registered and unregistered unemployment is monitored through the Labour Force Survey (LFS), conducted by the State Statistical Office. The Labour Force Survey started in 1996. The difference in the unemployment data by both sources is quite big. It is caused by the different methodological approach in defining and measuring the unemployment. The rate of registered unemployment is calculated based on the data of the number of the unemployed at the Employment Agency and the data on the number of the employed from administrative sources - from the State Statistical Office. This rate has shown an increase during the transition period. The rate of registered unemployment can not be considered as a real indicator of the labour engagement level in the Republic of Macedonia. This conclusion comes from the fact that a large number of the registered unemployed are not active job-seekers; they register in order to attain certain rights. The number of registered employed does not reflect the real condition either, because the data of administrative sources do not include all employees in the formal sector, the employees in the informal sector (grey market economy), and the active persons in agriculture. In order to get a clearer picture of the size and structural characteristics of the workforce in the Republic of Macedonia, labour market researches have been conducted since 1996 through the Labour Force Survey. The Survey is conducted in compliance with the methodological recommendations of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and the recommendations of the European Statistical Bureau (EUROSTAT). The Survey is a source of internationally comparable data for labour statistics. The Labour Force Survey includes both the registered and the unregistered unemployment. It has also approximated the number of the employed in the formal and informal sectors, and the active population in agriculture. In this context it shows more real diagnoses of the unemployment rate. Nevertheless, the Labour Force Survey data also shows the unfavourable condition in terms of unemployment dimensions in the Republic of Macedonia. Number of unemployed and unemployment rates in the Republic of Macedonia, 1990 -2003 Sources of data  1990 1994 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Unemployed Administrative 156.323 189.906 235.135 250.508 275.232 332.812 366.211 360.340 374.144 390.361 LFS / 251.489 288.213 284.064 261.451 261.711 263.196 263.483 315.868 
Unemployment rates LS / 31,9 36,0 34,5 32,4 32,2 30,5 31,9 36,7 Source: State Statistical Office During the transition period, there have been big changes in the size, the demographic and the socio-economic characteristics of the unemployed. In the gender structure of registered unemployment, the reduction of the share of unemployed women from 51,1% (1990) to 43,0% (2003) was evident, although its absolute size shows continued increase. This tendency has been confirmed by the Labour Force Survey data, too. This is a result of the high increase in the number of unemployed men due to lay-offs. The trend of reducing the unemployed women’s share continued in 2004. In August, 2004 the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia registered 392.909 unemployed, out of which 224.765 (57,2%) men, and 168.144 (42,8) women. Gender structure of the registered unemployment in the Republic of Macedonia Year Unemployed  Men  Women 1999 354.660 100 197.670 55,74  156.990 44,26 2000 366.211 100 202.630 55,33  163.581 44,67 2001 360.340 100 200.945 55,77  159.395 44,23 2002 374.144 100 209.131 55,90  165.013 44,10 2003 390.361 100 222.424 56,98  167.937 43,02 August * The number of the unemployed during the period 1999-2003 is specified to 31 December inclusive, whereas the latest data for 2004 refers to 31 August, 2004 inclusive. The Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia provides transparency of the services it delivers and the labour market information it has available. Its services also attempt to provide timely information to the unemployed and to the employers, and to other beneficiaries of their services about the legislation changes in the work of the Agency. This is done through all of the public information media, both electronic and printed. The Employment Agency plays the role of an information centre, implementing the following activities: -  Public presentation of professional articles, employment and unemployment topics, labour market information, etc.; Publishing monthly newsletters with constant increase in  contents; -  Organisation of panels with presence of unemployed and employees’ representatives in the job clubs of the employment centres, with an aim to receive information on their ideas and recommendations for improvement of services that could be provided by the Employment Agency; -  Open telephone line for constant communication with clients. Thus, the employers and the unemployed may directly ask for an advice on services to be provided by the Employment Agency, and communicate their suggestions for improvement; Preparation and printing of information materials for the unemployed and the employers. The Employment Agency constantly improves the computer centre and updates its web page, whose purpose, among else, is to give various instructions to the employers and the unemployed. The contents of the printed newsletters, instructions, forms, brochures, catalogues and other materials, and statistical employment and unemployment data can be found on the Employment Agency's Internet web page www.zvrm.gov.mk. The web page is updated once a month. Up to now, several active labour market measures have been established. Currently, the following is being implemented: services from labour exchange of the unemployed and other job-seekers (employment counselling, vocational orientation, preparation for employment of the unemployed and other persons), investment in financial benefits, public works, and employment of the disabled. The legal framework, the competent bodies, the funding and the monitoring thereof are described in detail in the answer to question 13_VI_A_4In 2004, the labour market policy was directed towards creation of a new concept for implementation of active policy for generation of new employment opportunities through joint and coordinated action of all labour market participants. Its measures and activities were focused on creation of conditions and support to job creation, organisation of training programmes, and modernisation of the information system. Beside the implementation of the above mentioned active employment measures, the Employment Agency is an active participant and implementer of many projects in the function of employment growth and modernisation of the Agency functions (Projects of the CARDS Programme, the World Bank projects, the UNDP and other projects funded by foreign donors). Taking into consideration the data contained in the answer to question 13_VI_A_4.on the number of persons included in the employment preparation programmes, the employed on a basis of financial benefits, and the employed disabled persons, it can be concluded that the mentioned active labour market measures covered a very small part of the unemployed in the Republic of Macedonia. This part got slightly bigger with the implementation of the Law on Employment Promotion. With this Law, in approx. over 9 months in 2003, about 15.000 persons were employed, which is 4,8% of the total number of the unemployed persons determined with the Labour Force Survey. Funding of the active labour market policy The planned total revenue of the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia for 2004 was 7.806.979.000,00 MKD. The total revenue structure consists of: -  Revenues from employment contribution in the amount of 1.270.000.000,00 MKD with 16,26% share in the total revenue structure; Other revenues in the amount of 25.000.000,00 with 0,32% share; Transfers from the Budget in the amount of  6.318.319.000.00 MKD, with 80,93% share; -  Transferred extra revenues from the previous year, which was 193. 560.000,00 MKD, with 2,48% share. The total planned expenditures of the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia for 2004 were in the amount of 7.806.879.000,00 MKD. -  The planned funds for provision of rights during unemployment, including the funding of the active labour market policies for 2004, were in the amount of 7.566.494.000,00 MKD. The share of expenditures in the total expenditure structure of the Employment Agency was 96,92%. Out of these funds, the Employment Agency planned 966.582.000,00 MKD or 12,38% of the total expenditures, for funding of active labour market policies. From these, 30.000.000,00 MKD (0,38% share of the total expenditure structure) were planned for training, re-training and additional training; 331.582.000.00 MKD(4,25%) for employment of disabled persons; and  605.000.000,00 MKD(7,75%) for payments due to the Law on Employment Promotion. -  The planned expenditures for the professional department for 2004 were in the amount of 240.385.000,00 MKD. 
B. Social Policy 

1. Do you have a Social Fund equivalent or similar to the European Social Fund (ESF)? 
In the Republic of Macedonia there is no Social Fund which is equivalent or similar to the European Social Fund (ESF). From the aspect of redistribution mechanisms in the domains of employment, the vocational training and the social inclusion, there are non-contributive social transfers (active and passive) as part of the national social protection system (for e.g., benefits for the unemployed; services for training and re-training; financial social assistance). These transfers are periodically strengthened by credits and development projects administered by international entities, especially the World Bank, the USAID, and the European Union. Currently, certain projects within the CARDS programme of the European Union are being implemented. These projects assist the creation of employment policy based on the employment policy of the European Union, through the development of the National Action Plan on Employment and reforms of the institutional structure of the labour market institutions with an aim to prepare these institutions for utilisation of the structural funds of the European Union. In accordance with the needs of the activities connected with the European Social Fund, the Republic of Macedonia will create the relevant infrastructure and train personnel capable to implement the programmes in connection with the ESF principles. For efficient utilisation of the ESF funds, the Republic of Macedonia will also strengthen the inter-ministerial coordination on national and local levels and will establish infrastructure for appropriate preparation, implementation and monitoring of the European Social Fund programmes. 2.  What is the administrative set-up for dealing with this policy? 
a) Ministries, administrations involved; 
b) Inter-ministerial co-ordination; 
c) Vocational education and training systems; 
d) Public employment services; 
e) Co-ordination with European Employment Service (EES) and social inclusion process; 
f) Participation of other authorities/partners (partnership)? 
a) 
 Ministries, administrations involved; Creation, administration and supervision of the social policy implementation in the Republic of Macedonia are competencies of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (MLSP). The administration of the specific social policy domains is performed by the sectors within the Ministry: Labour Sector, Pension and Disability Insurance Sector, Social Protection Sector, Children Protection Sector, and International Co-operation Sector (which includes the European Integration Unit). Additional bodies within the Ministry are the Directorate for Veterans’ and War Invalids’ Issues and the State Labour Inspectorate. Within its competencies, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy controls the activities of the social work centres, social protection institutions, kinder gardens, and the Institute for Advancement of Social Activities. Apart from the structure of MLSP at the central level, there are also 35 regional/local offices of the Ministry. The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy supervises the work of the Employment Agency, the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, and the Agency for Supervision of Fully Funded Pension Insurance. 
b) 
 Inter-ministerial Co-ordination; Along the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy there are other ministries with specific competencies which take part in the development and administration of the policies of public interest, which include the social policy. These ministries are: the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education and Science, the Ministry of Local Self-Government, the Ministry of Justice, and the Ministry of Finance.  Inter-ministerial co-ordination is organized regarding particular domains (e.g. employment) on a level of inter-ministerial committees, commissions and work groups. For the purpose of legal control of the proposals for amending the social policy laws, there is a Parliamentary Committee on Labour and Social Protection. 
c) 
Vocational education and training systems; Vocational education and training are under competency of the Ministry of Education and Science. It is organised in a two-year vocational specialisation and three-year and four-year vocational education. Currently, serious reforms of this educational sub-system are underway, financially supported by EU programmes. The VET 1 project was financed by the PHARE programme funds, while VET 2 and the current VET 3 are supported by the CARDS programme funds. The goals of these reform activities are creation of conditions to meet the labour market needs and strengthening the component of practice during the secondary vocational education. The vocational training for adults is realised through various forms of informal education - through organisation of courses mostly by private, and rarely by public providers of training services. In the Republic of Macedonia, in addition to the existing 13 workers' universities, in the recent years several consultant companies have appeared as training providers in the area of entrepreneurship, marketing, and management. Apart from these, there are also many private centres for studying foreign languages and information technology. For all these forms of informal education corresponding certificates are issued; however, the Republic of Macedonia has not established an appropriate system for recognition of certificates. To this end, a draft version of the Law on Vocational Education and Training has already been prepared, which will regulate this area. The Employment Agency implements programmes on training and re-training of the unemployed or other persons for their employment. These programmes may be short-term training for employment of the unemployed, on-the-job training, or training of the unemployed for participation in public works, and training of persons facing employment termination. These types of training can be performed independently by the Employment Agency or public or private training providers. The training can also be internal, implemented for the needs of the employer. The candidates are trained for performing tasks necessary for a particular job. 
d)  
Public employment services The public employment services of the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia are regulated by the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (“Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 37/97, 25/00, 101/00, 50/01, 25/203, 37/04, 03/05), which includes: labour exchange in the sense of providing services to employers; counselling of employers on laws and other regulations and their application; training, re-training or additional training of the unemployed and other persons; counselling of employers on employment of the unemployed under favourable conditions; services to the unemployed and other job-seekers; vocational orientation of the unemployed and other job-seekers; mediation for employment in the country and abroad; keeping records of employers and the unemployed; public works; and insurance in the case of unemployment. The amendments to the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (Official Gazette of the RM No.37/04) expanded the active measures of the Employment Agency to training, re-training or additional training before employment termination; short-term training for employment of the unemployed; on-the-job training; and training of the unemployed for participation in public works. These amendments also expanded the activities of the Employment Agency related to employment in foreign countries, and at the same time strengthened the exchange of information about available jobs and instructing the unemployed for employment. Working with employers For solving the unemployment issue, the Employment Agency will largely direct its activities towards improvement of active measures, analysis of the labour market and improvement of the co-operation with employers. Above all, the frequency of contacts of the Employment Agency and its centres with employers will be increased, which is necessary not only for precise research of the labour market needs, but, as its effect, for an active process of employment mediation. Therefore, the Employment Agency will constantly develop new forms of work, which - in active, expert, professional and organised manner - will determine the needs of the employers and will provide quintessential co-operation through a partnership relation in the area of employment.  
Working with unemployed persons The increased labour market measures and instruments will provide increased flexibility of the labour market. Many labour market measures and instruments have been established by the new legal regulations, so that the Employment Agency will provide a wider scope of possibilities. The part on training (preparation for employment) will assume new, more flexible dimensions, as well as the forms of mediation, which will be less administrative-technical and more active (by establishment of an Internet labour exchange within all job clubs at the local employment centres, for which preparations were completed in 2003, and other ways, too). The counselling of the unemployed and the labour market information, the vocational orientation and other forms of services and assistance for employment will provide more prospects for shortening the period to employment, will meet the employers' needs in a quality manner, and will increase the workforce mobility. The active labour market policy is one of the most efficient methods of increasing the labour market flexibility. The emphasis of the work of the Employment Agency as a modern service for the unemployed is largely shifting towards the active position of the unemployed in the resolution of the unemployment issue. By the introduction of new instruments and methods of work (eg. preparation of employment action plans), more intensive work is done on the motivation of the unemployed for self-evaluation of their working, professional, and personal potential, and at the same time, these instruments and methods enable the Employment Agency employees to perform a quality assessment of the knowledge, skills, and other characteristics of the unemployed. This further helps to provide higher quality professional assistance and guidance during increasing the opportunities for successful presentation on the labour market and for employment. The new instruments and techniques (individual work, active approach, teamwork, etc.) also enable a better selection of candidates for the needs of the employers, more legible database of the total human potential, planned and systematic work on the preparations for employment of the unemployed, especially for persons with reduced employment opportunities. Employment Measures  Pursuant to the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment the Employment Agency provides the following public employment services: - Employment counselling Employment counselling implies providing services to the unemployed and other persons for transfer of knowledge and techniques on successful job search and employment. The goal of this programme, which is being realised by the job clubs of the Employment Agency, is to induce initiative and active attitude of the job-seekers towards solving the employment problem, and to strengthen their capacity for successful presentation on the labour market, successful job search and employment.  The beneficiaries of the job club services can receive advisory and informative services on their rights and obligations, information about the labour market situation, education on various employment related topics, training through workshops with programmes on psychological assistance and support, preparation for successful presentation on the labour market (interview, CV, etc.), training for preparation of action plan for job search, motivation and training on self-employment, etc.  - Vocational orientation Counselling on vocational orientation is provided to the unemployed, pupils, students, employees and disabled persons in order to help them in selection of occupation and the professional development. Vocational orientation implies the services of the Employment Agency to the unemployed and other job-seekers for choosing an occupation or employment by means of testing and interview and informing them about the demand of certain occupations, as well as on the employment opportunities. It also includes individual counselling during selection of occupation according to the wishes, interest, and skills of the person for particular occupation and according to the labour market needs and opportunities. In addition to the vocational counselling and orientation as assistance during selection of occupation and the future employment of the unemployed and other persons, the vocational selection activities are also directed towards employers as assistance during selection of candidates for training, re-training or additional training and during selection of  candidates for new jobs. - Preparation for employment of the unemployed and other persons  One of the rights of the unemployed is the right to preparation for employment (training, re-training or additional training). This measure enables acquiring and supplementing the knowledge of the unemployed and other persons for the purpose of their employment. Training, re-training or additional training of the unemployed and other persons is performed for a known employer in duration of 1 to 3 months. The employer has an obligation to conclude an open-ended employment contract with at least 90% of the unemployed persons or workers included in the employment preparation and to keep them employed at least for a year. During the preparation and after the conclusion of the employment contract, the employer can not reduce the number of full-time employees for a period of 1 year. The Employment Agency expanded its active measures to: training, re-training or additional training before employment termination; short-term training for employment of the unemployed; on-the-job training; and training of the unemployed for participation in public works. - Investment of financial benefits  In order to encourage employment and motivate the employers and the unemployed,, this measure provides a possibility to pay the unpaid part of the financial benefit, upon a request of the unemployed, in a one-off amount or in monthly instalments, but not longer than 24 months, if the unemployed uses the benefits for concluding an open-ended employment contract. The beneficiary is obliged to return the used funds to the Employment Agency if the employment relations have terminated not by his/her fault, before the expiry of double the time he/she has been using the funds, with a bank interest of the funds at sight.  - Public works For the purpose of working engagement, unemployed persons regularly registering with the Employment Agency are appointed to perform public works. The public works are carried out based on a programme for public works, which is prepared by an organiser. The local self-government units or interested employers from the public sector could be organisers of public works.  During the public works, the organiser provides to the engaged persons a fee for the performed work, not less than the salary for the same type of work established in the collective labour agreement, transport or transport fee to the place of work and back, meals, insurance for accident at work and occupational disease, etc. If the organiser of public works engages unemployed persons – who receive fees for public works in duration over 30 days, he/she has a right to a monthly compensation by the Employment Agency amounting to the fee of the engaged unemployed person, but not higher than the salary for same type of work established in the collective labour agreement. - Exemptions from Personal Income Tax  This measure stimulates the employers who will employ a full-time worker above the number of full-time employees, on the day the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment is in force, to be exempted from payment of personal income tax for a duration of 3 years for the newly employed workers, if the employer hires an unemployed person who has been registered with the Employment Agency for at least one year. This measure also applies to employers who will commence doing an activity as sole proprietors or as founders of a trade company, and to natural persons performing an activity in accordance with the Law, and who, before the commencement of the activity, have not been registered for performing that activity.  - Law on Employment Promotion The Law on Employment Promotion, adopted in March 2003 by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, within the macroeconomic policy of the Republic of Macedonia for unemployment reduction, directly enticed employment of the unemployed through this active measure. With this measure, the employer who employed an unemployed person on open-ended basis above the number of employees was financially compensated for the paid pension and disability insurance contribution, the health insurance contribution, and the employment contribution for the newly-employed person for a period of 24 months after the employment. The target groups covered by this measure were: unemployed persons registered with the Employment Agency for at least one year; unemployed persons who have lost their jobs with dismissal due to economic, technological, structural or similar changes; unemployed persons who have lost their jobs on the basis of bankruptcy; and  unemployed persons, beneficiaries of social assistance, fit for work and socially insecure.  For the newly employed workers, the employer was compensated for the paid salary contributions with fixed monthly amount of EUR 69 per worker, every 60 days, if the employer has paid the salary and the salary contributions for that period. The employers who employed unemployed persons, financial and social beneficiaries, in addition to the right to compensation of the paid contributions amounts, also had a right to payment of three-monthly amount of 25% of the average monthly net wage per worker in the Republic of Macedonia, i.e. three-monthly payment of the average paid amount of social assistance in the previous year.  The employer is obliged to keep the employed person at least twice longer than the period in which he/she has used the compensation of salary contribution funds. This measure also enticed the unemployed of the target groups to self-employment if they commence doing an activity as sole proprietors, or found a trade company, or a natural person performing an activity in accordance with the law, if before the commencement of the activity he/she was not registered for performing that activity on his/her behalf or on behalf of a family member (spouse, children, or parents). This measure was applied in the period April 16 December 31, 2003. During this period a total of 15.308 unemployed persons were employed applying this Law. - Exemption from tax payment on agricultural activity  According to the amendments to the Personal Income Tax Law (Official Gazette of the RM No. 8/01) of February 2001, a person who is registered as unemployed with the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia is exempted from paying tax on agricultural activity for a period of 5 years if he/she for the first time enlists for performing agricultural activity as a basic activity. The same refers to a person, previously registered as unemployed, who returns to village and reactivates as a performer of agricultural activity. - Voluntary work  The Labour Relations Law which was in force from July 1990 to December 1993 allowed trainee to be vocationally educated for independent execution of tasks and duties without concluding an employment contract (voluntary work) if the vocational training, as a condition for independent execution of tasks and duties of the respective profession, is determined by law. The trainee who performed voluntary work had a right to health and disability insurance for disability or physical injury caused by injury at work or occupational disease, and the right to appropriate pecuniary compensation for the work performed.  - Granting agricultural land in state ownership to usufruct The Government of the Republic of Macedonia in July 2003 adopted a Decision on Granting Agricultural Land in State Ownership to Usufruct to certain categories of socially insecure persons (Official Gazette of the RM No. 51/03). With this measure, the socially insecure persons are granted agricultural land in state ownership to usufruct.  The following categories are considered as socially insecure unemployed persons:  -  beneficiaries of social welfare which are able to work and socially insecure, pursuant to the Law on Social Protection; -  unemployed beneficiaries of financial benefit pursuant to the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment ; unemployed persons whose right to financial benefit has expired, in a period of one year after the expiration of the right to financial benefit; persons registered as unemployed with the Employment Agency for more than one year; -  employees of employers who use agricultural land in state ownership for which salaries and salary contributions have not been paid for more than one year; and  socially insecure farmers without own land.  Granting agricultural land to usufruct is performed by making a public announcement in the local media in the area where the land offered for usufruct is located. The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy concludes an agreement with the beneficiary of the right to usufruct which, among other things, determines the contract duration, the amount of the fee for land use, and the assistance provided by the state for the start of the usufruct. The duration of the contract on usufruct of agricultural land can neither be shorter than three years nor longer than five years and it can be extended.   - Employment of disabled persons The Law on Employment of Disabled Persons (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 44/00 and 16/04), which is in force since June 2000 determines the special conditions and benefits for employment and work of disabled persons, who have difficulties in finding a job.  This measure includes the disabled persons with damaged eyesight, hearing impaired, impediments of voice, speech and language, physically disabled persons, persons with mild intellectual disability, persons with combined impediments and persons with psychoses, who, because of the degree of disability have specific needs during work. For financing this active measure, 15% of the total actual income from the existing employment contribution are allocated on a sub-account of the Employment Agency (Special Fund).  These funds are used for financing: job training of the disabled person for practical work for certain jobs, according to the needs of the employer and the disabled person, as well as job training of an employed disabled person who is not trained for performing certain activities;  -  open-ended employment of a disabled person, for which the employer is granted (per one employed disabled person, depending on the degree of disability) irrevocable amount of EUR 3.700 or EUR 5.600, with an obligation for the employer to keep the disabled person employed for at least three years from the day of employment. -  adaptation to the workplace where the disabled person will work, for which irrevocable amount of up to EUR 5.600 is granted; -  supply of equipment necessary for employment and work of the disabled person, for which irrevocable amount of up to EUR 9.300 is granted, which may be granted once in three years; and extension and adaptation of workspace for employment and work of the disabled person, for which irrevocable amount of up to EUR 9.300 is granted, which may be granted once in three years. In addition to the above-stated active measures for employment, the Employment Agency  actively participates and implements number of projects on employment increase.  
e)  
Co-ordination with the European Employment Services (EES) and social inclusion process; The Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia has not established coordination with the European Employment Services (EES), but continually cooperates with the employment services of the countries in the region (Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Bulgaria, and Bosnia and Herzegovina) and continuously makes efforts for development and expansion of the cooperation with the European Union Member States. Since 2000, the Employment Agency has become a member of the World Association of Public Employment Services (WAPES) and through the participation in its work establishes contacts, exchange and co-operation with countries of Europe.  Within the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, the Social Protection Sector has a Unit for Protection and Care of Socially Excluded Persons.  Within the Inter-Municipal Social Work Centre of the City of Skopje there is a Service for Socially Excluded Persons. This Service collects data on the number of socially excluded persons, contacts these persons, and has competencies for monitoring the implementation of activities in this domain. For implementation of services to socially excluded persons, temporary shelter centres are established, providing day care and services for categories such as: children living on streets, victims of school violence, displaced persons, etc.  In addition, the non-governmental organisations also contribute to provision of services for the socially excluded persons.  f)  
Participation of other institutions/partners (partnership) In accordance with the needs dictated by the latest economic, demographic and social trends, the social policy in the Republic of Macedonia corresponds with the plural model, where the non-governmental/non-profit, the private and the informal sectors have increased participation.  In the social dialogue, the state holds regular consultative meetings with the social partners (associations of labour unions and associations of employers). The principle of tripartite evaluation in the social policy is achieved through the collective agreements and the work of the Economic-Social Council (established in 1997, comprised of: the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, the Association of Trade Unions of Macedonia and the Economic Chamber of Macedonia).  After the adoption of the Law on Citizen Associations and Foundations (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 80/93, 33/95, 43/95, 71/96, 5/97, 28/98, 11/201), conditions were created for active participation of the non-governmental sector in all segments of the social life, including the area of social exclusion. The development of partnership with the non-governmental organizations was also provided for by the amendments to the Law on Social Protection (Official Gazette of the R M No. 65/04), by introducing a possibility of providing social services by these legal entities. In addition, the amendments to the Law provide a possibility for natural persons to perform certain types of social services. Besides, part of the competencies on providing social care is transferred to the municipality. To implement the stated forms of co-operation with private and NGO sector, there are planned funds within the Programme on Social Care Effectuation from the Budget of the RM, and as for the transfer of competencies to the local level the Law on Financing Local Self-Government Units was adopted (Official Gazette of the RM No. 61/04). The Law on Organising Games of Chance (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 10/97, 54/97, 13/01, 2/02) regulates the financing of certain citizen associations that work in the field of protection of the rights of persons with disability. 3.  How is the programming capacity conceived? 
a) Establishment of development plans and programming documents;  
b) Implications of structural funds principles: additionality, partnership, co-financing? 
a) 
The programming of the social policy is realised in accordance with: (1) the existing financial capabilities (budget transfers, contributions from the socially insured persons and various secondary sources, such as: credits, international donations, gifts, etc.); (2) constitutional principles and legal norms (according to which, the Republic of Macedonia is defined as a welfare state); and (3) wider social reforms, which incorporate the principles of pluralism, social inclusion and decentralisation into the social policy domain. In the domain of social policy, the Republic of Macedonia has created a series of development strategies and documents that aim to direct its course of reforms towards efficient, targeted, but also inclusive social policy. In 2002, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia prepared the Poverty Reduction Strategy (as a part of the negotiation process for arrangements with the international financial institutions - the World Bank and the IMF). The basic objectives (for the period 2002-2005) were the efforts for accelerated economic growth and poverty reduction. The acceleration of the economic growth, pursuant to this Strategy, is envisaged to be accomplished by achieving the following macroeconomic objectives: attaining real cumulative growth of the GDP by approx. 17 percent; maintaining the macroeconomic stability with inflation of around 3.5 percent; increase of export by 6-8 percent per annum; real growth of investments in fixed assets by 10 percent per annum; complete fiscal consolidation and achieving a budgetary balance; retain the external public debt on the current level;  further reduction of the internal public debt; reducing the unemployment rate to 22 percent. The poverty reduction as a goal is planned to be achieved in accordance with the multi-disciplinary and multi-sector approach, including:  -  Active labour market policy (which includes three types of measures: modernisation of the information system, organisation of training programmes (re-training and additional training), and creation of conditions and support for direct opening of new jobs);   Increase of the workforce mobility;  Reduction of income uncertainty;  Improvement of the accessibility to educational and healthcare services (especially for certain risk groups);  Affordable housing;  Improvement of the rural infrastructure, etc.  In accordance with the national demographic trends and needs, the Republic of Macedonia entered into changes of the pension insurance domain, through adopting the Law on Amending the Pension Insurance (2000) and the Law on Mandatory Fully Funded Pension Insurance (2002). With this, the paradigmatic model of reforms was started, which included not only changes of the age limits and the methods of calculation of pensions, but at the same time changed the previous pay as you go system (PAYG) based on generational solidarity and introduced the new three-pillar pension insurance system based on: mandatory pension and disability insurance based on generational solidarity (first pillar); mandatory fully funded pension insurance (second pillar); and voluntary fully funded pension insurance (third pillar). Preparations for implementation of this system in practice are in the finishing phase. The implementation of the system is planned to commence during 2005.  The Government of the Republic of Macedonia in February 2004 adopted the National Action Plan on Employment for 2004-2005, which reflects the Government strategy on employment, and which is based on principles of the Employment Policy and the recommendations of the Council of Europe from 2003. This document emphasizes the national targets for combating the unemployment and the social exclusion in accordance with the 10 recommendations for: active and preventive measures for the unemployed and the inactive; creating jobs and entrepreneurship; addressing the changes and promoting adaptability and mobility on the labour market; promoting human resources development and life-long learning; increase of the workforce and promoting active aging; promoting gender equality; promoting the inclusion of -- and the combat against discrimination of -- the non-privileged persons on the labour market; increasing the attractiveness of jobs; transforming the non-registered workers into regular employment; and dealing with regional variations of employment). The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is preparing the Plan of the National Strategy on Social Inclusion. The new reform directions in this domain envisage a change from the traditional passive towards active approach of inclusive social protection. This means combining the traditional guarantees of financial benefits with the measures for workfare, in order to reduce the dependency on social protection and employment increase. The trend towards work activation is also promoted in the amendments to the Law on Social Protection which envisage reduction of the period of receiving social transfers and reduction of the amount of social transfers after expiration of 48 months.  Within the Stability Pact activities, a Regional Centre for coordination of social policy issues, based in Skopje, will be established in the near future. This Regional Centre will largely contribute towards synchronising the national social protection activities with the recommendations and experience from the European Union. At the same time, the fact that it will be based in Skopje will improve the monitoring of the institutional capacities, especially in the domains of modernisation, adequacy and transparency of the social protection system in Macedonia.  
b)   
The structural funds principles: additionality, partnership and co-financing are compliant with the reform trends in the social policy in Macedonia.  Additionality: The application of this principle will contribute towards complementarity of the European with the national, regional, and the local resources in the financing of social policy projects. At the same time, with this principle, the planned projects will have larger tendency of co-relating the local priorities with the European standards, which will indirectly increase their efficiency and target.  Partnership: This principle will contribute to greater synchronisation of projects and programme activities undertaken in the field of social policy. Taking into account the increasing number of entities participating in the provision of social services, the partnership will provide: a greater co-relation among them; reduction of the danger of overlapping and repeating certain projects; greater quality of the offered social services, and finally, co-operation with the Committee in the domain of preparation, implementation, and supervision of the spent resources, which will provide for rational utilisation of funds in relation to the existing funds.  Co-financing: For implementation of this principle, statutory authorities and agencies will be elected, which will have the function of co-financing organisations. The implementation of this principle is expected to reduce the bureaucracy and the expenses for administration on a national level, as well as to enable better value for money. 
4.  How is the implementing capacity conceived? 
a) Preparation, selection, appraisal;  
b) Financial procedures;  
c) Monitoring;  
d) Evaluation;  
e) Audit and financial control? 

a)  
The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy has competencies for preparation and selection of the social policy implementation. Different sectors within the Ministry are responsible for preparation, selection and appraisal of specific policies (social protection, child care, family policy, etc.). In the preparation and selection of the inter-disciplinary policies (wages, employment, education, healthcare, housing) other line ministries participate, too (the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Education and Science, the Ministry of Health). The Institute for Advancement of Social Activities also participates in the preparation of legal projects and acts concerning the social protection, adopted by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The scope of its activities also includes control and appraisal of the social protection policies. The Ministry of Local Self-Government is responsible for planning and control of the social protection policy implemented by the local authorities.  The implementation of social policies is performed by decentralised units or bodies supervised by competent ministries. The principal social activities at this level are performed by legal bodies under jurisdiction of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, which include: Social Work Centres, Social Protection Institutions and Kinder Gardens. 
b)  
Taxes and contributions represent a financial basis for provision of benefits and services by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy and the social institutions. Taxation is used as a primary source of financing non-contributional social benefits and services (for example, for pecuniary social assistance, institutional and non-institutional accommodation), while the contributions of workers and employers are a basis for financing the benefits and services from the social insurance domain (pension and disability, health, and unemployment insurance). The Ministry of Finance (Sector for Budget Execution – Treasury) allocates annual funds available to the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. It is limited to the amount included in the budget planned for the year. The funds are allocated to the institutions on a monthly basis, according to criteria stipulated in the Law on Budget Execution of the Republic of Macedonia for the current year. Bigger changes of revenues or unexpected needs require regulating, which must be approved by the Government and the Parliament. The financial management is focused on the procedures and the criteria stipulated in the Law on Budget (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 79/93, 3/94, 71/96, 46/00, 11/01) as well as on cash transactions to individual beneficiaries. The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is responsible for internal financial management and staffing. The financial management in the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is a responsibility of the Accounting Sector, which receives requests from all Sectors and subordinate organisations for funds needed for the following month, as well as reports on expenditures from previous months.  
c), d)  
Monitoring and evaluation of the social policy implementation is a competence of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The Labour Sector is competent for performing supervision over the work of the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia. The Pension Sector performs supervision over the work of the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund of the Republic of Macedonia and over the Agency for Supervision of Fully Funded Pension Insurance. Within the Social Protection Sector, the Unit for Implementation of Social Protection Rights monitors and studies the manner and the quality of implementation of the social protection rights, while the Unit for Public and Private Institutions in the Social Protection performs supervision, monitoring and quality control of services and activities of the non-governmental organisations. Within the Child Care Sector, the Unit for Provision of the Right to Care, Education, Vacation and Recreation of Children performs supervision over institutions registered for child care. The State Labour Inspectorate (or the Labour Inspection) operates on the whole territory of the state through an established network of inspectors, a total of 60 labour relations inspectors and 28 inspectors on protection at work. They perform supervision over consistent implementation of the laws, collective labour agreements, and other regulations of labour relations and protection at work. They also prevent the entities from operating without determined measures, norms and standards on protection at work. The Institute for Advancement of Social Activities performs supervision and evaluation of the professional activities of the social work centres and other social protection institutions and their employees.  
e)  
Financial audit (both internal and external) is extensively regulated by laws. There are two types of internal audit procedures. During the ex ante audit procedure of the beneficiaries of the Budget of the RM, the local units perform internal financial audit, and the beneficiaries of the funds are also required to perform internal audit. The Ex post internal audit is performed by the Ministry of Finance (i.e. the central internal audit). It is activated on a case-by-case basis.  The State Audit Agency performs the external audit of all budget beneficiaries, state enterprises or companies in which the state is a dominant shareholder.  The control procedures include an initial phase of control through social institutions and a final phase of administrative control through the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The first control requires a full submission of the necessary documents, data and information by the requesting party. After a preliminary approval of the cash fee, the financial control is performed periodically. The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy holds the complete responsibility for the control because it is competent for application of the law, supervision of the local units and supervision of legal entities and individuals providing services in the field of social protection. The ministerial control is detailed and often based on reports, since the existing technical and human resources are engaged in control of emergency and critical cases. 

