III. HEALTH AND SAFETY AT WORK 
A. General 
Please provide information on: 

1. The legislation that is currently in force. 
In the Republic of Macedonia, the ratified Conventions of the International Labour Organization for safety at work, as well as the Law on Safety at Work (“Official Gazette of the RM” Nos. 13/98; 33/00; 29/02), as a basic law in this field, are enforced, the secondary legislation is adopted in accordance with the Law on Safety at Work, as well as several rulebooks on technical norms and Macedonian standards. Apart from the Law on Safety at Work the secondary legislation is covering the scope of the Directive in details. 1. Adopted Rulebooks based on the Law on Safety at Work  -  Rulebook on general measures for protection at work for work and utility rooms (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 31/89; 33/93, corrections in No. 36/89);  -  Rulebook on protection at work during construction works (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia” No.13/88); Rulebook on protection at work during loading and unloading (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia” No. 11/88); Rulebook on protection at work in textile industry (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia” No. 12/88); -  Rulebook on special measures for protection at work during work on railroads (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia” No. 1/89);  -  Rulebook on protection at work during mechanical processing and treatment of wood and similar materials (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia” No. 1/89);  -  Rulebook on protection at work during processing of non-metal raw materials (“Official Gazette of the R.M” No. 74/92); -  Rulebook on requirements to be met by legal entities in order to receive authorization for performing certain activities in the field of protection at work (“Official Gazette of the R.M” No. 71/03);  -  Rulebook on methods and terms for conducting pre-employment and periodical medical examination (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia” No. 27/88); -  Rulebook on identification of the National Labour Inspectorate (“Official Gazette of the R.M” No. 49/98);  Rulebook on methods of filing in the field of protection at work (“Official Gazette of the R.M” No. 98/00);  
2. Rulebooks in force 
Rulebook on measures and norms for protection at work for working tools (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 18/91). -  General Rulebook on hygiene and technical protective measures at work except for the provision of the articles 26 and 32, articles from 50 to 75, from 78 to 86, from 88 to 99, from 104 to 151 (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” Nos. 16/47, and 36/50);  -  Rulebook on means for personal protection at work and for personal protective equipment (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 35/69); Rulebook on technical norms for electrical elevators for vertical transportation of persons and cargo (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 16/86);  Rulebook on technical norms for facade electrical elevators (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 19/86);  Rulebook on technical norms for ski-lifts (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 11/85); -  Rulebook on transport of hazardous substances by road (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 82/90); -  Rulebook on construction of facilities for flammable liquids and storage and pouring of flammable liquids (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 20/71); -  Rulebook on training for perilous transport drivers and other persons that take part in the transport of these substances (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 17/91); Rulebook on technical norms for construction of facilities for liquid petrol gas (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 24/71); -  Rulebook on periodical testing of working tools and device, chemical and biological harmfulness, and microclimate (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 26/67); Rulebook on technical norms for electrical hanging scaffold (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 19/86); -  Rulebook on general measures and norms for noise protection in the work spaces (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 29/71); Rulebook on general measures and norms for protection at work for cranes (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 30/69); -  Rulebook on equipment and first aid and organising rescue teams in case of injury at work (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 21/71); -  Rulebook on protective measures against danger from electricity in work spaces and work grounds (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 107/47); -  Rulebook on chemical and technical protective measures during work in factories for glass production (carpenters) (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 14/48); -  Rulebook on protection at work during work in agriculture (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 34/68); -  Rulebook on hygiene and technical protective measures during work in quarry and brick plants, and during extraction of clay, sand and gravel (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 69/48); Rulebook on protection at work during maintenance of motor vehicles and during transport by motor vehicles (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 55/65); -  Rulebook on hygiene and technical protective measures during work in printing enterprises (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 7/55); -  Rulebook on technical norms for the smelting industry (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 14/79); Rulebook on technical and technological requirements during construction and reconstruction of mills (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 42/60); -  Rulebook on technical requirements during construction and reconstruction of bakeries (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 42/60, and “Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 24/63); -  Rulebook on special measures and norms for protection at work during processing and treatment of leather, fur and leather waste (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 28/65); -  Rulebook on technical and health protective measures at work during chemical and technological processes (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 55/50); Rulebook on hygiene and technical protective measures during diving (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 36/58); -  Rulebook on hygiene and technical protective measures during research and extraction of gas and natural gas by deep drilling (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 46/60); Rulebook on technical regulations for lightning rods (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No.13/68); -  Rulebook on technical measures for plants and maintenance of electrical facilities (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 19/68); -  Rulebook on protection at work during explosives and powder manufacturing and during explosives and powder handling (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 55/69); Rulebook on special health services and the procedure for identification of health services for workers in the railroad traffic (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia  No. 25/67”) Instruction on examination methods in enterprises and with employers (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia  No. 10/86”); Instruction for methods of death investigation, collective and serious injuries at work (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ” No. 10/86); -  Order for prohibition of usage of motor gas for degreasing, washing and cleaning of metal parts and objects made of other materials (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ” No. 23/67); Rulebook on storage and keeping of carbide and handling of carbide (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 9/62); -  Law on Hazardous Noise Prevention (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 66/04); -  Benzene Protection Ordinance (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 144/71) -  Rulebook on maximum allowed concentration of hazardous gases, vapours, aerosols in the working environment (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 35/71); -  Rulebook on technical measures and protection at work during surface excavation of coal, metal and non-metal raw materials (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” Nos. 18/61, 37/64, and 6/67). 3. International Labour Organization Conventions  Convention No. 12 on Injury During Work in Agriculture, 1921 (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 3/58); Convention No. 81 on Labour Inspection in Industry and Trade, 1947 (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 5/56); Convention No. 89 on Night Work for Women Employed in Industry (revised), 1948 (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 12/56); Convention No. 90 on Night Work for Children in Industry (revised), 1948 (“Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 6/57); -  Convention No. 119 on Protection of Machines, 1963 (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 54/70); -  Convention No. 121 on Allowances in Case of Injury at Work and Occupational Diseases, 1964 (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 27/70); -  “Convention No. 129 on Labour Inspection in Agriculture”, 1969 (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 22/75); -  “Convention No. 135 on Protection and Relief for Workers’ Representatives in Enterprises, 1971 (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 14/82); Convention No. 137 on Benzene Poisoning Protection, 1971 “(Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 16/76); -  Convention No. 139 on Prevention and Control of Occupational Risks Caused by Carcinogenic Substances and Agents, 1974 (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 3/77); -  Convention No. 148 on Protection of Workers from Occupational Risks Caused by Air Pollution, Noise and Vibrations in the Workspace, 1977 (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 14/82); -  Convention No. 155 on Protection at Work, Health Protection and Work Environment Protection, 1981 (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 7/78); -  Convention No. 162 on Protection during Usage of Asbestos, 1986 (“Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” No. 4/82). 
2. The act(s) being prepared (type, number, the ministry responsible). 
With the amendments to the Law on Safety at Work in 2000 and 2002, the Law is fully harmonised with the framework Directive 89/391/EEC. Draft-Rulebook on Safety at Work with Display Screen Equipment, which will be in compliance with the Directive 90/270, is being prepared by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The Ministry of Health is also preparing the National Strategy on Health, Healthy Living and Working Environment and Safety at Work. 
3. Its status in the adoption process. 
Draft Rulebook on Safety at Work with Display Screen Equipment has been prepared and submitted for public debate. The National Strategy on Health, Healthy Living and Working Environment and Safety at Work has been elaborated and is currently in Government procedure. 
4. The most probable adoption date. 
The Draft Rulebook will be accepted by the end of March of 2005. The National Strategy on Health, Healthy Living and Working Environment and Safety at Work will be adopted during 2005. 
5. The most probable date of entry into force. 
The Rulebook will enter into force by the end of 2005. The National Strategy on Health, Healthy Living and Working Environment and Safety at Work will enter into force in 2005.
6. The prescriptions of the Directives which will be covered in the planned legislation. 
The Rulebook on Safety at Work with Display Screen Equipment will fully transpose the Directive 90/270/EEC. The National Strategy on Health, Healthy Living and Working Environment and Safety at Work is based on the contents of the Framework Directive 89/391 of the European Community. 
B. By Directive 

1. Framework Directive (89/391/EEC) a) Does your country have similar legislation in the field covered by the Framework Directive? 
b) If several legislative acts exist, could you describe how they are coordinated and how they supplement each other? 
c) Is your legislation applicable to both the public and private sectors? 
d) How has national law taken up the principle of the employer’s objective responsibility (Article 5)? Specifically, is it expressly stated that the workers’ obligations do not affect the employer’s responsibility? Are cases of force majeure provided for? 
e)  What other obligations of employers are provided for in the national law (Article 6 and Article 9)? 
As regards obligations, does the national law address workers’ responsibility for occupational health and safety issues and if so, which are their obligations? 
f) How does national law provide for taking into account the general principles of prevention that employers must apply when taking measures to protect the health and safety of workers (Article 6)? 
g) Does national law provide for the assessment of risks to be set out in written form (Article 9)? Does national law provide for this document to be available to workers, their representatives and labour inspectors? How is this requirement included in national law and implemented in the undertaking? 
h) Article 9 states that the employer must keep a list of occupational accidents resulting in a worker being unfit for work for more than three working days and draw up reports on occupational accidents suffered by his workers. 
i) Are these obligations included in national law? 
ii) With a view to the work currently under way on Europe-wide harmonisation of statistics of accidents at work (the ESAW project), please answer the following questions: 
(1) Have the following data been partially or completely gathered? Employer’s economic activity; job, age and sex of the victim; type of injury and body part injured; geographic location, date and time of the accident. 
(2) Have the following data been partially or completely gathered? Size of the undertaking; nationality of the victim; victim’s employment situation; consequences of the accident – number of days lost, permanent incapacity or death resulting from the accident. 
(3) When a work-related accident occurs, are extra data collected on the causes and circumstances of the accident, such as: Type of place (e.g. building, field, road), type of work (e.g. maintenance), specific physical activity (e.g. repairing or transporting a tool), tools used for the specific activity (e.g. pliers, wheelbarrow), anomaly (e.g. broken fastener, tyre puncture, sideslipping), cause of the anomaly (e.g. grease, carpet in poor condition), contact – the way the injury occurred and what produced it (e.g. being burnt by acid, having a leg cut by a cable)? 
(4) Is there a list of officially recognised occupational diseases? (There is a European schedule of occupational diseases on this matter. It was the subject of Commission Recommendation 90/326 to the Member States, and is currently being updated.) 
(5) What data are you currently collecting? What extensions are planned? 
i) How is the principle set out in Article 6(5) (no involvement of the workers in financial cost) included? 
j) Does national law address the measures that employers must take concerning fire-fighting and the evacuation of workers according to Article 8 of the Directive? How is the part of the Directive concerning serious, imminent and unavoidable danger addressed (Article 8(3,4,5))? 
k) How is the consultation of workers and workers representatives provided for in Article 11 regulated? 
l) How do you ensure that workers’ representatives have the means required to accomplish their tasks (working time, etc., cf. Article 11(5) of the Directive)? 
m) How is the right to appeal to the competent authorities set out in Article 11(6) granted to workers and their representatives? 
n) Article 7. How does national legislation set out that all undertakings must: 
i) designate one or more workers to carry out activities related to protection and prevention; or 
ii) if no competent personnel can be found within the undertaking, enlist competent external services or persons? 
o) How does national law define the capabilities and aptitudes of the services and persons in charge of prevention and protection (Article 7)? How are the employers’ capabilities and aptitudes verified if they take on this role themselves? Is prior authorisation required to set up external services? 
p) How are the following organised? Surveillance of workers’ health (Article 14); worker training (Article 12): 
i) When they take up a post? 
ii) When they are moved to another job? 
iii) When organisational changes affect the workstation? 

a) 
The Law on Safety at Work is fully harmonised with the Framework Directive 89/391/EEC since the amendments to the Law on Safety at Work (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 33/00 and 29/02) are fully harmonised with the Directives 89/391/EEC, 92/57/EEC, and 89/654/EEC. 
b) 
The answer is provided in the answer to question 1. 
c) 
The provisions of the Law on Safety at Work are applicable to both, the public and private sectors.  d)  
The provisions of the Law on Safety at Work include the employer’s responsibility for planning, organising and regulating protection at work, training of the workers for safe work, periodical inspection of work tools and working conditions, as well as medical examination of employees working under special conditions. Pursuant to the Law, employees are obliged to respect the provisions of the law too. 
e) 
Apart from other obligations contained in the Law on Safety at Work, employers are also obliged to keep records concerning the area of protection at work. Regarding the workers’ rights and obligations, employers have to comply with the measures and means of protection during work and perform the work attentively in order to secure and protect their own life, as well as the lives and health of other workers, and to cooperate with the employer in order to exercise and improve the protection at work. Workers disregarding the prescribed measures and means of safety at work in the course of their work and endangering their own life, as well as the lives and health of others, the employer’s assets or the environment, may be temporarily suspended from the job or distanced from the employer, in accordance with the employer’s act and the collective agreement, about which the workers’ representative for the protection at work is informed in a written form. Workers disregarding the measures for protection at work prescribed by the Law on Safety at Work, other regulations and the collective agreement are guilty of serious misconduct. f)  Articles 2 and 9 of the Law on Safety at Work provide the general principles of protection, including measures, means and methods for creating safe work environment. g) 
The national legislation does not provide for assessment of risks. However, the Law on Safety at Work (“Official Gazette of the RM No. 13/98) defines the basic rules and principles for protection and safety that include tools and equipment, working environment and working process, health of workers, application of preventive measures (where elements for risk assessment exist as an indication hazard of the working environment). This is regulated with the obligation to examine the chemical, biological, and physical hazards, the micro-climate and illumination at work and in utility rooms for which employers are obliged to keep records. This responsibility is controlled by the labour inspection. With the other laws, especially the Law on Protection from ionized radiations, toxins, and transport of hazardous substances, employers are obliged to meet the basic rules and principles as stipulated above. h) 
Apart from the other records for protection at work employers have to keep, they are also obliged to keep records of injuries at work that cause absence from work for more than three days in a way prescribed by the Minister of Labour and Social Policy. i) According to Art. 41 of the Law on Safety at Work, employers are obliged to keep records of injuries at work, of occupational diseases and of cases of death at work. The method, procedure, and data for record keeping of injuries at work are regulated by the Law on Labour Record-keeping (Official Gazette of the RM No. 16/04). The Law on Safety at Work (Article 42) stipulates that employers are obliged to declare to the State Labour Inspectorate in a written form immediately, and not later than 24 hours after the incident, every case of death, collective accident or serious injury at work, as well as about every possibility which could cause immediate danger or endangers the safety of the worker’s job.  ii)  (1) 
Data under (1) are collected and contained in the Form for declaring injuries at work, in accordance with the rights from the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance and the Law on Health Insurance. There is no special Rulebook on the requirements and procedures for acquiring the rights to basic health insurance on the basis of injury at work and occupational diseases. Republic of Macedonia is ready to apply the unified statistical approach to injuries at work at the European level (through ESAW). The data on the economic activity of the employer, the type of business, age structure, type of injuries and body part injured, geographic location; date and time of the injury are contained completely. (2) The data on the size of the enterprise, the ethnicity of the victims and their employment status are not included in the Form for declaring injuries at work. The data on the number of working days for which the worker has been compensated (sick leave and maternity leave), or the data on permanent inability to work, as well as on possible death of the worker are collected by the Health Insurance Fund and the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund in accordance with the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance and the Law on Health Insurance and the regulations adopted on the basis of these laws. (3) The Form consists of the data on the cause of injury, time, source, place, location, usage of personal protective equipment, and the report of the doctor who examined the injured person. (4) There is a List of Officially recognised Occupational Diseases regulated with the Rulebook for the List of Occupational Diseases (Official Gazette of the RM No. 88/04). This Rulebook determines the diseases considered as occupational diseases according to the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance as well as the conditions and the criteria for recognition of occupational diseases. The new List of Occupational Diseases is prepared in accordance with the EU Recommendation C(2003) 3297 of September 2003 (COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION  OF 19/09/2003 concerning the European schedule of occupational diseases). The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy adopted the new List of Occupational Diseases in December 2004, engaging the Institute of Occupational Health as the best expert institution in labour medicine, to prepare elaborate requirements and criteria for verification of occupational diseases at the national level. Amendments are being prepared on the other provisions concerning monitoring of occupational diseases: application, registration, record-keeping and reporting on occupational diseases (in accordance with the EU documents and the new List of Occupational Diseases from 2004).  5)  The Application form No. 3-36-86 contains the beneficiary’s personal data, data on the job, total length of service and the length of exposure, harmful effects at the workplace, diagnosis of the professional disease according to IKD-10, findings verifying the diagnosis, and an evaluation of the working capability. It is planned to update the Application form and extend the data collection with additional elements: data on the size of the enterprise, i.e. the number of employees; economic sector and activity of the enterprise; application of personal protective measures, etc. The occupational diseases reports are collected at the Republic Institute for Health Protection which is the national centre for health statistics. However, the manner of the data collection is not compatible with the EU standards in this field Therefore measures have been taken in order to harmonise the methodology for occupational diseases data collection in accordance with the EODS-European Occupational Diseases Statistics Agreement of the EU In accordance with the EU Recommendation (Commission Recommendation of 19/09/2003 concerning the European Schedule of occupational diseases) and new national conditions and criteria for verification of occupational diseases the new form of application and registration of occupational diseases is in the process of preparation. A new design is planned for the Register of occupational diseases in accordance with the HASTE recommendations at the European level. This is within the responsibility of the Institute of Occupational Health, as a WHO collaborating centre. i) The Law on Safety at Work stipulates that employers cover all the health care expenses for the employee. j) Pursuant to Article 26 of the Law on Safety at Work, employers are obliged to regulate in details by act the basic rights, obligations and responsibilities for protection at work in the working environment and also for taking preventive measures for fire-fighting, evacuation of workers in cases of serious and imminent danger and giving first aid. k) Employers are obliged to provide safety at work, depending on the technological processes, by implementing scientific and technical methods in accordance with up-to-date achievements, whereas the professional protection at work is carried out by a professional r specialised in this field. l) The workers’ representatives for the protection at work enjoy the special employment protection of union representatives, in accordance with the Law and collective agreement. m) Article 49 of the Law on Safety at Work stipulates that worker’s representatives on protection at work may appeal to the Labour Inspection when they consider that the measures taken and funds received from the employer are inadequate for the safety and health of the workers. n)  i) The Law on Safety at Work contains a special chapter on representatives on protection at work, and it stipulates that every undertaking with more than 10 employees has to designate one representative on protection at work. The undertakings with 251 to 1.000 employees designate two representatives on protection at work, whereas undertakings with more than 1.000 employees designate three representatives on protection at work. The representatives on protection at work are entitled to contact employers at any time with regard to protection at work issues. ii) Employers may also engage competent external services or persons specialized in protection at work.  o) Legal entities may be authorised for carrying out protection at work activities if they meet the requirements concerning the number of competent experts in a certain profession having at least 2 years of work experience in the related field. The legal entities should have at their disposal appropriate workspace and technical tools determined by the Rulebook on the requirements the legal workers must meet in order to be given authorisation for carrying out certain activities in the field of protection at work (Official Gazette of the RM No. 71/03). Employers may perform examinations and tests for their needs if they meet the requirements determined for legal entities. In both cases, a request is submitted to the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy with appendices proving that the prerequisites regulated by the Law and the Rulebook are met. p) i) Surveillance of workers’ health is regulated by the Labour Relations Law (Official Gazette of the RM No. 80/03, consolidated text). Pursuant to this Law, a general requirement for commencing employment is good health, which is determined through a medical examination and verified by a medical certificate. The contents and procedure of the medical examination for determining the state of health and, the issuing procedure and validity of the medical certificate are designated by a special Rulebook (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 80/93 and 19/95). However, regarding working activities under special working conditions, in accordance with the Rulebook on procedure for pre-employment health examination and the procedure and terms for periodical medical examination of workers (Official Gazette of the RM No. 27/88), prior to commencing the employment the employer is obliged to instruct the worker to carry out a medical examination, in order to determine their health condition and to evaluate their working ability. The workers working under special working conditions are subjected to periodical medial examination in the periods determined by the Rulebook. New Rulebook on procedure for pre-employment health examination and procedure and terms for periodical medical examination is in the stage of adoption. Worker may not commence employment if they are not previously trained in protection and safety at work by the employer. The training provided by the employer is practical and theoretical. Workers’ representatives on protection at work are entitled to a special training on prevention and protection at work pertaining to the activity of the undertaking determined by the collective agreement. Employers test the workers’ ability to carry out working duties in an individual and safe manner every three years. 
ii) If workers are reassigned to another job with special working conditions, employers are obliged to send them to a preliminary medical examination and train them on safety at work. iii) 
With every change of workstation, introduction of new technologies or adopting new regulations on protection at work, employers are obliged to train the workers on safety at work. 
2. Inspection of labour (Article 4) 
a) Is a single body responsible for the inspection of labour, or are various bodies responsible for different areas? 
b) How are the different bodies responsible for controlling and supervising implementation of legislation on safety and health at work coordinated? In special cases, do they hold joint inspections? What are the main problems in coordinating the various bodies involved? 
c) As regards the labour inspectors: Is safety and health their main activity and to what extent? 
d) As regards the powers the labour inspectors have to ensure that legislative measures are being applied: Can they apply legal penalties? If so, what kind (monetary and/or criminal and/or administrative)? Do they have discretionary power? How many injunctions are issued? When the inspectors detect a problem, how far do they pursue the matter? Do they send a letter? Does the undertaking respond? How do they follow up? What percentage of detected infringements lead to legal action being taken? What is done with the money from fines? Is some or all of this money allocated to a fund for health and safety at work? 
e) How do you ensure that the labour inspectors are independent of the undertakings and organisations they inspect? Are the inspectors assigned to the same workplaces (i.e. must they inspect the same undertaking each year)? 
f) What rules govern the composition of the inspection team (are there one, two or more inspectors)? Are special cases provided for? 
g) As regards work-related accidents: How are they declared to the Labour Inspectorate? Is the information centralised? How do you assess non-declaration? How does the system of insurance for work-related accidents function? 
h) What do you consider to be the most serious problems in the field of inspection (e.g. lack of resources, lack of money for missions, weak penalties)? 

a) The inspection supervision of safety at work is carried out by state labour inspectors, except in mining operations, where the supervision is carried out by the mining inspection. b) The coordination between the State Labour Inspectorate and other inspectorates which have common competencies regarding safety at work is carried out if a need for joint inspection arises, during which there are no problems with coordination. c) The labour inspectors in the field of protection and safety at work are engaged exclusively on activities related to supervision of enforcing safety and health regulations.  d) If, during supervision, the labour inspectors detect an infringement of law or a regulation, the following measures might be taken:  -  The inspectors bring a decision on ordering the employer to eliminate the infringement in a reasonable period -  The employer is entitled to appeal the decision brought by the inspectors. The Minister of Labour and Social Policy decides upon the complaint. The inspectors may file a misdemeanour charge to the competent court  -  The inspectors may file a criminal charge with the Public Prosecutor’s Office, and are authorised to bring a decision on injunction for the activities at the workspace or the workstation on the spot, when there is an immediate danger for the life and health of the worker.  The labour inspectors carry out control supervisions related to the decisions until the identified irregularities are eliminated. The inspectors participate in the court procedures as a prosecuting party, if it is required by the court. In 2003, the labour inspectors for protection at work have decided on 524 injunctions. The funds raised from the fines are allocated to the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia. e) Several labour inspectors carry out supervisions of the undertakings, in compliance with the programme of the State Labour Inspectorate. In smaller areas, where only one inspector is assigned, the supervision is carried out periodically together with inspectors from other areas. The Law on Labour Inspection stipulates that the inspector can not carry out supervisions of undertakings in case of conflict of interests. f) The Labour Inspection Law does not regulate the composition and the number of persons in the inspection team. Most often, the inspectors at the State Labour Inspectorate carry out the supervisions independently, and in certain cases by two or more inspectors with different expertise, depending on the type of supervision. g) Employers have the obligation of declaring all serious injuries at work, collective accidents and cases of death at work directly to the Labour Inspection. In certain cases, the Labour Inspectorate receives information on serious injuries and cases of death at work from the Ministry of Interior. For each injury at work employers are obliged to fill the Form for declaring work-related injuries and to submit it to the Health Insurance Fund. All data on work-related injuries are collected at the Health Protection Institute. Minor work-related injuries, when there is no need for absence from work, are not declared. h) Inefficient courts  -  Slow processing of filed charges, which leads to obsolescence of the charges; verdicts with lesser sentences than the prescribed by the special laws, or with simple warnings; -  The number of 28 inspectors is not sufficient compared to the number of entities for supervision and the number of employees; Salaries without incentives and no possibilities for career development; -  Lack of technical equipment (computers, printers, fax machines, vehicles, gas, etc.) to carry out the duties efficiently; -  Lack of opportunities for education of the inspectors and learning from regulations and supervision experiences of other countries.  
3. Work equipment (Directive 89/655 amended by Directives 95/63 and 01/45) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Does your legislation include the requirements set out in Directives 95/63 and 01/45? 
c) How are the various legislative acts coordinated, if there is more than one? 
d) What approach has been or will be taken to include the rules on checking certain machines (those that are dangerous or subject to deterioration)? 
e) Have you carried out an impact study? What are its results? 
f) Do you already or do you plan to distinguish between new equipment and equipment that is already in use? 
g) Do you envisage a transition period for equipment that is already in use on the date of entry into force of the full legislation on new equipment? 

a) This subject matter is regulated by the Law on Safety at Work and several regulations in the field of protection at work among which the most important is the Rulebook on measures and norms for safety at work with work tools (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 18/91). Most of the provisions of these regulations are harmonised with the Directive, especially the provisions of the Law on Safety at Work and the Rulebook on measures and norms for safety at work with work tools and the Rulebook on general measures and norms for safety at work with cranes (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 30/69). b) The legislation in the Republic of Macedonia includes most of the requirements set out in the Directive 95/63 and 01/45.  c) There is a basic Law on Safety at Work on the basis of which special regulations that regulate various aspects regarding safety at work with work tools are adopted. In this field, the following regulations apply: Rulebook on special protective measures during railroad work (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 1/89), -  Rulebook on protection at work during processing of non-metals and non-ferrous metals (Official Gazette of the RM No. 18/93), Rulebook on protection at work during loading and unloading (Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia No. 11/88), Rulebook on protection at work during mechanical processing and manufacturing of wood and similar materials (Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia No. 1/89), -  Rulebook on protective measures against danger of electricity in workspace and on working grounds (Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia No. 107/47),  Rulebook on protection at work during maintenance of motor vehicles and during transport of motor vehicles (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 55/65), Order for prohibition for usage of high-octane gas for degreasing and cleaning of metal parts and objects made of other materials (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 55/65), Rulebook on hygiene and technical protective measures during research and deep drilling oil and natural gas (Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia No. 46/60) -  Rulebook on protection at work and technical measures for developers of acetylene and acetylene stations (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Nos. 6/67, 29/67, 27/69) Rulebook on hygiene and technical measures during processing and manufacturing  of metals (Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia No. 40/61), -  Rulebook on protection during explosives and powder manufacture and explosives and powder handling (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 55/69), -  Rulebook on general measures and norms for noise protection in workspaces (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 29/71), Rulebook on technical norms in the smelting industry (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 14/79), Rulebook on general measures and norms for protection at work with cranes (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 55/69), Rulebook on technical norms for electric elevators for vertical transport of persons and cargo (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 16/86) -  Rulebook on measures and norms for protection at work with work tools (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 18/91), -  Rulebook on technical measures and norms for elevators (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 57/70). 
d) The law and other legislation stipulate that all work tools are to be serviced and in good working condition at any time. Special attention is paid to the more dangerous work tools which have to be checked prior to use, and thoroughly checked every two years, or after rebuilding, or during repetitive use, as well as when beginning to work at a new workstation (on bulldozer cranes). The check-up is carried out by authorised legal entities or the employers themselves, if officially authorised. e) So far, we have not carried out such a study.  f)  We need to make distinguish between equipment in use and new equipment in order to be harmonised with the provisions of the Directive on Work Equipment. g) It will take longer for the equipment in use to be in compliance with the Directive provisions. As for the new equipment, it will take at least 5 years. 
4. Personal Protective Equipment (Directive 89/656) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) How is the general rule that PPE shall be used when the risks cannot be avoided by other means included in the legislation (Article 3)? 
c) Do you plan to set rules on use? 
d) Have you carried out an impact study, at least for the activities for which PPE is recognised as being necessary (e.g. helmets on building sites, hearing protectors on airport runways, etc.)? 
e) Does the PPE currently in use meet the requirements of Directive 89/686 (amended) concerning essential requirements for manufacturing and marketing? If not, has a date for this been set? 
f) Does national law ensure no involvement of workers in financial costs for the provision, maintenance, repair and replacement of PPE? 
a)  There is a Rulebook on personal protection means during work and personal protective equipment (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Nos. 35/69, and 21/71), which is not fully aligned to the Directive. It is quite obsolete and it does not provide for certain personal protective equipment anticipated in the Directive, nor does it stipulate what personal protective equipment is to be used for which job. b) The Law on Safety at Work prioritises technical solutions as protective measures (at construction sites, for work equipment, devices, etc.) for elimination of risks and their reduction to a minimum level. If such measures do not allow for full elimination of risks at the workstation, then personal protective means and equipment are used as final possible measure for provision of safety at work.  c)  The Rulebook on personal protection means during work and personal protective equipment (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Nos. 35/69, and 21/71) prescribes the use of personal protective equipment. However, it does not prescribe what type of personal equipment is to be used for particular risks. Therefore, it is a priority to adopt a Rulebook on personal protection means aligned to the Directive. d)  So far, such study has not been carried out.  e) Only a small fraction of the personal protective equipment is produced in our country (protective gloves, boots, overalls). The rest of the personal protective equipment is imported from EU countries, and they are labelled with the CE mark. The national laws prescribe that employers organize, regulate and provide protection at work. Workers are not involved in any financing of protection at work. 5. Display screen equipment (Directive 90/270) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Does the legislation distinguish between old and new equipment? If so, what is the reference date? 
c) How is a worker defined? More specifically, how has the “significant part of his normal work”, required for a worker to be subject to the provisions of the regulation, been defined? 
d) How are pauses taken into account? How is the principle of interrupting work by pauses set out in Article 7 included? 
e) How is the question of eye and eyesight tests handled (Article 9)? For example, are ophthalmological check-ups provided for? 
f) Does national law require workstation analysis to be performed, particularly as regards possible risks to eyesight, physical and mental stress problems, and does it, on the basis of the results obtained, lay down an obligation on the part of the employer to remedy the risks found? 
g) Have you carried out an impact study on some or all the measures set out in the Directive? What are the results? 
h) Who bears the cost of: glasses, medical check-ups, other elements (modifying the workstation)? 

a) There is no legislation on this subject matter in our country.  Considering the increase of display screen jobs, a Rulebook on Protection at Work for Display Screen Equipment shall be adopted in March 2005 and it shall be completely aligned to the Directive provisions. Please, refer to the answer to question 13_III_A_2.  
b) As there is no Rulebook on this, there is no date set for aligning of old and new display screen jobs. c) In accordance with the draft Rulebook, a worker is defined as “any person using computer display equipment at work at least half of the full working hours during the day”. d) The Rulebook will include periodical pauses. Appropriate exercises will also be prescribed during the pauses. e)  There is no special Rulebook on protection at work with display screen equipment. The existing Rulebook on methods and terms for pre-employment and periodical medical examination (Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia No. 27/88) regulates the check-up of eyes and eyesight as part of the medical examination during periodical and control check-up.  f) This issue is not separately regulated by the existing legislation.  g) Such study has not been carried out yet.  h)  According to the current regulations on protection at work, employers bear all costs. The Rulebook, which is to be adopted, will include the same provision, i.e. employers will bear the costs for medical check-ups and personal protective equipment. 6. Handling of loads (Directive 90/269) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) How do you take into account the general rule of avoiding the manual handling of loads? 
c) Have you set values for maximum loads? Are they indicative or binding? Are they different for occasional and repetitive handling of loads? 
d) Have recommendations or guidelines been drawn up? 
e) Have you carried out a study on the overall impact? On the impact on specific cases? For example, transporting the sick in hospitals or at home, carrying mail and packages (letter carriers or couriers), work done by street sweepers or dockers? 
a)  The following Rulebooks on handling of loads in mechanised and manual manner are to be aligned to the Directive.  Rulebook on protection at work during loading and unloading (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 11/88),  -  Rulebook on protection at work during construction works (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 13/88), -  Rulebook on technical norms for electrical elevators for vertical transport of persons and cargo (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 16/86),  Rulebook on technical norms for cranes (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 65/91),  -  Rulebook on technical measures and requirements for elevators (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 57/70).  
b)  There are no regulations for avoiding manual handling of loads. Considering that manual picking up and transfer of loads implies risk of injuries to the spine, such regulations are to be adopted. c) The Rulebook on protection at work during loading and unloading sets the values for maximum loads: 25 kg at a distance of 25 m and at a height of 1,5 m. In exceptional circumstances the load may be heavier than 25 kg, but not heavier than 50 kg. Manual transfer, loading, and unloading load heavier than 50 kg is prohibited under all circumstances. The current regulations make no distinction between occasional and constant handling of loads. The employees working on loading and unloading are subject to periodical medical examinations. d)  There are no special recommendations or guidelines. The health surveillance of these workers is regulated by the Rulebook on methods and terms for qualification and periodical examination (Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia No. 27/88). According to the Rulebook, the workers working on jobs with great physical strain, including handling of loads, are subject to qualification and periodical medical examinations every 12 months. e)  Impact study has not been carried out. Certain epidemiologic studies in the Republic of Macedonia show a significant presence of musculoskeletal diseases of more than 25% in the morbidity structure of the exposed population. 7. Workplace (Directive 89/654) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Do you plan to apply legislation identically in all locations (new, existing, old) or differently according to whether they existed at a certain date? 
c) What approach has been decided on to include the minimum requirements set out in the Annex to this Directive (for example: outdoor workstations, the disabled)? 
d) Have you carried out an impact study? 

a)  There is a Rulebook on general measures for protection at work for workspaces and utility rooms (Official Gazette of the RM No. 33/93). Most of it is aligned to the Directive provisions.  b)  The existing Rulebook needs to be amended in order to be fully aligned to the Directive. The terms for alignment of the existing construction facilities should be at least 5 years, whereas for the new ones, one year from the date of adopting the new rulebook. It will not be completely possible to align the objects under protection of the Law as cultural and historical sites (the Old Bazaar, etc.) to the Rulebook.   c)  
Regarding the minimum requirements set out in the Annex to this Directive which refer to temporary construction sites outside the main office of the undertaking, and which refer to accommodation, meals and transport of workers, those are regulated by the Rulebook on protection at work during construction works (Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia No. 13/88). As far as the disabled are concerned, according to the Law on Employment of Disabled Persons (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 40/02 and 16/04) every employer that hires disabled persons, as well as legal entities and natural persons who form sheltering workshops for employment of the disabled are entitled to use funds from a special fund of the Employment Agency for adaptation of the workplace. 
d) Such study has not been carried out yet.  8. Signs (Directive 92/58) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Have you carried out an impact study? 
a)  There is no special Rulebook on Signs.  The Rulebook on technical measures for plants and maintenance of electrical facilities (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 19/68) provides norms for the colours of pipelines depending on the liquid in the pipes. The Rulebook on Signs is planned to be developed and adopted. b)  Such study has not been carried out. 9. Temporary or mobile constructions sites (Directive 92/57) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Are or will all the provisions of the Directive be included in a single act? 
c) Have you carried out an impact study? 
d) How do the implementing structures define the role of the coordinators (Article 5 (project preparation) and Article 6 (project execution))? How and by whom are the conditions for awarding certificates and diplomas set? Who draws up the curriculum and exams? How is it done? 
e) Are the safety and health plan (Article 5(b)) and any adjustments made to it (Article 6(c)) sent to a specific authority? Who has access to it? Same questions concerning the file (Articles 5 (c), 6(c))? 
f) What steps do you take to ensure that only authorised persons are allowed onto the construction site (Article 6(f))? What measures are taken in practice? 

a)   The Rulebook on safety at work during construction works (Official Gazette of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia No. 13/88) is aligned to the Directive provisions for the greater part.  b)  All provisions are included in the Law on Safety at Work and in the Rulebook on safety at work during construction works.  c) Impact study has not been carried out.  d) 
When there are several enterprises working on a construction site simultaneously, the Law on Safety at Work allows for them to agree on the implementation of protection at work at the site as a whole, and to agree upon who the person responsible for the implementation of  safety at work by a written act. The existing law does not define who is to be the coordinator of these activities; and there are no rules for design of certificates and diplomas, nor for the curriculum and exams. e)  The safety and health plan is included in the plan for organization of the construction site, but it is not submitted to the labour inspection. However, in accordance with the regulations, the construction works contractor is obliged to have a plan prior to the beginning of construction. Based on the Law on Safety at Work, the safety at work representatives have a right to review all relevant documents. According to our regulations, the plan for organization of the construction site is not amended during construction; but nevertheless, all stages of the facility construction should be included in the plan. f)  Pursuant to the Rulebook on safety at work during construction work, the construction site is to be surrounded by an appropriate fence, access of unauthorised persons is not allowed, and there has to be a visible sign at the entrance which forbids entrance to unauthorised persons.  10. Extractive industries: On-shore and off-shore drilling (Directive 92/91 - old sites +5 years) and Surface and underground (Directive 92/104 - old sites +9 years) 
a) What is the scope of national legislation? (In other words, how are the extractive industries defined?) 
b) Has an adaptation period for old work-sites been planned? 
c) Is there special supervision for workers in the extractive industries (mines, quarries, etc.) (Article 8)? 
d)  What legislation is or will be applicable to undertakings that extract by dredging? (Article 12) (Sandpits, etc)  
e) How does national law include the requirement that the employer responsible for the workplace (Article 3 (3)) must coordinate the implementation of all the measures concerning the safety and health of the workers and state, in his safety and health document, the aim of that coordination and the measures and procedures for implementing it? 
f) How is the requirement that the employer have a safety and health document included in national law? 
g) Are there any special measures for SMEs? 

a) Activities related to extraction of minerals are defined as research, exploitation, and refinement of raw minerals. This subject matter is regulated with the Law on Mining. b) In our country there is no oil extraction drilling.  c)  The protection at work supervision in mines, quarries, etc. is done by a Mining Inspection, which is part of the general Technical Inspection.  d)  Dredging is under the jurisdiction of the mining inspection.  Mining applies the protection at work regulations and the regulations contained in the Rulebook on technical norms for surface exploitation of architectural-building stone, technical stone, gravel and sand, as well as processing of architectural-building stone  e)  Mining applies all provisions of the Law on Protection at Work, which we consider as fully aligned to the Directive 85/391/EEC. Pursuant to the Law on Safety at Work, employers have a duty and an obligation to provide and coordinate the protection at work in compliance with the Law and rulebooks which regulate the subject matter in all branches (industries, construction, forestry, agriculture, traffic, hunting and fishery, trade, health, etc.). f)          Pursuant to the Law on Safety at Work and the Rulebook on protection at work during construction work, employers are obliged to prepare an elaboration on the construction site organisation where, among other things, places of high risk to the life and health of workers have to be identified. The construction site manager is responsible for the implementation of safety at work. g)  The protection at work regulations is equally applicable to both small and medium-sized enterprises. 11. Fishing vessels (Directive 93/103) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Have you carried out an impact study on new vessels? On existing vessels? 
c) Has an adaptation period for existing vessels been planned? 
d) What body is responsible for enforcing the law (Article 3(2))? 
e) What body is responsible for the training of persons likely to command a vessel (Article 10)? 
f) What body verifies that the captain of a fishing vessel has actually received this training? 
In the Republic of Macedonia there is no fishing with fishing vessels. Therefore, there is no need for regulating the subject matter of the Directive 93/103 by secondary legislation. 12. Medical treatment (Directive 92/29) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider it to be aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Have you carried out an impact study? 
c) Is there at least one national centre providing workers with free medical advice by radio (Article 6)? 
d) Do the medical supplies carried by vessels meet the classification and content set out in the Directive? 
e) What authority is responsible for the annual inspection (Article 7)? 
f) Does national law provide for initial training and refresher courses on first aid (Article 5(3) and Annex V)? How is this done in practice? 
In Republic of Macedonia there is no regulation applicable to the Directive 92/29. 13. Carcinogens (Directive 90/394 amended by 97/42 (benzene) and amended by 1999/38 (mutagens – wood dusts – vinyl chloride)  
a) Does your country have similar legislation in the field covered by the Directive? 
b) As for the current situation on carcinogens: 
i) Do you use the Community classification or a different classification to define substances as carcinogens? 
ii) Does the law oblige carcinogens to be replaced by less dangerous substances? 
iii) Is the health surveillance of workers obligatory? 
iv) Are medical records kept? For how long (40 years in the European Union)? By whom? 
v) Will you have difficulties with the limit value for benzene (3 ppm until 2001, then 1 ppm)? 
vi) How do you plan to take into account Directive 1999/38? 

a)  
The existing international regulations and Conventions are enforced, only partially covering the provisions of the specified Directives: Convention No.139 on Prevention and Control of Occupational Risks Caused by Carcinogenic Substances and Agents (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No.3/77), -  Convention No.139 on Protection from Benzene Poisoning, 1971(Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 16/79), Recommendation on Benzene Protection 144 from 1971 (Fifty Six Session of the International Labour Organization), Rulebook on hygienic and technical protective measures during research and deep drilling oil and natural gas (Official Gazette of the Federal National Republic of Yugoslavia No. 46/60-838), Rulebook on protective measures during work with x-ray devices and radioactive substances (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 100/47-1394). 
b)  i) 
On the basis of the Law on Sale of Toxins (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 13/91) and the secondary legislation derived from the Law, certain elements may be applied for carcinogenic substances. The subject matter of carcinogenic substances is partially included in the Law on Safety at Work (Official Gazette of the RM No. 13/98) This Law stipulates that producers of dangerous and harmful substances that can cause injury and disease with workers are obliged to enclose public document with data on the chemical and physical properties of the substances at the time of delivery, as well as the extent of the risk of explosion and fire, radioactivity etc., the manner of storing, keeping, transfer, transport and the method of disposal, as well as instructions on first aid for workers. Dangerous substances are explosives, flammables, corrosives, carcinogens and radioactive substances. ii) The current norms provided with the Law on Safety at Work have incorporated replacement of dangerous substances by less dangerous. Employers may use dangerous substances only if the same results can not be achieved by applying harmless or less dangerous substances. The employer should reduce the use of dangerous substances at the workplace, partially by substitution of substances, technological processes (automation, vacuum), which under the given working conditions are not dangerous or are less dangerous to the health or safety of workers, and do not endanger the working and living environment.   iii)  
The current Rulebook on method and terms for pre-employment and periodical medical examination (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 27/88) provides for health surveillance of workers dealing with chemical substances (without marking the level of carcinogens) and it is compulsory. It is carried out through pre-employment and periodical medical examinations every 12 months, as well as with control check-ups.  New Rulebook on contents and procedure for pre-employment medical examination and contents and terms for periodical medical examination of workers is at the adoption stage. The Rulebook stipulates an obligation for health surveillance of workers exposed to substances with proven carcinogenic effects (category A1 - List of carcinogens of the WHO). iv)  Pursuant to the existing legislation, medical records for health check-ups of workers are to be kept at the medical institution for up to ten years. By the Rulebook on periodical examinations, the permanent keeping of medical records of workers exposed to ion-rays at the medical institution is compulsory. v)   
It is assumed that this limit value for benzene will be a difficulty, considering the current Rulebook on maximum allowed concentrations of harmful gas, vapours and aerosols in the workspace atmosphere (JUS 3B.001. Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 35/1971), according to which the maximum allowed concentration is 15 ppm, which will require closure or transformation of certain production processes where benzene is produced or used, that in turn requires new investments. vi) 
The Directive shall be taken into account by transposing its provisions in the Rulebook on occupational exposure limit values 
14. Chemical agents (Directive 98/24) 
a) What is the current situation as regards chemical agents? 
b) What legislative strategy do you intend to adopt regarding Directive 80/1107? Do you intend to transpose it or take Directive 98/24 solely into account? 
c) To what extent is risk assessment the employer’s obligation? 
d)  What is the scope of the regulations, and what categories of workers are or will be covered (Article 1(4)) (high-risk groups, etc.)? 
e) How have you or do you intend to transpose Article 3, i.e. do you plan to set up procedures which will allow two kinds of limit values to be set (indicative and binding)? In other words, what is or will be the nature of the “national occupational exposure limit value” when transposing the Community IOELVs into your legislation? 
f) What prevention strategy has been or will be drawn up to protect workers’ health, and what kind of measures will be taken to eliminate risk, or reduce it to a minimum (Article 5)? 
g) To what extent is health surveillance a compulsory requirement for work with chemical agents (Article 10)? 
h) Do you intend to transpose this Directive using binding legislative measures or non-binding guidelines (Article 12)? 
a)  
The current legislation is not aligned to the Directive. In the Law on Safety at Work (Official Gazette of the RM No. 13/98) certain articles relate to the obligations of the producer of dangerous and harmful substances which is a wide notion, and includes chemical substances, too. Several legal acts cover the subject of production, sale, transport, and protection of dangerous substances. According to the Law on Safety at Work, employers are obliged to conduct tests of chemical hazards   (gases, vapours, smoke, aerosols, etc.). The work places which include work with chemical agents are considered work places under special conditions and the workers are subject to preventive medical examinations (Rulebook on method and terms for pre-employment and periodical examination – Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 27/88). The Law on Sale of Toxins (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 13/91) and the secondary legislation derived from the Law include the definition of toxins, list of toxins that may not be marketed, a Rulebook on marking toxins, technical and sanitary-hygienic requirements of organisations dealing with sale of toxins. The list of toxins is quite long and covers almost all chemicals. There have been a lot of epidemiologic, scientific and research studies from the aspect of the influence of chemicals on the health of the exposed workers in metallurgic, chemical, pharmaceutical, shoe, and leather processing industries for many years. Research has been done on the effects of lead, cadmium, manganese, carbon monoxide, benzene, etc. at the Institute of Occupational Health, a WHO Collaboration Centre for Occupational Health in Skopje, as well as at the departments for occupational health in the country. b) Transposition of Directive 80/1107 and Directive 98/24 in the national legislation is underway. c)  
The current legislation does not regulate risk assessment, which is yet to be aligned to EU standards and recommendations. However, according to the Law on Safety  at Work, employers are obliged to conduct tests on chemical harmfulness after commencing work at a facility or when changing the technological process within the first stage of risk assessment:- identification of harmfulness. d)  
The Rulebook on methods and terms for pre-employment and periodical medical examination (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 27/88) prescribes that workers working with certain chemicals are subject to medical examination prior to commencing work with the chemicals, to periodical medical examination in the prescribed terms, as well as to control check-ups. e)  
New Rulebook on occupational exposure limit values is being prepared, where the Community IOELVs shall be transposed. The Rulebook on maximum allowed concentrations of harmful gas, vapours and aerosols in the atmosphere of workstations and construction sites is in force (JUS 3.BO.001. Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No 35/1971). The national limit values to occupational exposition shall be binding. 
f)  
The current protection at work strategy is based on basic rules and principles for protection and safety which include work equipment, work environment, and work processes, workers’ health, and implementation of all preventive measures. The new general strategy called the “National Strategy for Health, Healthy Environment and Safety at Work” is at adoption stage. It is broader and more complex (but relates to chemically harmful agents), and it provides for specific activities at all levels: national, local, and at the level of enterprises. Nevertheless, in the following period, a focused strategy on chemically harmful agents should come out of the Strategy. g) 
The work with chemical agents is classified under work places with special conditions. According to the Law on Safety at Work and the Rulebook on methods and terms for pre-employment and periodical medical examination, workers are subject to pre-employment, periodical, and control medical examinations depending on the specific chemicals. 
h) 
An adoption of an appropriate rulebook is planned, and it shall incorporate the Directive provisions with binding implementation. 
15. Limit values (Directives 91/322 and 2000/39) 
a) Is there currently a list of chemical substances for which exposure limit values have already been set? If so, how many substances are on the list? Are the limits indicative or binding? 
b) How do you plan to transpose the two lists from the Commission Directives? 
a)  
The existing Rulebook on maximum allowed concentrations implemented in our country is not aligned to the EU Directives. The Rulebook on maximum allowed concentrations of harmful gases vapours and aerosols in the atmosphere of workspace and construction sites (JUS 3.BO.001. Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 35/1971) which regulates this subject matter, provides obligatory, binding limit values to exposure. However, this Rulebook is not aligned to the EU Directives. This rulebook specifies 604 chemical substances. 
b)  
The harmonisation of the national to EU standards on this subject matter is underway. 
16. Asbestos (Directive 83/477) 
a) Are products containing asbestos currently sold? 
b) What is the limit value for exposure of workers (Article 8) (EU 0.1 fibres/cm3 as an eight-hour time-weighted average)? 
c) What method do you use to collect airborne fibres? 
d) Is applying asbestos by means of spraying prohibited (Article 5)? 
e) What authority is responsible for administering the notification system (Article 4)? 
f) Is there a register of recognised cases of mesothelioma? 
g) Do you require a complete plan of work to be drawn up before any demolition work is begun (Article 12)? Under what conditions (Paragraphs (2) added subparagraph and (3))? h) Are the air and sea sectors covered? 

a)  
There are products containing asbestos on the market in the Republic of Macedonia. The Asbestos Convention, 1986, dealing with protection during use of asbestos, as well as the Asbestos Protection Recommendation No. 172/86 (72nd Session of the International Labour Organisation (ILO)) were ratified within the framework of the legal system of the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette  of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 4/89). 
b)  
According to the existing Rulebook on maximum allowed concentration of hazardous gases, vapours and aerosols in the atmosphere of working environment and building sites (JUS Z 130.001, published in the Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 35/71) the quantity of asbestos in respirable dust shall amount to 1 mg/m, and the quantity of asbestos in the total dust amount shall be 3 mg/ m and the number of asbestos particles shall amount to 175 particles per cmof air. The maximum allowed concentration of asbestos fibers referring to eight hours exposure is not in compliance with the EU Directive, allowing only 0.1 fibers per cmNevertheless, the Institute of Occupational Health has performed several measurements in a working environment using the limit values provided by the EU Directive (0.1 fibers per cm). 
c)  
the Institute of Occupational Health has worked on several measurements in a working environment where asbestos is processed, applying the methods for collecting of asbestos fibers in the air, i.e. the method ALA (membrane filters method) using Casella pump with a flow of 1.5 l/min, and the time of sampling depended on expected asbestos concentrations in the air. As for the occupational exposure limit value, the value of EU Directive (0.1 fibers/cm) was used. 
d)  
Use of asbestos by dispersion has been prohibited by virtue of ratification of the Asbestos Convention, 1986, No. 162 dealing with protection during use of asbestos, as well as by virtue of the Asbestos Protection Recommendation No. 172/86 (72nd Session of International Labour Organisation (ILO)). 
e)  
There is an obligation for employers to notify the labour inspection in case of occupational disease related to the hazardous causative agent, but there is no obligation with regards to the type and quantity of the material used. There is no obligation for employers to inform any competent authority with regards to changes concerning the use of asbestos. 
f)  
There is no special registry with regards to mesotheliomas in the Republic of Macedonia, but there is a registry of occupational diseases and statistical monitoring of cancer in the State Statistical Office. It is planned a registry of recognized cases of asbestosis or mesothelioma to be kept. 
g) 
Pursuant to Article 137 of the Rulebook on Safety at Work during carrying out of construction works related to demolition of buildings or a part thereof, notwithstanding whether the demolition is being carried out manually, using machines or mines, an appropriate programme for the works and measures for safety at work shall be drawn previously, depending on the type of building and the level of danger threatening. 
h)  
The Rulebook does not comprise air force and maritime sectors. 
17. Noise (Directive 86/188) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider that it is aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Have you carried out an impact study? Does the Directive pose a problem for any sectors or activities? 
c) Have you set a daily noise-exposure value for workers? If so, what is it? 
d) Does current legislation set action levels on noise? If so, what is the action value? If not, do you intend to set one? 
e) Do you already have or plan to set a threshold (ceiling) limit value for noise? If so, what is this value? 
f) Do you have a framework of preventive measures including health surveillance to effectively protect workers against noise? If so, how are these measures related to the limit values? 
a) The existing legal regulations referring to noise in working environment (Rulebook on  General Measures and Norms for Protection at Work from Noise in Working Environment (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 29/71) are partially harmonized with the Directive 86/188. 
b) 
Several impact studies of the noise that affects the hearing, health condition and working capability, as well as the degree of noise in the working environment in various industrial branches such as forestry, metallurgy (87-118 dB), textile industry (88-11 dB), metal industry (96-115 dB), and mining (80-123 dB), have been carried out. The Directive should not pose a problem for any sector or activity, except for forestry, metal-processing industry, textile industry, etc. 
c) 
Pursuant to the existing legal regulations, the maximum level of noise allowed for 8 working hours is 90 dB, preventing hearing disorder. There are also other elements for determining the allowed noise level, depending on the activity, workplace, and time of exposure. In compliance with the EU Directives, the value of 85 dB (in dB according to the N curve) was accepted by experts as allowed daily exposure to noise (during 8 working hours) a year ago. The harmonization of the national legislation with the European legislation in the field of noise is underway. 
d) 
The existing regulations referring to the allowed levels of noise in a working environment do not determine the level of noise emission, but the new Rulebook on Noise Protection shall determine and define these elements. 
e) Pursuant to the legal regulations, the threshold limit value is 130 dB during a three- minute exposure. It depends on the daily exposure and the frequency area. 
f) Within the preventive measures, in accordance with the Rulebook on Methods and Terms for Pre-employment  and Periodical Medical Examinations, all employees exposed to the noise above 90 dB are subjected to pre-employment  and periodical medical examinations once a year. The measures as well include use of personal protective equipment, taking breaks during work, etc.  
18. Explosive atmospheres (Directive 1999/92/EC) 
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider that it is aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Have you carried out an impact study? Does the Directive pose a problem for any sectors or activities? 
a) 
The existing regulations are not aligned with the EU Directive. 
b) 
An impact study has not been carried out so far. A Rulebook on Protection at Work in Explosive Atmospheres, aligned with the Directive 1999/92, is planned to be adopted. 
19. Biological agents at work (Directive 2000/54/EC)  
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider that it is aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Have you carried out an impact study? Does the Directive pose a problem for any sectors or activities? 
c) Which national authority is competent? 
d) If there is legislation on this subject, do you consider that your legislation is in line with Directives 90/679 and 93/88 and their adaptations to technical progress? What parts are not aligned to date? 
e) What general principles do you apply or intend to apply to: 
i) risk assessment; ii) risk elimination; iii) risk reduction? 
f) Do you use a classification of biological agents? Does it tally with the one set out in the Directive? 
g) Is health surveillance set up along the same principles? 
h) Have containment measures been prepared? Does the classification tally with the Directive’s? 
a)  
Harmonization of the national law with the EU legislation from this field is pending. The Rulebook on Methods and Terms for pre-employment and Periodical Medical Examinations provide that the work places with exposure to biological material are  work places under special working conditions requiring pre-employment  and periodical medical examinations every 12 months. 
b)  
Considering the importance of the problem, besides the long-term surveillance of health conditions and occupational risks of the medical workers relating to biological agents for, an impact study was carried out in the Republic of Macedonia during 2002/2004 for the first time by the Institute of Occupational Health, a WHO Collaboration Centre in Skopje under the patronage of the Ministry of Education and Science, supported by the Ministry of Health. The scientific research Project ”Specific Occupational Risks of Medical Workers: Infectious and Psycho-Social Hazards was targeted to the problem of the presence of Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C and HIV/AIDS with a representative sample taken among medical workers from various levels and segments of the medical activities in the Republic of Macedonia. The Project gave the first results and measures for prevention and improvement of the medical workers’ health. 
c)  
The competent national authorities are: the Ministry of Health - for the protection of human health; the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy - for passing regulations concerning the protection at work; the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate and the State Labour Inspectorate - for supervising the implementation of regulations. 
d)  
The analysis of the EU legislation from this field is underway. 
e)  i) ii) iii) The basic rules and principles of protection and safety covering tools and equipment, working environment and work process, health of employees, application of all preventive measures, partly including the elements required with regard to biological hazards , are implemented in the same way as they are for all types of hazards  effects in a working environment. A Rulebook on Risk Assessment obliging the employers to assess the level of risk at the workplace is planned to be drawn up. During the risk assessment it is fundamental to determine the nature, the level and the duration of the exposure. On the basis of the established situation, an employer should take measures to eliminate or reduce the risk. At present, only the general principles for protection and safety at work regulate the above issue. 
f)  
There is no classification of the biological materials in use. 
g) 
The answer to this question is stated under the item (a). 
h)  
The analysis of the EU legislation referring to this field is underway. 
20. Vibrations (Directive 2002/44/EC)  
a) If legislation exists on this subject, do you consider that it is aligned to the EU Directive? 
b) Have you carried out an impact study? Does the Directive pose a problem for any sectors or activities? 
c) Do you envisage a transition period for work equipment or for agriculture and forestry sectors? 
d) Are limit values according to your legislation in line with the values that are set in the Directive? 

a)  
This issue is regulated by the Convention No. 148 on Protection of Workers from Occupational Risks in Working Environment Caused by Air Pollution, Noise and Vibrations, 1977 (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 14/82). The analysis of the EU legislation referring to this field is underway. 
b)  
There are two impact studies on vibrations in production (tunnel workers/drillers and workers using manual vibrating tools in the civil engineering industry) carried out by the Institute of Occupational Health.Characteristics of vibration during production process, hazardous influences on the health and working ability of exposed employees have been analysed with a special review on the hand/arm vibration syndrome (HAVS) and prevention measures recommended. c)  
The analysis of the EU legislation referring to this field is underway. 
d)  
There are no particular regulations on vibrations or determined limit values thereof. Nevertheless, the recommendations for the ISO Standards are being implemented in practice. 
