I. LABOUR LAW 
A. The Legal and Institutional Framework 
The legal framework 

1. Does your labour law contain a definition of: 
a) employed worker (employee)? 
b) self-employed worker (self-employed person)? 
c) civil servant/official? 
d) labour contract and status? 
e) employer? 
a) Employed worker (employe) 
The Labour Relations Law (consolidated text, Official Gazette of the RM No. 80/03), defines employment as a conformed relation between the employee and the employer for the purpose of performing particular tasks and acquiring the rights and obligations of that relationship. A special definition for the term employed has not been determined. b) Self-employed person  A self-employed person performs some of the independent activities in reference with the other special rulebooks on independent activities e.g. private practice in the health division, bar and notary service, artistic activities, artisanship. These activities are encompassed with the legal tax and social insurance rulebooks. c) Civil servant  According to article 3, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Law on Civil Servants (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 59/00, 112/00, 34/01, 103/01, 43/02, 98/02, 17/03, 40/03, 85/03, 17/04 and 69/04) a civil servant is a person who performs professional, normative and legal, executive, administrative and supervisory tasks and decides on the administrative matters in compliance with the Constitution  and the law and is employed by the state administration bodies, the bodies of the local self-government units and the City of Skopje and the advisory services of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, the President of the Republic of Macedonia, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia, the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia, the courts, the Republic Court Council, the Ombudsman, the Public Prosecution, the Civil Servants Agency and the State Audit Office (for more details see I_C_6). d) Labour contract and status Employment is established by a conclusion of an employment agreement between the employee and the employer, while in the state administration bodies and the bodies of the local self-government units an employment is established by a decision establishing an employment. The compulsory provisions of the employment agreement prescribed by the Labour Relations Law are: the grounds for commencing employment; the terms of employment (for a limited or unlimited period of time); the duties of the employee and the place of work ; the commencing date, the procedure for testing working skills; the working hours; vacation and leave; professional and additional training; the basic salary, the payment period and compensations and other rights and obligations in compliance with the law and the collective agreement. Depending on the type of contract for special cases (e.g. seasonal workers, workers assigned to work abroad, etc.) additional provisions regarding the contents of the agreement are prescribed. The Labour Relations Law and other laws regulate the basic employees’ rights and the obligations and authorisations of the employer. The lowest level of employees’ rights is guaranteed, whereas the higher level of rights is regulated by collective agreements, rulebooks on working activities and the employment agreement. e)  Employer The definition of the employer is determined by the Labour Relations Law. The term “employer”: means: enterprises and other legal entities performing business activities; establishments and other legal entities rendering public services; state administration bodies: local self-government bodies; and other domestic and foreign natural and legal persons which employ workers. An employer is obliged to provide work for an employee, to pay his wages for the work performed, to comply with the provisions of the Labour Relations Law and other laws, the international agreements, other regulations, collective agreements and rulebooks on working activities. 2. Does your labour law apply to other categories of employees, apart from persons in paid employment? 
Some of the labour law regulations also apply to other categories of persons that are not engaged in paid employment, especially to: students engaged in vocational training with an employer; students performing public works; persons in professional training, retraining and additional training; volunteers in the judicial and health care system; and others. Some of the provisions of the protection at work regulations and of social insurance regulations mainly apply to these persons as well. 3. Which categories of workers are not covered by the labour legislation? (e.g. part-time, fixed-term or temporary agency work)?  
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the employers are obliged to notify the employees of employment termination due to economic, technological, structural or similar transformations one month prior to the termination in cases of individual employment terminations or of employment terminations concerning a smaller number of employees; or three months prior to the termination in cases of employment terminations concerning more than 150 employees or 5 % from the total number of employees. At the same time, the employer also notifies the employment agency for the purpose of  mediation in the employment of  those employees. 4. Are workers in the public and private sectors treated differently? 
The Labour Relations Law does not treat the workers in the public and in the private sectors differently. The issues relating to the right to strike are regulated by a special law and the regulations referring to the army, the police, the state administration and the public enterprises also contain provisions relating to the right to strike. The Law on Civil Servants applies to the officials employed in the administration of the three state government branches: the legislative, the executive and the judicial, as well as in the local self-government, and there are special rules pertaining to their selection and employment, status, rights and obligations, as well as to their disability insurance. The Law on Health Insurance (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 25/00, 34/00, 96/00, 51/01, 11/02, 31/03) and the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 37/97, 25/00,101/00, 50/01, 25/03, 37/04 and 04/05) which apply to the workers in the private sector apply to the civil servants as well. 5. Which aspects are covered by the Labour Code (i.e. primary legislation passed by Parliament) and which aspects are dealt with by ministerial regulatory action? 
The Labour Relations Law covers the following issues: - General provisions; General conditions for commencing employment; Provision on discrimination ban; The procedure for commencing employment; Conclusion of employment contract; Regular and fixed term employment; Performing work at home; Hiring trainees;  - Working hours; Vacations and leaves; Protection of employees at work; Special protection of women, juveniles and disabled employees; Salaries and benefits; Association of workers in trade unions and association of employers in employer associations; - Liabilities; Termination of employment; Protection of the rights of employees; Supervision and inspection in the field of employment; - Penalty clauses; Transitional and final provisions. The following issues are covered by a regulation at the level of the Ministry of Labour and  Social Policy: Keeping records of collective agreements; Registration of collective agreements (general and branch)labour agreements; - Employment booklet; Other issues regarding the direct implementation of protection at work; The special labour relations in certain fields are regulated by secondary legislation – the rulebooks of other ministries. The following issues are covered by the Law on Civil Servants: Employment of civil servants; Rights and duties of civil servants; System of salaries and allowances for civil servants; Liabilities of civil servants; Assessment of civil servants; Termination of employment of civil servants. With the decrees brought by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the secondary legislation brought by the Civil Servants Agency, the state administration bodies and the other government bodies (the rulebooks, orders, guidelines, plans and programmes), certain provisions of the laws are elaborated for a more successful and efficient implementation. The secondary legislation which covers the civil servants’ issues is: -  Decree for Principles for Internal Organisation of the State Administration Bodies (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 93/00, 14/02); -  Decree for Description of Titles and Suitability of Positions with the Groups and Titles regulated by the Law on Civil Servants (Official Gazette of the RM No. 93/00); Rulebook on the Manner, Procedure and Criteria for Implementation of the Professional and Trainee Examinations (Official Gazette of the RM No. 59/01); -  Rulebook on the Criteria, Standards and Procedure for Employment and Selection of Civil Servants (Official Gazette of the RM No. 59/01); -  Rules on Working Procedures of the Commission of the Civil Servants Agency relating to resolving second instance civil servants’ complaints (Official Gazette of the RM No. 59/01); Rulebook on the Manner and Procedure of Civil Servants’ Assessment (Official Gazette of the RM No. 59/01); Rulebook on Specifying Positions with a high life and health risk for the Civil Servants (Official Gazette of the RM No. 96/01); Guidelines on the Criteria for granting financial awards to civil servants (Official Gazette of the RM No. 96/01); Civil Servants’ Code of Conduct (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 96/01, 16/01); Rulebook on the Manner and Procedures for Civil Servants’ Data Collection and Processing (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 68/02, 79/04); -  Guidelines on the annual plan contents for equitable representationof communities (Official Gazette of the RM No. 02/04); and -  Guidelines on the manner of Calculation and Payment of Civil Servants’ salaries (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 31/04); In addition, according to the Law on Civil Servants, every body which employs civil servants is obliged, among other things, to have a rulebook on its internal organisation and job categorisation, on the civil servants’ training programme, and an act which determines the manner of the body’s operation during the strike. Sources of legislation in the Republic of Macedonia, apart from the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia and the laws, include the international agreements ratified by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 188 of the Constitution). At the same time, from the viewpoint of the Ministry of Justice competences, the court practice is also a source of legislation. Namely, in compliance with the Law on Courts (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 36/95, 45/95, 64/03) the standardisation and unification of the application of law via court practice is within the competence of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia. 6. What are the main sources of law: international, constitutional, legislation, regulation, collective agreements, custom/conventions, case law? 
The main sources of labour law are the Constitution, the ratified Conventions of the International Labour Organisation, other signed and published international agreements, laws, decrees of the Government, rulebooks of the ministers, collective agreements, rulebooks of the employers on working procedures, and employment agreements. The main sources for the workers’ rights are the laws and the collective agreements. The civil servants system in the Republic of Macedonia is regulated by the Law on Civil Servants and by the secondary legislation which further regulates the civil servants’ issues. Regarding the issues that are not covered by this law and the issues cross-referenced to other law relating to civil servants, the general provisions for employment apply. 7. Is there a hierarchy of norms in respect of these sources of law? 
There is a hierarchy of norms in respect of these sources of labour law and it is structured in the following manner: the Constitution; the Conventions of the International Labour Organisation and other international agreements; the special laws and Decrees of the Government; the general laws and Decrees of the Government; the Rulebooks of the Ministers, the collective agreements binding on the employers; the Rulebooks of the employers on working procedures and the employment agreements. 
8. Does the system provide for collective labour agreements to be extended to all workers in the sector and territory concerned (e.g. at regional or national level)? 
The Labour Relations Law provides for the extension of nearly all the types of collective agreements to all the workers in the territory or the sector concerned i.e. profession.  Therefore, the collective agreements in the Republic of Macedonia may be concluded at the level of the Republic and of the branch, or the employer. At the level of the Republic there are two General Collective Agreements for the employees and the employers in the economic sector and in the sector of public services, public enterprises, state administration bodies, local self-government bodies and other legal persons performing non-economic activities. These two General Collective Agreements are directly applicable and compulsory for both the employees' and the employers’ organisation that concluded the agreement and for every employee and employer in whose names the agreement has been made. At the branch level, the collective agreement is directly applicable and compulsory for the employees’ and employers’ organisations that concluded the agreement, but not for the employees and the employers that are not members of the organisations who have concluded the agreement. The same applies to the collective agreements at the employer’s level. The above stated facts lead to the conclusion that the system of collective agreements in the Republic of Macedonia provides for total inclusion of all employees in a given sector or territory. 9. At what levels are collective agreements generally concluded (national, industry-wide, company, plant)? 
Our legal system, according to the Labour Relations Law, allows for conclusion of collective agreements at three levels: national, branch and employer level. Two General Collective Agreements have been concluded so far: one for the private and another for the public sector (for more details see 13_I_A_8). There are thirty one collective agreements at a branch level concluded in certain branch or areas in the private and public sector. The data are taken from the General and Branch Collective Labour Agreements Register which, in accordance with the Labour Relations Law, is kept in the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy of the Republic of Macedonia. 10. Does your country's legal system apply a "concessionary" principle whereby a norm lower down the legal hierarchy may modify the content of a higher-ranking norm provided that the effect is favourable to workers? 
The labour law in the Republic of Macedonia is based upon the “concessionary” principle. Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, if a certain employment right is arranged differently by an employment agreement, an employer’s rulebook on working procedures, a collective labour agreement or a law, then the more favourable right applies to the worker if not determined otherwise by this or some other law. Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the labour collective agreement cannot have provisions that diminish worker’s rights or establish less favourable working conditions than those provided by law, and if such provisions are present, the appropriate more favourable provisions of the law apply. The provisions and acts which regulate worker’s rights must not contravene the collective agreement unless they are more favourable for the worker. 
11. Which court or courts are competent to deal with industrial disputes? 
There are no specialized labour - social courts in the Republic of Macedonia. The basic courts are competent for the industrial disputes in the first instance, the appellate courts in the second instance, while the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia decides upon the extraordinary legal remedies. The courts of first instance which are determined by the Law on Courts (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 36/95; 45/95; 64/03) are competent for the industrial disputes in the Republic of Macedonia. 12. Is there a labour inspectorate responsible for the monitoring of working conditions? 
There is a special Labour Inspectorate within the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The Republic of Macedonia has incorporated in its legal system Conventions Nos. 81 and 129 of the International Labour Organisation concerning labour inspection. These conventions were taken over with the Constitutional Law for Implementation of the Constitution, pursuant to which the Republic of Macedonia, being a legal successor of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, has adopted the rights and obligations from the ratified conventions). 13. Does your labour law contain provisions on the protection of workers' personal data? 
There are no special provisions relating to this issue in the Labour Relations Law. The workers personal data protection is regulated by special laws which provide and secure the protection of the workers’ personal data and the manner of their usage. The special laws regulating this matter are the Law on Labour Record Keeping (Official Gazette of the RM 16/04), the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance (Official Gazette of the RM No. 16/04) and with the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the RM No. 07/05). 
The institutional framework 

14. In what way does the State intervene in social matters (e.g. procedure for drawing up norms; government institutions responsible; administrative institutions responsible for applying norms)? 
The State in its Constitution guarantees the right to work and a free choice of employment, equal opportunities at work, the right to earnings sufficient for a free and dignified life, and other basic employment rights. The rights of workers and members of their families concerning social security and social insurance are regulated by laws and collective agreements, whereas the rights regarding child birth, maternity leave and child care are regulated by a law. The ratified conventions of the International Labour Organisation and the bilateral agreements on social insurance are incorporated into the national legal system and are above law. Most of the draft laws and proposals for amending laws are prepared by the competent ministries and proposed to the Assembly by the Government, after a previous review by the Economic and Social Committee, the three-party consultative body of the three social partners. A law may be proposed by any Member of the Assembly, or by a group of at least 10,000 voters as well. Any citizen, a group of citizens or an association may submit an initiative for passing a law to the Assembly. Regarding the social matters, the State intervenes in the following ways: -  By adopting laws and other regulations determining the basic level of workers’ rights and providing the possibilities for arranging more favourable rights for workers by other legislation, by establishing an institutional framework for organisation and the activities of trade unions and employers’ associations by concluding collective labour agreements and regulating their legal effects: strike and lockout, social partnership etc. and by providing penalty provisions for strengthening the obligation to act in accordance with laws; -  By providing protection of rights before the courts and supervising the application of regulations through the competent inspections, including the labour inspection; by providing application of the International Labour Organization conventions and other international agreements, laws and other regulations; -  By negotiating with trade unions and concluding the collective agreements that regulate the working conditions in the public sector, while appointing representatives in the managing boards of the state owned or majority state owned enterprises participates in and stimulates the collective agreements at the level of enterprise  or activity; -  By the establishing and the managing the public institutions: the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund of the Republic of Macedonia, the Health Insurance Bureau and the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia, where the employees exercise their rights to pension, disability, health and unemployment insurance. 
B. Employment and Employment Protection 
Recruitment 

1. Are employers free to take on whatever workers they wish? Are there specific anti-discrimination provisions (racial ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation)?[Please give details of the legislative or regulatory framework relating ] 
According to the Labour Relations Law, employers freely decide how many workers and whom they will employ. An employer may satisfy employment needs by putting a public notice in the daily press, by announcing the need through the employment agencies, by recruiting the workers directly, without a public announcement or by recruiting them through private employment agencies. Pursuant to the same law, any direct or indirect discrimination on grounds of race, skin colour, sex, age, health condition, i.e. disability, religious, political or other beliefs, membership in trade unions, national or social origin, family status, property or economic status or other personal circumstances is prohibited. According to the Law on Civil Servants, the employment in the state administration complies with two basic principles: equal access to the jobs in the public sector and selection on the basis of skills. This is in compliance with Article 32, Paragraph 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia which stipulates that all jobs are available to all persons under equal conditions. The basic way for commencing employment as a civil servant is on the basis of a public announcement and a professional/trainee examination. The principle of equitable representation of the members of ethnic communities in the civil administration bodies and in the other public institutions at all levels is one of the fundamental values of the constitutional order in the Republic of Macedonia. This principle is further elaborated in the Law on Civil Servants, where the criteria of expertise and competence are respected above all when the employment of citizens belonging to the ethnic communities in the Republic of Macedonia is concerned. 2. Does the State hold a monopoly over placement services for certain workers? [Please give details of the legislative or regulatory framework relating ] 
The State does not hold a monopoly over placement services for any workers. The Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia is established as a public institution for keeping records of the unemployed persons, for carrying out employment preparations and an active employment policy, for clearing of vacancies in the country and abroad, and for safeguarding the workers rights during unemployment. The above mentioned activities, except for safeguarding the rights during unemployment, may be carried out by other private employment agencies as well, provided that they have a certificate from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy regarding the fulfilment of the legal conditions for employment mediation. 3. Has provision been made for protecting workers' private data? [Please give details of the legislative or regulatory framework relating ] 
There are no general legal provisions preventing the employers from requesting the workers’ personal data in the Labour Relations Law. There are also no provisions obliging the workers to present their personal data in relation to a certain employment right or to their protection. According  to the Law on Civil Servants, the Civil Servants Agency keeps a Central Civil Servants Register which is the only existing electronic database for the civil servants. The manner and the procedure for collection and processing of civil servants’ data are determined regulated by the Rulebook on manners and procedures for collection and processing of civil servants’ data which has been adopted by the Civil Servants Agency. The data from the Central Register are classified. 4. What legal forms are there governing employment relations (e.g. open-ended contracts; fixed-duration contracts; temporary work; part-time work; other forms)? 
The Labour Relations Law provides the following types of employment contracts: - open-ended contracts - fixed-duration contracts trainee  contract for an indefinite or definite period of time, employment contract on seasonal works, employment contract on work at home, employment contract on sending to a post abroad.  The weekly working hours, which may be full time or shorter, are an obligatory part of the aforesaid contracts.  Fixed-duration employment contract may be concluded for posts of temporary by nature, for three years with or without breaks. Break of work shorter than thirty working days is not deemed as a break. Employment relation for a definite period of time may be established until the return of the temporarily absent employee. In accordance with the Law on Civil Servants, the service is established only for an indefinite period of time. 
5. Are these various relations subject to formal conditions (e.g. written contracts with certain compulsory clauses)? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the employment agreement is concluded in a written form and is verified by an authorised employment agency. There is a legal obligation that the employment agreement should be kept at the employer’s working premises and that the employer should provide the employee with one verified copy of the agreement. The employment agreement contains provisions, pertaining in particular to: type of work; term of employment; duties of an employee regarding individual jobs; place of work; - commencing date; -  procedure for testing working skills, should this be a prerequisite for commencing employment; - working hours; vacations and leaves; professional training and further training; basic salary and the pay period; protection at work; termination of employment; other employment rights and obligations comply with the law and the collective agreement. The decision for commencing employment in public administration bodies must be in writing. 6. Are employers required to provide their workers with information on their conditions of work? What kind of information has to be supplied? Does this also cover workers who are required to work in another country? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the employers are required to inform employees about the prescribed measures and standards for protection at work in accordance with the law and the collective agreement, as well as to notify them of all the dangers at work and of the rights and obligations regarding the protection at work and working conditions. The obligations of informing and notifying with regard to the above mentioned issues also apply to the employees sent to work abroad. 
Employment protection 

7. What legal provisions apply to the suspension of a labour contract for maternity and parental leave? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, female employees are entitled to nine month continuous leave during pregnancy, birth and maternity, and to a one-year leave for birth of more than one child. Female employees who have adopted a child or children are entitled to a maternity leave under the same conditions. Fathers and male child adopters have this right too. While exercising the above right, the employment rests, and after the leave the employee may return to the same or to another appropriate job. 8. Does the legal system make provision for a system of compensation where a labour contract is suspended for economic reasons (e.g. supply difficulties)? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, workers who had their employment terminated due to economic, technological, structural or similar transformations are to be provided with a one-off compensation by the employer in the form of a severance pay in the amount of worker’s one-month up to three-month salary, i.e. for every three years of length of service with the employer where their employment terminates, and not exceeding eight monthly salaries of the month preceding the day of the termination of employment. The employer may pay more than the amount determined by law. After the employment termination, an employee is entitled to an appropriate financial unemployment insurance compensation pursuant to the special Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 37/97, 25/00,101/00, 50/01, 25/03, 37/04 and 04/05). Furthermore, an employer may provide an employee with training or retraining for employment with another employer. 9. Does the legal system include certain rights with regard to collective redundancies? 
The regulations make no distinction in the provision of the right to a severance pay between the cases of individual and collective employment termination.Pursuant to the Law on Civil Servants, in cases of employment termination due to abolishing or merging the body, limiting the competences, downsizing or changes in the internal structure with termination of jobs due to structural changes in the state administration bodies, the civil servants have the rights stipulated by the Labour Relations Law and the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance (Official Gazette of the RM No. 80/93). 10. What is the definition of collective or economic redundancy/dismissal? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, workers may have their employment terminated by notice due to economic, technological, structural or other similar transformations, in cases when employers plan to introduce major changes in production, programming, reorganisation, structure and technology, requiring reductions in the number of employees. Pursuant to the Law on Civil Servants, in case of abolishing or merging the body, limiting the competences, downsizing or changes in the internal structure with termination of jobs due to structural changes in the state administration bodies, the civil servants carrying out those activities may be reassigned within the same body to jobs in same or lower position. Civil servants who are single parents or adopters of a child up to seven years of age, parents of disabled children, labour disabled persons, and civil servants with the spouse employed with the same employer shall be given priority with reassignment. 11. Do workers' representatives have a right to be informed and consulted? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the employers are obliged to notify the employees of employment termination due to economic, technological, structural or similar transformations one month prior to the termination in cases of individual employment terminations or of employment terminations concerning a smaller number of employees; or three months prior to the termination in cases of employment terminations concerning more than 150 employees or 5 % from the total number of employees. At the same time, the employer also notifies the employment agency for the purpose of  mediation in the employment of  those employees. 12. Who are the workers' representatives in such cases and in what way are they designated? 
In such cases, a trade union representative is the one elected by the workers he represents. A trade union representative, according to the Law on Labour  Relations, is a person freely elected by the trade unions, trade union members or employees, in accordance with the statute, and who is legaly registered in the Trade Unions Register in compliance with the Law on Labour  Relations. That Register is kept at the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. 13. Under what conditions do they exercise these rights? 
The activities of the trade unions and their representatives may not be limited by employers’ acts if they comply with the law and the collective labour agreement. The employer is obliged to provide conditions for the trade union activities regarding the protection of employees’ rights stemming from their employment.The trade union representatives are specially protected and may not be held liable, nor may they find themselves in an unfavourable position, including termination of their employment due to a membership in the trade union or to participation in the trade union activities for the protection of employees’ rights and interests. 14. Do the public authorities have a role to play in the procedure (e.g. is there a requirement to give notice of planned redundancies to the public authorities to give them a certain time to seek solutions to the problems likely to be caused by such redundancy measures)? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the Employment Agency has this role before and after adopting the decision on dismissal of workers. In case an employer requests a help of an employment agency, the agency is obliged to establish a special commission consisting of representatives of the employment centre (at the municipality level), of the trade union (at the employer’s level), and of the entity of the local self-government unit. This commission provides professional and advisory assistance to the employer and the employees prior to their dismissal. 
15. Does the legal system include rights in respect of individual redundancy/dismissal? 
The workers’ rights are the same in individual as well as in collective dismissal cases. They are entitled to a period of notice and severance pay, to training and retraining. However, the scope of their rights depends on the length of service with the employer. 16. Does the system guarantee that labour contracts continue to apply where a firm changes hands? 
Our system, or more specifically, the Labour Relations Law, does not contain a particular provision of such kind. However, the employees who continue working after the change of employer, have the same rights regarding their employment as before the change. 17. What conditions apply in such cases? 
In cases of change of employer, the employment relation remains the same unconditionally and with same contents. The Labour Relations Law regulates in general terms the legal consequences of a change of employer or the legal consequences of a permanent or temporary transfer a part of the enterprise, plant, facility, trading company, institution or other legal or natural person. 18. In such cases, does the system provide protection for dismissal? Are the transferor and the new employer required to inform and consult workers' representatives? Do these rights apply where the transferor is in the process of being declared bankrupt? 
In such cases, the employment continues in compliance with the law, and all the legal provisions for the reasons and the dismissal procedures apply to dismissals by the new employer as if there were no changes of employer. In addition, the general provisions of the Labour Relations Law regarding notifying and consulting the workers’ representatives apply to the new employer too. 19. Does the legal system provide for unemployment benefit? Is such provision made in the labour law or in the social security law? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, workers who had their employment terminated due to economic, technological, structural or similar transformations are entitled, among other things, to a one-off compensation by the employer in the form of a severance pay in the amount of one to three monthly salaries, i.e. for every three years of length of service with the employer where their employment terminates, and not exceeding eight monthly salaries of the month preceding the day of the termination of employment, payable at the day of employment termination. Pursuant to the same law, the employer may pay the employee a one-off compensation in the form of a severance pay which is higher than the statutory one. In addition, pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the worker entitled to a severance pay is also entitled to a financial benefit and other rights on the basis of unemployment. The right to financial benefit in case of employment termination is provided by the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 37/97,25/00,101/00,  50/01; 7/02; 25/03; 37/04, 04/05). Conditions for acquiring the right to financial benefit The right to financial benefit is reserved for unemployed persons who were continuously employed for at least nine months or discontinuously employed for twelve months during the last eighteen months and whose employment has been terminated without their guilt or will. Pursuant to Article 67 of the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment, the right to financial benefit is not reserved for unemployed persons whose employment has been terminated due to: Submission of a written statement by the worker that he/she wishes to terminate his/her employment, unless the statement has been filed because of the spouse’s change of address or due to marriage; Termination of employment by agreement; Exercising employment rights against the law; Termination of employment enforced by law, except in cases of legal entity termination due to bankruptcy; -  Unjustified absence from work for three consecutive work days or for five discontinued work days in the course of one year; Termination of employment on the basis of employer’s notice of violation of working discipline or to nonfeasance of the responsibilities determined by the law, the collective agreement and the employment contract; Refusal to fulfil the working duties of the position they have been reassigned to in compliance with the law; Refusal to be reassigned with another employer by agreement, in compliance with the law; -  Refusal of training, retraining or additional training for another position with the same or different employer which has been provided to them in compliance with the law; Loss of working ability according to the pension and disability insurance regulations; Fulfilling the conditions for exercising the pension rights. 
The amount of financial benefit Article 68 of the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment lays down the amount of a monthly financial benefit during unemployment at 50 % of worker’s average monthly net salary in the last 24 months for the persons entitled to financial benefit for up to 12 months, and 40% for the persons entitled to financial benefit for longer than 12 months. The financial benefit may not be higher than 80 % of the average monthly net salary in the Republic of Macedonia set out for the previous month. Financial benefit payment period Pursuant to Article 71 of the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment, the financial benefit payment period depends on the period during which the unemployed person has been insured for unemployment. The financial benefit is paid to the unemployed person in case: -  For 3 months, if the person has been continuously insured for at least 9 months or discontinuously insured for 12 months during the last 18 months; -  For 4 months, if the person has been continuously insured for at least 24 months or discontinuously insured for 48 months during the last 3 years; For 6 months, if the person has been insured for more than 5 to 10 years;  For 8 months, if the person has been insured for more than 10 to 15 years; For 12 months, if the person has been insured for more than 15 years; An unemployed person that has been insured for more than 15 years, but still lacks at least 5 years to become eligible for old-age pension, is paid a financial benefit until his/her employment, i.e. until any of the conditions for termination of the financial benefit right is not fulfilled.  Termination of the financial benefit right Pursuant to Article 77 of the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment, the right to unemployment financial benefit terminates if the person: - Commences employment; Establishes a trade company, enterprise or other legal entity; Carries out artisanship or another professional activity; -  Refuses to report to the employer he/she has been sent to by the Employment Agency in order to commence employment; -  Refuses to commence employment with the employer he/she has been sent to by the Employment Agency; -  Refuses full-time employment or part-time employment not shorter than half of the full-time, which is compatible to his/her education, skills and abilities; -  Refuses training, retraining or additional training compatible to his/her professional qualifications, skills and abilities, or willingly terminates training, retraining or additional training; Fulfils the conditions for acquiring the pension rights or retires; If a competent service finds out that the unemployed person works or is engaged in an illegal activity; Loses the working ability on the day of determination of the working ability loss; -  Unjustifiably refuses temporary employment in extraordinary circumstances (floods, earthquakes, necessary agricultural work etc.) which is organised by a competent body for elimination of consequences or prevention of occurrence; Refuses engagement in public works; -  Refuses employment at a position requiring lower qualifications than theirs if before the unemployment  they had willingly worked at such a position or had stated that they would have accepted a job requiring lower qualifications; Starts serving an imprisonment sentence of more than six months; Does not report at the Employment Agency at the set date; Unjustifiably does not report to the Employment Agency upon an invitation; Within eight days does not notify the Employment Agency of every change that is a condition or grounds for acquiring, realisation or loss of the right to financial benefit. Apart from the above law, there is also the Social Protection Law (Official Gazette of the RM No. 50/97, 16/00 17/03 and 65/04) providing for a special system of social care. This law stipulates the following rights: The right to permanent financial benefit; The right to one-off financial benefit; and The right to social benefit. Persons unfit to work, persons with no social security and persons unable to provide means of subsistence on the basis of other regulations are entitled to permanent financial benefit. Persons with mild, moderate or profound intellectual disability; persons with physical impediments; single mothers during the pregnancy, one month before giving birth; and single parents of children under three years of age; children under the age of fifteen or under the age of twenty-six if regularly attending school; and persons over the age of sixty-five are considered unfit to work. The permanent financial benefit is a basic financial right of the beneficiaries, it is calculated according to the average monthly net salary per worker in the Republic of Macedonia in the last three months, and it amounts to: 20 % of the salary base determined by law, for single beneficiaries; 28 % of the salary base determined by law, for beneficiaries supporting one person: 40 % of the salary base determined by law for beneficiaries supporting two or more persons. The right to permanent financial benefit is exercised as long as the beneficiary is unfit to work and financially insecure. In the Republic of Macedonia, the right to permanent financial benefit for April 2004 was exercised by 5.172 beneficiaries. The funds paid for that month amounted to 14.97.382,00 MKD. The right to one-off financial benefit or benefit in kind is provided for in the Social Protection Law and in the Rulebook on the calculation of the one-off financial benefit amount (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 2/03 and 57/03). This right is granted to persons or families with a poor social status due to natural disasters, epidemics, death, longer medical treatment in a hospital or in other social crises, and to social beneficiaries that have taken agricultural land for free cultivation. The one-off financial benefit is calculated according to the average monthly net salary per worker in the Republic of Macedonia in the last three months. The highest amount of the one-off financial benefit may be up to two average monthly net salaries per worker in the Republic of Macedonia, while the lowest amount of the one-off financial benefit is up to 30% of the average monthly net salary per worker in the Republic of Macedonia. Benefit in kind means providing clothes, food and other means necessary for minimum existence. In the Republic the right to one-off financial benefit for April 2004 was realized by 1.922 households. The paid funds for that month amounted to 3.049.840,00 MKD. Pursuant to the Social Protection Law, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopted the Decision on the conditions, criteria, height, manner and procedure of calculation and realisation of the social benefit right (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 15/98, 21/98, 28/01, 23/02, 91/02, 37/03 and 59/03). Social benefit may be used by persons fit to work yet socially insecure and unable to provide means of subsistence due to other regulations. Social benefit is granted to households where the beneficiary is: An employed person with incomes lower than the allocated social benefit; A retired person with incomes lower then the allocated social benefit; An unemployed person; Beneficiary of permanent financial benefit. The amount of the social benefit is calculated according to the relative poverty line, which at annual level amounts to 36.000,00 MKD, i.e. 3.000,00 MKD per month. The social financial benefit for a one-member household is established at the level of 57% of the calculated relative poverty line and amounts to: 1.700 MKD for one-member households; 2.200 MKD for two-member households; 2.800 MKD for three-member households; and -  3.600 MKD for four-member households and 4.200 MKD for households of five and more members. The social benefit in the Republic of Macedonia was used by 64.164 household in April 2004. A total of 139.283.177,00 MKD has been paid off. The social financial benefit is paid from the day of acquiring this right, and in the amount established by the Decision for the duration of the first 24 months. During the third, fourth and fifth year, it is paid in the amount of 70% of the established base. In the fifth year, it is paid in the amount of 50% of the established base. 
C. Conditions of Work and Pay 
Conditions of work 

1. What penalties can employers impose in cases of non-performance of work? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, in cases of non-performance of work, the employer may terminate the employment agreement due to employee’s inability to perform working duties, due to violation of the rules of order and discipline at work etc. Apart from the termination of employment by dismissal, the employer may substitute a dismissal with a fine which cannot be higher than 15% of the worker’s monthly salary for the duration of one to six months. The law and the collective labour agreement contain more precise provisions for the cases, conditions and types of dismissal, as well as the criteria and manner of the employment termination by dismissal. Pursuant to the provisions of the Law on Civil Servants, the civil servant is personally responsible for the performance of the working duties. For violation of the duties, all civil servants, except the General Secretary i.e. State Secretary, are disciplinary liable. The liability for the committed criminal offences and misdemeanours does not exclude the disciplinary liability of the civil servant. The civil servant is disciplinary liable for disorderly conduct and discipline offences. Disorderly conduct means a minor, insignificant violation of the official duty i.e. a minor violation of the respectability of the service or of the civil servant. A discipline offence is a serious, significant violation of duty i.e. severe violation of the respectability of the duty, of the service or of the civil servant. For violation of the official duty, one of the following disciplinary measures may be imposed on the civil servant by an official decision: 1. Public notice; 2.  Fine of 10% to 30% of the monthly salary paid in the last month prior to the violation; and 3. Employment termination. A disorderly conduct is defined as: 1.  arrival at work later or leaving the work earlier than the scheduled working hours in spite of the notice given by the superior civil servant; 2.  disorderly keeping of official records and data; 3.  unjustifiable absence from work for up to two working days in the course of one calendar year; and 4.  not displaying the badge with the personal name if such an obligation exists. A discipline offence is defined as: 1.  non-performance or unconscientious, improper, untimely or negligent performance of duty; 2.  expressing and advocating political beliefs while performing official duties; 3.  refusal to provide the data or giving the incorrect data to state administration bodies, legal entities and citizens if providing information is prescribed by law; 4.  illegal disposal of assets; 5.  refusal to perform official duties at the appointed position or refusal to carry out orders given by the superior civil servant; 6.  non-compliance with the provisions of Article 27, paragraph 2 of the above law; 7.  not taking or partially taking prescribed measures for securing the confided files; 8.  causing a major material damage; 9.  repetition of disorderly conduct; 10. accepting gifts and other types of abuse of position; and 11. refusal of the assigned professional training. Discipline offences from points 1 to 10 are fined with an amount of 10% to 30% of a monthly salary paid to the civil servant in the month prior to the offence, and if there were any damaging consequences for the service, and there were no extenuating circumstances for the responsible civil servant, the measure of employment termination is taken. The discipline offence from point 11 may be fined with an amount of 10% to 30% of a monthly salary paid to the civil servant in the month prior to the offence. The appropriate disciplinary measure for the discipline offence perpetrated by the civil servant is pronounced by the minister, i.e. the official in charge of the body, but after a completed disciplinary procedure proposed by the Committee for carrying out disciplinary procedures for discipline offences. The disciplinary measures for disorderly conduct against the civil servant are pronounced by the minister i.e. the official in charge of the body, upon a written report submitted by the superior civil servant. 2. Does the legal system give workers certain basic rights, such as human dignity at work? 
On the basis of the provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 25), referring to the guaranteed respect and protection of privacy and dignity, there are provisions in the labour legislation and the international documents covering the issues of human dignity at work. In this respect, the Labour Relations Law contains a special chapter of provisions for protection of employees at work. Such provisions regulate the issues relating to the employer’s obligations regarding the provision and implementation of protection at work in compliance with the above law and other regulations and collective labour agreements. 3. What is the minimum age for employment? 
The minimum age for employment is the age of fifteen. 4. From what age and under what conditions may children perform minor jobs? 
The Labour Relations Law does not provide possibilities for employment of children under fifteen, so there are no conditions under which children may perform minor jobs. 5. What other steps have been taken to protect their physical and moral integrity? 
The Labour Relations Law stipulates the following measures for the protection of the physical and moral integrity of children: Ban on underground work in mines; Ban on work involving strenuous physical labour which may be harmful or threatening to their health and lives; Previous examination of the general health and ability (stipulated by secondary legislation); -  Ban on work in night shifts in industries, building construction and transport, except when compelled by public interest, and with the approval of the state administration body competent for labour related issues. Employed children may use annual leaves increased by seven working days more than the maximum. 6. Are there specific provisions concerning the number of hours that people of less than 18 years may work? If so, what do they specify? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, employees under 18 years of age cannot be assigned to work longer than full time. The Law does not allow for overtime work and longer working hours for these employees. 7. Are there general arrangements concerning working time? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, full working time is 40 hours during a working week. The employer may introduce working time shorter than 40 hours per week (shortened working hours), under the conditions provided by this  Law
8. What is the maximum weekly working time?

Full time work must not exceed 40 hours per week. In cases of force majeure, extraordinary circumstances, extra increase of work volume and other cases of urgent and necessary needs determined by the law, the employee’s working time may exceed 40 hours, but not more than 10 hours per week (apart from the obligatory 40 hours). The working time that is longer than 40 hours per working week may last as long as it is necessary to eliminate the dangers, i.e. to prevent the harmful consequences.  9. What are the different ways of organising working time (e.g. annualisation; flexitime; overtime, etc.)? 
Employees may sign employment contracts for full working time or for reduced working hours. The working hours of employees whose health cannot be protected from harmful effects by protective measures, may work with reduced working hours, proportionate to the harmful effects to their health or working capability, but not less than 30 hours per working week. Employers may assign shorter working hours per week when work is organised in shifts, but not less than 32 hours per week for employees working in shifts. An employer may also assign shorter working hours for the completion of everyday duties in a smaller scope or if the disposition of the work requires so. Overtime is prohibited for persons under the age of 18, for female employees during pregnancy or with children under the age of 2. There is an exception for female employees with children over one year of age who are permitted to work overtime only at their request.  Another exception for overtime work is made for single parents whose children are under the age of 7 or disabled, solely on the basis of their written consent. One of the parents of disabled children is permitted to work half of the full working hours in cases when either both parents are employed or if the parent is self supporting, based on the findings of a competent medical board, and if the child is not placed in a social or a medical institution. The reduced working hours in this case are considered full working hours. The working hours may be rearranged if this is required by the disposition of the activity, work or duties, the organisation of work, for better labour utilisation and more rational use of working hours, so that the total working hours in average do not exceed 40 hours per week during the year. 10. What is the system of paid leave? 
During the course of one calendar year, the employees are entitled to annual leave of  minimum 18 and maximum 26 working days. Employees who have not accumulated one year of employment in the calendar year in which they have commenced employment, are entitled to annual leave of two working days for each month of employment, but not exceeding 18 working days. The duration of annual leave for employees working under specific working conditions is determined by branch collective agreements, but may not exceed 36 working days. The duration of annual leaves longer than the prescribed, is determined by collective agreements or employment contracts. Employees are permitted seven days leave from work during the calendar year with a compensated pay, in cases and under conditions determined by the collective agreement, particularly in cases of marriage, death of a close family member, for professional or other kinds of examinations on the employer’s request. 
11. What protection is there for night workers? 
Working hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, and in agriculture between 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. the following day, are considered night work.Night working hours represent a specific working condition, when determining the rights of employees.Female employees working in industries and building construction can not be assigned to night shifts unless a minimum seven hour break has been provided between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day.This prohibition does not pertain to female employees granted special authorisations and responsibilities or those engaged in health, social or other services for protection of employees.As an exception, female employees may be assigned to night shifts when it is necessary to continue interrupted work due to force majeure or when it is necessary to prevent damages to raw materials or other substances, or when compelled by particularly critical economic, social and similar circumstances and under condition that the employers are granted approval for initiating such endeavours by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. Employees are entitled to an increased salary for working during night hours. 
12. Do social partners have a role to play in implementing the various forms of organising working time? 
Regulations determine only the maximum weekly working time, a continuous rest of at least 12 hours between two consecutive working days, the break of 30 minutes during the working day, and for the protected group of employees (under the age of 18, female employees, pregnant women, parents of small children and single parents) restrictions on night work, overtime work, and work within the rearranged working hours. Within the legislative framework, the social partners may sign collective agreements and determine the scheduled working time according to the needs of the employers too, with the restrictions prescribed by the central authorities for the government bodies and public services. 
13. Does the system provide protection of workers with part-time or fixed-duration contracts and workers supplied by temporary employment agencies? 
The system as well provides protection of workers with employment contracts for part time jobs and with the fixed term employment. Such employment may be continued for the duration of up to three years (fixed term employment). If there is a need for the extension of a contract, it is transformed into regular employment. There are no legal restrictions on the duration of the employment contracts for part time jobs. 14. What protection is there in the event of major change in working conditions? 
A major change in working conditions is not by itself a justified reason for termination of employment. Employers are obliged to discuss their intentions to introduce new technology and changes in the structure and organisation of work with the trade union. In such cases, employers are obliged to provide the employees with the possibility of employment with another employer, training, re-training or additional training, or with severance pay - according to the abilities of the worker and the needs of work. 
Pay 

15. Is there a guaranteed minimum level of pay? Is this a statutory minimum or is it subject to collective agreement? How is pay determined? What are the relevant criteria? 
The minimum level of pay is not guaranteed and it is not a statutory minimum. Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the salaries of employees may not be lower than the lowest salary which is determined for particular levels of work complexity, according to law or the respective collective agreement. The minimum pay for the lowest level of work complexity is determined and published by the signatories of the General Collective Labour Agreement at least once on quarterly basis. When determining the minimum pay, the following is taken into consideration: the cost of living, the economic opportunities, the general level of salaries in the country, the productivity level, the social allowances and other economic and social allowances. 16. In what way is the payment of wages and salaries guaranteed? 
Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law, the salaries are calculated and paid at least once a month. Employers are obliged to keep records of the calculated and paid salaries and to issue a document to the employees for the payment of salaries compensations and contributions. 17. Do workers enjoy a general privilege over the employers' goods and assets for payment of wages and salaries? 
The Bankruptcy Law (Official Gazette of the RM No. 17/04) stipulates that the claims on unpaid salary contributions for pension and disability insurance by the employees have priority for collection from the employer’s bankruptcy estate to the creditors’ claims. 18. Are there additional guarantees where the employer is insolvent? More particularly, does the system provide for the creation of special guarantee institutions to protect the claims of workers owed money because of the employers' insolvency? How do such institutions work and how are they managed? 
Our system does not provide for special guarantee institutions. 19. Are there schemes for worker participation in profits, shareholding, etc.? 
The Labour Relations Law stipulates that the the salaries of the employees are provided from the employers resources, in proportion to the work rendered and their participation in the profit, according to the conditions and criteria stipulated in the law and in the collective agreement. The General Collective Labour Agreements for the economic (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 29/94, 87/01) and non-economic sectors (Official Gazette of the RM Nos. 39/94, 73/01) of the Republic of Macedonia also stipulate that employees are entitled to salaries in proportion to their participation in the profit, according to the conditions and criteria stipulated by the collective labour agreement at branch level and/or at the employer’s level. Therefore, if the collective labour agreement at branch level and/or at the employer’s level determines the criteria and conditions, the worker may be paid in proportion of the participation in the profit.  
D. Industrial disputes 

1. Is there a special court to deal with disputes under collective agreements? 
There is no special court to deal with disputes under collective agreements. The protection is provided at the basic courts, since labour disputes are under their jurisdiction. 2. Is there a right to strike? 
The right to strike is guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, and is regulated by the Labour Relations Law, the Law on Strike (Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia No. 23/91) and other special laws (e.g. concerning the state administration, the police, the army, and the public enterprises).  The unions and their associations have the right to organize strike for the purpose of enforcing employees’ economic and social rights. The organisation and participation in a lawfully conducted strike is not a violation of the employment obligations. The organisation and participation in a strike contrary to the provisions of the law is a violation of the employment obligations, which may result in employment termination. According to the Law on Civil Servants, the civil servants have a right to found unions for attaining their economic and social rights. They may be union members under the conditions determined by law and have a right to strike. 3. How is the right to strike regulated? 
Pursuant to the Law on Strike, the employer must be informed about the strike. The decision to go on strike contains the workers’ requests, the time when the strike begins and the place of the strike. A body (the Strike Committee) is formed to represent the interests of workers and to lead the strike. The Strike Committee is obliged to announce the strike five days before the date set for the beginning of strike at the latest. The Strike Committee and the representatives of the body to which the strike has been announced, are obliged to try and contractually solve the announced dispute starting from the day they were informed about the strike as well as during the strike. The strike ends by agreement between the parties that have adopted the decision on strike and the bodies to which this decision has been submitted, or by decision of the unions, i.e. the workers that have adopted the decision on strike. While exercising the right to strike, the civil servants are obliged to provide the minimum for smooth functioning of the administrative body necessary for exercising the rights and interests of citizens and legal entities, and implementation of ratified international agreements.  The Minister, i.e. the high official managing the administrative body, regulates the way of carrying out the functions of the body during strike by an act, as well as the number of civil servants that will carry out these functions in the interest of citizens and legal entities, and in order to execute the ratified international agreements. Non compliance with the provisions of the above act which defines the manner for performing the minimum for smooth functioning of the administrative body and the necessary level for exercising the rights and interests of citizens and legal entities, as well as the execution of ratified international agreements, implies disciplinary action against the civil servant for committed discipline offence which is a serious violation of official duty. During strike, the civil servant is entitled to a salary up to 60 % of the last month’s salary.   4. What restrictions are there on the right to strike in the private and public sectors? 
There are no restrictions on the right to strike with regard to the type of ownership. There are restrictions only regarding the type of activity. A special law regulates the right to strike in the army, the police, the state administration, and in certain public services. The Strike Committee and the workers participating in the strike are obliged to organize the strike in a way that does not endanger the security and health of persons and property and that it provides continuation of work after the strike ends. For employers whose activity or work is of public interest determined by law, a general act, i.e. the collective agreement, determines the tasks and duties and the way of performing the duties during strike, which should provide in particular: minimum process of work that provides security of persons and property, performance of tasks that are indispensable for people’s lives and work as well as for the work of other employers, and for the execution of international obligations.  The only restriction on civil servants for attaining their right to strike is their obligation to provide: the minimum for smooth functioning of the administrative body; the necessary level for exercising the rights and interests of citizens and legal entities; and the execution of the ratified international agreements. The Minister, i.e. the high official managing the administrative body, regulates the way of carrying out the functions of the entity during strike by an act, as well as the number of civil servants who will carry out these functions in the interest of citizens and legal entities as well as for the execution of the ratified international agreements. The organisation and participation in a lawfully conducted strike is not a violation of employment obligations. 5. Are lockouts allowed? 
Lockouts are allowed in case when strikes are organized and conducted against the law. 6. How are lockouts regulated? 
The lockouts are regulated by regulations relating to employment termination in case of disregard of working duties, pursuant to the Labour Relations Law. Employment is terminated by notice of dismissal received from the employer due to violation of working discipline or not fulfilling the obligations determined by law, collective agreement and employment contract in particular for:  1.  disobeying the rules of order and discipline prescribed by the employers; 2.  non-performance or dishonest and delayed performance of working duties; 3.  disregarding regulations pertaining to the fulfilment of working duties; 4.  disregarding the scheduled working hours; 5.  failing to request the leave or to notify the employer promptly when taking leave;  6.  failing to notify the employer within 48 hour absence from work due to illness or justified reasons;  7.  improper handling the means of work or disobeying technical working instructions ; 8.  failing to notify the employer immediately of damages, defects or losses caused in the process of work; 9.  improper handling or not maintaining the means and equipment for protection at work, and  10. illegal and unauthorised use of the employer’s assets.  Depending on the degree of responsibility, the conditions under which the damage has been inflicted, the previous performance and conduct at work and the seriousness of the damage, the employer may replace the lockouts by fines (in the above-mentioned cases). Employment is terminated without a term of notice when disregarding the rules of order and discipline at work or not fulfilling the working duties determined by the above or other law, collective agreement, and employment contract, in particular for: 1.  unapproved leave during three consecutive working days or five discontinued working days in the course of one year; 2.  abuse of sick leave; 3.  disobeying regulations for protection against illnesses, protection at work, from fire, explosion, harmful effects of poisons and other dangerous substances and violating the regulations for environment protection;  4.  supplying or consuming alcohol and narcotics;  5.  committing robbery, causing damages to the employer due to extreme carelessness;  6.  misusing or exceeding granted authorisation, and  7.  revealing business and other secrets.  The decision on employment termination is given in a written form, with right to an appeal and court protection in a legally prescribed timeframe according to the Labour Relations Law.   7. Are there special methods for dealing with industrial disputes, e.g. conciliation, mediation and arbitration? There are no special procedures for alternative solving of disputes (conciliation, mediation, and arbitration) in our legislation. According to the Labour Relations Law, in case of a dispute regarding the application of a collective labour agreement, a special arbitration council may decide on disputable issues. The council members, the method of work and the legal effect of the decision by the arbitration council are determined by the collective labour agreement.  The Strategy for Judiciary System Reform of the Republic of Macedonia foresees the adoption of a legal act in the near future, with the purpose of establishing a legal framework for out-of-court protection of violated rights of citizens in certain areas. 
