VIII. ANTI-DISCRIMINATION 

1. Which is (are) the government department(s) responsible for measures to combat discrimination on the grounds outlined above? 
The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia, in accordance with Article 110 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, is competent to decide upon the appeals of citizens for protection of freedom and rights that relate to the prohibition of discrimination among citizens on the grounds of sex, race, religion or national, social or political affiliation. The courts, according to the Law on Courts (Official Gazette of the RM No. 36/95), protect the freedom and rights of citizens as well as the rights of other legal entities. The jurisdiction of courts also includes protection of citizens from separate illegal acts by the state administration and other institutions that have public authorisation (administrative disputes). Regular courts have general jurisdiction on human rights protection. The Ombudsman is a body that protects the constitutional and legal rights of citizens and all other persons when their rights are violated by acts, actions, and omission of actions by the state administration bodies and other bodies and organizations that have public authorisation and that takes actions and measures for protection of indiscrimination and appropriate fair and equal representation of the members of the communities in the state authority bodies, the local government bodies, and the public institutions and services.  The Ombudsman takes actions and measures for protection of the principle of indiscrimination of the members of the communities that do not belong to the majority of the population and their unfair and unequal representation in the state authority bodies, the local self-government bodies, and the public institutions and services (Law on Ombudsman, Official gazette of the RM No. 60/03). Within the institution, by decision of the Ombudsman, a Department for protection of children was established in 1997. One of the Ombudsman deputies is responsible for the protection of the constitutional and legal rights of children when violated by state authority bodies or organizations with public authorisation. One of the Ombudsman deputies is female, monitoring the rights of women. From the information received so far from the Ombudsman Office, there is no complaint on violation of constitutional or legal rights of women. At the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, there is a Standing Survey Committee for Protection of Civil Freedom and Rights, whose purpose is to take care of the protection of the civil freedom and rights in case they are not practically exercised or are violated by the government bodies. The Standing Survey Committee is formed by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia. Its establishment has enabled initiation of procedure for determining responsibility of public position officials. The Committee for Relations with Religious Communities and Religious Groups reviews issues on relations among the communities in the Republic of Macedonia and gives proposals and positions for their solution. The Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia is obliged to review the positions and proposals by the Committee and to bring a decision. The Administration for Affirmation and Improvement of the Communities Representatives’ Culture in the Republic of Macedonia deals with activities directed towards encouragement and improvement of the co-operation with the neighbouring and European countries, then international and technical assistance in cherishing the cultural identity of the representatives of the communities in the Republic of Macedonia, and affirmation, improvement, and publication of the cultural creation, and care, cherishing and presentation of the cultural heritage of the representatives of the communities in the Republic of Macedonia. The State Education Inspectorate is responsible for performing inspection supervision through the educational inspectors in a manner determined by the Law on Education Inspection (Official gazette of the RM No. 33/95). According to this Law, if it is determined that there has been a violation of certain rights of pupils or students in the education, the education inspector brings a decision according to which certain measures are ordered to be taken with a certain deadline. This decision may be appealed to the Minister of Education and Science so that the complaint does not stop the execution of the decision. By decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, in January, 1997 a Department for Improvement of Gender Equality - DIGE was established within the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The basic function of DIGE is to positively influence the improvement of the women’s position and promote equality of genders in accordance with the international conventions ratified by the Republic of Macedonia, providing for the women to fully enjoy human rights. DIGE also initiates and coordinates activities for gender equality at the level of government institutions with clear goal and strategy to overcome the problems that women in Macedonia face. At the same time, DIGE co-operates, participates, supports, and coordinates numerous activities initiated by non-governmental organisations.  Within the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy there are: Sector for Protection of Children with Department for Provision of the Right to Children’s Protection, Department for Care and Education, Rest and recreation; Sector for Pension and Disability Insurance, Department for Protection and Care of Persons with developmental disabilities, care for refugees and asylum-seekers. Discrimination issues are solved in different sectors of the: Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Interior, and the Ministry of Environment, in accordance with their competencies.  The Labour Inspection is responsible for providing protection of employment rights. Any person believing that their right has been violated on any grounds, may address the Labour Inspection and ask for mediation and protection of the right. Apart from this, the person, discriminated on any basis, may appeal for court protection from the regular courts.   2. What kind of legislative and non-legislative measures exist in your country to tackle discrimination? 
In accordance with Article 9 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, all citizens have equal rights and freedoms, regardless of gender, race, and colour of the skin, national and social background, political and religious affiliations, financial and social status. Gender equality is additionally implemented in all of the legal regulations in the country. Primary education is compulsory for all children in Macedonia regardless of their gender. This principle of non-discrimination is also completely respected in the secondary education. In the Laws on Primary Education and the Law that regulates higher education there are no provisions that promote gender inequality. The non-discriminatory provisions, based on gender, are clear and explicit in the process of education. The Law also provides equitable access to university education of the citizens representatives of ethnic communities in the Republic of Macedonia. In order to create real conditions and assumptions to attain that right, the measure taken is called “positive discrimination”. It provides a possibility within the already determined competition conditions, apart from the regular students, for enrolling students from the ethnic communities in the first year by determining a so-called additional quota. The number of students in the additional quota is determined by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. This measure, with the amendments to the Law on Higher Education (Official Gazette of the RM Nos 64/00 and/ 49/03, is also established as a legal obligation and is incorporated in Article 95, paragraph 9 of the Law. For more details see 18_I_A_4The Labour Relations Law (Official Gazette of the RM No. 80/03), which regulates the issue of labour and employment, does not contain provisions that in any way promote discrimination of women (both in terms of employment and in terms of placement on an appropriate job, as well as in terms of salaries and other types of compensation). The amendments to the legislation since 1991 have mostly been focused on promotion of gender equality and protection of women based on increased opportunities for making the right choice by both genders and based on the global concept of protection of individual human rights and freedoms. With the Law on Defence (Official Gazette of the R M No. 42/01) women are allowed to engage in active military service (they can participate in the active military forces of the Republic of Macedonia); with the Law on Internal Affairs (Official Gazette of the RM No. 19/95, 55/97, 38/02, 33/03, 19/04) and the Rulebook on Parade Police Uniforms (Official Gazette of the RM No. 5/96) contain provisions that define parade uniforms of women. Article 48a of the same Law stipulates that when employing persons at the Ministry of Interior citizens of all communities should be represented and the criteria of expertise and competence should be respected. The Criminal Code (Official Gazette of the RM No. 28/91, 24/92, 49/93, 37/96, 80/99, 4/02, 43/03, and 19/04) envisions a possibility of court procedures for private disputes on sexual harassment and rape in marriage. The amendments to the Criminal Code (Official Gazette of the RM No. 19/04) adopted in March, 2004, incriminate domestic violence. In Article 122 point 19 of the Criminal Code the term family violence is defined as a maltreatment, severe insult, endangered security, physical injury, sexual or other psychological or physical violence which causes a feeling of insecurity, endangerment or fear of the spouse, parents or children or other persons that live in a marital or non-marital institution or common household, or in a former spouse or persons who have a child or close personal relations. Furthermore, the actions of family violence are contained in the following crimes contained in the Criminal Code of the Republic of Macedonia: Article 123 - Murder, Article 125 - Instant Murder, Article 130 - Bodily Harm, Article 131 - Severe Bodily Harm, Article 139 - Coercion, Article 140 - Illegal Deprivation of Freedom, Article 144 - Endangered Safety, Article 192 -Mediation in Prostitution, and Article 188 - Sexual Attack on a Child.  In the Labour Relations Law, in Article 9, paragraphs were introduced by which employers are prohibited from putting a person looking for a job (job applicant) or a worker in an unequal legal position because of race, colour of the skin, gender, age, health condition, i.e. disability, religious, political and other affiliation, membership in a union, national and social background, family status, financial status or other personal circumstances. Women and men must be provided equal opportunities and equal treatment for employment, progress, job insurance, work conditions, working hours, and termination of employment contracts.  In Article 77 of the Labour Relations Law, a paragraph is introduced stipulating that employers are obliged to pay equal salary for equal job requirements to the workers regardless of their gender. The provisions of the employment contracts and collective agreements provisions which are contrary to paragraph 1 of this article are annulled. As part of the affirmative actions taken to achieve equal participation of men and women in politics and in the decision-making bodies, the Department for Gender Equality Improvement at the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy initiated amendments to the Law on Election of Members of Parliament in 2002. Article 37 of this Law provides that in the proposed list of candidates, each gender shall be represented by at least 30%.” In June, 2003, amendments were initiated to the Law on Local Elections with the new Article 15-a which provides that in the proposed list of candidates for members of the Municipality Council and the City of Skopje, each gender shall be represented by at least 30% both in the upper and lower half of the list.” Gender equality is integrated in all national programmes and strategies adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, e.g., the National Action Plan for Employment 2004-2005 and the National Strategy for Combating Poverty.  Non-legislative Measures The freedom of association is guaranteed by Article 20 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia which provides that citizens are guaranteed freedom of association for implementation and protection of their political, economic, social, cultural, and other rights and convictions. Citizens can freely establish citizen associations and political parties, and may freely join and leave them. The programmes and activities of the associations and political parties can not be directed towards forceful destruction of the constitutional order of the Republic or towards encouraging or calling for military aggression or exciting national, racial, or religious hatred or animosity. Military or semi-military associations which do not belong to the armed forces of the Republic of Macedonia are prohibited. The freedom of association has been further regulated by the Law on Citizen Associations and Foundations in 1998. The non-legislative measures include numerous activities, such as: Permanent media campaign on destruction of stereotypes; Organised support to female candidates and encouraging women to vote for women; Changing the male political vocabulary (for e.g., Lady Minister instead of Minister);  Permanent pressure as an interest group for changing the inequality in politics  -  Organizing domestic and international seminars, workshops, and open debates on the need for including women in politics; -  Exhaustive work for overcoming personal blockades in women (prejudices) on their own position as a political subject;  -  Encouraging dialogue between women’s NGOs, women party forums, female Members of Parliament, Lady Ministers.  
3. What kind of judicial remedies exist in case of discrimination in the fields of employment, education, health care, social security, housing and access to goods and services? To what courts or other tribunals could victims of discrimination take their cases?

The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia envisions four types of protection of individual freedoms and rights: protection by courts, protection by the Constitutional Court, protection by the Ombudsman, and protection by the Standing Survey Committee at the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. Starting with these constitutional provisions, it may be concluded that in cases of discrimination in employment, education, health care, social security, housing, and access to goods and services, the person considering themselves victim of discrimination may protect their rights first of all in an administrative or criminal and litigation court procedure, i.e. take the case to the state administration bodies and to court, and then in a Constitutional Court procedure, as well as in a procedure taken to the Ombudsman of the Republic of Macedonia.  More specifically, there is a legal protection in administrative and court procedure in cases of discrimination in the field of employment, when a person looking for a job or a worker thinking that the employer has put them in an unequal position because of their race, colour of the skin, gender, age, health condition, i.e. disability, religious, political, and other affiliation, membership in a union, national or social background, family status, and financial status.  Namely, this person first submits a request on protection of rights to the State Labour Inspectorate at the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy which supervises the enforcement of laws and other labour and employment regulations. The person has a right to file a complaint against the State Labour Inspectorate’s decision to the Minister of Labour and Social Policy, who brings a second instance decision. Against the final decision by the Minister of Labour and Social Policy, administrative dispute can be initiated at the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia.  In case of indiscrimination in the field of health care and social security, the person prevented during the actual exercise of their rights to health care on the ground on the above mentioned bases, has a right to an appeal to the Director of the Public Health Organization, and to the Ministry of Health. This person has a right to ask for protection of their rights by the Ministry of Health, too, or more specifically, by the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate at the Ministry of Health, for a first instance decision. The person has a right to file a complaint against this decision to the Minister of Health, who then brings a second instance decision. As previously mentioned, against the final decision of the Minister of Health, administrative dispute may be initiated at the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia.  In case of discrimination in the field of education, if the pupil, i.e. his parent or custodian, or the student thinks that a certain education right is violated, they are entitled to address the State Education Inspectorate, which carries out an inspection supervision through the education inspectors. If the education inspector finds that laws, other regulations, and general acts have not been enforced, orders by a decision for the execution of certain measures with the purpose of elimination of the established infringements and irregularities. The person may file a complaint against the education inspector’s decision to the Minister of Education and Science, who brings a second instance decision.  Against the second instance decisions by the above mentioned Inspectorates, the persons not satisfied with the decisions of the administrative procedure, have a right to a lawsuit at the Supreme Court and to appeal for court control over specified administrative act, i.e. to initiate an administrative dispute. Apart from the protection of these persons in administrative procedures at the state administration bodies, a persons thinking they are discriminated on any grounds, may appeal for court protection. The discrimination victim is entitled to legal protection in a criminal procedure, as well as protection by courts in a litigation procedure.  The legal protection relevant to this issue is provided for with Article 137 of the Criminal Code (Official Gazette of the RM No. 28/91, 24/92, 49/93, 37/96, 80/99, 4/2002, 43/03, and 19/04). In context of this issue, other important articles are 138, 166, and 167 of the Criminal Code. Namely, according the Article 137 of the Criminal Code, in the Chapter dedicated to criminal acts against the freedoms and rights of people and citizens, violation of citizen equality defines each deprivation or limitation of rights determined by the Constitution, law, or ratified international agreement, i.e. giving privileges in attaining these rights which is a result of certain differences of the citizen or more citizens considering the gender, race, colour of the skin, national and social background, political and religious affiliation, financial and social position, language or other personal characteristic or circumstances. This is discrimination of or privilege to citizens on some of these grounds resulting in a violation of some right or privileged attainment of some right. The crime of violation of the right to use of language and alphabet, prescribed by Article 138 of the Criminal Code is a special form of violation of citizen equality considering that it relates only to a violation of the guaranteed right to use of language and alphabet. Although the violation in this case is not based on discrimination according to the grounds specified in Article 137, we consider this provision of importance because it guarantees criminal protection and provides attainment of the right to use of language and alphabet relevant to education.  The same can be said for crimes prescribed in Articles 166 and 167 of the Criminal Code which protect the basic rights of workers where the employer is responsible for violation of employment rights and violation of social security rights.  In all of these cases, during the criminal procedure the potential discrimination victim has a status of an injured party, as a person with certain personal or property rights violated or endangered by the crime. When the injured party is a plaintiff, they also become a party in the procedure. The competent public prosecutor will prosecute the perpetrator of the crime sanctioned by Article 137 of the Criminal Code and the perpetrators of crimes sanctioned by Articles 138, 166, and 167 of the Criminal Code, because these crimes are prosecuted ex officio. The injured party has a right to report this crime to the competent public prosecutor. This right is determined by Article 141, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Law on Criminal Procedure (Official Gazette of the RM No. 15/97, 44/02, and 74/04). The injured party files criminal charges to the competent public prosecutor which is a base for initiating criminal procedure. The damaged party has a right, according to Article 56 of the Law on Criminal Procedure, to take over, i.e. to continue the criminal prosecution in specified cases (when the public prosecutor finds there is no ground to take over the criminal prosecution for crimes prosecuted ex officio, when the public prosecutor finds there is no ground to take over the prosecution against some of the reported accomplices, or when the court brings a decision on adjournment due to renunciation of the public prosecutor from prosecution). Then, the injured party as plaintiff has the same rights as the public prosecutor, except for those that belong to the public prosecutor as a government body.  The injured party as plaintiff has a right to regular and extra-legal remedies in a criminal procedure. This means that they have a right to appeal the verdict and appeal the court decision to a higher instance court, and are entitled to file an appeal for renewal of procedure as extra-legal remedy.   Persons considering themselves discriminated on one of the above mentioned grounds, in one of the above mentioned fields, has a right to file charges with the competent court and initiate a litigation procedure. Moreover, separate litigation procedure is possible for labour disputes for which there are short deadlines for taking certain procedural activities in order to enhance the procedure. In this procedure, too, the person has a right to regular and extra-legal remedies, i.e. has a right to file a complain and file an appeal for renewal of procedure.  After using all regular and extra-legal remedies, the citizen may ask for protection by the Constitution Court of the Republic of Macedonia. Any citizen thinking that their right or freedom is violated by an individual act or action may ask for protection by filing a request for protection of freedoms and rights with the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court, according to Article 110 line 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, protects the freedoms and rights of people and citizens that relate to the freedom of conviction, conscience, thought and public expression of thought, political association and activities, and prohibition of discrimination of citizens based on gender, racial, religious, national, social, and political affiliation. The procedure on protection of freedoms and rights from Article 110 line 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia is regulated from Article 51 to Article 57 by the Rules of Procedure of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the RM No. 70/92). The decision brought by the Constitutional Court is final and by bringing the decision, the national legal remedies are exhausted. The person may file an appeal to the Ombudsman when they believe the principles of indiscrimination and appropriate and fair representation of the members of the communities in the bodies of Article 20 of this law are violated.  By filing the appeal, a procedure for protection of constitutional and legal rights of citizens is initiated at the Ombudsman’s. The Ombudsman may initiate a procedure by their own initiative, too. They do not act on cases which are in court procedure. The person that files the appeal does not pay fees for the procedure at the Ombudsman’s. The Ombudsman is an institution of the Republic of Macedonia which protects the constitutional and legal rights of citizens when violated by acts, actions, and omission of actions by state administration bodies, by other bodies and organizations with public authorisation and which takes actions and measures for protection of the principles of indiscrimination and appropriate and equal representation of the members of the communities in the state authorities bodies, the local government units, and the public institutions and services. After the completion of the procedure by the domestic bodies that decide on the domestic legal means, i.e. after all legal means have been exhausted, both in administrative and court procedures, persons have a right to file individual complaints in the European Human Rights Court at the Council of Europe. The right to access for citizens of the Republic of Macedonia to the European Human Rights Court derives from the fact that the Republic of Macedonia, has ratified the European Convention on Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. From that moment the right of the citizens to individual complaint with the European Court when citizens believe that certain freedoms or rights guaranteed by the Convention have been violated by acts and actions of state authorities’ bodies, including the domestic courts is into function.  4. Does your legislation define various types of discrimination (direct, indirect, harassment and instructions to discriminate)?

The legislation of the Republic of Macedonia does not define various types of discrimination, but defines various bases of the discrimination prohibition (gender, race, colour of the skin, etc.). The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia in Article 9 stipulates that all citizens are equal in their freedoms and rights regardless of the gender, race, colour skin, national and social background, political and religious affiliation, financial and social status, and then continues stating laws and other regulations which explains in detail this constitutional provision. The criminal legislation contains provisions which prohibit racial and other type of discrimination. There are provisions in the civil and administrative legislation on this matter, too. For example, Article 9 of the Labour Relations Law of the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the RM No. 80/2003) stipulates various types and bases of discrimination.  Preparation of a new Labour Relations Law is underway, and it will regulate direct and indirect discrimination upon the determined grounds.  5. What bodies exist to promote the fight against racial discrimination (and discrimination on other grounds)? What are their powers? 
The bodies described in the answer to question 13_VIII_2 take measures for fighting against discrimination and promoting the combat against racial discrimination and discrimination on other grounds.  The Ombudsman is one of the bodies that protects the constitutional and legal rights of citizens and all other persons when they are violated by acts, actions, and omission of actions by the state administration bodies and other bodies and organisations with public authorisation and takes actions and measures for protection of the indiscrimination principles and appropriate and equal representation of the members of the communities in the state authorities bodies, the local government bodies, and public institutions and services. By the Amendments from the year 2001 to the Constitution of 1991, a special procedure has been prescribed on election and dismissal of the Ombudsman, incorporated in the Law on Ombudsman, too, according to which the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, by recommendation of the competent Parliament Committees, elects and dismisses the Ombudsman by majority of votes from the total number of the parliament members present, provided there is a majority of votes from the total number of the parliament members representing the communities which are not majority in the Republic of Macedonia. In order to carry out the activities under jurisdiction of the Ombudsman, offices as local Ombudsman units are established in Tetovo, Kichevo, Shtip, Strumica, Kumanovo, and Bitola. Each person may file a complaint to the Ombudsman’s when they think their constitutional and legal rights have been violated or when the indiscrimination principles are violated as well as the equitable representation of the members of the ethnic communities in the state authorities’ bodies, the local government bodies, and public institutions and services. The Ombudsman may initiate a procedure by their own initiative, too. During the Ombudsman procedure, another language spoken by at least 20% of the citizens, including its alphabet, is official, too.  Each person in the communication with the Ombudsman may use one of the official languages and its alphabet, whereas the Ombudsman replies in Macedonian and its Cyrillic alphabet, as well as on the official language and alphabet used by the person filing the complaint. Within the institution, a separate Department for Child Protection has been functioning for several years. There is an Ombudsman protecting the constitutional and legal rights of children when violated by the state authorities’ bodies and organisations with public authorisation. More information about the Ombudsman’s activity in terms of meeting their obligation to take actions and measures for protection of indiscrimination principles and the equitable representation of the members of the ethnic communities in the state authorities’ bodies, the local government bodies, and public institutions and services, can be found in the answer to I_H_22

Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, Standing Survey Committee for Protection of Freedoms and Rights of Citizens  Article 76, paragraph 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia obliges the Assembly of Republic of Macedonia to establish a Standing Committee for Protection of Freedoms and Rights of Citizens. The purpose of the Standing Committee is protecting the freedoms and rights of citizens when they are not attained in practice or when violated by the competent state bodies. Its findings are a base for initiating a procedure for determining the liability of public officials. This liability primarily relates to acts and actions by these officials that violate or put in question the freedoms and rights of citizens. During its work, the Standing Committee co-operates with scientific and expert organizations in the protection of freedoms and rights of citizens, with relevant foreign and international bodies dealing with protection of freedoms and rights of citizens, as well as with relevant working bodies at the Assembly. 
Community Relations Committee  By the Amendment 12 of the year 2001 to the Constitution of 1991, a Community Relations Committee has been established. This Committee, established on 18 September, 2003 reviews the inter-ethnic relations in the country and gives opinions and proposals for solutions. In accordance with Amendment 12 that replaces Article 78 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, the Committee consists of seven members from the members of the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia, Macedonians and Albanians, and one member from the Turkish, Vlach, Roma, Serbian and Bosniak members of the Parliament. The decision-making process of the Committee, the body proposing other members when some community does not have its representatives in the Committee, and other details related to its work are described in the answer I _H_22. The Committee has adopted a Programme based on the implementation of various aspects of the Framework Agreement. The special intentions of the Committee is to focus its activities on four topics: 1) primary and secondary education of the members of the communities which are not the majority population in Macedonia; 2) equal and appropriate representation; 3) use of language and alphabet of the communities which are not the majority population in Macedonia; 4) use of national symbols of all communities which are not the majority population in Macedonia. Considering the place of the Committee in the institutional frame of the state authority and its Programme, it may be concluded that the Committee has a potential to play the key role in implementing the different elements of the Framework Agreement in a manner that strengthens the communication and contact among different communities. 6. What NGOs exist to promote the fight against discrimination? How are they involved in concrete actions, including policy-making and the defence of discrimination cases in the courts?

There are many NGOs dealing with promotion of human rights and fight against discrimination. Their activities are organised at national, regional, and local levels. Many of them have influenced the fight against discrimination in various aspects of social life (protection of the rights of the national minorities, gender equality, children’s rights, the rights of the disabled, the rights of the unemployed, the rights of the pensioners, consumers, homosexuals, etc.) Some of these NGOs are: the Helsinki Committee; the Macedonian Centre for International Co-operation - MCIC; Civil Society Research Centre - CSRC; Association for Dignity of the Handicapped - Hope; Association for Assistance to the autistic children in the Republic of Macedonia; Association of Children suffering from cerebral paralysis - Message, Polio Plus; the First Children’s Embassy – Medjasi; Association for Children’s Rights Protection; the Children’s Parliament; Save the Children; Humanitarian organisation for protection and assistance to the elderly – Life and Hope; Association for Education, Culture and Research of the Roma, Skopje; Association of the Vlachs - Kichevo; the Serbian Community in Macedonia; Association of Women’s Organizations in the Republic of Macedonia; Association of Albanian Women in Macedonia; the Roma Women’s Organisation in the Republic of Macedonia; Association Esma, and Daja from Kumanovo; Association of Vlach women; Association of Serbian Women in the Republic of Macedonia; Association of Friendship of the Turkish Women in Macedonia; the Humanitarian Association for Emancipation and Solidarity (HA-ESE), etc. In March, 2000, the Macedonian Women’s Lobby, MWL, was established as a response to the initiative by the Stability Pact and the Working Table on Gender Equality. The MWL is a group for pressuring the institutions, the public, and the media. It is an open structure, i.e. coalition of women from various structures: NGOs, political parties, government institutions, the local government, unions, media, women from various fields and different national, ethnic, party, and religious affiliation. The same year, the Department for Gender Equality Improvement at the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy provided offices for the National Office of the MWL which is logistics support for implementation of its programme activities which are in accordance with the National Action Plan for Gender Equality of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The MWL has lobbied for the amendments to the Law on Election of Members of Parliament and the Law on Local Elections.  The Macedonian Centre for International Co-operation - MCIC, has actively participated in the preparation of the amendments to the Law on Citizen Associations and Foundations in the Republic of Macedonia, which is underway.  The  Civil Society Research Centre - CSRC, has actively participated in the preparation of the amendments to the Law on Citizenship and in the initiation of adopting the Law on Asylum. The First Children’s Embassy - Medjasi, is an NGO taking care of the children’s rights protection and suggests and participates in the creation of draft legal solutions in reference to protection of children.    These NGOs do not have available information about concrete actions in including the NGOs in the defence of discrimination cases at any court, but when it comes to providing legal advice in the field of protection of their rights at competent courts, they provide free legal advice to the citizens not having means for providing legal representation on their own. 