IV. SOCIAL DIALOGUE 

1. What are the social dialogue mechanisms in your country? What is their legal basis? 
A social dialogue mechanism is established in the Republic of Macedonia. It is established and functions on the following legal basis: the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise No. 87, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention on the Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining No. 98, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention on International Labour Standards No. 144, and the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Recommendation No. 152 on International Labour Standards, the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, the Labour Relations Laws, other laws and collective labour agreements and other special laws and legal acts. Furthermore, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, the Macedonian Trade Unions Association and the Association of Employers have signed a separate agreement on the establishment of an Economic and Social Council as a tripartite advisory body consisting of representatives of the three social partners (the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, the Association of Workers, and the Association of Employers). The Economic and Social Council is an advisory body in which the representatives of the social partners review the economic and social issues and agree on general and common economic and social interests. The social dialogue is carried out in the Economic and Social Council and is realized on tripartite and bipartite levels. The Agreement on Establishment of the Economic and Social Council determines the issues related to the competencies of the Economic and Social Council in details, as well as the composition thereof and methods of work. Within the bipartite dialogue, two General collective agreements, 31 branch collective agreements, and collective agreements on employer’s level have been signed. Social partnership is implemented on various levels, including participation of the representatives of the social partners in preparation and implementation of the concrete projects related to the local economic development, employment, training etc.  The National Action Plan for Employment for 2004/05 has been prepared within the framework of the social partnership with participation of the social partners who will also participate in its implementation. Moreover, the Government and the Macedonian Trade Unions Association have signed a social agreement which determines the economic and social issues, priorities and obligations, as well as the course and dynamics of realisation. In accordance with the special laws, the representatives of the social partners participate in the administrative bodies of the relevant funds and institutions, representing the interests of the membership thereof, aligning them with the representatives of the Government and take an active part in preparation and implementation of the regulations from the relevant field. At the employers’ level, the social dialogue is being realized through the establishment and activities of unions, and participation in the procedure for concluding collective agreements at the employers’ level. There are also legal grounds and legal framework for the establishment of tripartite bodies on a local level with a participation of the delegates of local communities, with an aim to encourage the local economic development and to provide services to employers, employees and the unemployed for the labour market needs. 
2. What are the trade unions and employers’ organisations recognised at national level or at regional or branch levels? Is a list available with their names, dates of creation and coverage? How are these organisations entitled to recognition as social partners’ organisations (criteria set out by law, code of labour, …)? The Labour Relations Law provides that the employees and the employers shall establish organisations by own choice and join them under conditions determined by a Statute thereof. According to the records of the Registry f Unions kept by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (date of establishment and fields covered), the following unions are registered at the national level: Union of Metalworkers, Miners and Energy Engineers of Macedonia (08/02/1994); Union of Workers in the Agricultural Industry of the Republic of Macedonia – The Agri-Union (22/2/1994); Union of Workers in the Textile, Leather and Shoe Industries (28/02/1994); -  Union of Workers in the Civil Engineering Industry, Industry, Building Materials Industry and Planning of the Republic of Macedonia (28/02/1994); -  Autonomous Union of Workers in Education, Science, and Culture of the Republic of Macedonia (07/11/1994); -  Union of Workers in the Administration, Justice, Social Organisations and Associations of Citizens (23/09/1994); Autonomous Union of Workers in Health, Pharmacy, and Social Protection of the Republic of Macedonia (28/02/1994); -  Union of Workers in Catering, Communal Hygiene and Handicrafts of Macedonia (10/05/1996); Union of Workers in Transport and Communications (30/03/1994); Union of Workers in Chemical and Non-Metal Industries of Macedonia (30/09/1994); Union of Workers in Forestry and Wood Industry of Macedonia (22/02/1994); -  Independent Union of Workers in the Ministry of Interior of the Republic of Macedonia – Macedonian Police Union (28/12/1994); Union of Workers in Graphic Design, Information, Film, and Publishing, and Paper Production (28/02/1994); Union of Workers in Trade (28/02/1994); Independent Union of Workers in the Electrical Industry of Macedonia (04/05/1998); Autonomous Union of Workers in Defence (12/01/1998); -  Autonomous Union of Post Office and Telecommunications Workers of Macedonia (16/09/1998). The above unions are united in the Macedonian Trade Union Association, registered on 28/02/1994. Within the Macedonian Trade Union Association, there is a union network of 31 regional union organisations covering the interests of the branch unions which are not registered on their own because they are not independent legal entities. Besides the above-mentioned unions at the national level, the following unions are registered by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy: Federation of Independent and Autonomous Unions of Macedonia (07/03/1994); Union of Workers in Financial Organisations of Macedonia (05/11/1994) Association of Unions in Macedonia (15/01/1998); Coalition of Independent Unions of Macedonia (25/01/2000); Federation of Independent Transport Unions of the Republic of Macedonia (20/08/2001); Autonomous Union of Workers in the Clinical Centre (12/12/2001); Federation of Independent Civil Engineering Unions of Macedonia (31/05/2002); Union of the Macedonian Diplomatic Service (15/07/2002); Federation of Independent Industry Unions of Macedonia (04/07/2003); Association of Truck Transporters of Macedonia (16/07/2003); Confederation of Union Organisations of Macedonia (29/09/2004) and Federation of Music Unions of Macedonia (27/04/2004). The interests of the employers were represented by the Board of Employers functioning as a body of the Chamber of Economy of the Republic of Macedonia elected by the Assembly of the Chamber. The Chamber of Economy has acquired the status of a legal entity in accordance with the Law on the Chamber of Economy (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 38/90 and 10/91). Besides the Board of Employers, the interests of the employers are represented at the national level by associations in separate branches, as a basic form of organisation and operation of the members of the Chamber, organised within the framework of the Chamber of Economy of the Republic of Macedonia. The associations are constituted by a Decision of the Assembly of the Chamber of Economy (No. 08-4703/8 dated 13 November, 1992) as follows: Association of Energy, Ferrous and Non-Ferrous Metallurgy; Association of Metal and Electrical Industry; Associations of Mines and Non-Metal Industry;  Association of Civil Engineering Industry and Building Materials Industry; Association of Chemical Industry; Association of Textile and Garment Industries; -  Association of Paper and Cellulose Industry, Graphic Industry, Press and Publishing and Cinematographic Industries; Association of Leather Processing Industry; Association of Tobacco Industry; Association of Agricultural and Food Industry; Association of Water Management; Association of Forestry and Wood Industry; Association of Sales and Services; Association of Transport and Communications; Association of Catering and Tourism; Association of Communal Services; Association of Banking and Insurance; Federation of Associations of Individual Businessmen. In accordance with the Law on Chambers of Commerce (Official Gazette of the RM No. 54/02), the chambers of commerce may be established according to activities thereof. Chambers of trade, industry and services have been promoted so far, and by virtue of the Law, they are registered at the Registry of Chambers kept by the basic court in the territory of the chamber’s main seat. The new Law on Chamber of Commerce of the Republic of Macedonia is in adoption procedure, providing association on a free and voluntary basis. The aforesaid Law provides that the chamber shall be registered in the Trade Registry. The right of the organisations of employees and employers to participate in social dialogue derives from the Labour Relations Law and other laws and regulations. Namely, Article 96 of the Labour Relations Law (consolidated text) provides that the majority union and the employers’ association shall conclude a general collective agreement concerning the workers in the economy of the Republic of Macedonia. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the majority union conclude a general collective agreement on public services, public enterprises, government bodies, local self-government bodies, and other legal entities performing non-economic activities. Collective agreements at a branch level are concluded by the competent union and the competent organisation of the employers determined by the statute of the organisation of the union and the organisation of the employers. Other laws and regulations providing the right to participate in social dialogue are the Law on Employment and Insurance in Case of Unemployment, the Agreement on Establishment of the Economic and Social Council, the Social Agreement, the National Action Plan, etc. 
3. Is there a tripartite process and how is it functioning? Where does the dialogue take place, what is the rationale for consultation/negotiation? What are the trade unions and employer organisations that participate in this tripartite process, and what are the main criteria for their participation? What are the main areas covered by tripartite consultations? Have there been tripartite national agreements concluded over the past few years? Do they represent an important feature of labour and social regulation in the country? Are there any plans to modify or develop tripartite bodies in the future? 
The tripartite process is established and it is carried out through the mechanism of social dialogue and partnership as described in the previous answers. The social dialogue takes place through participation of the social partners in the work of the Economic and Social Council, in the preparations and implementation of the concrete projects (National Action Plan for Employment (NAP), PRiSMa, etc.), in managing boards of certain bodies and institutions, membership in Steering and Managing Committees of certain projects, participation in seminars, workshops, and conferences organized by the ILO (International Labour Organisation), the Stability Pact and the Council of Europe, with an aim to provide more harmonious development of the social processes, improvement of the social dialogue, solving of the economic and social issues and problems of interest both for the employees and the employers. The basic criteria for the Union’s participation in the tripartite dialogue are contained in the Labour Relations Law, and the representation thereof in the tripartite bodies at the national level is based on the number of members. The criteria for organisation of employers into associations are founded on a national level with an appropriate coverage of separate organisations according to fields and branches. Based on the aforesaid, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, the Macedonian Trade Union Association and the Macedonian Chamber of Economy participate in the tripartite process at the national level. Pursuant to the Agreement on Establishment of Economic and Social Council, tripartite consultations are made on economic policy issues and on measures for stable economic development in the following fields: economic policy and measures for economic and social stability and development; policy of pricing and salaries; labour and social security; collective bargaining and collective agreements; standard of living; - employment; working conditions and safety at work; - health protection; education, culture and vocational training; financial/credit and taxation policy; pension and disability insurance; social and children care Besides the abovementioned, the Council shall: encourage peaceful resolution of collective labour disputes; -  participate in coordination of work of the social partners collaborating with the International Labour Organisation and other international European institutions dealing with the tripartite dialogue on the national level and the implementation of the international labour conventions; develop the mechanisms of tripartite cooperation between the Government, the Union and the Chamber of Economy when dealing with economic and social issues and problems. The activity of the Economic and Social Council is carried out within the framework of cooperation between the three partners in the process of reviewing and resolving the various economic and social issues and problems. Thus a satisfactory cooperation has been achieved and a comprehensive process of harmonization regarding the most of regulations and issues has been completed. The current and future activities are directed towards the alignment of positions of the social partners on numerous economic and social issues and towards the process of harmonisation of legislation, then towards completion of the collective bargaining system on a branch level and signing the collective agreement and improvement of the collective bargaining system at the level of employers aiming at bigger scope and coverage of greater number of employers by collective agreements on the level of employers. Moreover, in order to improve and develop the social partnership, a special Social Partnership Sector at the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is in process of establishing. This Sector will contribute to improvement of communication between the social partners, provide professional and logistic support to the Economic and Social Council and the bodies thereof, make the relevant analyses, conduct researches and develop technical materials of interest for the social partnership. 
4. What is the state of development of autonomous bipartite social dialogue? How are the social partners structured at the intermediary levels of collective bargaining (sectoral and branch levels)? At what levels are collective agreements signed mostly? Can you supply information about the coverage by collective agreements? 
The bipartite social dialogue is carried out at the employer’s level in companies, institutions, and public enterprises; at branch level, between the association of unions and employers association; in public and in civil services between the union and the Government, i.e. between separate ministries; on a government level when concluding collective agreements for the private sector, between the Association of Unions and the Employers Association, as well as between the Government and the public sector union. There are two general collective agreements and 31 branch collective agreements, covering almost all fields and branches of the public and private sectors in the Republic of Macedonia. Pursuant to the Constitution and the legal regulations concerning all the branches and business activities, associations of unions and associations of employers have been organised according to the principle of freedom of association and organisation. There are on-going negotiations on concluding branch collective agreements in culture, care and education of children, higher education, and science. 
5. Have there been important strikes in recent years? On which matters? 
There is no institution responsible for keeping records on strikes during the past years. According to the information of the Macedonian Trade Unions Association, the number of strikes cannot be precisely determined, due to interruptions from one to another month, putting the strike at rest, transfer from one to another year, etc. According to the data available at the Association, there were some significant strikes in 2002 and 2003 by: some of the public servants, metal workers, miners, energy workers, textile, leather and shoe-making workers, transport and communications employees, as well as the employees in the publishing industry and paper production. The Law on Keeping Labour Records (Official Gazette of the RM No. 16/04) provides that records on strikes shall be kept by the employers encountering a strike and by the association of the majority union. 
6. What is the state of social dialogue in public administration and state enterprises? Are collective agreements signed in sectors such as education, health etc.? What is the situation with regard to trade union recognition and signature of collective agreements in state enterprises? 
The rights of employees in the state administration bodies, public services, and public enterprises are regulated by collective agreements as follows: by the General Collective Agreement on public services, public enterprises, government bodies, local self-government bodies, and other legal entities carrying out non-economic activities and by separate branch collective agreements on separate activities or public services (education, health, social protection, state, judiciary and local self-government bodies). The Law on Civil Servants regulates the status, rights, duties and responsibilities, as well as the system of salaries and compensations of salaries of the employees with the status of civil servants. As for the issues related to the rights that are not regulated by the above Law, regulations valid for labour relations, i.e. collective agreements, apply. 
7. Is there collective bargaining or involvement of workers at enterprise level? What forms of workers' participation have been developed at enterprise level (participation in decision-making, information/consultation, financial participation etc.)? 
We have had a developed trend of concluding collective agreements at the branch level so far. The process of collective bargaining at employers’ level has been developing in a parallel manner, but somewhat slower, depending on the interest and readiness of the employers and union, organisation and activity thereof, as well as on the business situation of the enterprise. Pursuant to the ILO (International Labour Organisation) Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise, 1948 (No. 87), the ILO (International Labour Organisation) Convention on the Right to Organise and to Collective Bargaining, 1949 (No. 98), the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, and the Labour Relations Law, employees have the right to organise in unions. Unions may, together with the employers, improve and protect the interests of their members and conclude collective agreements. Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law and the Law on Safety at Work,  there is an obligation for employers concerning informing the employees individually or collectively on issues related to working conditions and safety at work and informing also the union on the acts regulating the employment rights, measures related to introduction of new technologies and changes in organisation, working hours, leaves, holidays, individual and collective termination of employment and on other employment issues deriving from legal obligation. 
8. How are social partners currently involved in the EU integration process? Is there any tripartite committee for this purpose? What role do social partners play in different preparatory activities/discussions in the framework of integration? 
Social partners are involved in the EU integration process through the membership in international organisations and associations of the European Union, as follows: The Macedonian Chamber of Economy is a member of the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris, of the Eurochambers from Brussels. It has acceded to the Project on Institutional Capacity Building of Commercial Chambers and other Business Associations in the Western Balkan, it improves and promotes regional cooperation through the participation in other projects and initiatives in the region. The Macedonian Trade Unions Association has established a co-operation with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and expects to become a member thereof soon; it was awarded a status of observer in the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC) in June 2000; the individual branch associations of the Macedonian Trade Unions Association are the members of relevant union organisations at the EU level. The social partners are regularly informed about the activities related to the EU integration process through the work of the Economic and Social Council. They are actively involved in the debates and give opinion on issues related to the integration processes. The social partners are also involved in the procedure for ratification of separate conventions and recommendations of the International Labour organisation (ILO) and in the review of other legal projects deriving from or relating to the process of integration or harmonization of the national economic and social legislation to the EU legislation. At the same time, social partners are regularly involved and participate in training sessions, seminars, and workshops related to the above activities. The representatives of the social partners are directly involved in the work on harmonisation and implementation of the EU legislation within the framework of various EU projects and through the participation in working committees for separate projects. 