III. EMERGENCY MEASURES 
B. Questions 

1. What is the current level of oil stock reserves in your country, calculated according to EC methodology, and how are stocks currently calculated and controlled? 
According to the Law on Commodity Reserves (“Official Gazette of RM” No 68/04), see 14_Annex_03, the stock reserves of oil derivatives are mandatory stored, kept and renewed by the entities which perform production or trade of oil derivatives thereby complying to the general and specific conditions on trade with oil derivatives in the Republic of Macedonia. The current level of reserves of oil derivatives within the stock reserves warrants coverage of the consumption in the Republic of Macedonia for 43 days, calculated according to the average daily consumption in the previous calendar year, which is in conformity with the EU methodology. The Commodity Reserves Bureau controls stock reserves of oil derivatives, and according to the Law on Commodity Reserves, the control can also be entrusted to an entity registered for oil derivatives quantity and quality control. The State Market Inspectorate and the State Inspectorate for Technical Inspection perform inspection supervision over the stock reserves of oil derivatives. 
2. What are the existing or envisaged mechanisms in your country to face a disruption in oil supply and mitigate the effects of such disruption? 
In a case of a disrupted or insufficient supply of the market in the Republic of Macedonia with oil derivatives, caused by a state of war, a state of emergency, a natural disaster or another cause, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia decides on the regime of utilization and renewal of oil derivatives within the stock reserves. According to the Law on Commodity Reserves (“Official Gazette of RM” No 68/04), see 14_Annex_03, the quantities of separate types of oil derivatives in the stock reserves should be on a level of daily consumption for at least 90 days, calculated according to the average daily consumption in the previous calendar year. Pursuant to this Law, a mid-term Programme on Commodity Reserves for 2005-2007 was adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No 96/04).The procurement of stocks of oil derivatives, according to the mid-term programme on stock reserves is as follows:   In 2005, reserves of all types of oil derivatives shall be on a level of daily internal consumption for 46 days;    In 2007, reserves of all types of oil derivatives shall be on a level of daily internal consumption for 60 days;    In 2010, reserves of all types of oil derivatives shall be on a level of daily internal consumption for 90 days.  In cases of reduced availability of oil derivatives, in normal or emergency conditions, according to the regulations and documents of the Government, a prioritised, or in cases of difficulties - a reduced supply to preferential and specific consumers of oil derivatives may be performed. 
3. With priority given to the constitution of stocks according to paragraph A. above, what would be a realistic timetable to address the above issues (including a timetable to reach 30-60-90 days of stocks) as well as the expected difficulties while implementing the above legislation (financial, legal, setting up of institutions, other)? 
According to Article 6 and Article 7 of the Law on Commodity Reserves (“Official Gazette of RM” No 68/04), see 14_Annex_03, the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, upon a proposal from the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, adopts a mid-term programme which determines the type and quantity of stock reserves. With the mid-term programme for 2005 - 2007, the planned restocking of the oil derivatives' reserves to 60 days coverage of consumption will be reached by the end of 2007, and 90 days coverage of consumption will be reached by the end of 2010, which will be subject of the mid-term programme for the period 2008-2010. Financial problems may arise during the implementation of restocking of oil derivatives' reserves according to the above-stated schedule, if the planned funds from the Budgets of the Republic of Macedonia in the period between 2005 and 2010 for restocking of oil derivatives' reserves are not provided. 
4. What is your government’s position on IEA membership and, if appropriate, by what date has such membership been requested or will it be requested? 
The Republic of Macedonia has not applied for membership in the International Energy Agency. The membership in the International Energy Agency is subject to meeting several criteria, among which are the following:   Creating an energy policy based on sustainability, flexibility and efficiency, in accordance with the rising awareness of the energy impact to the environment, which is a primary goal of the International Energy Agency;   Incorporation into the global energy context, through sharing and exchange of information regarding the energy sector, coordination of the energy policy and cooperation in the development of energy programmes;   Accepting the nine common goals of the International Energy Agency, pertaining to:   Diversity, efficiency and flexibility within the energy sector;   Ability to respond promptly and flexibly to energy emergencies, especially related to oil supply;   Environmentally sustainable provision and use of energy with minimum adverse environmental impacts;   Use of environmentally acceptable energy sources;   Improved energy efficiency for promoting environmental protection and energy security;   Research, development and market deployment of new and improved energy technologies;  Undistorted energy prices;   Free and open trade; and   Cooperation among all energy market participants. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia shall implement the necessary reforms in the energy sector in the near future. In the meantime, it shall consider the possibilities for meeting the conditions for membership in the OECD and the IEA and submitting an application for membership in these institutions. 
5. What is your current legal framework for this area? In the event that your country has a dedicated oil stocks body, what are its tasks, staffing and budget?  
In the Republic of Macedonia there is no dedicated authority competent exclusively for oil reserves, but instead, the oil derivatives are integral part of the stock reserves and are under competence of the Commodity Reserves Bureau. The legal framework which regulates this subject is the Law on Commodity Reserves (“Official Gazette of RM” No 68/04), see 14_Annex_03The Bureau is a state administration authority within the Ministry of Finance, with a capacity of a legal entity. The Bureau has 24 employees, including 1 official - the Director, 8 civil servants and 15 workers for performing auxiliary tasks (without a status of civil servant). The Bureau is a holder of rights, obligations and responsibilities in the management, utilisation and handling of stock reserves of the Republic of Macedonia. The Bureau is responsible to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and to the Minister of Finance for its operation. The Bureau controls the methods of establishing, storing, restocking, utilization, as well as quality and quantity control of the commodities in the stock reserves.  The funds for financing the stock reserves are provided from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia and from donations. However, in the period since 1999 to date, the Commodity Reserves Bureau has not received any donation. In the period until 2007, the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia for the Commodity Reserves Bureau will amount up to 395.000.000 MKD on an annual level, including 45.000.000 MKD for salaries, rental fees and charges for goods and services, 250-350.000.000 MKD for provision of oil derivatives and no more than 100.000.000 MKD for the remaining commodities in the stock reserves. 
6. Does your Government, in case of IEA membership, have the intention to co-ordinate closely its positions in the IEA with those of the EU/European Commission? What would be your preferred mechanism for such coordination? 
In the case of achieving membership in the International Energy Agency, the Republic of Macedonia will coordinate its position in this organisation with the position of the EU / European Commission. Therefore, in the mechanisms, special attention will be paid to the coordination and harmonisation of our energy policy with the policy of EU member states.  