V. NUCLEAR ISSUES 
A. Nuclear energy 

1. Please submit any nuclear policy papers/statements/declarations made by your government regarding the peaceful utilisation of nuclear energy in your country. Please submit your government’s plans for the present and the future regarding nuclear energy, including the financing aspect. 
The Government currently has no plans or declarations for utilisation of nuclear energy, except for use of radio-isotopes in medicine and industry.  2. Please provide information on the structure of the National Regulatory Authority (NRA) (if any). Please provide the following information in detail: a) the legal framework of the NRA; b) the powers of the NRA concerning nuclear safety, the licensing of operating and/or new nuclear facilities, including fuel and waste treatment facilities, implementation of nuclear safeguards; c) the structure and responsibilities of the various departments of the NRA; d) the degree of autonomy and independence of the NRA, method of appointment and reporting relationship of the officers of the NRA. 
The Republic of Macedonia has no National Regulatory Authority on nuclear safety. According to the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety  (“Official Gazette of RM” No 48/02), see 14_Annex_04, establishing of a Directorate for Radiation Safety is in process. This activity shall be completed in 2005. 3. What provisions are related to nuclear safety? Are there specific authorities dealing with the matter? Does your country use/apply the IAEA/NUSS codes and standards? 
The Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety  (“Official Gazette of RM” No 48/02), does not contain separate provisions which are related to nuclear safety, except for the general provisions on protection from ionizing radiation, the reason being that the Republic of Macedonia has neither nuclear plants nor facilities nor nuclear material on its territory. The Republic of Macedonia does not have a separate authority for nuclear safety for the same reasons stated above. IAEA standards on nuclear safety are not used in the Republic of Macedonia, except for the International Basic Safety Standards (BSS) from 1994 publicised by IAEA.  
4. Regarding the supply of fuel: i) Who in your country can buy, own and sell nuclear material? ii) Who in your country can physically hold nuclear material? iii) With regard to the fuel used in your reactors, which country/countries is/are the source of enrichment services? 
In the Republic of Macedonia there are no nuclear reactors - neither for research nor for energy production, therefore no nuclear fuel is used, meaning that Macedonia does not import nuclear fuel. According to the existing legislation of the Republic of Macedonia, no authorizations on buying, owning and selling of nuclear material are given, and no authorization on physical handling of nuclear material is given. 
5. Please describe what is your country’s policy regarding import, export and trade of nuclear equipment, nuclear materials, new and irradiated nuclear fuel. Please give details of any national authorities responsible for controlling and/or monitoring such trade. 
There are no provisions concerning import, export and trade of nuclear equipment, nuclear materials, new and irradiated nuclear fuel, in the existing legislation of the Republic of Macedonia. 
6. What is the existing and planned capacity for storing nuclear waste? 
The Republic of Macedonia has no capacities for storing nuclear waste, and no storage of nuclear waste is planned for the future. 
7. What are your country’s nuclear research activities (existing/planned)? In case your country has research reactors, of which type are they and which nuclear fuel do they use? 
In the Republic of Macedonia there are no nuclear research activities, nor research reactors, and their construction is not planned; therefore no nuclear fuel for research is used. 
B. International commitments (nuclear energy, radiation protection and safeguards) 

1. Please provide the Commission with the texts of your international agreements and conventions on cooperation in the field of nuclear energy and radiation protection with other countries (in one of the official EU languages). 
The Republic of Macedonia hasn’t signed any international agreements and conventions on cooperation in the field of nuclear energy and radiation protection with other countries. 2. Please provide the Commission with the list of IAEA conventions to which your country is party as well as the corresponding national legislation aiming to enforce these conventions in the national legal order. 
The Republic of Macedonia has joined the following conventions and other documents of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA):    Statue of the IAEA - the Statute was published in the "Official Gazette of the SFRY" No 01/58. The Statute was adopted in February 1994 by succession, and was enforced on 17.09.1991.   Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident - the Convention was ratified with a Law on Ratification, and was published in the "Official Gazette of the SFRY" No 15/89. The Convention was adopted on 20.09.1996 by succession, and was enforced on 17.11.1991.   Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency - the Convention was ratified with a Law on Ratification, and was published in the "Official Gazette of the SFRY" No 04/91. The Convention was adopted on 20.09.1996 by succession, and enforced on 17.11.1991.    Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material - the Convention was ratified with a Law on Ratification, and was published in the "Official Gazette of the SFRY" No 09/85. The Convention was adopted on 20.09.1996 by succession, and was enforced on 17.11.1991.   Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage. - the Convention was ratified with a Law on Ratification, and was published in the "Official Gazette of the SFRY" No 05/77. The Convention was adopted on 08.04.1994 by succession, and was enforced on 08.09.1991.   Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons - the Treaty was ratified with a Law on Ratification, and was published in the "Official Gazette of the SFRY" No 10/70. The Treaty was adopted on 30.03.1995 by succession, and was enforced on 17.11.1991.   Agreement for the Application of Safeguards in Connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which was ratified on 23.01.2002 and published in the "Official Gazette of RM" No 13/02, see 14_Annex_06. The Agreement was enforced on 16.04.2002. The Small Quantities Protocol, which is signed by all countries that do not have nuclear weapons available, was signed together with the Agreement.    Law on Liability for Nuclear Damage ("Official Gazette of the SFRY" No 22/78) and the Law on Amending the Law on Liability for Nuclear Damage ("Official Gazette of the SFRY" No 34/79) , see 14_Annex_05According to Article 68, Line 6 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia ratifies the international agreements of the Republic of Macedonia with law. After the ratification, the international agreements became part of the internal legislation and can not be amended by law. Consequently, by the act of ratification itself, the conventions became a part of the internal legal order and there is no need of adopting special acts of their implementation into the legislation. In Annex is the text of the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety  (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 48/02), see 14_Annex_04
3. Given that your country is party to the Treaty for the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, does it have a full-scope safeguards agreement in force with the IAEA? If so, please send a copy. If not, will there be such an agreement in force in the near future? 
The Republic of Macedonia signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In accordance with Article III (4) of this Treaty, on 21.03.2002 the Agreement for the Application of Safeguards in Connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was signed. The Agreement was ratified on 23.01.2002 and published in the "Official Gazette of RM" No 13/02, see 14_Annex_06. The Agreement was enforced on 16.04.2002. The Small Quantities Protocol, which is signed by all countries that do not have nuclear weapons available, was signed together with the Agreement.  4. Is your country a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)? Does it have national legislation to enforce the guidelines of the NSG and the capability to maintain the necessary controls? 
The Republic of Macedonia is not a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG). Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety  (“Official Gazette of RM” No 48/02), see 14_Annex_04, has been adopted and harmonized with the international Basic Safety Standards (BSS), which enables implementation of NSG guidelines and the necessary control in the country. 
5. Has your country signed a Protocol Additional to the Safeguards Agreement on the basis of the document published as INFCIRC/540 and, if yes, since when is this Protocol in force? 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs initiated a procedure with other ministries for signing the Protocol Additional to the Safeguards Agreement, based on the document published as INFCIRC/540, in order the procedure to be completed in the second half of 2005. 
6. Has your country made a voluntary offer to the International Atomic Energy Agency concerning extended reporting on movements of nuclear materials and equipment, pursuant to IAEA document GOV/2929 of 22.1.1993? If so, please provide a copy. 
The Republic of Macedonia has not made an offer to the International Atomic Energy Agency concerning extended reporting on movements of nuclear materials and equipment, pursuant to the IAEA document GOV/2929 of 22.01.1993. 
7. What is the position of your country regarding third party nuclear liability (the Vienna Convention and the Paris Protocol)? Please give a progress report regarding the ratification process. 
The Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage was ratified with the Law on Ratification (“Official Gazette of the SFRY” No 05/77). The Convention was adopted on 08.04.1994 and enforced by succession on 08.09.1991. The position of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia is to support efforts for locating direct liability for nuclear damages. The Republic of Macedonia is not a member of the Paris Protocol, but considers that conditions for entering this Protocol have been already met. 
8. Does your country follow the 1994 International Basic Safety Standards (BSS) edited by the IAEA? 
The Republic of Macedonia fully complies with the International Basic Safety Standards (BSS) published by IAEA in 1994. In 2002 the new Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety  (“Official Gazette of RM” No 48/02) was adopted. It was previously verified by the legal department of IAEA. Based on Article 3 of that Law, there is an ongoing procedure for establishment of an independent Directorate for Radiation Safety. This activity shall be completed in 2005.  
With the expert assistance from IAEA: 1.  Three rulebooks have been drafted so far: Draft Rulebook for Limitation of Exposure to Ionizing Radiation, Conditions for Exposure in Special Circumstances and Carrying out Interventions in Emergency Cases, see 22_Annex_21Draft Rulebook for the Conditions and Measures for Protection against Ionizing Radiation for Performing Works with Radioactive Sources, see 22_Annex_22; and   Rulebook on Conditions and Measures for Protection against Ionizing Radiation in Operation of X-ray Apparatuses, Accelerators and other Devices arising from Ionizing Radiation, see 22_Annex_232.  Country Programme Framework was developed (CPF), see 14_Annex_11, based on which national projects from the field of radiation protection for building capacities and human resources for implementation of BSS are being conducted. 
9. Is your country a member of the Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD or if not, does it intend to become member? 
The Republic of Macedonia is not a member of the Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD, and for now, there is no intention on becoming a member. 
C. Safeguards 

1. Please provide the Commission with the texts of the international agreements and conventions that have been concluded with third countries or international organisations in the field of nuclear material supply, accountancy and safeguards. 
The Republic of Macedonia has not concluded any international agreements and conventions with third countries or international organisations on cooperation in the field of nuclear material supply, accountancy and safeguards. 2. Please provide the Commission with texts of national legislation and policy in the field of nuclear material supply, accountancy and safeguards. 
In the Republic of Macedonia there is no legislation in the field of nuclear material supply, accountancy and safeguards. According to the Spatial Plan of the Republic of Macedonia, adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No 39/04), in the section on energy sources and energy infrastructure, there is no planned construction of nuclear facility for production of electricity or other facility which would use nuclear material, on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. 
3. Does you country envisage any regulatory problems in adapting its legislation to ensure that it conforms to the provisions of chapter VII of Euratom as regards the implementation of Euratom safeguards in all nuclear installations on its territory? 
The Republic of Macedonia does not envisage any regulatory problems in adapting the national legislation to conform to the provisions of chapter VII of Euratom as regards the implementation of safeguards, having in mind that there are no nuclear facilities in the country. 
4. Please provide information for all major nuclear sites and installations in your country on their activities, processes, throughputs and inventories of Uranium, Plutonium and Thorium. 
On the territory of the Republic of Macedonia there are no nuclear sites or installations.  
5. Please provide information on any future plans or projects for installations storing, handling or processing Uranium, Plutonium and Thorium. 
In the Republic of Macedonia there are neither plans nor future projects for installations storing, handling or processing Uranium, Plutonium and Thorium.  6. Please provide information on components and equipment related to the nuclear fuel cycle present in your country that are subject to any agreement or convention concluded with third countries or international organisations. 
There are no components and equipment related to the nuclear fuel cycle present in the Republic of Macedonia, therefore there are no agreements or conventions concluded with third countries or international organisations. 
7. Does your country participate in any fusion research programme that involves the use of Tritium and who are the suppliers of this Tritium? 
The Republic of Macedonia does not participate in any fusion research programme that involves the use of Tritium; therefore there is no need for supply of Tritium. 
8. Does your country envisage any problems in suspending the existing Safeguards Agreement between your country and the IAEA and adhering to the Agreement INFCIRC/193 between the Community, the IAEA and the non-nuclear weapon Member States of the European Union? Please answer the same question concerning the Protocol Additional to the Safeguards Agreement between your country and the IAEA. 
The Republic of Macedonia does not envisage any problems in suspending the existing Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA and adhering to the Agreement INFCIRC/193 between the Community, the IAEA and the non-nuclear weapon Member States of the European Union. In addition, the Republic of Macedonia does not envisage any problems in suspending the Protocol Additional to the Safeguards Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the IAEA. 