IV. PRIVATISATION AND RESTRUCTURING 

1. Please describe current policy and implementation as regards the privatisation of large industrial enterprises for the main industrial sectors of your economy. What schedule, if any, has been identified for privatisation or restructuring and how is the privatisation of large industrial enterprises proceeding according to this schedule? Where obstacles impede full respect of the schedule, what are the obstacles and the solutions proposed by the government to overcome these difficulties? 
The privatization in the Republic of Macedonia is described in detail in Chapter II – Economic Criteria. See 275HII_V_14At the beginning of the privatisation in the Republic of Macedonia there was an intensive debate whether restructuring of the enterprises was needed, and if so, whether it should take place before or after their privatisation. On one side the opinion was that it is better to start the privatisation sooner through sale of the enterprises in the conditions they were since: (a) restructuring is expensive and (b) it is best to let the owners determine the specific restructuring modes. But soon after it became apparent that some enterprises can not be sold if not restructured previously, which was primarily the case with the large loss-making enterprises. Hence the idea arose to make an effort for restructuring in the pre-privatisation phase and so to mitigate the post-privatisation adaptation. As result of those discussions the First Programme and the First Law on Restructuring the Loss–making Enterprises(“Official Gazette of RM” No. 2/95) were drafted and enacted in 1995, for the implementation of which the Government received huge support from the World Bank. The Law on Restructuring the Loss–making Enterprises of 1995 referred to 25 enterprises which generated greatest losses in the economy. They produced 13% of the gross domestic product while generating 80% of the losses in the enterprise sector. Their debts accounted for 60% of the entire bad debts of the banking system and employed 55.000 employees. Among them were also the Electric Power Company and the Railway Company. The basic provisions of the 1995 Law on Restructuring were the following: isolation of those enterprises from the banking system; conversion of their debts towards the state and banks in capital; reduction of their expenses and, even more, reduction of the number of their employees through providing certain state aid for severances; stimulation of quick privatization – totally or of some of their parts – and if some parts could not  be privatised, then conducting liquidation as fast as possible. As a result of that activity out of the 25 enterprises around 160 smaller units (enterprises) were formed most of which were privatised, about 10 units were liquidated in the first two–three years of the implementation of the Law; yet few of the original 25 enterprises remained unrestructured and became subjects of restructuring programmes later on.  The second wave of restructuring loss-making enterprises encompassed in a special Action Plan of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia started in 2000. That plan was realized through privatisation/selling or bankruptcy/liquidation processes determined by the FESAL-2 Arrangement with the World Bank, according to which the Government was obliged to solve/restructure the sector of largest state-owned loss-making enterprises by the end of 2003. Some of the enterprises were sold to strategic investors, while some were liquidated within bankruptcy procedures and their assets were either sold or are still in a process of being sold via international tenders in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/97, 53/00, 37/02, 17/04) - through decisions of creditors (in most cases the biggest creditor of these enterprises is the state). In accordance with existing legal regulations, while the bankruptcy/liquidation process is open, being a shareholder, the Privatisation Agency was not given the power to manage and make decisions about the capital of those enterprises. Within the Programme, and as a constituent part of the Arrangement with the World Bank, 40 enterprises were selected as the largest loss-making enterprises. Those 40 loss-making enterprises subject of the new Government Restructuring Plan employed 10.4% of the total number of employees in the enterprises sector and in 1999 generated a total loss of $ US 95 million.  In order to realize the FESAL requirements, i.e. for the World Bank to release the three conditional financial instalments, the Government was obliged to find solution - through privatisation/selling or liquidation - for 30 out of the 40 nominated enterprises by the end of 2003..In November 2000 the Government fulfilled the conditions for withdrawing the first instalment of the arrangement by selling the ferro-nickel smelter (FENI) to a foreign investor. By the end of July 2003 the Republic of Macedonia withdrew the second instalment of FESAL-2 by finding solution for other 5 loss-making enterprises and, after finding a solution for a group of another 25 enterprises, the third instalment was released on January 6 2004. The rest of them will be restructured and privatised in accordance with the Bankruptcy Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/97, 53/2000, 37/2002 and 17/2004). The strategy used to implement the restructuring of the loss-making enterprises was realized through the following:     An economic and financial (cost-benefit) analysis by an independent consultant was performed for each enterprise in order to determine the most appropriate option - whether to sell (privatize) or liquidate it;   Selling of shares/parts of the loss-making enterprises was performed via international tenders in totally transparent procedures;    Selling of the property of liquidated enterprises on the basis of bankruptcy, was performed without placing any special conditions to buyers, except paying the price according to agreed conditions;   In order to provide transparent selling of assets additional engagement of external consultants to help bankruptcy managers of enterprises in bankruptcy was provided;   A Coordination Body of State Creditors for mutual and coordinated participation in bankruptcy appearances in court was established, with the task to overtake control over bankruptcy procedures based on state’s majority of claims in the loss-making enterprises, using the position of dominant creditor with a decisive voting right in the Board of Creditors;   Detailed procedure for announcement of international public tenders according to the best international practices was established, providing transparency in seeking, identification and qualification of the strategic investor;   Direct and indirect Government support for the socially/politically sensitive enterprises was provided;   Restructuring of the state claims in the loss-incurring enterprises. In the privatisation process the procedure ownership registration in the State Authority for Geodetic Works (survey and land registry departments in municipalities) appears as an obstacle, which is expected to be overcomed with the reforms in the State Authority for Geodetic Works. Another issue is the slow realization of the bankruptcy procedures which is connected with the promptness (or lack thereof) of the courts. The need for rationalisation and increase of the efficiency of the bankruptcy procedures will be further considered and adequate measures and activities will be used to overcome these difficulties.  Restructuring (privatisation) of the Electric Power Company of Macedonia will take place under a special law. In the period until now the engaged consultant prepared documents which were adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, and they include a model for restructuring and a plan for implementation of the restructuring. In March 2004 a Law on Transformation of Electric Power Company of MacedoniaState-Owned Shareholding Company for Production, Transmission and Distribution of Electrical Energy (Official Gazette of the  Republic of Macedonia No. 19/2004) was enacted which stipulates that the company – now shareholding company in state ownership – is to be divided into two new companies:   JSC MEPSO – owner and operator of the system for electric power transfer and management with the electro-energetic system, and in the same time market operator, which will remain in state ownership and   JSC Electric Power Company of Macedonia which will undertake the equipment and functions of production, distribution and supply of electrical energy, and which could later enter the process of privatization, through a decision and a strategy adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The privatisation can be carried out through: (1) sale of a dominant part to a strategic private investor, but only through transparent procedure via public tender with a pre-qualification phase; and (2) sale of a minority part (a share which by no means can interfere the managing rights of the private investor) to an international financial institution (IFI), through a direct contract. In accordance with the stated Law, in this moment the prepared Plan for Division of JSC Electric Power Company of Macedonia (which is harmonized with the new Company Law) has to be officially adopted by the Managing Board of JSC Electric Power Company of Macedonia and submitted to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  With  this Decision made  by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia starts the  realization process of the Plan for division and the legal registration procedures for both new companies. At the same time the Consultant of the Government will conduct a new due diligence of JSC Electric Power Company of Macedonia (the new company – without the transmission system) which is supposed to finish at the beginning of 2005, and further on it will be continually updated. The Consultant who is engaged to prepare the privatisation procedure of JSC Electric Power Company of Macedonia (the new company) will prepare a strategy that should be adopted by the Government, that will suggest what is to be offered to the investor and in what percentage. The Consultant will prepare the whole tender documentation and will assist professionally in the whole tender procedure in the course of the year 2005. See 276H04_I_8
2. What is the progress in privatising the banking sector and utilities? 
The banking sector privatisation in the Republic of Macedonia,has been carried out through two modes: (a) “passive privatisation”, i.e. privatisation of the ownership of the existing banks shareholders (in the previous system of Macedonia the banks were established by business entities which were socially-owned; hence through their privatisation the participation of the socially-owned/state capital in the ownership structure of the banks was gradually decreasing); and (b) through entry of new domestic and foreign investors (new shareholders) which, besides the change of the ownership structure, meant transfer of new capital  and new forms of management in the banks. So, according to the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia Report on Banking Supervision and the Banking System in the First Half of 2004 90.7% of capital in the banking sector is privatized. If the capital of the Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion (completely state-owned) is not considered in the analysis, the capital in banking is privatized 95.1%. This is to say that, out of the 20 banks which now have dominantly private capital, 7 are completely private,,that on an aggregate level (including the capital of the Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion) only 8.9% of the ordinary shares and 1.8% of the priority shares are owned by the public sector, while the remaining ordinary and priority shares are in private ownership. With the finalization of the process of privatisation of enterprises and the sale of the small number of state-owned shares in the banks, only bank with state owned capital will be the Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion. The utilities are not privatized.  The privatisation in the Republic of Macedonia is described in detail in Chapter II – Economic Criteria. See answer277H II_V_14
3. Is the environment for developing the ownership and corporate governance system adequate? Are there arrangements for post-privatisation corporate governance? 
For the purpose of implementing the strategic orientation of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia to improve the business environment an appropriate legal framework for protecting the private property is being prepared and enacted. The new Company Law, that entered into force on 08.05.2004 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04), protects the rights of minority shareholders (which was inadequately protected by legal means). This area is also regulated with the Securities Law  (“Official Gazette of RM” Nos. 63/2000, 103/2000, 34/2001, 4/02, 37/2002, 31/2003, 85/2003), as well as with the Industrial Property Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 47/02, 42/03 and 9/04). Improving the corporate governance in the Republic of Macedonia was an issue of thorough debate. As part of the strategy for developing the private sector a USAID funded Project was established which aims at developing activities that will help companies improve corporate governance standards. The Project has several activities, one of which was assistance in the preparation of the new Company Law, as a favourable framework for improved regulation of the corporate governance issues. A separate activity of the Project is the public education campaign, considered to be particularly important having in mind that the privatisation in the Republic of Macedonia resulted with large number of minority shareholders. In this respect, the main objective of the Project is that business executives, shareholders, employees and other stakeholders understand the ideas and principles of good corporate governance. A separate planned activity is the development of a corporate governance code, which the business entities will be encouraged to adopt voluntarily. The Project cooperates with various institutions and organizations in the Republic of Macedonia, helping them develop various concepts and proper implementation of good corporate governance. Collaboration has been achieved with the Macedonian Stock Exchange, the Macedonian Institute for Media, etc.  In the context of improving corporate governance it is important to mention that twenty large companies in the country joined the UN Global Compact network. With the signing of the Global Compact these companies count on increasing the credibility in business partnership and mutual contacts. The Global Compact incorporates the standards and principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work of the International Labour Organization, the Rio-Declaration on Environment and Development, as well as the standards of the United Nations Convention against Corruption.  With the signing of the Global Compact the companies are committed to observe the labour and human rights, to combat corruption and to care for the environment.  In the direction of improving the corporate governance in Macedonia particular attention will be paid to the complete adoption of an accounting system compatible with European standards, as well as to the development of efficient audit systems on the basis of the EU methods and procedures. The accounting and auditing profession will be improved through the establishment of an independent professional institution with the responsibility of ensuring the quality of the accounting and auditing services, securing in that manner the quality of the information on the business entities operation. See Chapter 28: Financial Control. 
4. What is the main driving force behind industrial restructuring? Privatisation? Foreign Direct Investment? Development of competitive companies? 
In order to  answer this question more thoroughly, meaning to determine the effects of different driving forces (privatisation, attracting foreign direct investments or start-ups of originally private competitive companies) upon restructuring of the entire industry, a detailed analysis of long-term data series is needed which cannot be done at present, since there is no data on the financial results in the economy of Macedonia categorized to sectors of ownership. However, even with the data for the trends in the 1995 – 1999 period some conclusions can be obtained. In a relatively simplified form the charts below present the indicators of: productivity (total income per employee – chart 1), efficiency of managing expenses (level of total expenditures coverage with revenues – chart 2) and profitability (gross profit related to fixed capital – chart 3). What can be concluded from these data which show faster growth of the originally private companies, is that (a) start-ups of originally private competitive companies is an important driving force behind the industrial restructuring in Macedonia, and (b) that this group has an increasing significance in the restructured Macedonian economy. For the group of privatized enterprises no stable tendency of their efficiency trends can be derived; hence it means that privatisation appears as somewhat less important driving force behind the industrial restructuring of the economy although, bearing in mind that this group of companies used to be the most essential part of Macedonian economy (and industry) before the privatization, the same conclusion does not necessarily holds true for their significance in the restructured Macedonian economy. The third group comprises the public and mixed (not completely privatized) companies. According to the indicators, this group is mainly worse-off than the other two groups, although some improvement in their performance is noticeable as well. For more precise conclusions a more detailed and comprehensive analysis is needed. There are several independent research studies for the contribution of the privatisation in the Republic of Macedonia, and their results are the following:   1.  In 1996 and 1997 privatized companies have been more productive than non-privatized ones, but the initial after privatisation productivity of companies privatized later was lesser than of those which have started the privatisation process earlier. After correcting this statistical bias, it appears that there is no statistically significant verification that privatisation in Macedonia has resulted in better performance of companies.2.  Macedonian companies operated in a turbulent environment characterized by changing measures of economy policy and hostile neighbouring environment for a long period during the nineties. The productivity of production factors was decreasing during that time, and the issue of corporate governance was a significant problem in the analyzed period.3.  Companies privatized by outsiders have better performance than those owned by insiders and they are more inclined to undertake the necessary phase of restructuring.In the previous analysis there is no elaboration of the influence of foreign direct investments over the restructuring of Macedonian industry. In general, Macedonia was not especially attractive location for foreign investors in or out o the privatisation process. In this context, although largest number of privatisation models assumed use of public and open calls for bids by any individual or legal entity in the country and abroad, in huge number of cases the only bidders were the insiders – employees and managers of the companies. Neither “greenfield” foreign direct investments in Macedonia until today are not a sufficiently large part of the restructured Macedonian economy. Hence, although penetration of foreign direct investments means contribution to restructuring of the economy, the influence of this instrument for restructuring of the industry in Macedonia is lesser than the other two. 
Chart 1.  Total income per employee (in thousands MKD)  
 Cebotari, Aliona; Drummond, Paulo; Glennester, Rachel; Marciniak, Philippe; Sekine, Toshitaka; Young, Hue (2000): Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Recent Economic Developments, IMF, 2000.  Janez Prasnikar, Will Bartlett, Polona Domadenik, Verica Hadzi Vasileva Markovska: “The Productivity f Firms in Transition: The Case of Slovenia and Macedonia”, 11th Conference of The International Association for The Economics of Participation (IAFEP), ‘Participation World-Wide’, Katholieke Universiteit Brussel – K.U.B., Brussels, 4-6 July 2002  Hadzi Vasileva – Markovska, Slaveski, Pahor, 20015001.0001.5002.0002.5003.000economyprivatizedprivateother1.995 1.996 1.997 1.998 1.999 Chart 2.  Total income to total expenditures 
0,020,040,060,080,100,120,140,160,180,20economyprivatizedprivateother 1.995  1.996  1.997  1.998  1.999 
Chart 3.  Profitability ratio 
Source:  Calculated on the basis of: Payment Operations Bureau, Information on the obtained results in the economy of the Republic of Macedonia in the corresponding years. 
5. Are there an adequate bankruptcy legislation and effective enforcement procedures in place to allow for the closing of non-viable enterprises? 
Republic of Macedonia both within the frames of SFRY and in the period from its independence until the adoption of the Bankruptcy Law  in 1997 used to regulate this sphere with the Yugoslav Bankruptcy Law. Today regulation of bankruptcy is enforced according to the Bankruptcy Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/97, 53/2000, 37/2002 and 17/2004.) The law is drafted according to the German Bankruptcy Law model and comprises most contemporary bankruptcy solutions including UNCITRAL rules. Latest amendments of the Bankruptcy Law provided provisions for achieving greater efficiency and quality of bankruptcies, elimination of certain shortcomings and harmonization with other laws.   The Bankruptcy Law is the basis for liquidation of enterprises. In Article 4 of the Law the reasons for opening of bankruptcy proceedings are stated, which are:   inability to pay (insolvency), which is a general reason for opening a bankruptcy proceeding;  over-indebtedness;   inability for settling claims by debtors in an execution procedure. The result of a bankruptcy may be either liquidation or reorganization of the company. In the case of liquidation of a debtor-company, the debtor’s property is converted into cash and the funds (revenues) obtained are distributed to creditors. The Law provides the possibility to prepare a reorganization plan for the company subject to bankruptcy procedure, in the case of concluding special contract which allows forced settlement of claims. The Law specifies multiple modalities for 0,020,040,060,080,100,120,140,160,180,20economyprivatizedprivateother 1.995  1.996  1.997  1.998  1.999 implementation of the reorganization plan and for transformation of the debtor-creditor relations into equity, through:   1.  Allowing the debtor to manage or dispose of the whole or a portion of his/her property, unless is otherwise specified by the Law; 2.  Transferring the entire or a part of debtor’s property to one or more legal entities that either exist or will be established; 3.  Merging of the debtor with one or more legal persons; 4.  Selling all or a part of debtor’s property, with or without right to separate settlement; 5.  Dividing all or a part of debtor’s property among creditors; 6.  Determining the manner of settlement of bankruptcy creditors; 7.  Settling or changing the rights to separate settlement; 8.  Reducing or postponing the payments of debtor’s liabilities; 9.  Turning debtor’s liabilities into loan; 10. Compensating some or all liabilities of a debtor towards creditors with parts or shares which are owned by the partners, i.e. shareholders;   11. Undertaking a guarantee or providing another type of collateral for fulfilment of debtor’s liabilities; 12. Transforming some or all debtor’s liabilities towards creditors into a stake or shares in the reorganized debtor company, on the basis of the previous assessment of the net value of the paid-up capital of the company by an authorized assessor; and 13. Allowing an increase of the paid-up capital of the company through issuance of new shares and parts for the creditors or for new investors. It is important to emphasize that amendments to the Bankruptcy Law are in procedure in order to eliminate the shortcomings of organizational and procedural aspect, which appeared in the course of the application of the Law. The changes are made in the frames of the judicial system reforms. Amendments to the Law on Civil Procedure and Law on Execution Procedure are also under way in order to provide legal protection of the participants in the debtor-creditor relation. 6. Has the government prepared sector-specific restructuring packages? If this is the case: Is enterprise viability the guiding principle behind the restructuring programmes or are there other objectives in terms of e.g. employment targets? How are these programmes financed? Is the support from the state compatible with EU state aid rules? 
In the case of privatization in the Republic of Macedonia there were no differences in the method of privatization and/or restructuring of enterprises from different sectors in the industry, that is, the same principles and methods were applied for the enterprises in all sectors. The privatization of industrial enterprises without restructuring (See answer 278HII_V_14) differences in the models of privatization existed only in respect to the size of enterprises (small, medium and large) but not in respect to the sector, and the same is the case with the privatization of the enterprises in the industry where previous restructuring was performed (of the  loss–making large enterprises, for example). Thus, there are no particular sector specific packages for restructuring of specific sectors. The steel sector is an exception, where the  National Restructuring and Conversion Programme in the Steel Industry of the Republic of Macedonia is adopted, which is an obligation according to Protocol 2 of the  Stabilisation and Association  Agreement. Although not within the industrial sector, differences in the privatization and restructuring of  the enterprises existed for enterprises of other business sectors. The first  specific case were the enterprises from the agricultural sector (which started with privatization in 1996), and later on from the telecommunication sector, energy sector (the privatization is in progress), insurance, utilities, lotteries, pharmacies and some health services and etc. Regarding sector specific restructuring, particular attention deserves the process of restructuring and privatization of agricultural enterprises. At the beginning of the privatisation (in 1993) the agricultural enterprises were exempted from the process, and they were encompassed with a special law – the Law on Transformation of the Enterprises and Co-operatives Utilizing Agricultural Land (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 19/96, 25/99, 81/99 and revised text 48/00), which was enacted in 1996. When compared  to the law for the industrial enterprises, an important feature of the Law on privatisation of agricultural enterprises is it required that deeper involvement of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy in the process. The “integrated agricultural combinats”, as well as the enterprises which owned substantial parcels of land, had to be restructured before privatization, and each entity resulting from the restructuring had to be put on sale separately. The rationale behind this kind of restructuring and privatization was the need  to increase the efficiency and competitiveness (higher specialization) during their privatisation. Also, 15% of the land owned by the “agricultural combinats” was put for sale to private farmers. The purpose of this policy was to support the development of a market for land in the country. See the answer to the next question of this chapter. 
7. In the case of steel sector restructuring: Have the authorities prepared a restructuring plan that foresees a reduction of capacity based on the analysis of demand? Is implementation proceeding according to schedule, and in line with provisions of the SAA? Please describe the current state of implementation of protocol 2 of the SAA. 
In accordance with Article 23 of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and the Republic of Macedonia of April 2001, i.e. Article 10 of the Interim Agreement on Trade and Trade-related Matters between the European Communities and the Republic of Macedonia, and on the basis of the provisions of Protocol 2 on steel and iron products, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has adopted the obligation to prepare a National Programme on Restructuring and Conversion of the Steel Manufacturing Industry. On the basis of a Government decision from 2001 The Ministry of Economy, together with other authorized ministries, is obliged to prepare a National Programme for Restructuring and Conversion of the Steel Industry and to provide its implementation in a five years period. For this purpose within the CARDS Programme in the period 2000 – 2006 (Regulation of the Council of the European Union No. 2666/2000) funds were allocated that were used for formation of the National Programme for Restructuring and Conversion of Iron and Steel Industry, as well as support of the specific sector within the frames of preparing the National Plan on Economic Development. The National Plan for Restructuring and Conversion of Steel Industry was prepared in cooperation with a foreign consultant (Euro Strategy Consultants) selected via an international tender and the Steel Department of the Ministry of Economy. The National Programme and the individual business plans for the leading companies in this industrial sector (Makstil, Ladna Valavnica and Valavnica za lenti) on 19th July 2004 were adopted by the Government or the Republic of Macedonia, and European Commission have been informed about this matter. The National Programme for Restructuring and Conversion of Steel Industry and the individual business plans of the companies should provide the companies  to achieve the foreseen economic vitality and capability for global competition in the period of five years. See 279H15_Annex_01