II. GLOBAL STRATEGY 

1. Is there a framework policy paper that defines the government’s approach to industrial development and restructuring (including privatisation aspects)? Specify the status of this document. If it is not the case, which documents can be considered reference documents for understanding the government’s policy in the industrial sector? 
The most recent framework document for the policy that defines the approach towards industrial development including the restructuring in the Republic of Macedonia is the “National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union,” prepared during 2003 and the beginning of 2004. In the previous period of transition the approach of the Government towards those questions has been partially or more holistically considered and defined within several documents, prepared and enacted successively since 1992.   The first such document is the “Strategy for Adjustment of the Economy and Global Considerations for the Economic Development,” prepared in 1992 by the Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts (MANU), upon the request of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (the Ministry of Development). As far as privatisation is concerned, prior to the enactment of  the Law on Transformation of Enterprises with Social Capital (“Official Gazette of RM” 38/93, 48,/93, 7/,97, 9/98, 21/98, 25/99, 39/99, 81/99, 49/00, 6/02, 31/03, 38/04), upon Government’s request the Faculty of Law in Skopje prepared a Study on Privatisation in Macedonia. Also a special analysis on the privatization in Macedonia was conducted, which was edited by Dr. Cento Veljanovski. Considering the urgent need for combating hyperinflation and introducing and maintaining macroeconomic stability in Macedonia, a Stabilization Programme was enacted in 1994 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 4/94), prepared in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund and supported by the World Bank. In this Programme, among other things, special attention was paid to the reforms in the enterprise sector, referring primarily to their privatization and restructuring. In 1997 Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts (MANU) prepared a “National Strategy on Economic Development of the Republic of Macedonia”, which is a long-term vision - up to 2020 – of the global directions and strategic changes in the economic development.  In 1999 Macedonian Academy of Arts and Sciences prepared an “Export Strategy of the Republic of Macedonia”, a document which tackles the strategic directions of exports. In 2000 the Government of the Republic of Macedonia enacted a “Framework Programme on Economic Development and Reforms – Macedonia 2003” (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 49/00). Being a complex document with mid-term approach it stipulates the measures and activities for the realisation of reforms. Special sector policies are also treated in the Programme, with a special part deals with the development of the industry and privatisation and restructuring of enterprises. Until 2004 other special strategies and programmes are prepared and enacted tackling different sectors of the economy, and restructuring and development of the industry. The following are more important: Programme of Measures and Activities for Entrepreneurship Promotion and Competitiveness Creation of Small and Medium Enterprises in the Republic of Macedonia, Strategy for Development of Small and Medium Enterprises, Programme of Investment Promotion in the Republic of Macedonia, National Action Plan on Employment 2004 – 2005, National Restructuring and Conversion Programme in the Steel Industry, National Strategy on Quality, National Environment Protection Action Plan, National Assessment of Sustainable Development, Public Investments Programme 2004 – 2006. The National Programme on Development of Education and the Strategy on Energy Efficiency of the Republic of Macedonia are also prepared and they are undergoing enactment procedure. Second National Environment Protection Action Plan is prepared based entirely on the European Union Environmental Programme, as well as National Strategy for Sustainable Development, which also tackle the issues of the industrial development policy. As for the current macroeconomic policy, each year the Government enacts an annual Programme which stipulates measures and activities of the policy of economic development, whereas the measures of the industrial policy are also tackled. 
2. Has the government developed a specific competitiveness strategy for the transition period? Specify i) how it is based on the analysis of the country’s competitive advantages, market imperfections/failures; ii) when and for what reasons state intervention is foreseen; iii) how the interface is articulated with other government policies such as competition, education and research, employment, and regional policies; iv) whether interested parties (business operators, academic and research institutions, intermediary agencies) have been involved in the design of the strategy. 
i) The Republic of Macedonia in the transition period from planned to market economy faced complex economic problems which primarily required rapid action for their mitigation. In addition to the problems that are common for the transition (loss of traditional markets, hindered access to the international financial market, etc.), there were also problems caused by external political factors (the disintegration of former Yugoslavia, the UN posed economic sanctions towards Yugoslavia, blockades from the southern neighbour, the Kosovo crisis and the disturbed political and security situation during 2001). Thus the economic policy measures in the initial period of transition were principally aimed at establishing macroeconomic stability and creation of a new normative and institutional framework for a market-oriented economy. The stabilization measures of macroeconomic, policy, determined by the Stabilization Programme of 1994, were a mix of measures of the monetary policy, fiscal policy and foreign exchange policy, followed by measures of the income policy and structural reforms. The consistent implementation of the Stabilization Programme, which was implemented through annual programmes on the macroeconomic policy, gave positive results rather quickly. On the other hand, having the orientation towards creation of a market economy, the Republic of Macedonia was also undertaking policy measures aimed at increasing the economic efficiency and competitiveness, i.e. measures to support structural changes and business restructuring. Such measures are planned in the long-term papers and in the annual programmes on the macro and microeconomic policy of the Government. However, due to the complex conditions which the Macedonian economy was exposed to during the transitional period, particularly in the initial years but also afterwards, it did not succeed in accomplishing significant restructuring and increase of competitiveness. After 2002 more favourable conditions for undertaking structural reforms and competitiveness increasing of Macedonian economy were created. In order to promote economic growth and alleviate poverty, primarily through upgrading the economic efficiency and the competitiveness of the economy, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has set the consistent implementation of market liberalization, creation of business environment compatible to the environment of economically developed countries (EU members states), as well as the implementation of structural reforms and the creation of a new economic (industrial) structure as its first priority. In this context the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union, prepared during 2003 and 2004 and adopted by the Government and the Committee on European Issues of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, is a document which includes a vision, strategy and measures and programmes of the industrial policy for increasing the competitiveness of Macedonian economy. The document has primarily a mid-term perspective (until 2007), but lots of the measures and programmes also have long-term orientation, while the term until 2007 is their launching period. The industrial policy for creating competitiveness of Macedonian economy envisaged by the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union has the evident orientation not to embark on a “picking the winners policy” but rather through a set of policy measures at horizontal  level, to create favourable conditions for business restructuring, increase in competitiveness and intensifying the growth of business entities on a relatively wide basis. A starting position is the notion that in current vibrant business conditions debates on competitive advantages based on factor endowment lax full meaning, instead the focus should be to competitive advantages which have to be created. In this context, the basic supporting rationale of the Strategy is that in the previous fifteen years the first phase of the transition (i.e. the phase of establishing private ownership and basic institutions of the market economy) was completed ,hence now is the time to launch an industrial policy with an active approach towards fostering growth and promoting prospective businesses. This policy is focused on structural changes and upgrading the competitiveness of companies, which is closely linked to the policy of technological development, entrepreneurship promotion and creation of new (primarily small and medium) enterprises. Improvement of the investment climate is also a concern of the Government, and in addition, an environment favourable for stimulating structural adjustment of enterprises and improvement of their market positioning will be promoted. By the same token, two important priorities of Government’s policy in this area are: (a) to create conditions for the private business sector to take the leading role in creating economic growth while the Government is to be its partner through the creation of a favourable business environment; and (b) to start the transformation of Macedonian economy into a modern knowledge-based economy.  According to the stated approach, the Document envisages support to the business sector  in its efforts for structural adjustment to fast-changing competitive conditions via introduction of new products and production programmes and/or via improvement of existing ones. Clustering, intra and inter-companies technological integration and attracting foreign direct investment will be also stimulated. These activities define the basic framework of the industrial policy for upgrading the growth of the business sector of Macedonian economy, which is comparable to the policy of creating competitiveness implemented in the EU (according to “The Lisbon Strategy” and other documents). In addition to the horizontal approach, the industrial policy for creating competitiveness of Macedonian economy defined within the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union also stipulates a vertical (sector) approach. In the creation of the policy framework the mutual correlation of policy measures on horizontal and vertical level is observed, where the vertical (i.e. the clustering) approach is given central focus, while the horizontal aspect is represented by a network of policy programmes and projects which have the aim to stimulate and strengthen the competitiveness of clusters. Each cluster in Macedonian economy can belong and encompass as many parts of the “horizontal network” as are necessary in its specific case. In the context of efforts for creating competitiveness of Macedonian economy it is important to note that, starting from 2003, a special (USAID funded) Project on creation of competitiveness of Macedonian economy is implemented, while now the intentions are to transpose the Project’s activities as an integral part of the proactive industrial policy of the Government of Macedonia. As part of the Project activities a National Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness Council of Macedonia was established, which is a partnership between the private, the public and the civil sector. Support to the creation of clusters in Macedonian economy is of special importance of that Project as well, hence five clusters as having high growth potentials have been selected and are supported: the lamb and cheese cluster, the tourism cluster, the information technology cluster, the wine cluster and the textile cluster. Regarding the question on how are market imperfections and failures respected, the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union has a separate subchapter which tackles specific reforms in the activities of public interest – infrastructure, transport, telecommunications and energy. In general, the improvement of the functioning of the public sector should be achieved through: (a) commercial orientation and increase of management efficiency of utilities (specific measures are corporatisation, management contracts and adequate pricing policy); (b) privatization of parts of the public sector; and (c) regulation improvement. 
ii) In the initial phase of the transition period, due to the general conditions in the country – the start of transition towards a market economy, beginning of privatization and reforms in all areas, as well as due to the influence of the situation in the region and the unstable political and security situation in 2001 – state intervention was used at a relatively large extent. The intervention was mostly intended for re-establishing normal conditions in the economy and for rehabilitation of certain strategic enterprises, in order to maintain production and improve the social position of employees. This has resulted in unequal treatment of businesses, delayed restructuring and sluggish creation of a functioning market economy in general. As of 2002 the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has increased the promotion of market liberalisation,, through improving the market environment and abandoning state interventionism. An effort is made to establish the true role of the state in a market environment, - as regulator of overall business conditions and as creator of macroeconomic stability. On the other hand, with the Stabilization and Association Agreement the Republic of Macedonia is obliged to respect an identical regime for the use of state aid as do EU member states - areas eligible for state aid are regions with unusually low living standard and huge unemployment. A Law on State Aid (“Official Gazette of RM” 24/03) with the basic by-laws which is harmonized with relevant EU Directives was enacted,to guarantee that stated goals of the state aid policy will be accomplished. More on the aspects of State Aid can be found in Part II of Chapter 6: Competition. See 255H06_II_1256H06_II_2257H06_II_3258H06_II_4259H06_II_5260H06_II_6.  
iii)  
Competition The industrial policy for creating competitiveness of the Macedonian economy envisaged by the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union also determines that policy measures should be complementary, coordinated and supported with appropriate measures of other policies within the overall economic policy framework. The policy of price liberalization has two aspects of primary importance: (a) decrease of number of products and services that have controlled prices, but preceded with introducing market competition; and (b) announcing the intentions (with time frames) for future price liberalizations, which should provide transparency, decrease of inflationary pressures and give apt signals to enterprises for future restructuring needs. This is especially important in the energy sector. The policy of protecting market competition foresees establishment of favourable and transparent conditions for competition. The prices in monopolized sectors are controlled, which is considered as a transitory solution, while the permanent solution is elimination of the monopolies wherever possible. Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), Law on State Aid (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 24/03) and Law on Protection of Competition (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 04/05) were enacted. Pursuant to the Law on Protection of Competition a Commission  for Protection of Competition will be formed, based upon the principles of eligibility, autonomy, independence and joint working and decision-making. Finally, in order to secure success in the implementation of the policy of protection of market competition the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union points to the necessity of improving the efficiency of the judicial system and of establishing an adequate institutional and administrative framework. The implementation of the Strategy on Judicial Reform will involve, among other things, training and preparation on applying the new anti-monopoly legislation, while also public awareness among the business community and the general public about Government’s policy of protection of competition will be promoted. Education and research Since the Republic of Macedonia is lagging behind EU member states in regard to scientific and technological progress, which itself is a result of numerous difficulties faced in the areas of scientific research and technological development in the initial period of transition - scarce budgetary funds, lack of capacity and equipment, unsatisfactory institutional infrastructure, insufficient transfer of knowledge and research resources in the business sector, low investment in the application of research and innovations, low levels of private investment in research and development as well as the “brain drain” - the key issue that is of interest now is the improvement of the technological knowledge of the business sector in Macedonia up to a level so that implementation of latest achievements in technological development will be made possible. This objective of the Science and Technology Policy of Macedonia is an integral part of the policy of creating competitiveness which, among other things, relies on results of educational and research policy. Having in mind that education, research and innovations lie in the heart of competitiveness, reforms in the educational system, incorporated in the Draft National Programme on Development of Education 2005-2015 (which should be adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia) are under way. This programme foresees increasing of competitiveness of Macedonian economy through improving the education, development of R&D and the promotion of creativity and innovations. The document entitled “Basic Policy of Technological Development in the Republic of Macedonia” is prepared by the GTZ - Project on transfer of technology.  Creation of an information society and promoting extensive use of information and communication technology are also of significant importance for creating competitiveness and for future economic growth of Republic of Macedonia. The information technology sector in the Republic of Macedonia was recently selected as one of the five industrial clusters that receive support from the Macedonia Competitiveness Activity (the USAID funded Project on creation of competitiveness of Macedonian economy), since rapid growth is expected in this sector. For several years until now in Macedonia the “e-Macedonia for all” Committee exists, and the Government of the Republic of Macedonia also has established a Committee on Information Technology which has initiated the preparation of a National Strategy of the Republic of Macedonia on the Development of Information and Communication Technology in accordance with the EU action plans eEurope and eEurope+, as well as a Project entitled “e-Government”, aimed at implementation of information technology in the operations of the public administration. See 261H19_III_A_1262H19_III_A_2263H19_III_A_3Employment Regarding the employment policy the Government of the Republic of Macedonia develops and implements a strategy for increasing the employment (decreasing the unemployment), mostly through training of workers which have been layed-off and reforms of the labour market supported by appropriate legal regulations. The main goals of the policy of improving the human resources and lessening labour market rigidity in Macedonia are to increase the capacities of human capital, increase productivity, improve competitiveness and raise the quality of living. A National Action Plan on Employment 2004-2005 in compliance to European Directives was prepared, which defines the employment policy and the specific measures aimed at increasing the employment. The active policies of the labour market promoted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia are concentrated on: measures on increased flexibility of the labour force, support to seeking employment (providing information, intermediation and counselling), organization of training programmes (training and retraining) and the creation of conditions for supporting jobs creation. 
iv) In the Republic of Macedonia universities, research institutes and experts from various areas of expertise are regularly involved in planning and drafting national strategies and policy papers. The same applies to the drafting of the competitiveness creating policy of Macedonia within the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union. In addition to that in the course of the preparation of the document a roundtable discussion with wide auditorium including representatives from both the academic and the private sector was held. On the other hand, the National Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness Council of Macedonia which is active within the Project on creating competitiveness of Macedonian economy is a tripartite body (partnership) between the public, the private and the civil sector, comprised of over twenty members. It includes five Ministries (the Minister of Economy, of Finance, of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, of Transport and Communications, and the Minister of Labour and Social Policy), two representatives of the civil sector (from the Trade Union Association and from the “Ss. Cyril and Methodius” University in Skopje), and the other members are leaders from the private business sector. The Council has two co-chairs – the Minister of Economy as a representative of the public sector and one representative of the private sector. The main objectives of the work of the National Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness Council are: to serve as a forum for dialogue for identifying and proposing measures aimed at reducing (or eliminating) the obstacles to private sector growth; to advocate and lead the implementation of policy changes critical for economic growth; to promote public awareness on the importance of entrepreneurship and competitiveness for the economic growth of Macedonia; to develop long-term strategies for promoting competitiveness, productivity, growth of small and medium size enterprises and entrepreneurship; to conduct research and analyze information regarding Macedonia’s economic policy vis-à-vis the global economy; to help establish a competitiveness culture in the private and public sectors that successfully embraces competition, innovation and sustainable development. In addition to that, the Council also proposes strategies and policies which have the goal to enable Macedonian companies and clusters to create and export high-value added products and services on foreign markets.  For its first year of operation the members of the National Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness Council defined top priorities and developed action plans for each of them, having the intention to achieve both short-term and long-term results. The priorities are: attracting foreign direct investment to Macedonia; increasing exports; and, improving management capabilities. At its second Annual Conference held in July 2004 the Council has set the priorities for the following 12 months: increasing domestic and foreign investments; promotion of the EU accession of Macedonia; increase of public investment; and improving management capabilities. 
3. If an industrial policy is in place, please describe its main features and priorities. How are these priorities made consistent with the overall economic policy? Does the industrial policy take into account the necessity i) to create an attractive operating environment for business and investors; ii) to promote the development of adequate professional skills, the creation of an integrated innovation system and the development of clusters? 
The Industrial policy for creation of competitiveness of the Macedonian economy incorporated in the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union is of a recent date (adopted in the second half of 2004).  Hence, the industrial policy practised in the Republic of Macedonia until now is defined in other framework documents, strategies, or annual programmes for the current economic policy. The basic characteristic of the industrial policy which has been practised in the Republic of Macedonia is establishing an equal treatment of all business entities and equal conditions for market competition of all business entities, through the formation of an adequate institutional infrastructure, adequate mix of elements of the economic system and adequate measures of the current (short-term) and the development (long-term) policy. In this context, the industrial policy of Macedonia in general has a horizontal approach, whereas the vertical (sector) approach has had much lesser importance.  Although several strategies and programmes for restructuring and upgrading of certain sectors (such as tourism, etc) have been prepared, the industrial policy of Macedonia practically has not entered into direct and selective support of few sectors. For the steel sector a special National Restructuring and Conversion Programme in the Steel Industry in the Republic of Macedonia is adopted, which results out of an obligation from Protocol 2 of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement. With that Programme, the restructuring of businesses in the steel industry is planned in order to maintain the economic vitality after the implementation period, and to help them to become more competitive on the global market. The basic aims and priorities of the general economic policy in the Republic of Macedonia are: (a) maintenance of the macroeconomic stability;  (b) increase of employment (rather decrease of the huge unemployment); (c)  growth of GDP ; and (d) creating conditions for decrease of social inequalities.  The priorities of the industrial policy are reconciled to the priorities of the general economic policy, and they are:  (a) structural changes of the industrial production towards products and services of higher phases of finalisation (higher value added); (b) development of production of goods and services which are market compatible and export oriented; (c) competitiveness improvement and development of small and medium enterprises;  (d)growth of investment (domestic and foreign); (e) protection of private property. According to the explanations in the previous question, the general characteristic both of the industrial policy for creation competitiveness of the Macedonian economy, which is defined in the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union, as well as of the industrial policy practiced so far, basically is brought down to preference of equal treatment of all business entities, creating conditions for equal market competition and defining policy measures, instruments and programmes whose purpose is - throughout providing various kinds of business restructuring and technical and technological upgrading - to increase the competitiveness of the Macedonian economy. In this respect, four objectives of the general economic policy defined within the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union are singled out as most essential: (a) maintaining macroeconomic stability; (b) creating conditions for faster economic growth and increase of employment; (c) provision of adequate and/but targeted social protection for reducing the social consequences of transition; and (d) improving the implementation of the formally already established regulatory and institutional framework, i.e. reduction of the so-called implementation gap. On the other hand, the basic aims and priorities of the industrial policy for creating competitiveness of Macedonian economy which is defined in the same document are the following: (a) creating a stable and completely predictable institutional environment and a framework adequate to the needs of the modern market economy; (b) process of careful and gradual harmonization and adoption of the EU legislation; and (c) conducting a proactive industrial policy for promotion and development of the prospective businesses. In that respect, a special attention is paid to the compliance of the priority aims of the industrial policy with those of the total economic policy.   
i) The direct answer to this question is – yes, the industrial policy practiced in the Republic of Macedonia has always respected the necessity for creation of an attractive business environment. On one hand, in respect to the creation of attractive business environment for the private sector a special Programme for measures and activities for support of entrepreneurship and of small and medium enterprises in the Republic of Macedonia was prepared and adopted, and work is already underway on separate projects defined by that Programme. For improving the business environment, in cooperation with domestic experts and representatives of international organizations such as the World Bank, MIGA, UNDP, USAID, a Programme for investment promotion in the Republic of Macedonia was also prepared. The basic principles for investment promotion are elaborated in detail, among which the following are most important: (a) formation of a detailed Action Plan for elimination of administrative barriers to investment; (b) establishing of an Agency for Foreign investments; (c) intensifying the fight against corruption and improvement of neutrality in the work of the state administration; d) upgrading of the judicial system; e) upgrading of the tax system; and  e) other similar incentives for investment. In cooperation and coordination with the specialised institution of the World Bank – FIAS, in April 2003 a Study was prepared to detect the administrative procedures and barriers to investment and attracting foreign direct investment in the Republic of Macedonia, with recommendations for their upgrading and/or elimination. Special emphasis in the realization of the macroeconomic policy of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for 2004 was placed upon the implementation of the Programme for Investment Promotion (prepared in 2003). 
ii) Regarding the need of promoting the development of vocational qualifications in Macedonia a process of changing and targeting the educational profiles according to the needs of the labour market has begun, which is also positive from the technological development point of view. A National Programme on Development of Education is in its final stage of preparation.  Parallel to that, within the process of industrial policy creation the need for creating conditions for more rapid technological innovation capabilities development was recognized, as well as of creating conditions for competition in innovation, development of knowledge based economy and of highly qualified workforce that will be able to follow contemporary trends of technological upgrading. In this period, taking into consideration the need for a new technological policy of the Republic of Macedonia, the German Institution GTZ prepared a document entitled “Basic Policy of Technological Development in the Republic of Macedonia.”  The Government encourages and supports the technical and technological development throughout co-financing of research and innovation projects.  Forms for educating the young people in technical creativity and for promoting the results of innovation activities have been developed. Annual programmes of specialized organizations for inventions and technical promotion are prepared, where priority to innovations is given. Yet, financial and technical conditions for the creation of an integrated system for inventions lack. The needs for developing specialized qualifications and an integrated innovation system are the basic components of the industrial policy for creating competitiveness of the Macedonian economy defined in the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union. The priority goals in the area of upgrading human resources and the labour market are: (a) to support continuous investment in human capital through provision of an adequate public and private education network; (b) to eliminate the existing institutional rigidity of the labour market and social protection schemes; and (c) to increase the workforce mobility. The modernization of education is focused on improving the quality of human resources of primary importance for business restructuring and for increasing economic growth. Support will be given for investment in higher education offering qualifications which meet the labour market demand. Concerning the need of including the Republic of Macedonia in the common European Higher Education Area the creation of legal framework for implementation of the Bologna process is planned, aimed at creating conditions for treating higher education as public good. The number of places for students entering university (higher) education will continue to increase, as will the quality standards of studies. In accordance with the Bologna process and the Communiqué of the European ministers of higher education, adopted at the Conference in Berlin in September 2003, Macedonia will continue with the reforms for harmonization in the areas of: (a) structure of degrees in the higher education (graduate, postgraduate and doctoral studies); (b) provision of high quality higher education; (c) elimination of barriers for mobility, of students teaching and administrative personnel in the European Union member states and in the South East Europe region; (d) further development and implementation of the European system of transfer of credits; (e) recognition of qualifications and diplomas; (f)  development of different forms of life-long learning; and (g) connecting with the European Higher Education Area and the European Research Area within the united “Europe of  Knowledge.”  Finally, the policy of vocational (secondary) education will have the goal to strengthen the connections between education and training and the demand on the labour market. In this respect, the dialogue and cooperation within the partnerships between the public and the private sectors in Macedonia has to intensify, in order to provide adequate institutional forms and conditions for vocational training and application of new knowledge and technologies by the trained personnel, adequate to the economic reforms and labour market demand. It is important to improve the education (formal and informal) so it can become a permanent process during the entire life of citizens.  Regarding the need of promoting the development of clusters, in this period that activity takes place (only) as a part of the Macedonian Competitiveness Activity. Within those frames activities to form and encourage the further development of five clusters have started. The five clusters are: lamb meat and cheese, tourism, information technology, wine and apparel. Since Macedonian Competitiveness Activity is a time-limited project, the development of those clusters will actually intended to serve as example for the entire private sector, whereas the successful strategies, methods and ways of improvement of those clusters are planned to be used in the other clusters which will be formed by the enterprises in Macedonia. On the other hand, within the industrial policy framework for creating competitiveness of the Macedonian economy defined in the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union, the need of promoting the development of clusters is considered as a central part of policy. In fact, in defining the basic approach of the industrial policy within that strategy, the support to developing industrial clusters is a point around which the entire network of programmes at the horizontal industrial policy level is created. More precisely, the strategy provides for the policy for promoting the development of industrial clusters to grow from a project task to a constituent part of the industrial policy in Macedonia. 
4. Has the government prepared specific strategies in related areas such as innovation, research & development? 
The general political, security and economic conditions which the Republic of Macedonia was facing in previous years, among other things, delayed the realization of technological development, which is a crucial factor for inclusion in the international market, for achieving higher rates of economic growth and for integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union and into the contemporary global economic trends. Yet, taking into account the fact that, due to the need of responding to the challenges of modern technological changes and of creating a way to enable faster adjustment to international economic development trends special attention has to be given to scientific research and technological development. Within the project supported by the GTZ for transformation and technology, the document “Basic Policy of Technological Development Policy in the Republic of Macedonia” was prepared. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia, upon recommendation of the Ministry of Education and Science, has also adopted a Programme for Science and Research Promotion and Support, as well as a Programme for Technological Development and Technical Culture. The allocation of budgetary funds for research, technological development and technical culture is made according to those programmes. Finally, within the frames of the industrial policy for creating competitiveness of the Macedonian economy defined in the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union, adequate treatment is given to the strategies and policies of research, development and innovation. The basic guidelines for the research  and development (R&D) policy in Macedonia are: (a) harmonization of the R&D policy and the modes of competitive advantages of certain industries in Macedonia; (b) transfer of the latest scientific and technological information in Macedonia; (c) development of commercially relevant technologies for Macedonia (i.e. technologies which bear potential for creating international competitiveness of Macedonia); (d) connecting the research centres, universities and the business sector in Macedonia; (e) increasing the budgetary funds for R&D; and (f) stimulating the financing and sponsoring of R&D projects by the business sector. In the field of R&D policy the Republic of Macedonia has to support and promote international cooperation and transfer of knowledge and technologies; introduce systems of monitoring and evaluation of scientific and technological quality by means of internationally accepted standards and criteria; increase the investment into R&D; increase the use of international funds and technical assistance; define interdisciplinary programmes for targeted research; support the formation of research units in the business sector with the purpose of effective transfer of modern technologies; create conditions for increase of knowledge and innovation quality; and develop technological information system. The  following priority fields for the scientific and research work are identified:  Sustainable development   Management of the water resources;   Energy and new materials;  Environment;   Information and Communication Technology (ICT)  Health care;  Biotechnology;   Production of high quality food and geological sciences and engineering. Special attention will be paid to overcome the problems concerning modernization of the existing scientific and technological infrastructure and to building new premises, through:  further development of the academic and research network; supply of research equipment and foreign; development of a sophisticated information system; establishment of entities for transfer of technology, in order to connect the results of the scientific and research activities with the needs of the industry. 
5. How are requirements of sustainable development incorporated in the design and implementation of industrial policy? 
The implementation of international recommendations and obligations for sustainable development, as well as of the relevant strategies and  policy of the Republic of Macedonia, presume taking care for the human dimension and the limits imposed by environment protection in the creation of the industrial policy. In this respect, during the creation of the industrial policy the connection among economic, social and environment protection constituencies of economic development, which form the core of the sustainable development concept, must be taken into consideration. In the past period the determination of the Republic of Macedonia for sustainable development was emphasized in many strategic documents. The Stabilization and Association Agreement also obliges the Republic of Macedonia to harmonize the legislation in the field of environment protection with the European Union legislation. The policy implemented until now is flown into different strategic documents: “Conceptual Approach to Creation and Implementation of the National Strategy for Sustainable Development of the Republic of Macedonia” (2000); “National Assessment of Sustainable Development of the Republic of Macedonia” (2002); “Research Concept for Provision of Analytical and Prognostic Material in Function of the Preparation of the National Strategy for Sustainable Development of the Republic of Macedonia” (2003); and a complete National Strategy for Sustainable Development is being prepared. The policy of sustainable development of the Republic of Macedonia in the previous period had the following basic goals:   Realisation of a positive trend of growth of production in the long-run;   Increase of employment considering the development of wider social, economic and other factors, and especially the labour market; and    Reduction of waste and pollution and rational use of natural resources. Sustainable development remains a determination and obligation of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in accordance with the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union. In this context, the following guidelines are considered as basic goals in the field of environment protection: (a) in relation to the total strategy for integration into EU – realisation  of environmentally sustainable economic development through increase of competitiveness and an integrative approach towards environmental problems; (b) in relation to the EU legislation – gradual harmonization of the domestic legislation in this field with the EU legislation for environment protection and active participation in international efforts for solving the global pollution and environment degradation; (c) protection of biodiversity and habitats; (d) active participation into international systems for environment protection; and (e) sustainable management of natural resources and their protection. However, considering the social aspect as a constituent part of the sustainable development concept, in determining the general goals and tasks of the policy special attention must be given to: (a) gradual attainment of an optimal price level of energy and of public utility services in accordance with the real purchasing power of citizens, in order to maintain their use in the most efficient manner; (b) gradual increasing of investment in environment and nature protection; (c) increasing the share of public expenditures for environment protection in GDP; and (d) preparation of programmes aimed at introducing competition and inclusion of the private sector in the public utility enterprises. Along these lines the feasibility both of the increase of current and of the introduction of new measures for environment protection will be taken into account, after which the question of simplifying the payment systems appears, through considering the use of different types of economic instruments for environment protection. Hence, an optimal balance among economic efficiency and social acceptability on one side and the environment protection effectiveness of economic and other instruments of policy on the other side is expected to be attained. Finally, in the conceptual designing of the mode of integration of the policy of sustainable development with the industrial policy, the experience and best practices of European countries and the countries of South Eastern Europe are studied. Following the polluter pays principle, an adequate mix of pollution charges must be implemented in order to internalise the externalities created by environment protection expenses through their inclusion in production costs. As the experience of SEE countries shows, if pollution protection charges are adequately designed and implemented, besides other things, they provide improvement in several areas: environment protection, innovation and competitiveness, employment, tax system, as well as strengthening of other instruments. 