V. ADMINISTRATIVE CAPACITY 

1. Which governmental body is responsible for policy-making and co-ordination in the field of industrial policy? Please provide an organigramme and basic information on staffing levels and competencies. Is there an appropriate mechanism to ensure the co-ordination of various governmental policies that have a bearing on industry? How are industrialists consulted on policy? How are responsibilities divided between the central government, regional and local government and the implementing agencies? 
The Government of the Republic of Macedonia is a collective body responsible for designing and coordinating the overall economic policy, as well as for determining its strategic priorities. In determining the country’s (macro and micro) economic policy for each year there is coordination between all competent ministries and departments. The Government sets up working bodies, i.e. general and special committees. The general committees of the Government are the Committee on Political System, Committee on Economic System and Economic Policy and the Committee on Human Resources and Sustainable Development. In the area of the economy special committees are the Privatization Committee and the Committee on Production of Arms and Ammunition. The working parties of the committees, upon considering the documents, define positions and conclusions which are submitted to the Government for acceptance. Among other activities the Government of the Republic of Macedonia cooperates with the administration of municipalities, of public enterprises and with business entities. The Government applies the principles of publicity and transparency in its work. The Ministry of Economy is an administrative body with competencies to design industrial policy. The Ministry of Economy, independently and/or in cooperation with other Ministries - in the first place with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management (competent for the agriculture), and with the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, the Ministry of Education and Science and the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning - drafts policy proposals which are approved by the Government. A Department for Industry and Structural Reforms within the Ministry of Economy is responsible for designing policies for the industry. This Department cooperates with the Entrepreneurship Promotion Department, the Department for Promotion of Foreign Direct Investment, the EU Integration Department, and the State Administrative Inspectorate - a body having executive authority over a segment of the policy implemented by the Ministry of Economy. The organizational chart given below illustrates the departments which prepare and coordinate the implementation of the industrial policy together with number of employees (in accordance with the planned funds for wages in the 2004 Budget). Regional and local cooperation has an increasing role in the implementation of the part of the industrial policy which deals with promotion of entrepreneurship and development of SMEs. Several years ago a network of SME support centres – Regional Centres, ECA Centres and others – has been established. International donors have provided substantial financial and expert support for the establishment of these centres including: recruitment, staff training and equipment. Those regional centres are a base for the development of an entire institutional network for promotion of entrepreneurship. This is in accordance to decentralization plans, and has the goal to link Government’s and donor’s policies and programmes with final beneficiaries. Few business incubators are also successfully operating for several years. The institutional framework promoting entrepreneurship includes entrepreneurial zones as well, whose development will emphasize the importance of local economies, through participation and support of local self-government units. The zones should create conditions that will highlight the comparative advantages of local self-government units. Chapter 15      Industrial policy 453/457 GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA Commission on the Economic System and Current Economic Policy
Ministry of Economy,
453  employeesMinistry of Finance,
674
employees Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management,
417  employees Ministry of Local Self-Government,
18  employeesMinistry of Transport and Communications,
516  employees Ministry of Labour and Social Policy,
391  employees Ministry of Education and Science, 
29020 employees Ministry of Justice, 
663  employeesMinistry of Health,
166  employeesMinistry of Foreign Affairs, 
339  employeesIndustry and Structural Reforms Department -12 Entrepreneurship Promotion Department -5Department on Promotion of Foreign Direct Investments -9EU Integration Department -5State Administrative Inspectorate -213Unit for Monitoring the Conditions in the Industry and for Proposing Measures
Unit for Economical, Structural and Technological Adjustment 
Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning,
98  employees Ministry of Defence,
9652 employees Ministry of Internal Affair,
12018 employeesMinistry of Culture,
39  employees2. Which institutions are responsible for the implementation of the policy, in particular in the areas of privatisation, restructuring, export promotion, investment promotion, innovation and training? What are their main functions, organisation, staffing levels and annual budget? How is co-ordination between the various institutions arranged? 
The Government of the Republic of Macedonia is a collective body responsible for designing and coordinating the overall economic policy, as well as for determining its strategic priorities., while the Ministry of Economy is an administrative body with competencies to design the industrial policy. Competent for the implementation of different parts of industrial policy are institutions coordinated by the Ministry of Economy. An institution responsible for the implementation, i.e. for the organization and control of privatisation of enterprises, is the Privatisation Agency of the Republic of Macedonia. Pursuant to the Law on Transformation of the Enterprises with Socially-Owned Capital (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/93, 48/93, 21/98, 25/99, 39/99, 81/99, 49/00, 6/02, 31/03 and 38/04), the Privatisation agency is established in 1993 as a legal entity with public authorisation. The organisation of the Agency is regulated with a Charter approved by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Agency is managed by a Director and governed by a Managing Board comprised of members appointed by the Government. The Agency adopts annual activities programme and financial plan which are approved by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The operating expenditures of the Agency are covered by its revenues, in accordance with Agency’s programme of activities. For its operation and the use of funds the Agency submits an annual report to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, and a Report with same content is submitted to the Government two times in a year. Pursuant to latest legal changes the Agency will cease to operate by 31.03.2005.  An institution in charge of implementing policies to facilitate creation of favourable conditions for attracting foreign direct investments is the Agency on Foreign Investments in the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 37/04). It is established by Law which defines its basic scope of work – securing conditions for increased inflow of foreign investments. The Agency has a status of a legal entity and is autonomous in its work. Its headquarters are in Skopje and it can form organizational units (which are not legal entities) abroad. The Agency is managed by a Director selected via public announcement, and is governed by a Managing Board with members appointed by the Government upon proposal of the Minister of Economy. At least twice a year the Agency submits reports on its activities to the Ministry of Economy and the Ministry resubmits them to the Government for adoption. The funds for establishing the Agency are provided from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, and for its operations it can receive proceeds from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, donations and funds from other sources in accordance with the law. Until now a Managing Board and a Director of this Agency have been appointed, but it still needs additional staffing in order to perform the duties. In the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia for 2005 funds have been allocated for the work of the Agency, and 15 employees are planned to be employed. The Agency for Promotion of Investment and Development is yet another institution with competencies to implementing policies for creating favourable conditions for attracting foreign direct investment in Macedonia. It is an autonomous body (legal entity) formed by the Government, and its activities are related to: realization of the programme of promoting investments; to observe the implementation of established priorities for increasing domestic and foreign private investments; to observe the implementation of contracts on capital transfer; the implementation of investment activities by foreign investors in the Republic of Macedonia and investment activities by Macedonian legal entities abroad; exchange of information on possibilities for investment; promotion and care for finalizing the secured investments in and outside of the Republic of Macedonia; and other duties established by law. In 2004 the total allocated budget funds for this institution amounted to MKD 75.364.000, with funds for salaries for 15 employees.  The creation of conditions for increasing the competitiveness of SMEs in the Republic of Macedonia through implementation of the Programme on Measures and Activities for Promotion of Entrepreneurship (proposed by the Ministry of Economy and approved by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia), as well as for the implementation of other entrepreneurship programmes programmes set by the Government, a responsible institution is the Agency for Promotion of Entrepreneurship. It is established pursuant to the Law on Establishment of the Agency for Promotion of Entrepreneurship (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 60/03). The Agency has a status of an autonomous legal entity and for the implementation of the goals and activities of the Programme it is authorised to establish contractual relations with other institutions. The agency is managed by a director selected via public announcement, and is governed by a managing board of members appointed by the Government upon proposal of the Minister of Economy. At least twice a year the Agency submits reports on its activities and use of funds to the Ministry of Economy, while a detailed annual report is submitted to the Government. The funds for the establishing of the Agency are provided by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, while for its operations, in accordance with previously adopted annual programme, it can receive transfers from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia and donations and funds from miscellaneous other sources. Until now the managing board and the director have been appointed, but in order to be able to implement its duties the Agency needs additional trained personnel. Funds in the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia have been allocated for the work of the Agency in 2005. The Directorate for Free Economic Zones is an institution established pursuant to the Law on Free Economic Zones (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 57/99, 41/00 and 6/02) which is authorised to implement the activities for establishing, promoting and monitoring the operations of free economic zones. The scope of its activities are determined by an annual Government programme. The Directorate is managed by a director and governed by a managing board of seven members all appointed by the Government. Funds for its operations are provided from the Budget. At least once a year (by the end of May) the Directorate submits a report on its activities in the previous year to the Government. In 2004 the total allocated budget funs amounted to MKD 8.664.000, including funds for salaries of 10 employees. The State Aid Committee is formed pursuant to the Law on State Aid (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 24/03) with authorisation to supervise all forms of state aid. The Committee is comprised of three experts appointed by the Government, two proposed by the Minister of Economy and one by the Minister of Finance. The Committee is independent in its work, its decisions are binding and published in the Official Gazette of RM. By 31 March each year the Committee submits report on its decisions, the total amount and the allocations of state aid granted either through schemes or on individual basis. The administrative operations of the Committee are performed by the Office of the Ministry of Economy. The members of the Committee and the employees of the Ministry of Economy which perform the administrative operations of the Committee are obliged to protect confidentiality of all data and information. Except the aid forms eligible by the Law on State Aid, all other providers of state aid are obliged previously to submit request to the Committee about their plans for granting aid or changing the existing aid schemes. No form of state can not become effective until the Committee approves it through a decision, and afterwards each provider of aid should submit an annual report to the Committee on the amount, the use and the effects of the approved state aid. The report has to contain all necessary information for assessment of the aid by the Committee especially the objectives, the size, the time duration, the form and legal grounds, and information regarding the provider and beneficiary of the aid. The manner and the procedure for submitting the report are arranged by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Committee will asses each proposal for state aid and will decide on its approval or refusal depending on the compatibility or incompatibility of the proposal with Law on State Aid.  
3. Which professional organisations exist and how are the interests of industry represented in these organisations? What co-operation exists between these organisations and government policy makers? 
In the Republic of Macedonia there are several professional organizations.   The Chamber of Commerce of Macedonia is  a business, professional, non-profit, non-political and independent association of the economy, which has a long continuity of chamber organizing.  From 1990 until recently it acted as a sole professional association of the businessmen in the country, i.e. as a representative of the interests of the business community.  The present statute and functions of the Chamber are derived from the Law on Chamber of Commerce of the Republic of Macedonia of 1990 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/90). The interests of the economic entities - members are articulated through multiple points of action of the Chamber. It is a business service of the economy. Its members have either free, or available at a low price, access to databases, information and consulting services  of various kinds: (a) registering of firms, (b) global and analytical branch and sector data on physical volume of production, production capacities, volume of foreign trade, supply and demand; (c) information on fairs, possibilities for education, e-commerce, announcement of domestic and foreign tenders, projects and credit lines; (d) automatic connection of domestic and foreign supply and demand; (e) business resource centre; (f) financial and legal consulting and arbitration; (g) information connected with implementation of ISO standards and system of quality, services of EAN MAK; (h) e-market centre for placement of products of small enterprises; (i) information regarding European integration (cooperation with EU, technical aid and programmes, customs, documentation, etc.);  (j) legal regulations, the state of the Macedonian economy; (k) opportunities for investing and potentials of the Republic of Macedonia. The Information system of the Chamber of Commerce of Macedonia is integrated, interactive and web-oriented, providing its members with fast flow of business information, support of the process of technical, technological and overall development modernization of their work. As separate organizational units within the Chamber, there are centres for: integration into the European Union, promotion of small and medium size enterprises and ISO standards, which derive from postulated programme and development priorities of the Chamber members.  Shaping of the activities of the centres is in accordance with the needs of members for educating their personnel and for different consulting services in the process of harmonization of the national legislation, implementation of the European quality standards and especially for programme supported development of the medium and small size enterprises, which requires separate treatment within the organizational establishment of the branch associations in the Chamber. In this sense, the administrative personnel of the Chamber is elected members of a large number of working groups and subgroups working on implementation of the European standards. There is also administrative personnel for ISO standards certification which, in cooperation with BSI (British Standards Institute), have implemented these standards into large number of business entities. The centres organize training activities and seminars for the managing and expert personnel of the member businesses; The Chamber also has public authorizations determined by law and other legal acts, and issues certificates, and other documents upon its members’ demands and on the basis of inspected original documents issued by an authorized body, such as certificates of origin, GSP certificates, ATA plates, certificates of exclusivity, expert opinions on presence of deceptive advertising, etc.  The Chamber of Commerce of Macedonia represents the interests of the business entities through promoting initiatives and providing professional opinions to Government bodies, to committees of the Assembly and through the Economic and Social Council, whose member it is. The direct participation of the Chamber in the process of creating system solutions in the authorized working bodies and committees of the Government and the Assembly is mainly upon their request, and is realized through direct participation.  Macedonian Chamber of Commerce is an active promoter of the national economy abroad. The Chamber implements that activity as an active member of large number of international institutions and organizations: The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), Association of the European Chambers EUROCHAMBRES, Association of the Balkan Chambers (ABC), Conference of the Presidents of the Central European Chambers of Commerce Initiative (CECCI), ATA Plates System, EAN International, SECI National PRO Committee (MAKPRO), Trade and Transport Facilitation in Southeast Europe Program(TTFSE), Partnership Project of ABC and the Association of the German Chambers of Commerce and Industry (ABC-DIHK), Balkan Centre for Trade Promotion (BCTP), Balkan Association of Tourist Agencies (BAFTA), and others. The Chamber is a partner in three mixed chambers (with the chamber institutions of Bulgaria, Slovenia and Croatia), as well as in eight business councils (with business associations or chambers of: the USA, Russia, Canada, Turkey, Romania, Albania, Poland, Serbia and Montenegro). On the basis of agreements on bilateral inter-chamber cooperation, the Chamber cooperates with twenty-four chamber institutions in the world.  In the course of 2004 a new Union of Chambers was established. A new Law on the Chamber of Commerce of Macedonia is in procedure of adoption, and it is in procedure in the Assembly. In addition to the  chamber organizing, several forms of public-private partnerships that have been recently formed in the Republic of Macedonia contribute to the transparency in the work of the public administration and to the influence of the business community on formulation and implementation of the industrial (and overall economic) policy. In general, the real influence and role of the public-private partnerships have not been completely accomplished in Macedonia yet, and they are in a process of building, although their influence is obvious in the formation of the Government’s economic policy.  These include:  The National Entrepreneurship  and Competitiveness Council of Macedonia (formed upon the initiative of the Macedonia Competitiveness Activity), the Managing Committee of the project Administrative Barriers for Investing (which is being realized in cooperation with FIAS), and the International Council of Investors, which  cooperates with the Government of Macedonia and the national institutes with a goal to discuss the influence of the legislation on the functioning of the private sector, examine the demands of the foreign investors in the country and give recommendations in other fields. In this context, reference can be made to the Euro Info Correspondence Centre (EICC) in Skopje which is the first “one-stop-shop” centre for supporting SMEs. This centre provides valuable information and assistance on European Union matters, such as: access to the European market, EU funds and EU tenders. In the Republic of Macedonia there are also several professional organizations (of textile producers, honey producers, food producers, etc) that co-operate with competent bodies for certain issues.  The competent bodies organize round tables and similar activities, in order to exchange opinions on certain issues in the field of industrial development and economic policy.  The co-operation of the policy makers with these organizations is continuous. 
4. Has the government supported the creation of free zones and industrial parks or similar initiatives? If so, how can their operation be assessed so far? Are the relevant contractual agreements consistent with EU regulations? 
The Republic of Macedonia supports the creation of free economic zones. At present one zone is in operation, “Dolina na Nikelot “ – Kavadarci  (“Valley of Nickel” –Kavadarci), which is founded with already existing industrial capacities. “Dolina na Nikelot – Kavadarci co-operates with its founder “FENI Industry” – Kavadarci and several other users. In the Agreement for Purchase of Shares, for 100% of the shares of FENI, Kavadarci, between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and SCMM (Societe Commerciale des Metaux et Minerals) – France, of 3rd November 2000, there are no provisions in the case of the Republic of Macedonia becoming a member of the European Union.   The Government of the Republic of Macedonia has issued consent for the greenfield free economic zone “Bunardzik” – Skopje. The free economic zone “Bunardzik”  has not started operating yet. The best bidder has undertaken activities for registration of the Company in accordance to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04) , after which investments and infrastructure activities are expected. In accordance to the provisions of the Agreement for Establishment and Development of the Free Economic Zone Bunardzik, agreed between the Directorate for Free Economic Zones and the founder Glendor Estate Ltd Wales and the Agreement for Long-term Lease of Construction Land and Objects of the Free Economic Zone Bunardzik, the harmonization of the treatment of the free economic zone Bunardzik with the legislation of the European Union is planned to happen.   Industrial parks as instruments for support of technologically innovative enterprises are merely in initiation, although they are planned in the “Programme of Measures and Activities on Entrepreneurship Promotion and Creation of Competitiveness of the Small and Medium Size Businesses in the Republic of Macedonia.” Activities for creation of one industrial park in Bitola are in the start-up phase, in cooperation with partners from the Republic of Greece, the Faculty of Technical Sciences in Bitola and the Foundation for Small and Medium Size Enterprises. However, an effort must be made for stronger activities in this field. In the Republic of Macedonia 8 incubators operate successfully, where industrial and other enterprises are being developed. See 280H25_II_7