INDUSTRIAL POLICY INCLUDING INVESTMENT PROMOTION 

1. What instruments does the policy establish at a horizontal level in order to achieve the targeted objectives? Are the instruments foreseen by the industrial and regional policies well co-ordinated (i.e. detailed in a National Development Plan)? 
The basic goals of the economic policy in the Republic of Macedonia are: (a)  maintaining macroeconomic stability and equilibrium; (b) increase of employment (decrease of the huge unemployment); (c) growth of GDP; and (d) creation of conditions for decreasing social inequalities. On the other side, as it was stated in the answers to previous questions, the horizontal approach - i.e. equal treatment and providing equal conditions for market competition on a wide basis (to all business entities) - is a basic characteristic of the industrial policy implemented in the Republic of Macedonia. In this context, resulting from the need to achieve co-ordination with the goals of the overall economic policy, the industrial policy has focused on: (a) creation of a functional market economy – through improvement of the existing legislation and/or enacting new legislation, through institutional development in order to achieve adequate and effective implementation of the regulatory basis for unaltered performance of economic activities, as well as through decreasing of administrative barriers for investment, especially for start-ups: (b) finishing the process of privatization; (c) changing the structure of industrial production towards creating products and services with higher phases of finalization (higher value added); (d) upgrading the competitiveness of Macedonian economy; (e) increasing investment (domestic and foreign); (f) promotion of small and medium size enterprises and entrepreneurship; (g) price and foreign trade liberalization; etc. In order to achieve the mentioned goals, the industrial policy of Macedonia incorporates a mix of policy instruments and programmes which are typical for a modern market economy.  The instruments and programmes of the industrial policy of Macedonia include: programmes for support of the promotion of small and medium size enterprises, programmes for investment promotion (especially foreign direct investment), programmes for export promotion, programmes for improvement of the corporate governance, etc. Regarding the support and promotion of SMEs and entrepreneurship, a special Programme of Measures and Activities is prepared and enacted, and work on separate projects established with it is under way, while efforts are made to make them compatible to measures utilised by the EU member states. The SMEs promotion Programme is focused on four basic areas: (a) creation of an institutional infrastructure for improvement of entrepreneurship and competitiveness of SMEs; (b) establishing sound business environment in accordance with the achieved level of the economic development of Macedonia; (c) promotion of entrepreneurship through non-financial forms of support; and (d) promotion of entrepreneurship through financial forms of support. An Entrepreneurship Promotion Agency is established, which has the role of an one-stop-shop institution and the task to implement the measures for SMEs promotion. In the Republic of Macedonia there is also a network of other centres for support of SMEs (regional centres, ESA centres etc), several business incubators, entrepreneurship  zones and, as of 2004, an Euro-Info-Centre.  In respect to investment promotion, in cooperation with domestic experts and representatives of international organisations (World Bank, MIGA, UNDP, USAID), a Programme for Promotion of Investment in the Republic of Macedonia was prepared. The basic policy measures for investment promotion are elaborated in detail, among which the following are most important: (a) establishing an Agency for Foreign Investment; (b) decreasing administrative barriers for investing; (c) strengthening the fight against corruption and improvement of neutrality in the work of civil administration; (d) improvement of the judicial system; (e) improvement of the tax system; and (f) other related facilities for investment. In co-operation and co-ordination with the specialized institution of the World  Bank – FIAS, a Study of Administrative Barriers to Investment and for Attracting Foreign Direct Investments in the Republic of Macedonia is prepared. This Study starts from: (a) identification of the problems and barriers to investment and attracting foreign direct investment in the Republic of Macedonia; and (b) establishing a dialogue between the public and private sector in order to identify the necessary administrative reforms and to suggest policy measures for the realisation of reforms. In April 2003, FIAS prepared a Report on All Administrative Procedures for Investing in the Republic of Macedonia, with recommendations for their overcoming and/or elimination. A Managing Committee was also established as a consultative body consisted of different ministries, state institutions and of the private sector which, in co-operation with the Ministry of Economy, has prepared an Action Plan with concrete measures, activities, time-limits and implementing institutions in the field of administrative barriers to investment. An Agency for Foreign investments is established which started working actively at the beginning of 2005. As part of the measures and instruments of the industrial policy at horizontal level for improving corporate governance a new Company Law was enacted (“Official Gazette of RM”  No. 28/2004), which provides sound conditions for establishing and functioning of new business initiatives, investment promotion, attraction of foreign capital and increased protection of the foreign investors. With this Law protection of the rights of minority shareholders is also provided, the transparency and accountability in the work of companies is enhanced, and the procedure for registering of companies in the Commercial Register is shortened. Preparation of by-laws is also carried out, in parallel to the introduction of a one-stop-shop institution for registering foreign investors. In order to improve the overall business environment in the country a new Law on Industrial Property (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 47/02, 43/03, 9/04) and a Law on Concessions (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 25/02, 24/03) are enacted. In Macedonia fiscal and financial incentives for investing exist. In accordance with the Law on Free Economic Zones (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 56/99, 41/100 and 6/02) there are certain incentives for investing within free economic zones. In the period until now a coordination of measures and instruments of the industrial with measures and instruments of the policies from other areas, mainly with the fiscal policy, trade policy, pricing policy and labour market policy was realized. The horizontal dimension of the industrial policy is also a part in the National Strategy for Integration in the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union, where this policy segment is given an even greater meaning and is analysed deeper. The instruments of the industrial policy at a horizontal level in that Strategy are separated into three integrated and interconnected groups of programmes, which together create an entire network of policy programmes. Those segments are: (a) promotion programmes, which include export promotion, promotion of foreign direct investment, and promotion of SMEs; (b) upgrading programmes, which include upgrading of production factors, creation of an information society and development of ICT and R&D; and (c) programmes for improving corporate strategies and organizational structures, which include education of management, business restructuring (modernization); harmonization and implementation of the international technological standards in the Republic of Macedonia and improvement of the corporate governance system. The regional policy in the Republic of Macedonia in the direction of its harmonization with the European policy and practice, including the preparation of the first draft version of the National Development Plan is described in the chapter 21: Regional Policy and co-ordination of structural instruments. The coordination of the industrial policy instruments with the regional policy instruments will be provided after the Regional Policy of the Republic of Macedonia is completely defined. 
2. Does the government plan to implement or is the government implementing sector specific development support programmes? What types of actions are envisaged? How are they financed? Is the form of support envisaged by the government compatible with EU state aid rules? 
Unlike the horizontal level which is a dominant part of the industrial policy implemented in the Republic of Macedonia, the sector (vertical) level of the industrial policy has had much lesser importance.  Several strategies have been prepared for the development of certain sectors (such as tourism, etc), but the industrial policy in Macedonia practically has not entered more deeply into direct and selective support of certain sectors. Only for the steel sector a special National Restructuring and Conversion Programme was prepared, which stems as an obligation from the Protocol 2  of the Stabilization and Association Agreement.  For this purpose, within the CARDS Programme for the 2000 – 2006 period (Regulation of the Council of the European Union No. 2666/2000) funds are allocated for the preparation of the National Restructuring and Conversion Programme in the Steel Industry, as support of the specific sector within the frames of preparing the National Plan for Economic Development. The programme envisages the restructuring of the enterprises in the steel industry in order to maintain their economic vitality after the implementation period and to help them become more competitive on the global market. On the other side, starting form 2003 a special four-year project for creating competitiveness of Macedonian economy is implemented in Macedonia, where the support to the formation of clusters  in the Macedonian economy is a special segment. Considering their potential the National Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness Council of Macedonia has identified five clusters which receive special support: the lamb meat and cheese cluster, the tourism cluster, the information technology cluster, the wine cluster and the apparel cluster. Regarding the progress of the selected clusters in the previous period, it is evident that progress has been achieved in terms of accepting the idea of clustering and in understanding the benefits of cluster networking (clustering) by the managers of the businesses which are connected into clusters. However, there is still no evident progress in terms of significant growth of productivity of the entities incorporated into the mentioned clusters, nor a significant increase of their exports. These results are expected to come in due course, since the digestion of the essence of modern business operations, as well as the practical implementation of modern forms and techniques of doing business, are a complex task for a large number of businessmen in Macedonia.  Within the industrial policy for creating competitiveness of the Macedonian economy, which is defined in the National Strategy for  Integration of the Republic of Macedonia into the European Union, the sector (i.e. cluster) approach of the industrial policy has a special meaning. In this context, besides the three segments of instruments and programmes of the industrial policy at the horizontal level (described in detail in the previous question), this industrial policy has defined the fourth segment of policy instruments and programmes that are directed towards promotion and support of the development of industrial clusters. A selection of concrete clusters (in terms of economic activities or clusters) that would be supported has not been made, ut the policy fundamentals in relation to any future cluster are laid down. More precisely, the industrial policy of clustering in Macedonia is envisaged to be a continuous process of changes and promotion of the business sector, whereas three segments with focal points of action are distinguished: (a) promotion of clustering; (b) promotion of intra and inter-firm technological integration; and (c) targeting foreign direct investment projects which will form clusters in the Republic of Macedonia. Taking into consideration that  the Law on State Aid  was enacted (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 24/03), and is compatible to the  EU rules in that area, all future activities connected with state aid, including the potential aid to individual industrial sectors, will be implemented in accordance with this Law and the related secondary legislation.                                                                                                               
3. What are the specific measures implemented to promote investment, and in particular to attract foreign direct investment? 
The legal framework for attracting foreign direct investment in Macedonia is permanently improving, yet there is still a lot to be done for its further refining. The Republic of Macedonia has signed agreements for protection and promotion of foreign investment with large number of countries, including almost all South East Europe countries and EU member states, as well as Agreements for Avoiding Double Taxation. Foreign direct investments in the Republic of Macedonia enjoy national treatment. The taxation burden in Macedonia is estimated as relatively favourable (e.g. profit tax of 15%, VAT of 18% and 5%, etc). Investment promotion is also carried out through free economic zones, for which there is a special Law on Free Economic Zones (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 56/99, 41/00 and 6/02), where incentives are defined and offered. Enterprises from all industries except the textile and apparel industry can invest in the free economic zones. Domestic and foreign investors are offered a number of fiscal incentives (See also 264H15_I_II_A, point 5) Upon request of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, in 2003 the World Bank , i.e. the specialized institution FIAS, prepared a Study on Administrative Barriers to Investment in the Republic of Macedonia. Based on deep analysis, an Action Plan on Eliminating the Existing Administrative Barriers was prepared, which also states the priority areas of reforms derived from the dialogue between the business community, state bodies and other stakeholders. The Action Plan is implemented as a constituent part of the Programme for Investment Promotion adopted in August 2003. Priority areas of reforms are: (a) procedures for establishing of enterprises (registration of enterprises, employment of foreigners, issuing residence permits to foreigners); (b) procedures for acquiring real estate, access to land and obtaining construction permits; and (c) various operational procedures (administration of taxes and tariffs and inspections) At the beginning of 2005 the Agency for Foreign Investments of Republic of Macedonia started to operate (Law on Establishing  the Agency for Foreign Investments of  the Republic of Macedonia, “Official Gazette of RM” No.  37/04). One of its activities will be to implement best practices to promote and attract foreign direct investments. 
4. Are levels of funding/human resources sufficient to implement the policy? Are the foreseen financing instruments compatible with EU state aid rules? 
The human resources in Macedonia for implementation of the horizontal and the sectoral dimension of the industrial policy, which also includes investment promotion, can be estimated as insufficient. This results from the fact that, although employees in the sectors of the ministries and other state institutions have received some training, a systematic and comprehensive training is still missing.  It is obvious that there is a need for upgrading of their professional capacity through training and education, which is planned to be financed by both budget resources of the ministries and other state bodies, and by technical assistance within the frames of certain donor projects and programmes. Also, the Agency for Promoting Foreign Investments of the Republic of Macedonia and the Agency for SMEs and Promotion of Entrepreneurship of the Republic of Macedonia have to be provided with the necessary fully trained staff in order to perform their duties. In the Republic of Macedonia a Law on State Aid was enacted recently (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 24/03), which is in conformity with the equivalent EU legislation. This Law regulates the procedure and the supervision of granting state aid. According to the Law each form of state aid is under supervision of the State Aid Committee, which is formed by the Law on State Aid. The Committee consists of three competent (expert) members, appointed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia - two of the them are elected upon a proposal by the Minister of Economy, and one is upon a proposal of the Minister of Finance. The professional (expert) and administrative duties of the Committee are performed by the administration of the Ministry of Economy, which has to be provided with necessary staff. For more details see answers 265H06_II_1266H06_II_2267H06_II_3268H06_II_4269H06_II_5270H06_II_6271H06_II_7272H06_II_8273H06_II_9274H06_II_10.  
5. Are industrialists or businessmen aware of the government’s policy or actions in favour of industry? To which extent did or do they have impact on the design and implementation of policy? Do they all have equal access to information regarding tendering of projects? 
The process of reforming the institutional infrastructure (public administration reform) in the Republic of Macedonia, in terms of enhancing its efficiency, is not yet finalized, and with its completion, among other things, it is expected that more functional mode of communication between the public and the private business sector will be created. This also means that  the process of improving the transparency of the work of public administration in Macedonia is still in progress, which determines the method of familiarizing the businessmen with the overall government policy. On the other hand, this is not to say that the businessmen are not acquainted with the government policy at all, but above all, it refers to the manner in which that activity is carried out. What needs to be improved is the way of communication between the state and the private sector. Otherwise, the general approach of the policy, as well as the concrete policy measures, instruments, and programmes are stated and debated publicly by means of mass communication media (printed and/or electronic), which results in a relatively reasonable degree of transparency of government’s activities in the field of industrial (as well as the overall economic) policy.   On the other hand, the procedure for public debates on certain laws and other legal acts drafted and proposed by the Government is a legally regulated and required procedure, by the: Law on Organisation and Operation of the State Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 58/00 and 44/02), Rules of Procedure of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/01, 98/02, 9/03, 47/03, 64/03), Law on the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 59/00 and 12/03) and in the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 60/02). According to those acts, public debates are organized if some legal acts of “wider interest” are prepared. But, ministries often organise public debates during the preparation of drafts of certain laws. Some consultations are also made through inclusion of experts, representatives of the private (business) sector, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders in the working groups that prepare draft laws. The business community is included in the process of drafting and preparation of new regulation also through its association – Economic Chamber of Macedonia. The Chamber gives either initiatives, expert opinions or suggestions to various draft laws, secondary legal acts and proposed measures of economic policy, or representatives of the Chamber (of its branches and sector associations and groups) are included into the activities of the expert bodies and committees of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. The cooperation among legislative and executive authorities with the business community via the Economic Chamber of Macedonia has a long tradition in Macedonia. In 2004, besides the “old” Economic Chamber of Macedonia, few other new sector (industrial) Chambers were organized as an initiative of a part of the private business sector in Macedonia.   Apart from the chamber network, the transparency of the work of public administration and the influence of the business community upon the formulation and implementation of the industrial (and overall economic) policy is also realized via several forms of public-private partnerships in the Republic of Macedonia, established in recent years. In general, the real influence and role of public-private partnerships in Macedonia has not been achieved yet, and they are in a process of upgrading, although the influence of the business community in Macedonia on the creation of Government’s public policy is obvious. Regarding the question of wide availability of information and data on public tendering, the procedure for their organization is regulated by  the Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of RM” 19/2004). According to that law, open competition for public procurement, as well as for other projects, must be announced publicly through the Official Gazette of RM and through other public media, so they become available to all interested parties. In future, with respect to improving the transparency of Government’s activities and for achieving wide-spread availability of all public information (including  all public tenders), increasing of the use of information technology and the Internet has to be promoted. A National Strategy for Information Society in Macedonia is being prepared, where a special part for development of the “e-Government” concept is planned. 
6. What progress has been made in implementing the policy? Is policy implementation monitored in an open and transparent manner? 
Republic of Macedonia faced complex economic problems in the period of transition from planned to market economy, which primarily required rapid actions and quick solutions for their mitigation. In general, the problems which the Republic of Macedonia had faced during the transition can be separated into two categories: problems which are typical for the transition – loss of the traditional markets, rigid access to international  financial markets, inadequate industrial structure and inappropriate technological state of the equipment utilised by businesses, improper administrative structure and public management, etc., plus additional problems (compared to other countries in transition) which were caused mainly by external political factors – disintegration from former Yugoslavia, UN posed economic sanctions towards SRY (Serbia and Montenegro), blockade from the Southern neighbouring country, the Kosovo crisis, disturbed political and security situation during 2001 and problems resulting from the hyperinflation which Macedonia inherited from former SFRY. Hence, the economic policy measures in the initial period of transition generally focused in two directions: establishing macroeconomic stability (lowering the hyperinflation) and creating a new legal and institutional framework of a market economy. The stabilization measures of the macroeconomic policy determined by a 1994 Stabilization Programme were a mix of measures of the monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policy, followed by measures of the income policy and structural reforms. The consistent implementation of the Stabilization Programme, which was performed through annual programmes of the macroeconomic policy, gave positive results relatively fast. During 1995 Macedonian economy left the hyperinflation zone inherited by the disintegration from former SFR Yugoslavia, and at the same time a base for maintaining low inflation with stable exchange rate in a longer period was created. Sustained macroeconomic stability is an essential characteristic of the Macedonian economy until now. Being oriented towards creating a market economy, the economic policy of Republic of Macedonia concurrently has the orientation towards undertaking policy measures, mainly of the microeconomic policy (part of which is the industrial policy), aimed at increasing economic efficiency, productivity and competitiveness - i.e. measures for promoting structural changes and business restructuring. Such measures were planned in the strategic documents and in annual programmes of macro and microeconomic policy which are implemented in practice. However, on one side due to objective reasons resulting from the intricate conditions which Macedonian economy had faced during the transition period, especially in the initial years of transition but also afterwards (until to 2001), and on the other side due to subjective reasons resulting from insufficient determination and persistence in implementing the reforms, the economy of Macedonia did not succeed to accomplish overall restructuring and increase of competitiveness. In the period of transition until 2002, apart from privatization, other types of restructuring of the private business sector (and of the public sector as well) were not implemented with huge intensity and vigour. Besides the changed ownership structure which Macedonia has today and the consequently changed structure of ownership control over business entities, there has not been proportional change of the industrial (sector) structure of the economy, neither of the export products structure, nor of the export market structure (finding new markets where Macedonian exports are sold), nor of the structure of the technological level of the equipment utilised by business entities, nor of the sources (methods) of providing capital for investments in the private sector, etc. This assessment refers to enterprises which were socially owned (it is a peculiar kind of ownership characteristic only for the former SFR Yugoslavia, which is somewhat different than state ownership) and which have undergone the privatisation process, whereas in respect to the originally (de novo) private enterprises - ones that were formed as private from the very beginning of the transition - analyses show that they have higher productivity, profitability and faster growth in comparison to the privatized enterprises. After 2002 more favourable conditions for performing structural reforms and for increasing the competitiveness of the Macedonian economy were created. In order to promote economic growth and to decrease poverty, primarily through increased economic efficiency and competitiveness, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has recognized the creation of functioning market economy (market liberalisation and creation of business environment compatible with the one of EU member states), as well as the implementation of structural reforms and changing the industrial structure of the economy, as areas of highest priority. Number of measures, instruments and programmes which correspond to such approach of the economic (and industrial) policy are stipulated in the annual programmes of the Government, and they are mainly implemented. In this context, a list of accomplishments breaks down to the following:  the privatization is in its very final phase; the Project on restructuring loss-making companies included in the FESAL II Arrangement with the IMF is realised; legal prerequisites for securing market competition are created; liberalisation of imports and exports of goods - through liberalization of trade with neighbouring countries, implementation of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and accession of the Republic of Macedonia to the World Trade Organization in 2003 - is achieved.; the policy measures for promotion of entrepreneurship and development of SMEs are implemented, as are the policy measures for increasing investments, especially for attracting foreign direct investments (through elimination of administrative barriers to investment). The reforms in other areas which contribute to industrial development are also under way. Yet, the effects of the mentioned and of other measures of the industrial policy are still not noticeable. This is revealed primarily through the relatively low rate of GDP growth, but also through other indicators. It is fair to say that, due to the obviously still existing consequences of the disturbed political and security situation of 2001, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia even in the period after 2002 devoted great part of its energy in solving  those problems instead of in realization of economic reforms. Hence, a large number of reforms remains to be implemented. It is also a fact that relatively large part of the private business sector in Macedonia (still) needs new skills for managing business operations in an open and competitive environment, especially when speaking of operating on foreign markets. But, since the direction of restructuring and reforming of Macedonian economy is known and defined, especially with the beginning of the EU accession process (through the submission of the application for membership), the expectations are that the steady implementation of all reforms and the gradual upgrading of the quality of the human capital in Macedonia, the effects of increase  of competitiveness and faster growth of the economy will become reality in the Republic of Macedonia. The monitoring of the implementation of reforms is rather open and transparent, since the effects of the measures and programmes of the industrial policy are measured and expressed mostly through quantitative indicators. Besides the State Statistical Office which regularly publishes publications on ongoing trends in Macedonian economy, as a whole or of different sectors, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Economy also publish regular bulletins in which the accomplished progress in the reforms of the Macedonian economy is presented  through quantitative indicators. 