L. BILATERAL RELATIONS 
1. Please provide an overview of your relations with neighbouring countries, and countries of the Western Balkan Region, including outstanding bilateral issues and prospects for solutions. The Republic of Macedonia fosters good relations with all countries in the region of Southeast Europe (SEE), which are characterised by a progressive development. The Republic of Macedonia has achieved a high level of co-operation and understanding in the bilateral relations with its neighbours, which is confirmed by frequent visits, meetings and contacts at all levels. The contractual framework governing the cooperation and relations is continually developed. In its relations with the neighbours, the Republic of Macedonia is committed to openly responding to all questions, applying the highest standards as those applied by member-states of the European Union. Overall, the relations of the Republic of Macedonia with its neighbours have been adequately balanced and by such a quality they are continuously developed with a clear European perspective.  The commitment of Republic of Macedonia and its readiness to play an active role in the region has been reconfirmed by its contribution as an initiator, founder or an active participant in all regional initiatives. As of the beginning the Republic of Macedonia has been participating in the South-East European Cooperation Process, being also its productive chair. Furthermore, the Republic of Macedonia has chaired the Central European Initiative, and has been participating in the Stability Pact for SEE and SECI since their establishment. The Republic of Macedonia participates in activities under the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative, and has also been participating in the Danube and the Szeged Processes. At the same time, the Republic of Macedonia is in a procedure of acquiring fully-fledged membership in the Organisation of the Black Sea Economic Co-operation .For more details, please see answer 27_B_03.  The peaceful departure from the former federation and the peaceful approach while acquiring its independence was the initial and positive input for the constructive development of the relations of Republic of Macedonia with the SEE countries. The steps of the Republic of Macedonia in this context have been acknowledged in Europe and worldwide. By implementing substantial and rapid reforms rooted in its own needs, and accordingly responding to regional challenges, the Republic of Macedonia has been confirming itself as a factor of stability in SEE.  In overcoming the crises and conflicts in the Region, the Republic of Macedonia has proven itself to be open and co-operative towards initiatives by the European Union and the international community. The Republic of Macedonia has been pursuing a transparent foreign policy based on mutual recognition of differences and respect for the sovereignty and identity of the peoples in Southeast Europe.  Some relations have been burdened with difficulties, the consequences of which are partially present even today. The source of the so-called open issues among the countries in the Region has been and still is the slow accommodation of some of the countries to the realities that emerged as a result of the changes in Central and Southeast Europe.  The commitment to European integration strengthens the stability of this part of Europe. The accession of the Republic of Macedonia into the Union (the prospects for accession of other countries in the Region, as well) will reduce the influence of patterns of conflict from the past and will open prospects for all nations and states. At the same time, the Union will be free to deal with other challenges. In essence, all known issues in the relations between the Republic of Macedonia and its neighbours can be resolved by the full adherence to the United Nations Charter, OSCE Final Document, and the Charter of Paris, as well as by respect of high standards enshrined in all relevant conventions for human and minority rights, and with the respect and implementation of values, principles and basic acts of the European Union.  REVIEW OF BILATERAL RELATIONS WITH THE NEIGHBOURS AND THE COUNTRIES OF THE WESTERN BALKANS The relations with the Republic of Albania are good and dynamic and their progress is particularly evident at the bilateral political level. The relations are characterised by an open dialogue on all issues of mutual interest, accompanied with intensive co-operation in all fields. There are frequent visits at all levels and in all fields. The Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Albania share the same foreign policy goals – the European Union and the Euro-Atlantic integration.  The Adriatic Charter and the activities undertaken in its framework aimed at the advancement of the co-operation in relation to the Euro-Atlantic integration have given particular impetus to the development of bilateral relations in the last two years. Similar activities are undertaken on the basis of the signed Memorandum for Co-operation for Exchange of Experiences in the Process of Euro-integration. The Republic of Macedonia continuously supports Albania’s endeavours to join the European integration processes, as well as its membership of NATO. In the course of development of bilateral relations, a number of bilateral agreements, protocols and other documents have been signed creating a solid legal framework for the development of the co-operation. However, their full and consistent implementation is necessary. The Agreement on Good-Neighbourly Relations and Friendship is expected to be signed (please see 27_Annex_01). Bilateral relations have reached a level that enables the successful prevention of negative scenarios for the security in the Region, particularly following the Kosovo crisis.  The economic co-operation is carried out on the basis of the Free Trade Agreement signed in March 2002, which in a short period of time provided for increased and more balanced bilateral trade. However, higher forms of co-operation are still lacking. In 2003 the bilateral trade was 18,81 million EUR, of which 15,34 million EUR exports and 3,47 million EUR imports; and in the course of January-August 2004 the total trade was 13,32 million EUR, of which 9,85 million EUR exports and 3,47 million EUR imports. The two countries have been coordinating their activities in regional initiatives in order to secure funds for regional infrastructure projects of mutual interest, such as the Corridor 8, the Euro-region Ohrid-Prespa projects, environmental protection, etc. The border co-operation has been carried out on the basis of the signed 7 agreements regulating the maintenance and demarcation of the border line; measures for prevention and resolution of border incidents; the visa regime and the facilitation of communication of the border area inhabitants; legal assistance in civil and criminal law matters; mutual execution of court decisions and extradition. Visas for citizens of both countries are issued in Diplomatic and Consular Missions and at the border-crossings. As of June 2000, the Agreement Facilitating Communication of Inhabitants in the Border Areas has officially been implemented. Its aim is to alleviate the problems regarding illegal crossings of state borders, thefts, etc. The activities for opening new border-crossings for cross-border communication, as well as the co-operation based on the implementation of recommendations of the Border Security and Management Ohrid Conference in the Region are expected to be intensified. As a result of intensive bilateral meetings at the political level, there are on-going preparations of treaties that would regulate issues of cultural co-operation and protection of national minority rights in the two countries in accordance with European standards. The Macedonian national minority in Albania is organised in several associations registered in accordance with the applicable legislation in the country; however, representatives of the minority claim that little has been done for the practical exercise of their human and minority rights. During the population census in the Republic of Albania, in April 2001, all instruments for methodology testing and validity of data have not been applied as it was done during the census in the Republic of Macedonia in 2002. Thus significant differences in data as regards the number of this population have been registered between governmental and non-governmental expert sources.   There is continuous cooperation co-operation with the Republic of Bulgaria in many fields. The two countries are building partner relations by assuming contractual obligations on the basis of the declared mutual interests. The contractual framework of the relations between the two countries has been completed to a great extend (please see 27_Annex_01). Several other agreements are in procedure of negotiation or ratification. The accession of the Republic of Bulgaria to the EU and the accession of the Republic of Macedonia to EU and NATO have been identified as mutual interests and are the basis for intensive co-operation, in which respect a Memorandum of Co-operation was signed in August of 2004.  The  political bilateral relations are developed through frequent visits at all levels, including the highest. In addition to the economic co-operation, the two countries also successfully cooperate in the fields of cross-border cooperation, defence, justice and home affairs, transport and communication, agriculture, forestry and water management, local self-government, culture, environment protection and in other fields.  The economic co-operation between the two countries has been carried out pursuant to the Free Trade Agreement signed in 1999, which has been fully harmonised with the WTO rules. The Agreement envisages the establishment of a free trade zone as of 01.01.2005. The payment operations are to be contractually regulated. The trade between the two countries in 2003 was 154,65 million EUR (exports 22,8 million EUR, imports 131,85 million EUR); and in the course of January-August 2004 the trade was 133,45 million EUR (exports 24,66 million EUR, imports 108,79 million EUR). The Republic of Bulgaria is ranked sixth in terms of overall foreign trade of the Republic of Macedonia. Bulgarian investments in Macedonia from 1991 until 2004 were approximately 13,30 million EUR.  The two countries have been successfully co-operating in multilateral bodies, primarily in international organisations, through mechanisms of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Co-operation (EAPS) and Partnership for Peace (PfP), and they are members of almost all regional initiatives. The co-operation under the Stability Pact, mostly in the Second Working Table, is of great importance. In this respect, Bulgaria and the Republic of Macedonia have submitted projects of mutual interests (interconnection of railways between the two countries, the 400 kV transmission line from Štip to Blagoevgrad, new border-crossings, etc). They also actively co-operate in the South East European Cooperation Process, where, as in the CEI, the priority mutual interest is the construction of Corridor 8, and especially the finalisation of construction of the railroad connection between the two countries.  Issues related to the border between the two countries have been regulated by many bilateral agreements in several fields. The co-operation in this area will be intensified through the already reached agreement on convening expert consultations regarding the border, phyto-sanitary and customs regime, in accordance with the EU standards. Pursuant to the recommendations of the Ohrid Conference on Border Security and Management, as of 01.09.2004 the border police have taken over the competence for securing the eastern border towards the Republic of Bulgaria. The Macedonian national minority in this neighbouring country, as well as the Republic of Macedonia, expect that by Bulgaria’s advancement towards European Union membership, conditions for the free expression of ethnic identity of all citizens in Bulgaria will improve. The Republic of Macedonia is committed to resolving all known open issues through the realisation of human and minority rights standards in this neighbouring country. The relations and co-operation with the Hellenic Republic have significantly improved in the last nine years, after the signing of the Interim Agreement. At the present, there is intensive economic and other co-operation; however, meetings at the highest political level are still lacking. In October 2004, an Office for Consular and Trade Relations of the Republic of Macedonia was opened in Thessalonica and a similar office of the Hellenic Republic is expected to be opened in Bitola. The Republic of Macedonia expects further support from the Hellenic Republic, as the only neighbour, which is both an EU and NATO member, for its European and Euro-Atlantic integration, as well as continuation of the activities within the Greek plan for economic revitalisation of the Balkans. In order to promote the current co-operation, the Republic of Macedonia has proposed several draft-agreements, several agreements of which have been harmonized and are expected to be signed in the near future (see 27_ Annex_03). Economic co-operation: The Hellenic Republic is the first ranked investment partner of the Republic of Macedonia, with the investment priorities in the fields of energy, telecommunications and finance. The Greek investments account for 57% of the total foreign investments in the Republic of Macedonia. The trade between the two countries is increasing - in 2001 it was 319,47 million EUR (112,95 million EUR of exports and 206,52 million EUR of imports); in 2002 it was 374,01 million EUR (123,28 million EUR of exports and 250,73 million EUR of imports); in 2003 it was 426,66 million EUR (158,74 million EUR of exports and 267,92 million EUR of imports) and in the course of January-August 2004 the trade was 263,59 million EUR (115,40 million EUR of exports and 148,19 million EUR of imports). The increase of trade, higher forms of co-operation and organised regional interconnections are the main tasks in terms of future activities.  At the same time, the regional and multilateral co-operation has been successfully carried out under regional initiatives and international organisations, with a focus on the trilateral co-operation, as well, which includes the Republic of Albania.  In the context of the border between the two countries (which in accordance with undertaken reforms has been secured by the border police at the side of the Republic of Macedonia) there have been no problems for a longer period. This co-operation was particularly successful and intense during the complex operation of securing the Olympic Games, and is expected to continue in the future. Taking into account its commitment to accession to the European Union, the Republic of Macedonia expects new measures to be undertaken at the bilateral level in accordance with the EU criteria, that would adjusted the current border-crossing regime to the new conditions and trends. On the other hand, full diplomatic relations between the two countries have not yet been established as it is stipulated in the Interim Accord signed in 1995. In addition, the two countries have not yet considered the issue of former citizens of the Hellenic Republic who have been deprived of their citizenship and whose entry and stay in the Hellenic Republic has been denied under decrees adopted by former Greek governments. In this context, still unresolved is the exercise of property rights in the Hellenic Republic by current Macedonian citizens and their descendants. This and other questions with regard to national minority rights have been raised by the Republic of Macedonia, but there are still no effective and open talks at the bilateral level, in this respect.  An open question in the relations between the Republic of Macedonia and the Helenic Republic is the objection of the Hellenic Republic to the use of the constitutional name of the Republic of Macedonia. The Republic of Macedonia has been adhering to its responsibilities assumed under the UN Security Council Resolution 817 (1993) and has been supporting the continuation of the dialogue process within the UN, which is to be carried out in a constructive and friendly atmosphere and mutual respect, in the spirit of good-neighbourly co-operation. The Republic of Macedonia firmly maintains its position to preserve its constitutional name in the entire internal and international communication. The Republic of Macedonia expresses readiness to finding a mutually acceptable solution in the bilateral communication between the two countries.  After the normalisation of the relations of the Republic of Macedonia with Serbia and Montenegro in 1996, the two countries entered a period of co-operation and contractual regulation of their relations in various fields, which was intensified after the democratic changes in this neighbouring country in 2000. The only open question between the two countries – the delineation and description of the Macedonian-Yugoslav border – was resolved in this period as well (in 2001). This agreement has been implemented successfully and the demarcation of the border is expected to be completed in 2005. A new border crossing has been opened to facilitate communication of border area inhabitants, and currently there are procedures under way for opening additional three such border crossings.  The high level of political bilateral relations and co-operation has been confirmed by the frequent and numerous highest-level meetings. These relations and co-operation have been characterised by a positive development trend, with a high level of mutual trust, understanding and good-neighbourliness, which all contribute to the maintenance of the peace and stability in SEE. The Republic of Macedonia has been supporting Serbia and Montenegros’ endeavours for a speedy integration into European and Euro-Atlantic processes.  The Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro have signed 23 bilateral agreements and acts. There are initiatives for signing co-operation agreements in the field of information and protection of cultural and historical monuments, as well as the Agreement on Good Neighbourly Relations and Friendship. (see 27_Annex_01).  The economic co-operation has been carried out in accordance with the Free Trade Agreement, signed in 1996. By concluding agreements for the promotion and mutual protection of investments and avoidance of double taxation, the two countries have created prerequisites and a solid legal framework for a more successful co-operation. For the purpose of expanding and promoting the economic co-operation, in March 2000 the two countries founded a Joint Macedonian-Yugoslav Chamber. The total trade in 2003 was 429,04 million EUR (241,10 million EUR of exports and 187,94 million EUR of imports) and in the course of January-August 2004 the trade was 292,40 million EUR (167,37 million EUR of exports and 125,03 million EUR of imports). There are negotiations under way for the adaptation of the Free Trade Agreement due to changes in the status of the state community following the Belgrade Agreement. As a result of the endeavours for the protection of national minorities, on 06.07.2004 the Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro signed an Agreement on the Protection of the Macedonian National Minority in Serbia and Montenegro, and the Serbian and Montenegrin national minority in the Republic of Macedonia, as a first such agreement in the region. The two countries expect that its implementation will provide further guarantees for the rights of national minorities in accordance with international standards.  The Republic of Macedonia is still hosting about 1800 persons, citizens of Serbia and Montenegro, originating from Kosovo, who have remained in the Republic of Macedonia following the Kosovo crisis in 1999. In order to resolve their problems the Government  has initiated several activities for their safe return to their places of living.(for more details see answers, I_K_01 and I_K_02
The Republic of Macedonia continues to closely follow the developments in Kosovo, in accordance with the UN Security Council Resolution 1244. The Republic of Macedonia is giving its full support to the UN and international community policies the ultimate goal of which is the establishment of a true multiethnic community, to promote security, strengthen the democratisation and to establish rule of law. At the same time, the Republic of Macedonia offers continuous support to the endeavours of the UN and other relevant factors in the fulfilment of their responsible mission. The Republic of Macedonia has been developing co-operation with UNMIK and the interim administration of Kosovo, pursuant to the Resolution 1244 of the UN Security Council, on issues of mutual interest, and especially concerning practical issues of importance to citizens. The movement of people and goods to and from Kosovo has been facilitated; there are ongoing preparations for the establishment of a trade office; and an interim free trade protocol is being drafted. The Republic of Macedonia has been reiterating that any future status of Kosovo must not result in the destabilisation of the SEE. The Republic of Macedonia supports the resolution of this issue through dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, with enhanced participation by the international community. With regard to the endeavours for relaxation of the situation in the region, it is especially important for the Republic of Macedonia that the technical operations for demarcation of the border in the Kosovo section are complete prior to the ultimate outcome of the Kosovo problem. Hence, the Republic of Macedonia has been asking for a firm commitment on the part of the international community to adhere to international principles in order to prevent any unfavourable development.  The relations and co-operation with Bosnia and Herzegovina are good and are developing in all areas. They are characterised by a continuous political dialogue at all levels, bilaterally and multilaterally, as well as by readiness for their improvement. Due to the specific and complex constitutional and legal system of Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially in respect of international relations, the two countries have signed a few bilateral agreements ( see 27_Annex_01).There are negotiations under way for the harmonisation of several agreements that can be signed. Five agreements are in their final phase.  The economic co-operation between the two countries does not match the possibilities of the two countries, which is partly a result of the situation in the Region, and especially in Bosnia and Herzegovina.The trade between the two countries has amounted in 2003 to 31,26 million EUR, of which Macedonian exports amounted to 20,91 million EUR and imports of 10,35 million EUR. The trade between the two countries for the period of January-August 2004 was 21,78 million EUR, of which Macedonian exports was 14,68 million EUR and imports of 7,10 million EUR. An additionally negative factor for a greater economic co-operation has been the absence of a contractual framework in this area.  The two countries have been successfully co-operating at the multilateral level and under regional initiatives. The Republic of Macedonia has expressed readiness to share its experiences in the European Union and Euro-Atlantic integration processes with Bosnia and Herzegovina.  Minorities: Since 1991 a population census has not been organised in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 1998 a so-called consideration of the number of population and its ethnicity was organised in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the citizens of the Republic of Macedonia have been categorised under the “others” section.  The relations and co-operation with the Republic of Croatia have continuously been developing in all areas of mutual interest, with readiness expressed by both parties to their further improvement. The relations have been characterised by friendship; absence of open issues and a political dialogue at all levels. The co-operation has especially been dynamic under European and Euro-Atlantic integration processes. The two countries have signed an Agreement on Co-operation in the context of EU accession, as one of the obligations arising from the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with EU (for more details see answer I_L_02), as well as the Memorandum of Co-operation. The two countries also closely co-operate within the Adriatic Charter.  Bilateral agreements: The two countries have achieved a high level of contractual regulation of co-operation in various areas (22 agreements and 1 protocol – please see 27_Annex_01). They have also expressed an interest in signing a Payment Operations Agreement, Media Co-operation Agreement, and Health and Medicine Co-operation Agreement.  As regards economic co-operation, apart from traditional forms, the two countries have announced more significant mutual investments, as well as investments of Croatian companies in the Macedonian economy. The trade between the two countries for the period of January-June 2004 was 73,23 million EUR, of which Macedonian exports were 40,46 million EUR and imports of 32,77 million EUR.  The total trade volume between the two countries in 2003 amounted to 104,29 million EUR, of which Macedonian exports amounted to 58,32 million EUR and imports of 55,97 million EUR.  The two countries have been successfully co-operating at the multilateral level, especially as regards the candidacy of the Republic of Macedonia for the ECOSOC (for 2005-2007) and Croatia’s candidacy for a non-permanent UN Security Council member, as well as under regional initiatives. Minorities: The Republic of Croatia has established a positive position regarding the activities of Croatian citizens of Macedonian origin. The two countries have established mechanisms for state support in protection of their ethnic identity and social and political activity. For more details on the relations between the Republic of Macedonia and other countries in the neighbourhood and co-operation in regional initiatives, see answer 27_B_03
2. Please describe the steps you have taken to negotiate a convention on regional cooperation with Croatia, in accordance with Article 12 of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement. Pursuant to its foreign policy commitment to developing neighbourly co-operation, and taking into account European Union’s criteria defining the successful regional co-operation as one of the conditions for the integration of the countries of the region into the EU, the Republic of Macedonia has initiated negotiations with the Republic of Croatia to sign a Convention on Regional Co-operation, to which end it has prepared a draft-text. The European Commission has been informed on the proposal, and it has welcomed the initiative. After reviewing the draft-text, the European Commission has given remarks and suggestions, and parts of them have been incorporated into the text in the course of negotiations. Meanwhile several joint consultations have been realised as regards the draft-text. Following the entry into force of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between the Republic of Macedonia and the European Union,  negotiations between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Croatia have intensified. Pursuant to Article 12 of the SAA, and taking into account the fact that strengthening of the regional co-operation between the two countries within the Stabilisation and Association Process is a significant step forward to accession, the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Croatia have agreed to sign an Agreement on Co-operation between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Croatia in the Context of Approximation and Accession to the EU. In the spirit of co-operation as an incentive to other countries in the region, but also as a contribution to united and stronger Europe, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the two countries have signed the Agreement in Skopje on 06.09.2004. The Agreement shall come into effect after the completion of internal legal procedures of ratification within the two contracting parties.  The Republic of Macedonia, pursuant to its legal procedure, has ratified the Agreement in the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia on 01.02.2005. 3. How has the SFRY Succession Agreement been implemented? Are there any remaining difficulties? The Agreement on issues concerning succession of the former SFRY was signed in June 2001, and after its last ratification by the Assembly of the Republic of Croatia in 2004, conditions for its entry into force have been met. In the course of the final phase of negotiations (April 2001), some of the provisions concerning the division of state foreign exchange reserves have been implemented. Following the signing of the Agreement, the implementation of the provision on the division of the diplomatic property of former SFRY was initiated. After the successful conclusion of negotiations for regulating the debt of the former USSR to former SFRY, this segment was implemented according to the modalities determined in the Memorandum and with the agreed between particular countries-successors of the former SFRY and the Russian Federation, during the additional talks. In 2003, part of the assets that had been frozen in certain financial institutions in the U.S. were distributed. The committees on financial issues and diplomatic property responsible for the preparation of the decisions on further implementation of the Agreement with regard to remaining issues are having regular meetings. The Republic of Macedonia is firmly determined to continue with its constructive attitude and active contribution in the realization of this international agreement. Pursuant to provisions of this Agreement, the Republic of Macedonia is to convene the first assembly of the Permanent Joint Committee for the Implementation of the Agreement, which is going to enable the institutional basis for its realisation. Taking into account the different views and issues that have not yet been tackled, a realistic assessment on the efficient implementation of the Agreement can be given after the first session of the Permanent Joint Committee. 
