M. INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS 
1. General a) How is co-operation with The Hague tribunal organised both at political and operational levels? Is there a specific legal framework? What is the procedure followed when the government receives requests for assistance (RFAs) from the ICTY? Which is the ministry/body in charge? b) Was there a change in the procedure in May 2004? Is it correct that from onwards the Ministry of Justice was in charge of serving summonses to witnesses and suspects? c) How many and what types of RFAs have you received in 2004 and how many replies have been given? How many summonses for witnesses? How many since May 2004? d) How much time is needed as an average to respond positively to a RFA? How many RFAs were answered positively in 2004? How many since May? Of these RFAs, how many summonses for witnesses? e) How many RFAs are still to be answered? What are the reasons for the delay in answering them? What issues are they related to? f) Is your country ready to respond positively to possible future requests for information from the ICTY and how do you envisage ensuring the appropriate follow-up? g) How many cases have been opened by the ICTY and what is the state of the proceedings? h) Do you have legislation and mechanisms to protect witnesses? i) What judicial cooperation and extradition mechanisms exist with the other countries which belonged to the former Yugoslavia? a) The Government of the Republic of Macedonia has expressed its firm political commitment and support regarding the operation and actions of the Hague Tribunal, highly appreciating its role in undertaking efficient measures to bring to justice the perpetrators of serious war crimes and other crimes against humanity. The cooperation has been unimpeded, with full respect of the ICTY documents: the UN Security Council Resolution 827 (1993); the Statute of the Tribunal adopted by the Resolution and the Rules of Procedure and Evidence. The Republic of Macedonia, being a UN Member, has obligations under the Resolution 827, i.e. it has undertaken and fulfilled all legally binding international obligations deriving from the Resolution and other international documents. The cooperation with the ICTY has been regulated by the provisions of the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04).  May 2004 inclusive, requests for assistance (RFAs) from the ICTY were submitted to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, i.e. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which forwarded them to the Ministry of Justice. Subsequently, the Ministry of Justice, if there was a need, communicated the Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Defence and the competent court. Replies to RFAs were submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as the competent ministry for coordination. 
b)I n order to abbreviate the regular procedure and respond to RFAs within the shortest possible period, as of May 2004 the Ministry of Justice has been in charge of responding to RFAs. The Ministry approaches the competent court with special request for serving summonses to witnesses and suspects. The following documents are enclosed therewith: notification of the receipt of summons, list of addresses and other data previously obtained from the Ministry of the Interior, a copy of Article 29 of the ICTY Statute and Rule 39 of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence. For suspects, the following is also enclosed: a copy of Rules 42 and 43 of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence, regulating the right to be assisted by a defence attorney and the Instruction on Assignment of Defence Attorney to the competent court. If necessary, the Ministry of Justice communicates the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence requesting consent for relieving persons employed in these Ministries from the obligation to preserve a state secret, which is to be disclosed to the Tribunal. 
c) In the course of 2004, 22 RFAs were received and all of them were replied. Since May 2004, replies to 13 of these RFAs were submitted. Out of the total number of the received RFAs, 6 referred to submission of specific data, information and documents requested by the Tribunal, while 16 RFAs referred to serving summonses for interviewing persons in the capacity of witnesses and suspects. So far, 163 summonses have been submitted, including 111 to persons in the capacity of witnesses and 52 to persons in the capacity of suspects. Since May 2004, 96 summonses have been served for interviewing persons in the capacity of witnesses and 52 summonses for interviewing persons in the capacity of suspects. In January 2005, another 3 RFAs on hearing persons in the capacity of witnesses were delivered to the Ministry of Justice. d) Preparation of RFAs replies is conducted in the shortest possible timeframe, respecting obligations incorporated in the Statute of the Tribunal for acceptance without delays of the ICTY requests and orders concerning identification and location of persons, taking testimonies, provision of evidence, and service of summonses (13 days on average). All RFAs submitted thus far have received positive replies; out of them 113 RFAs are referring to interviewing persons in the capacity of witnesses. e) All RFAs received so far have been replied. Reasons for delays in submission of replies have been of objective nature, depending on the particular RFA (number of persons to be served summonses for interviews; specific nature of the requested data or information). Delays have been due to the difficulties faced by the delivery service when serving summonses and the need of assistance by the Ministry of the Interior (more than one person with the same first name and surname; persons who have moved out; need for police assistance when persons were apprehended by means of force, by a special order of the investigative judge). f) The Republic of Macedonia will continue to cooperate with the ICTY in future. The procedure will be conducted in accordance with the ICTY Statute and the national legislation. In doing so, the established cooperation will be further enhanced. g) The Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Ministry of Justice in particular have confirmed their readiness to cooperate by handing over five cases to the ICTY competence. Proceeding upon the Decision of the ICTY Trial Chamber of 04.10.2002 on handing over the competence for investigations and court proceedings regarding five cases – NLA Leadership, Mavrovo construction workers, Lipkovo Lake, Ljuboten and Neprosteno, the Ministry of Justice forwarded the aforementioned cases on 29.11.2002. The RFAs from the Tribunal so far referred to the Ljuboten case. h) Protection of witnesses in the Republic of Macedonia has been regulated by Chapter XIX-a of the Law on Criminal Procedure. Provisions of the Law stipulate that, in the course of proceedings, the public prosecutor i.e. investigative judge or president of the chamber may undertake actions for protection of witnesses, collaborators of justice or victims appearing as witnesses in the proceedings, in case they may be exposed to intimidations, threats of revenge and risks for their life, health and physical integrity or when their protection is required. The Law on Protection of Witnesses that is currently in parliamentary procedure (passed first reading) is in line with the efforts to provide increased protection of witnesses. i) Court and extradition cooperation with the countries that belonged to the former Yugoslavia has been carried out by applying the Council of Europe Conventions – the European Convention on Extradition, European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters, Convention on Transfer of Sentenced Persons with its Protocol, ratified by the Republic of Macedonia in 1999, as well as on the basis of bilateral agreements. The Republic of Macedonia has signed bilateral agreements with the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Slovenia, namely:   Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Croatia on Mutual Execution of Court Rulings in Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.17/95), which entered into force on 26.05.1997;   Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Croatia on Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Maters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.19/95), which entered into force on 26.05.1995;   Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Slovenia on Mutual Execution of Court Rulings in Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.24/96), which entered into force on 05.09.1997;   Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Slovenia on Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.24/96), which entered into force on 05.09.1997;   Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Slovenia on Extradition (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.24/96), which entered into force on 05.09.1997. The judicial cooperation has been carried out through the respective Ministries of Justice. The requesting state submits judicial requests to the requested state, which forwards them to the court of the respective jurisdiction. The Republic of Macedonia has signed bilateral agreement with Serbia and Montenegro that has still not entered into force. The judicial cooperation has been carried out through the Ministries of Justice of the two states. With Bosnia and Herzegovina, the court cooperation has been carried out through diplomatic channel, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Macedonia.  2. Domestic trials for war crimes a) Please explain how the Amnesty Law is implemented. b) Does the Republic of Macedonia accept the notion of command responsibility, as defined by the ICTY Statute (Art. 7.3) and the Rome Statute of ICC (Art. 28)? Is evidence coming from the ICTY acceptable, in theory and in practice, in national court proceedings? c) Does your country have the necessary trained judicial personnel (prosecutors, lawyers, judges) to process domestic war crimes trials? a) The Amnesty Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 18/02) releases from prosecution, terminates criminal procedures and fully acquits of serving the remaining sentence (in the text to follow: amnesty) citizens of the Republic of Macedonia, persons with legal residence as well as persons having property or family in the Republic of Macedonia (in the text to follow: persons), for whom there is reasonable doubt that they have organised or perpetrated crimes related to the conflict in 2001, 26.09.2001 inclusive. The amnesty also covers persons who have organised or perpetrated crimes before 01.01.2001 related to the conflict in 2001. The amnesty releases from prosecution persons for whom, pursuant to the Criminal Code or other law in the Republic of Macedonia, there is reasonable doubt that they have organised or committed crimes related to the conflict, 26.09.2001 inclusive. Criminal procedures are terminated for persons for whom, pursuant to the Criminal Code and other law in the Republic of Macedonia, there is reasonable doubt that they have organised or perpetrated crimes related to the conflict, 26.09.2001 inclusive. In addition, persons who have organised or perpetrated crimes pursuant to the Criminal Code or other law, related to the conflict, 26.09.2001 inclusive, are fully acquitted of serving the remaining sentence. The sentence and all legal consequences arising thereafter are annulled for crimes perpetrated 26.09.2001 inclusive. The foregoing provisions do not apply to persons who have committed crimes related to the conflict in 2001 under the competence of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Part of this Law’s provisions apply to the persons who in the course of the conflict have not responded to summonses for serving the army or who have evaded military services and drills, as well as persons who have deserted the military forces. In addition, the Law acquits of serving the remaining sentence persons who have been convicted of crimes pursuant to the Criminal Code or other law of the Republic of Macedonia, and who have started serving their sentence by the day of the Law's entry into force. This acquittal refers to 25% of the remaining sentence. Acquittal does not refer to persons convicted of crimes against humanity and international law; persons convicted of illegal production and trafficking in narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors or those enabling the use of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors, as well as to persons sentenced to life. Procedure The procedure on the implementation of the Amnesty Law for persons currently under criminal proceedings is initiated ex officio by the competent public prosecutor and/or by the competent basic court or the person subject to amnesty, or by a third person who on behalf of the defendant may file an appeal. Procedure for persons already convicted and serving a sentence is initiated by the penitentiary institution in which they serve their sentence. Procedure for persons who have not started serving their sentence is initiated ex officio by the court that has brought the first instance verdict or upon the request of the public prosecutor or the convicted person. The amnesty decision is adopted by the competent body in accordance with the Law on Criminal Procedure and the Law on Execution of Sanctions (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 3/97, 23/99 and 74/04). Implementation of the law Decisions already adopted: 1.  Pursuant to Article 1 of the Amnesty Law, 164 persons were amnestied (for all crimes stipulated by the Criminal Code except for crimes covered by the international humanitarian law for which The Hague Tribunal is competent). 2.  Pursuant to Article 2 of the Amnesty Law, 734 persons are amnestied for the crimes: Not responding to a summon (Article 341 of the Criminal Code), Evading military service (Article 342 of the Criminal Code), and Deserting military forces (Article 344 of the Criminal Code). 3.  Pursuant to Article 3 of the Amnesty Law, 962 persons, who at the moment of the adoption of the Law had already been convicted and imprisoned, have been acquitted of serving 25% of the remaining of their sentence. Apart from the decisions on the implementation of the Amnesty Law, public prosecutor’s offices of first instance have also decided to:   Drop charges for 32 persons,   Release from prosecution 65 persons, and   Terminate proceedings for 3 persons. Apart from the application of amnesty regarding crimes related to the military conflict of 2001, the President of the Republic of Macedonia has pardoned 64 persons. b) Macedonian legislation has been harmonised with the provisions of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) Statute (Article 7, item 3) and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) (Article 28). Command responsibility has been regulated in Chapter XXXIV of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 37/96, 80/99, 4/00, 43/00, and 19/04). Article 416-b stipulates the command and other responsibilities for crimes against humanity and international law (403-416a) committed in a time of war or any other military conflict. As regards the acceptance of evidence coming from the ICTY, pursuant to Article 150, paragraph 2 of the Law on Criminal Procedure all evidence and data necessary to decide wherever an indictment will be submitted are collected in the course of investigation. In the hitherto practice criminal proceedings for crimes against humanity and international law have not been conducted in the Republic of Macedonia. The five cases mentioned in the answer to the previous question have been deferred to the competence of the Tribunal. 
c) There is continuous training of judges, prosecutors and lawyers to process trials of various crimes. Special training has been carried out by the Continuous Education Centre within the Judges' Association of the Republic of Macedonia in co-operation with the US Embassy to Macedonia through the Assistance Programme of the Office of Overseas Prosecutorial Development, Assistance and Training (OPDAT) and the Association of Public Prosecutors of Macedonia. In addition, a Conference on the Position and Procedures before the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has been held. 