B. THE PARLIAMENT 

2. Please provide a description of the structure and functioning of the Parliament including the competences of the Parliamentary Committees, the prerogatives and competences of the Parliament with respect to holding members of the Executive to account, and procedures for the adoption of legislation (including an explanation of existing fast track procedures and their applicability to the adoption of acquis related legislation). 
Structure and Functioning of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia  The Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia is a citizens’ representative body and the legislative power is vested in it. The Assembly is unicameral and consist of 120 to 140 Representatives elected at general, direct and free elections, by secret ballot. In accordance with the Law on Election of Representatives in the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 42/02, 52/02 and 46/04), the current Assembly’s mandate consisting of 120 Representatives was elected on the basis of the proportional electoral model. The Representatives mandate is professional. Representatives are elected for a four year term, which may be extended only in a state of war or emergency. Representatives have a free mandate, they may not be revoked and they enjoy immunity. The Assembly may dissolve only if such a decision is voted for by the majority of the total number of Representatives. The organisation and the operation of the Assembly are regulated by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 60/02), which is adopted by a majority vote of the total number of Representatives. By a majority vote of the total number of Representatives, the Assembly elects a President and one or more Vice-Presidents from among the Representatives. In the current mandate, the Assembly has elected two Vice-Presidents. The President represents the Assembly, ensures the application of its Rules of Procedure, calls elections for Representatives, for President of the Republic, local elections and performs other duties determined by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly. The President, together with the Vice-Presidents and the Coordinators of parliamentary groups, performs duties stipulated by the Rules of Procedure. The Assembly appoints a Secretary General who performs duties stipulated by the Rules of Procedure and organises the operation of the Assembly’s Service. Representatives are organised in parliamentary groups. The Assembly is in permanent session and works at sittings convened by the President. Sessions of the Assembly may also be convened during the 1 – 31 August recess. The Assembly’s sittings are public. By a two-thirds majority vote of the total number of Representatives, the Assembly may decide to work without public presence. Official language in the work of the Assembly is the Macedonian language and its Cyrillic alphabet. A Representative  who speaks a language other than the Macedonian, which is spoken by at least 20% of the citizens of the country, may, at the Assembly's plenary sittings and at the sittings of its working bodies, speak in that language. The Assembly may decide if majority of the total number of Representatives attend the sitting. The Assembly decides by a majority vote of the attending Representatives, but not less than one-third of the total number of Representatives, in case no special majority vote is prescribed in the Constitution (absolute, two-thirds or a majority set forth in the 2001 Constitutional Amendments). In accordance with the 2001 changes to the Constitution (Amendment X, item 2), laws that directly affect culture, use of languages, education, personal documents and use of symbols, are adopted by a majority vote of the attending Representatives, within which there must be a majority vote of the Representatives attending who belong to non-majority communities in the Republic of Macedonia. A law on local self-government is adopted by a two-thirds majority vote of the total number of Representatives, within which there must be a majority vote of the Representatives belonging to non-majority communities. Laws on local finance, local elections, municipal boundaries and the City of Skopje are adopted by a majority vote of the attending Representatives, within which there must be a majority vote of the attending Representatives who belong to non-majority communities (Amendment XVI to the Constitution). Besides in plenary, the Assembly operates in its working bodies sittings. By a decision, the Assembly establishes standing working bodies and determines their terms of reference and the number of their members. For carrying out special tasks, ad hoc working bodies may be established, as well as inquiry committees on any area or issue of public interest. In accordance with the Constitution, the Assembly sets up a Standing Inquiry Committee for Protection of Civil Rights and Freedoms. For international multilateral and bilateral cooperation, the Assembly sets up delegations and groups through which it actively participates in the work of  international parliamentary assemblies of the Council of Europe, SCE, NATO, CEI, IPU, etc. Furthermore, the Assembly cooperates with the parliaments of other states. The standing working bodies examine proposals to adopt laws, preliminary draft-laws, draft laws, draft-regulation and draft-texts of other general acts adopted by the Assembly, as well as other issues within the Assembly’s competence. Chairpersons, Members and substitute-members of the working bodies are elected from among the Representatives. Equitable representation is ensured in the working bodies of Representatives belonging to parliamentary groups and Representatives who are not organised within parliamentary groups. The Assembly’s working bodies operate in sittings attended by a Government’s representative (Minister or Deputy Minister) or a Government delegate (State Secretary, State Advisor or Head of a Sector in the competent ministry) when a Government proposal is being debated, or a representative of a state administration body when an issue within its scope of activity is discussed. The sittings of the working bodies are open, i.e. academics or experts may be invited at a sitting, as well as representatives of the local self-government, trade union, non-governmental and other organisations, institutions and associations of citizens, in order to present opinions on issues on the agenda. A working body adopts a position by a majority vote of the attending members, but not less than one-third of the total number of its members. It then submits a report to the Assembly. Working bodies may hold joint sittings; in cases of which the vote is conducted separately. There are 18 standing working bodies in the Assembly, 17 of which have been established by the Decision on Setting Up Standing Working Bodies of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 85/02). The European Affairs Committee was established by an Amendment to the Decision on Setting Up Standing Working Bodies of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 30/03). The President of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia is Ljupo Jordanovski and the Vice-presidents are: Slobodan Najdovski and Gzim Ostreni. Standing working bodies of the Assembly are the following: 1.  Constitutional Affairs Committee; 2. Legislative Committee; 3.  Defence and Security Committee; 4.  Committee on Political System and Inter-Community Relations; 5.  Foreign Affairs Committee; 6.  European Affairs Committee; 7.  Committee on Election and Appointment Issues; 8.  Standing Inquiry Committee for Protection of Civic Rights and Freedoms; 9.  Committee for Supervising the Work of the Security and Counter-Intelligence Directorate and the Intelligence Agency; 10. Finance and Budget Committee; 11. Economic Affairs Committee; 12. Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management Committee; 13. Transport, Communications and Environment Committee; 14. Education, Science and Sports Committee; 15. Culture Committee; 16. Health Care Committee; 17. Labour and Social Affairs Committee;  18. Committee on the Rules of Procedure and Mandatory and Immunity Issues;  Terms of reference of the working bodies 1. Constitutional Affairs Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 16 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Implementation of the Constitution;   Proposals for amendments to the Constitution;   General constitutional issues pertaining to the adoption and enforcement of laws and other regulations and acts;   Other Constitution-related issues. 2. Legislative Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 12 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Compliance of laws and other acts with the Constitution and the legal system, as well as their legislative and technical processing;   Compliance of laws with the European Union legislation;   Requests for authentic interpretation and drafting of proposals for authentic interpretation of laws; Determines revised texts of laws and other acts, if authorised by a law or another act;   Submits corrigenda to published texts of laws or other acts on the basis of the authentic text of the adopted laws, or other acts of the Assembly, and   Examines other issues concerning legislation and development of the legal system of the Republic. 3. Defence and Security Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 12 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines issues pertaining to:   Protection of the order established by the Constitution;   Supervision over defence and security;   Defence of the Republic of Macedonia and civic protection;   Cooperation with the collective security and defence systems to which the state has acceded;   Integration of the state in the Euro-Atlantic organisations and relations of the state with these organisations;   Protection of life, personal safety and citizens’ property as guaranteed by the Constitution;   Production, trade, purchase, possession and carrying of arms, arms spare parts and ammunition;   Security provision for individuals and facilities;  Citizenship;   Preservation of peace and public order;   Public assembling and events;   Road, airway, railway and lake transport safety;   Protection against natural disasters and epidemic diseases;   Registration and cancellation of permanent or temporary residence;   Crossing of state border and movement and stay in border areas;   Movement and residence of aliens;   Definition and resolution of border-crossing incidents and other state border violations, and   Other issues concerning defence and security. 4. Committee on Political System and Inter-Community Relations The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 12 and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Functioning of the political system;   Changes of the country’s borders;   State symbols and their use;   The judiciary, the bar and the public prosecutor's office;   Granting amnesty and pardon;   Freedom of movement and freedom to choose dwelling;   Personal identification records and protection of personal data;   Personal names, identity cards and travel documents;   Census of the population;   Public information system;   Citizens’ right to association and political organisation,   Voting right and method of election of representatives in the Assembly, President of the Republic of Macedonia, council members and mayors;  Referendum;  Local self-government;   The Ombudsman;    The Macedonian Orthodox Church, as well as the Islamic Religious Community in Macedonia, the Catholic Church, the Evangelistic and Methodist Church, the Jewish Community and other religious communities or groups;   Decorations, acknowledgements and awards;   Holidays in the Republic of Macedonia;   State administration organisation;   Right to use languages and alphabets of the communities;   Guarantees for protection of communities’ ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity, and    Other issues concerning the political system and relations among communities. 5. Foreign Affairs Committee The Committee includes a Chairperson, 12 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Foreign policy of the Republic of Macedonia and its relations with other states and international organisations;   Policy which ensures that care is taken by the Republic for the situation and the rights of Macedonians in the neighbouring countries and Macedonian expatriates, as well as for the cultural, economic and social rights of Macedonian citizens abroad;   Accession to or withdrawal from an alliance or a community with other states;   Accession to or withdrawal from international organisations;   Requirement to start negotiations to sign bilateral or multilateral international treaties of the Republic of Macedonia, i.e. Platforms for such negotiations;   International treaties ratification;   International legislation in the area of human and civil rights and freedoms, as well as international organisations and associations’ documents;   Establishment of cooperation of the Republic of Macedonia with other states and international organisations;   Establishment of cooperation with foreign affairs committees in parliaments of other states;   Initiatives and proposals for definition of the foreign policy strategy of the Republic of Macedonia, and    Other issues pertaining to the Republic of Macedonia’s foreign policy. 6. European Affairs Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 12 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines issues referring to:    Compliance of proposals to adopt laws, i.e. Draft-laws with the European Union legislation;    Monitoring and encouraging the process of harmonisation of the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia with the European Union legislation; proposing measures to enhance harmonisation procedures, providing of opinions and proposals for the activities of the assembly’s working bodies in this regard;   Fulfilment of obligations under the agreements between the European Union and the Republic of Macedonia;   Monitoring the government and the state administration activities aimed at the accession of the Republic of Macedonia to the European Union, and giving opinions and recommendations on these issues;   Implementation of programs and other actions of the European Union institutions in the Republic of Macedonia, including programmes of financial support;    Regular reporting to the assembly on all issues related to European integration;   Initiation and implementation of activities to inform the public on the European union integration process;    Cooperation with the corresponding committees in other countries, and   Consideration of other issues related to European integration. 7. Committee on Election and Appointment Issues The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 12 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee’s activities include:   Submission of proposals for election and appointment, i.e. Dismissal of officials elected or appointed by the Assembly, if a law or the Assembly’s Rules of Procedure or another act stipulate that the committee shall submit such proposals;   Submission of proposals for election and appointment, i.e. Dismissal of officials elected or appointed by the Assembly, if the Constitution, the law, the assembly’s rules of procedure or another act do not stipulate that another body shall submit such proposals;   Proposing composition of the standing and ad hoc working bodies of the assembly;  Proposing composition of the Assembly’s permanent delegations to international parliamentary assemblies and assembly’s parliamentary groups for cooperation with other parliaments;   Proposing members of  governing boards and other bodies in public enterprises, organisations and institutions elected or appointed by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, if the constitution, a law or another act do not stipulate that another body shall submit such proposals;   Proposing members of the editorial board of the Assembly’s bulletin;   Proposing  appointment and dismissal of state representatives in governing boards, as well as members of selection committees for executives within the assembly’s competence;   Proposing the composition of boards and other bodies of the assembly entrusted to  organise and implement observation of important historic events for the Republic and other events that need to be observed, as well as bodies for presentation of national awards;   Giving opinion upon proposals for election, i.e. Appointment of public office-holders elected, i.e. Appointed by the assembly, proposed by other bodies;   Considering draft-regulation on salaries and other incomes of the representatives  and officials elected or appointed by the assembly, representatives  and officials whose mandate has terminated, and within legal competence, adopting more concrete regulation for their enforcement;   Adoption of acts for which authorised by the assembly;   Deciding on individual salaries and other incomes of Representatives  and other officials elected or appointed by the assembly;   Deciding on the act for a 5% deduction of the salary for each day of absence to a representative  who has been absent from at least three assembly’s plenary, i.e. Working body’s sessions, and has failed to notify thereof the president of the assembly, i.e. The working body's chairperson;   Determining remunerations for academic or specialist institutions and associations for their engagement in the working bodies;   Deciding, in accordance with the regulations, on the level of per diem allowances, compensations for costs for separation from the family, holiday allowances, moving and other expenses;   Deciding upon complaints against decisions by the assembly’s secretary general, unless otherwise determined by a law or another act;   Corrigenda to acts adopted by the committee, and published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia, and   Other election and appointment issues. 8. Standing Inquiry Committee for Protection of Civil Rights and Freedoms The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 8 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Principle issues, proposals and opinions relating to the implementation of the constitutional provisions, laws and other regulations and acts relevant for the exercise and protection of civil rights and freedoms;   Pointing to the need of adoption of laws, regulations and other acts aimed at a more comprehensive protection of civil rights and freedoms;   Monitoring, examining and analysing the implementation of ratified international agreements governing the protection of civil rights and freedoms;   Considering citizens’ complaints and adopting positions on them;   Cooperation with academic and specialised organisations in the domain of protection of civil rights and freedoms;   Cooperation with corresponding foreign and international bodies in the domain of protection of civil rights and freedoms;    Other issues pertaining to the protection of civil rights and freedoms. The Inquiry Committee may not exercise investigative or other judicial functions. The Committee’s findings are grounds for initiating a procedure to establish public office-holders’ accountability. 9. Committee for Supervising the Operation of the Security and Counter-Intelligence Directorate and the Intelligence Agency The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 8 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Respect, on the part of the Security and Counter-Intelligence Directorate and the Intelligence Agency, of the constitutionally and legally granted rights and liberties  of citizens, enterprises and other legal entities;   Legality in the exercise of authority on the part of the Security and Counter-Intelligence Directorate and the Intelligence Agency in terms of possible exceeding of authority, unauthorised activities, abuse and other detrimental actions, in violation of their rights determined by Law;   Methods and means applied by the Security and Counter-Intelligence Directorate and the Intelligence Agency in terms of their legality and respect of the rights of citizens and other entities;   Financial, personnel and technical capacity of the Security and Counter-Intelligence Directorate and the Intelligence Agency, and   Other issues regarding the Security and Counter-Intelligence Directorate and the Intelligence Agency. 10. Finance and Budget Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 12 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:  Financial system;   The budget of the Republic of Macedonia;   Taxes, charges, contributions and other public fees paid by citizens and legal persons;  Customs system;   Monetary and crediting, banking and foreign exchange system;   Payment operations and audit;   Loans and credits;  Public procurement;  Insurance system;   Ownership and other property-rights relations;  Commodity reserves;   Lottery games, and   Other finance-related issues. 11. Economic Affairs Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 10 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:  Production and trade;   Mineral resources and energy;   Tourism, catering and craftsmanship;  Foreign trade;  Foreign investment;  Ownership transformation;   Measures against monopolistic position and actions on the market;  Consumer protection;  Public enterprises;  Concessions;   Accelerated development of underdeveloped regions;  Statistics, and   Other issues related to the economic system. 
12. Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 10 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Agricultural land, pastures and other natural resources;   Redistribution of estates, land consolidation and land reclamation;   Cattle breeding, farming; orchard and vineyard cultivation;   Hunting and fishing;   Flora and fauna;   Veterinary care and plant protection;   Land register and cadastre;   Water resources managementand water resources regime approval;   Hydro-melioration systems and hydro-meteorological matters, and   Other issues related to agriculture, forestry and water management. 13. Transport, Communications and Environment Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 10 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Road, railway, river, lake, airway, postal, telegraphic, telephone and radio traffic;  Cableways and ski-lifts;   Telecommunications and broadcasting systems;   Transport and telecommunication facilities construction;   Physical and urban planning;   Construction land development;   Housing and utility service management;   Environment, nature, air, soil and water development and protection against pollution;   Ensuring conditions for healthy environment;   Harmful noise prevention;   Protection against ionising radiation and other adverse effects on people’s lives and health, as well as special security measures in case of use of atomic energy, and   Other issues related to transport, communications and environment. 
14. Education, Science and Sports Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 10 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   System and organisation of pre-school, primary, secondary and higher education;   Right to teaching in community languages;   System and organisation of scientific and research activities;   Creation, application and evaluation of inventions, patents and other inventive activities resulting from scientific, artistic or other type of intellectual creation;   Information technology, scientific and technological development and technical culture;   Organisation, development and operation of the information system in the country;   Youth education and students’ standard;   Providing incentive for the youth intellectual, cultural and scientific creation;   Education provided to youngsters on preventive protection against diseases of addiction and aids;   Development and enhancement of physical culture;   Top-level sports development, and   Other issues related to education, science, youth and sports. 15. Culture Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 10 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Organisation, development and promotion of culture;   Preservation of natural and cultural heritage of the Republic of Macedonia;   Enrichment of historical and artistic creation;   Promotion and preservation of outstanding cultural values;   Authorship and copyright promotion and protection;   Movable and immovable cultural treasure preservation and usage;   Publishing and librarianship;   Monuments construction and preservation;   Use and protection of the Macedonian language;   Information dissemination, cultural and other activities aimed at expression of communities’ identity and their distinctive features;   Determining anniversaries of events and individuals of particular importance for the state development, historical and cultural heritage and fostering of  general civilisation values;   Manner and forms of observing important events and personalities;    Activities of boards established for specific celebrations, and   Other issues related to culture and observation of anniversaries of important events and persons. 16. Health Care Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 10 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Health care of the population;  Health care insurance;   Protection of population against communicable diseases, protection against harmful effects of gasses, ionizing radiation and noise; air, water, soil and nutrimental pollution;   Protection against diseases of addiction and aids;   Hygienic and epidemiological situation;   Production, trade in and supply of drugs, additional medicines and medical devices, medical equipment, sanitation devices and materials, toxins and narcotics;   Sanitation and health care supervision, and   Other health care issues. 
17. Labour and Social Affairs Committee The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 10 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines the following issues:   Labour relations and workers' protection at work;   Right to strike;   Employment and rights in case of unemployment;   Women protection at work and maternity protection;   Salaries and standard of living;   Social policy and citizens’ social safety;   System, organisation, development and promotion of social welfare and children’s protection;   Population policy, marriage and family;   System of pension and disability insurance;   War veteran and disabled protection and protection of disabled war veterans and persons persecuted and detained for the ideas of independence of the Macedonian people and its statehood, and    Other labour and social issues. 
18. Committee on the Rules of Procedure and Mandatory and Immunity Issues The Committee consists of a Chairperson, 8 Members and their Substitutes. The Committee examines:   The implementation of the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly and rules of procedure of the working bodies and gives opinions on matters of dispute;   Initiatives for changes to the Assembly’s Rules of Procedure and the rules of procedure of the working bodies;   Amendments to the Assembly’s Rules of Procedure;   State Electoral Commission’s reports on Representatives who have joined the Assembly from party lists over the course of the Assembly’s mandate;   Grounds for termination or revoking of Representatives’ mandate, and reports to the Assembly;   Immunity of Representatives, judges and the Public Prosecutor and his/her deputies, and   Other issues related to the Rules of Procedure and mandatory and immunity rights. In accordance with Amendment XII to the Constitution, the Assembly adopted a Decision to establish a Committee on Inter-Community Relations (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No 85/02). The Committee consists of 19 members from the ranks of the Representatives to the Assembly of whom 7 members are Macedonian, 7 members are Albanian, and one member each from among the Turks, Vlachs, Roma, Serbs and Bosniaks. If any of the communities does not have Representatives in the Assembly, the Ombudsman, after consultation with relevant representatives of those communities, shall propose the remaining members of the Committee. This has not been the case until now. The Committee reviews issues pertaining to relations among communities and exercise of the constitutionally and legally determined rights of members of non-majority communities in the Republic of Macedonia. The Committee, furthermore, gives opinions and proposals for resolution of issues in this area, while the Assembly is obligated to review them and decide upon them. The Committee decides in case of dispute concerning the implementation of the voting procedure in the Assembly on laws that require majority vote by Representatives in the Assembly belonging to the non-majority communities in the Republic of Macedonia. Prerogatives and competences of the Parliament with respect to holding members of the Executive to account The Assembly conducts its political control and scrutiny over the Government by way of the Parliamentary question, inquiry committees, interpellation motions and confidence vote. Parliamentary question is set at a special sitting held every last Thursday in the month. Inquiry committees may be established in any area or on any issue of public interest, and their findings constitute grounds to initiate procedure to determine accountability of public-office holders. Interpellation motion for the work of the Government and each of its members individually, may be put forward by at least five Representatives, in writing and with an attached explanation. The interpellation motion is debated at an Assembly’s sitting. The debate is followed by an adoption of conclusion that expresses the Assembly’s position on the claims included in the interpellation motion. A motion of confidence for the Government may be raised by at least 20 Representatives, in writing and with an attached explanation. The President of the Assembly immediately forwards the confidence motion to the Representatives, the Government and the President of the Republic. A confidence motion may be withdrawn until the beginning of the sitting. A confidence motion is debated at an Assembly’s sitting. The Assembly votes on the motion within three days from its submission. A vote of non-confidence is adopted by a majority vote of the total number of Representatives. If a vote of non-confidence in the Government is passed, the Government is obliged to resign. The Government that was voted non-confidence continues to act until the election of a new Government. The Assembly decides upon dismissal of a Government’s member, only upon a proposal of the President of the Government. If the President of the Government proposes dismissal of more than one-third of the Government’s member, the Assembly decides as if electing a new Government. The procedure of impeachment of the President of the Republic is initiated by the Assembly with a two-thirds majority vote of all Representatives. The President is accountable for any violation of the Constitution and laws in exercising his/her rights and duties. (Article 87 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia) A proposal for initiating the procedure of impeachment may be raised by at least 30 Representatives, in writing and with an attached explanation. Before deciding, the Assembly sets up a Committee to assess the existence of reasonable grounds for the proposal. The Committee shall report to the Assembly. A debate is held on the proposal and on the report, after which the President of the Republic may give his statement, in writing or orally. If the Assembly votes for the proposal to initiate procedure to determine the accountability of the President of the Republic, the President of the Assembly shall immediately submit the proposal to the Constitutional Court which decides upon the President’s accountability. Reporting to the Assembly in accordance with legal obligations Specific bodies, in accordance with the obligations under respective laws, submit reports to the Assembly. In that sense, the Ombudsman, submits an annual report, that the Assembly examines at a session attended by the Government members. (Article 36 of the Law on the Ombudsman, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 60/03) The Public Prosecutor’s Office of the Republic of Macedonia drafts a single annual report on the operation of all public prosecution offices and submits it for examination to the Assembly (Article 15 of the Law on the Public Prosecutor’s Office, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 38/04). The Public Prosecutor of the Republic of Macedonia is appointed by the Assembly.  The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, whose Governor is appointed by the Assembly, submits to the Assembly semi-annual and annual reports on its operation, supervision, measures undertaken related to banks and savings banks and the handling of the foreign exchange reserves (Article 55 of the Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 03/02, 51/03, 85/03 and 40/04). The State Audit Office whose Chief State Auditor is elected by the Assembly, submits an annual report on the conducted audits and on its operation. (Article 12 of the Law on State Audit, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 65/97, 70/01, 31/03, 19/04 and 73/04 - consolidated text).  The Securities Committee, whose Chairperson and members are appointed by the Assembly, submits an annual report on its operation and an annual account (Article 163 of the Law on Securities Law, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 63/00,103/00, 34/01, 4/02, 37/02, 31/03 and 85/03).  The State Commission for Prevention of Corruption, whose members are appointed by the Assembly, submits an annual report on its operation and the undertaken measures and actions (Article 49 paragraph 1 line 10 of the Law on the Prevention of Corruption, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 28/02 and 46/04).  The Director of the Civil Servants Agency, who is appointed by the Assembly, submits a report on its work (Article 8 of the Law on Civil Servants, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 59/00, 112/00, 34/01, 103/01, 43/02, 98/02, 17/03, 40/03, 85/03, 17/04 and 69/04). The General Manager of the Macedonian Radio and Television, also appointed by the Assembly, submits an annual report on the work of the MRT to the Assembly (Article 18 of the Law on Establishment of a Public Enterprise – Macedonian Radio and Television, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 6/98, 98/00 and 78/04).  Procedure of adoption of laws Every Representative in the Assembly, the Government and at least 10.000 voters have right to propose adoption of a law. The procedure of adoption of laws has been stipulated by the Rules of Procedure. As a rule, laws are adopted in a regular procedure of two readings, namely a proposal to adopt the law and a draft-law. By exception, the Assembly may decide a law to be additionally examined as a preliminary draft-law. A proposal to adopt the law, as the first stage in the procedure (first reading), prior to the debate on it in the plenary, is debated by the working body responsible for the issues governed by that particular law, as well as by the Legislative Committee. Working bodies examine the law from the viewpoint of the need for its adoption, the principles upon which it has been founded, basic relations being regulated and the manner in which they have been regulated. The Legislative Committee examines the law from the viewpoint of the need for its adoption and its compliance with the Constitution, as well as its compliance with the EU legislation. The President of the Assembly forwards to the Government a proposal to adopt the law that has not been submitted by the Government, requesting an opinion on it. If the Assembly decides that there is a need to adopt a law, it passes a conclusion approving of the proposal to adopt the law. A draft-law, being the second stage in the procedure (second reading), shall be submitted within 60 days from the day of the conclusion of the first stage. The provisions governing the first stage in the Rules of Procedure and its examination in the working bodies and in the Legislative Committee are accordingly applied to the draft-laws. In the course of the debate on a draft-law, discussion and vote is also held on the amendments that may be submitted by a Representative, a working body, the Government and at least 10.000 voters, within timeframes prescribed by the Rules of Procedure. The Government may also express its position on amendments it has not proposed. The Rules of Procedure also provide for a shortened procedure for adoption of laws. Namely, if the proposed law is not a complex or an extensive one, upon a proposal by its proposer, the Assembly may decide that both stages of the law are debated at the same sitting (the proposal to adopt the law and the draft-law). If the law governs a complex or an extensive subject, the Assembly may decide that, prior to the draft-law, the proposer prepares a preliminary draft-law that shall be examined in accordance with the same procedure as the proposal to adopt the law. The Assembly may decide that a public debate is carried out on a preliminary draft-law of broader significance.  By exception, a law may be adopted in an urgent procedure, only in cases specified by the Rules of Procedure (when necessary in order to prevent or eliminate major disturbances in the economy, when required by the security and defence of the country, or in cases of major natural disasters, epidemic diseases or other emergency conditions). Attached to the proposal to adopt the law in an urgent procedure, the proposer shall submit the draft-law. The Assembly, without a debate, shall decide upon the justifiability of the proposal for an urgent procedure. If the proposal has not been submitted by the Government, before deciding, the Assembly shall request an opinion of the Government. Prior to or in the course of the debate, the Assembly may request an urgent opinion by a working body or the Legislative Committee, each within its responsibilities. Procedure of adoption of laws related to the 
cquis 
The procedures explained above apply to the adoption of laws related to the cquis, as well. This means that these laws, depending on the character and the extensiveness of the issues being regulated, may be adopted in a regular (two stages), in a shortened (one stage) or in an urgent procedure. In other words, procedures stipulated in the Rules of Procedure do not pose an obstacle to their timely adoption. The acquis-related laws, depending on the issues being regulated, are debated by the competent working bodies. The Legislative Committee examines the law from the viewpoint of its compliance with the Constitution and the legal system of the country, as well as from the viewpoint of its compliance with the EU legislation. The European Affairs Committee examines issues pertaining to the compliance of the proposals to adopt laws, i.e. draft-laws with the EU legislation. In addition, this Committee monitors and provides incentive for the process of approximation of the domestic legislation with that of the European Union. Furthermore, it proposes measures to enhance the procedures aimed at the approximation of the legislation and provides opinions and proposals on the activities of the Assembly’s working bodies
3. What measures have been taken to allow the use of the Albanian language in the Parliament? How are they being implemented in practice? 
The Rules of Procedure of the Assembly, in accordance with the Constitutional Amendments of 2001 (Amendment V, item 1, paragraph 5), provide that in the work of the Assembly, along with the official Macedonian language and its Cyrillic alphabet, the Representatives in the Assembly - ethnic Albanians may use their language at the plenary sessions of the Assembly and at the working bodies’ sessions. In order to enable the use of the Albanian language in the work of the Assembly and its working bodies, the necessary technical pre-conditions have been provided as well as competent staff. The plenary session hall and the working bodies’ halls have been equipped for simultaneous interpretation. Five Albanian language translators/interpreters, two Albanian language editors and two Albanian language proof-readers have been employed in the Assembly’s Staff. In addition, at least two professional simultaneous interpreters are engaged part-time for the plenary and the working bodies’ sessions. The Assembly provides continuous training for the translators and language editors in cooperation with the Albanian Language Department at the Skopje Faculty of Philology. The funding has been partly provided from domestic sources and partly with the assistance of the Governments of Belgium and Canada. The Assembly sessions are broadcasted by the Public Broadcaster, Macedonian Television (MTV). The third channel of the MTV offers the audience a possibility to follow the broadcasts of the Assembly's sessions fully in Albanian language. The complete Albanian translation and language editing of the laws adopted by the Assembly, before their publication, is performed by separate translation and language editing units in the Assembly Service. Pursuant to the Law on Publication of the Laws and Other Regulations and Acts in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 56/99 and 43/02), besides in Macedonian, the laws are also published in the Albanian language. For that purpose, TRADOS text translation software has been installed in the Assembly. The undertaken technical and other measures have, in the practice, provided for an unobstructed use of the Albanian language in the work of the Assembly and its working bodies.  4. How many political parties are registered in your country? How many of these are represented in Parliament? What percentage of parliamentarians are (a) women and (b) from ethnic minorities? Article 20 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 1/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03), guarantees freedom of association to citizens, to exercise and protect their political, economic, social, cultural and other rights and convictions. Citizens may freely establish associations of citizens and political parties join them or withdraw from them.  The Law on Political Parties (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 76/04) regulates the mode, terms and procedure for establishing, registering and terminating political parties. Citizens freely establish political parties in order to exercise and protect their political, economic, social, cultural and other rights and convictions, in order to participate in the political decision-making process and to take part in the elections for Representatives in the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, the elections for council members and mayors in municipalities and in the City of Skopje. Members of a political party may only be citizens of the Republic of Macedonia. The work of the political parties is public and they are organised and operate on a territorial principle. A political party may be established by at least 500 adults (with a voting right), who are citizens of the Republic of Macedonia and who have signed a statement for founding of the political party. Fifteen days before the end of each year, the political party is obliged to submit to the competent court written evidence, proving that the number of its founders has not been reduced. Member of a political party may be every citizen of legal age, who has legal capacity and who shall give a statement for voluntary membership in the political party. Each member may freely withdraw from a political party. A political party is founded by a Founding Assembly which adopts the party’s founding act, its programme and statute, and which elects its bodies. The founding act includes the party’s name and the abbreviated name, the party’s main office, the name of the person authorised for entry in the court register and the names of its founders, including their personal identification numbers and the addresses of their permanent residence in the Republic of Macedonia.  A political party programme includes provisions as to the goals and selection of forms and methods of the political party’s activity. A political party’s statute includes provisions on: the name and the abbreviated name of the political party; the party’s main office; its political objectives; transparency in its operation; terms and mode of becoming a party member and termination of membership, as well as the rights, obligations and responsibilities of its members; representation and termination of the political party; the party’s bodies, mode of their election and recall, duration of their tenure and decision making modalities; acquisition and managing of funds; termination of the political party; property proceedings in case of termination of the political party; property proceedings after the termination of the political party and the party’s symbols (flag, logo, emblem, etc). A political party begins its work and acquires the status of a legal entity on the day of its registration in the Court Register.  A political party ceases to exist once it has been erased from the Court Register, in the following cases: a political party itself submits a request for erasure from the Court Register; on the basis of a final decision for erasure of the political party from the Court Register, passed by the Court on the basis of the Law on Political Parties; when the political party has been forbidden activity by a final court decision, in accordance with the Law on Political Parties; and when the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia finds that the political party’s programme or statute are not in compliance with the Constitution. In the Republic of Macedonia, the status reported on 31.12.2004 indicates 75 registered political parties. In the current composition of the Assembly, 14 political parties are represented and the political structure is as follows:   Social-Democratic Union of Macedonia (SDSM) – 44 Representatives (36,66%);   Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) – 15 Representatives (12,5%);   VMRO People’s Party - 12 Representatives (9,96%)   VMRO Democratic Party of the Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE) – 11 Representatives (9,13%);   Liberal-Democratic Party (LDP) – 10 Representatives (8,33%);   Democratic Party of the Albanians (DPA) – 7 Representatives (5,83%);   Liberal Party of Macedonia (LPM) – 5 Representatives (4,17%);   Party for Democratic Prosperity in Macedonia (PDP) – 2 Representatives (1,67% %);   Democratic Party of the Turks of Macedonia (DPTM) – 2 Representatives (1,66%);   Democratic League of the Bosniaks in the Republic of Macedonia (SLBRM) - 1 Representative  (0,83% );   United Roma Party of Macedonia (OPRM) – 1 Representative (0,83%);   Democratic Party of the Serbs in Macedonia (DPSM) – 1 Representative (0,83%);   Socialist Party of Macedonia (SPM) – 1 Representative (0,83%);   National Democratic Party (NDP) – 1 Representative (0,83%);   Independent Representatives – 7 (5,83 %). The current composition of the Assembly, in terms of ethnic structure, is the following:   Macedonians – 85 (70,83%);   Albanians - 26 (21,66%);   Turks – 3 (2,5%);   Serbs - 2 (1,66%);   Bosniaks - 2 (1,66%);   Roma - 1 (0,83%) and   Vlachs - 1 (0,83%). The current composition of the Assembly, in terms of gender structure, is the following:   Male - 97 (80,87%)   Female - 23 (19,13%). 
ETHNIC AND GENDER STRUCTURE OF THE ASSEMBLY 

Macedonians  Albanians Turks Vlachs Roma Serbs Bosniaks Total Total 85 26 120 %  70,83 21,66 2,5  0,83 0,83 1,66 1,66 100 23 Female 21 0 0 19,17 % 97 Male 64 24 3 1 1 2 2 80,83 % Source: Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia 
