A. DEMOCRACY AND THE RULE OF LAW 

1. Please provide a brief description of the constitutional and institutional situation in the Republic of Macedonia. 
Constitution  
The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia was adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia on 17.11.1991, following the Referendum of 08.09.1991, which resulted in establishing the Republic of Macedonia as an independent and sovereign state. The Constitution was amended several times. On 06.01.1992, Amendments I and II were adopted and proclaimed; on 01.06.1998 - Amendment III; on 16.11.2001 - Amendments IV through XVIII, and on 30.12.2003 - Amendment XIX. Thus, the amendments became an integral part of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia.   
The fundamental values of the constitutional order of the Republic of Macedonia are:the fundamental freedoms and rights of the individual and citizen, recognised in international law and determined by the Constitution; the free expression of ethnic identity; equitable representation of citizens belonging to all communities in state bodies and other public institutions at all levels; the rule of law; the separation of state powers into legislative, executive and judicial; political pluralism and free, direct and democratic elections; the legal protection of property; the freedom of the market and entrepreneurship; humanity, social justice and solidarity; local self-government; organising and humanising the environment, protecting and improving living conditions and the natural environment; respect for the generally accepted norms of international law (Article 8 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia). Citizens of the Republic of Macedonia are equal in their freedoms and rights, regardless of their gender, race, skin colour, national or social origin, political or religion conviction, property or social status. Citizens are equal before the Constitution and the law. 
Organisation of state power  
The state power in the Republic of Macedonia functions on the basis of its separation into legislative (the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia), executive (the President of the Republic of Macedonia and the Government of the Republic of Macedonia) and judicial power. 
 Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia 
The Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia is the citizens’ representative body in which the legislative power of the state is vested. The Assembly is comprised of 120 Representatives, elected at general, direct and free elections, by secret ballot and for four year term ofoffice. The Assembly adopts and amends the Constitution, adopts laws and gives the authentic interpretation of laws; determines public taxes and fees; adopts the Budget and the Budget’s Final Account of the Republic; adopts the Spatial Plan of the Republic; ratifies international agreements; decides on war and peace; makes decisions concerning any changes in the borders of the Republic; makes decisions on association in and disassociation from any form of alliance or community with other states; issues notice of a referendum; makes decisions concerning the reserves of the Republic; sets up councils; elects the Government of the Republic of Macedonia; elects judges to the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia; elects and discharges judges; elects, appoints and dismisses other holders of public and other offices determined by the Constitution and law; carries out political control and supervision of the Government and other holders of public office accountable to the Assembly; proclaims amnesties; performs other activities determined by the Constitution (Article 68 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia). In performing the duties within its competence, the Assembly adopts decisions, declarations, resolutions, recommendations and conclusions. The organisation and the functioning of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia are regulated by its Rules of Procedure (for more details see I_B_2). 
President of the Republic of Macedonia  
The President of the Republic of Macedonia represents the Republic and is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Macedonia (Article 79). The President of the Republic is elected at general and direct elections, by secret ballot and for a five year term of office. A person may be elected President of the Republic two times at most, and he/she should be a citizen of the Republic of Macedonia and at least at 40 on the day of the election. A person may not be elected President of the Republic if, on the day of the election, he/she has not been a resident of the Republic of Macedonia for at least ten years within the last fifteen years. The President of the Republic of Macedonia  nominates a mandatary to constitute the Government of the Republic of Macedonia; appoints and recalls by decree ambassadors and other envoys of the Republic of Macedonia abroad; accepts the credentials and letters of recall of foreign diplomatic representatives; proposes two judges of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia; proposes two members of the Judicial Council of the Republic; appoints three members to the Security Council of the Republic of Macedonia; proposes the members of the Council for Inter-Ethnic Relations; appoints and dismisses other holders of state and public offices determined by the Constitution and the law; grants decorations and honours in accordance with the law; grants pardons in accordance with the law; and performs other duties determined by the Constitution (Article 84 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia). The President of the Republic addresses the Assembly on issues within his/her sphere of competence at least once a year. The Assembly may request the President of the Republic to state an opinion on issues within his/her sphere of competence (Article 85). The President of the Republic is President of the Security Council of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 86). The current President of the Republic of Macedonia is H.E. Branko Crvenkovski, elected at the Presidential Elections held on 15.04.2004.  
Government of the Republic of Macedonia 
Executive power is vested in the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Government exercises its rights and duties on the basis and within the framework of the Constitution and the laws (Article 88 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia). The organisation and the mode of working of the Government are regulated by law. The Government is composed of a Prime minister and Ministers (Article 89). The Government is elected and dismissed by the Assembly. The Government and each of its members are accountable for their work before the Assembly. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia: determines the policy of execution of the laws and of the other regulations of the Assembly and is accountable for their execution;  proposes laws, the Budget of the Republic and other regulations to be adopted by the Assembly; proposes a Spatial Plan of the Republic; proposes decisions concerning the reserves of the Republic and is responsible for their execution; adopts secondary legislation and other regulations for execution of the laws; determinates principles on the internal organisation and the mode of work of the Ministries and of the other administrative bodies, directs and supervises their work; provides opinions on the draft - laws and on the other regulations submitted to the Assembly by other authorised proposal-makers; takes decisions on the recognition of states and governments; establishes diplomatic and consular relations with other states; decides on opening of diplomatic and consular missions abroad; proposes the appointment of Ambassadors and envoys of the Republic of Macedonia abroad and appoints chiefs of consular missions; proposes the Public Prosecutor; appoints and dismisses holders of public and other offices determined by the Constitution and the law; and performs other functions determined by the Constitution and the laws (Article 91). On issues within its competence, the Government decides on sessions. Upon an invitation by the President of the Government, and in order to participate in the debate and provide opinions and proposals on specific issues, heads of other bodies of state administration and administrative organisations, as well as representatives of public enterprises, citizens’ associations and foundations, institutions and other legal persons may attend the Government sessions without a right to vote. The Government is comprised of a President, four Ministers without Portfolio and 14 Ministers in charge of the individual ministries (for more details see  I_C_5). 
State Administration   
The state administration is comprised of Ministries and other administrative bodies and organisations determined by law. The organisation and work of the bodies of state administration are regulated by law adopted by a two-thirds majority vote of the total number of Representatives (Article 95). The bodies of the state administration perform their duties within their sphere of competence autonomously and on the basis and within the framework of the Constitution and laws, being accountable for their work to the Government. The bodies of state administration in the fields of defence and police are headed by persons who have been civilians for at least three years before their election to these offices (Article 97)(for more details see I_C_5). 
Judiciary 
Judicial power is exercised by the courts. The courts are autonomous and independent. The courts judge on the basis of the Constitution, the laws and the international agreements ratified in accordance with the Constitution. There is a single form of organisation for the judiciary. Extraordinary courts are prohibited. The types of courts, their jurisdiction, their establishment, abrogation, organisation and composition, as well as the procedures they follow, are regulated by law adopted by a majority vote of two-thirds of the total number of Representatives (Article 98). A judge is elected without restriction on the duration of his/her term of office (Article 99). Judges are elected and discharged by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. Judges enjoy immunity, and the Assembly decides on the immunity of judges (Article 100). The Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia is the highest court in the Republic providing uniformity in the implementation of the laws by the courts (Article 101). In the Republic of Macedonia, there are three appellate courts and 27 basic courts. Court hearings and delivery of the court decisions are public (Article 102). 
Judicial Council of the Republic  
The Judicial Council of the Republic is composed of seven members elected by the Assembly. Members of the Judicial Council of the Republic enjoy immunity. The Assembly decides on their immunity (Article 104). The Judicial Council of the Republic: proposes to the Assembly the election and discharge of judges and determines proposals for discharge from a judge’s office in cases determined by the Constitution; decides on the disciplinary accountability of the judges; evaluates the competence and consciousness of the judges in the performance of their office; and proposes two judges of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 105).The President of the Judicial Council is Lene Sofronievska (for more details see I_D_16). 
Public Prosecutor’s Office  
The Public Prosecutor's Office is a single and autonomous state body prosecuting crimes and other offences determined by law and performing other functions determined by law. The Public Prosecutor's Office performs its functions on the basis of, and within the framework of, the Constitution and the law.  The Public Prosecutor is appointed by the Assembly for a six-year term and is discharged by the Assembly (Article 106).The Public Prosecutor enjoys immunity, decided upon by the Assembly (Article 107).The Public Prosecutor of the Republic of Macedonia is Aleksandar Prevski (for more details see I_D_3). 
Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia 
The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia is a body of the Republic protecting constitutionality and legality (Article 108). The Assembly elects the judges of the Constitutional Court. The Assembly elects six of the judges of the Constitutional Court by a majority vote of the total number of Representatives. The Assembly elects three of the judges by a majority vote of the total number of Representatives, within which there must be a majority of the votes of the total number of Representatives who belong to non-majority communities in the Republic of Macedonia. The term of office of the judges is nine years without a right to re-election (Amendment XV). The Constitutional Court elects a President from its own ranks for a three-year term without a right to re-election (Article 109). The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia: decides on the conformity of the laws with the Constitution; decides on the conformity of the other regulations and of the collective agreements with the Constitution and the laws; protects the freedoms and rights of the individual and the citizen relating to the freedom of conviction, conscience, thought and public expression of thought, political association and activity as well as to the prohibition of discrimination on the ground of gender, race, religion, national, social and political affiliation; decides on competency conflicts between the holders of legislative, executive and judicial powers; decides on competency conflicts between the bodies of the Republic and the local self-government units; decides on the accountability of the President of the Republic; decides on the conformity of the programmes and statutes of the political parties and the associations of the citizens with the Constitution; and decides on other issues determined by the Constitution (Article 110). The Constitutional Court shall annul or abrogate a law if it determines that it is not in conformity with the Constitution. The Constitutional Court shall annul or abrogate another regulation or official document, collective agreement, statute or programme of a political party or an association if it determines that the same does not conform to the Constitution or law. The decisions of the Constitutional Court are final and executive (Article 112). The mode of work and the procedure of the Constitutional Court are regulated by an enactment of the Court (Article 113).The President of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia is Liljana Ingilizova Ristova. 
Local self-government 
The right of citizens to local self-government is guaranteed. Municipalities are units of local self-government. Within municipalities forms of neighbourhood self-government may be established. Municipalities are financed from their own sources of income determined by law as well as from funds belonging to the Republic (Article 114). Local self-government is regulated by a law adopted by a two-thirds majority vote of the total number of Representatives, within which there must be a majority of the votes of the total number of Representatives belong to the communities not in the majority in the Republic of Macedonia. The laws on local finances, local elections, boundaries of municipalities and the city of Skopje shall be adopted by a majority vote of the Representatives attending, within which there must be a majority of the votes of the Representatives attending who belong to the communities not in the majority in the Republic of Macedonia (Amendment XVI). The territorial division of the Republic and the area administered by each municipality are defined by law (Article 116). The City of Skopje is a particular unit of local self-government the organisation of which is regulated by law. The City of Skopje is financed from its own sources of income determined by law, as well as by funds from the Republic. The City of Skopje is autonomous in the performance of its constitutionally and legally determined spheres of competence; supervision of the legality of its work is carried out by the Republic (Article 117)(for more details see I_C_16). 
Ombudsman 
The Assembly elects the Ombudsman by a majority vote of the total number of Representatives, within which there must be a majority of the votes of the total number of Representatives who belong to communities not in the majority in the Republic of Macedonia. The Ombudsman protects the constitutional and legal rights of citizens when these are violated by bodies of the state administration and by other bodies and organisations with public mandates The Ombudsman gives particular attention to safeguarding the principles of non-discrimination and equitable representation of communities in state bodies, bodies of the units of local self-government and public institutions and services (Amendment XI). The Ombudsman is elected for a term of eight years, with the right to one re-election. The conditions for election and dismissal, the sphere of competence and the mode of work of the Ombudsman are regulated by law (Article 77). The Ombudsman of the Republic of Macedonia is Ixhet Memeti (for more details see I_G_6I_G_7I_G_8I_G_9). 
