City/Village 1 


A year-round house Seasonal house Note 3 Tetovo Tearce Jelošnik 5    15000 Funds for labour  7 Tetovo Džepčishte Otunje 1    20000 Burnt down after the conflict in 2001 8 Tetovo Tearce Varvara 1    3000 Funds for labour  9 Tetovo Tetovo Tetovo 1    3000 Funds for labour  8    41000   Total 41,001 


Total in   € 569,845  Total number of houses by categories 44  II 15  III 5  IV 48  
Total 112  
*The tables do not include houses from Aračinovo and Matejče  Source: Ministry of Transport and Communications 
4. Explain your overall policy on the return of refugees and displaced persons. Explain which efforts have been made to overcome the tensions and difficulties that resulted from the 2001 crisis, and in particular: - to promote inter-ethnic confidence and security of persons and goods; - to revitalise the economy of the former crisis areas. 
By the end of December 2004, as result of the 2001 crises In Republic of Macedonia, there were 1424 internally displaced persons, out of which 468 persons are hosted by the host families and the rest of 956 persons are sheltered within the collective centres in city of Kumanovo and Skopje.  The accommodation cost and of food for the internally displaced persons sheltered within the collective centres is provided and covered in total by the budget of Republic of Macedonia. For the internally displaced persons hosted by families, a family packages are provided on monthly basis, and for the families that are hosting internally displaced persons a monthly amount of 75 EUR is provided as grant.    In addition, for the persons who have returned to their reconstructed homes and have no basic home furnishings, a one-off install grant is being provided, by the Ministry of labour and Social Policy, and so far more than 350 families have received this kind of assistance.  The Government official attitude towards internally displaced persons is to support the return to their homes in spite of difficulties and constrains that may be met and regardless of the time this may take.  In doing so, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia will continue to take all the measures within its capacity to ensure return for the remaining 1424 persons to their homes. In regards of the return of the refugees, all information are provided in the answer of the question in the I_K_2 and 24_F_10.  In this context, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia is paying special attention to several questions, all related to the reconstruction of damaged homes during the 2001 conflict, security conditions, and the revitalisation of the former crisis areas. During the 2001 crisis in the Republic of Macedonia, a total of 6,678 houses were damaged in the crisis areas. At the moment there are only 112 remaining houses qualified for reconstruction. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia consider this process as  being successfully brought to an end with the financial assistance of the international community. A total of 32 million EUR have been awarded at the Donors’ Conference in Brussels for the reconstruction of the damaged homes and additional 1.9 million EUR was reallocated from the CARDS programme for this purpose.  With the end of the 2001 crisis, and by the signature of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, the major  paths were defined for overcoming of the tensions and difficulties as result of the crises  Namely in the Annex C of the Ohrid Framework Agreement a number of measures have been envisaged aimed at restoring interethnic confidence as well as the confidence between the local population in the former crisis areas and the police. In order to implement the provisions of the Ohrid Framework Agreement as an assigned strategic priority, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopted a special Plan on the Implementation of the Framework Agreement, which envisages the following measures in connection with the promotion of interethnic confidence and the security of persons and property:   Strengthening of security and safety in the areas involved in the 2001 crisis, including the reconstruction and rebuilding of demolished or damaged police stations (Mateje, Tearce, Žerovjane and Raduša), and the creation of the necessary conditions for their normal functioning, as well as the construction of a new police stations in areas assessed as needing strengthened security (Arainovo).   Strengthening of the presence of an adequate number of police officers from different ethnic origin  and re-gaining the competences by the police in the former crisis areas, and   Continuation of activities aimed at mutual confidence building between the police, the local population and local self-government in these populated areas. In this context, the police stations in Arainovo and Mateje were built (through a donation from the governments of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of Hungary), and the police station in Žerovjane has been reconstructed (through a USAID donation from the United States). The project for the construction of a police station in Tearce is currently under way (following a donation from the Norwegian Government), i.e. the construction works will commence in March. The equipment for all of them has been provided by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, i.e. from the Ministry of the Interior. At the same time, the Principal Plan for the Return of the Police Force to the former crisis areas was fully implemented. A result of its implementation is that a mixed police force is now successfully performing its functions in the field. Through various projects initiated by international implementing agencies and the non-governmental sector, in cooperation and coordination with the Ministry of the Interior and the OSCE, the mutual confidence was strengthened and promoted, including the security of persons and property, the development of cooperation between the police and the population at local level through the establishment of special citizens’ counselling groups, as well as the reform of the police with the aim of ensuring better quality services to citizens. As far as the revitalisation of the former crisis areas is concerned, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopted a special Programme of Activities for the Economic Revitalisation of the Former Crisis Areas. The main objective of the Programme is to initiate a new stage of activities following the implementation of the process of reconstruction of damaged homes, i.e. a stage in which efforts will be intensified to achieve economic growth in the former crisis areas. The areas in which the future activities of the programme should be concentrated are the following: agriculture, the communal sector and business. In this context, a special Action Plan of Activities for Revitalisation is being foreseen, and which is currently in the final phase of preparation. During the preceding one-year period, a number of projects have been completed in the aforementioned areas as defined in the programme, primarily through appropriate annual programmes developed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, but  also through the close cooperation with the donor community. With regard to the revitalisation of the roads, the water supply and sewage systems, and the telecommunications infrastructure, it has to be noted that this has been almost fully completed through the intervention funds from the international community and the participation of several public companies from the Republic of Macedonia, in accordance with the programme for urgent measures adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and presented at the Donors’ Conference in Brussels in March 2002. In order to support the implementation of the Framework Agreement (Annex C — Confidence-Building Measures) and rehabilitation of the 2001 crises consequences, the Government of the Republic of Italy and the Government of Republic of Macedonia, provided an amount of  1.3 million EUR  for the purpose of the economic revitalisation of the former crisis areas. These funds were reallocated from the programme for the reconstruction of a number of damaged houses in the village of Mateje, whose owners had not signed the tripartite reconstruction contracts.  In this context, at the request of the Government of the Republic of Italy, the implementing agency International Management Group (IMG) developed a project entitled “Economic Revitalisation of the Former Crisis Areas”. The aim of the project is to complete the reconstruction of some of the damaged commercial buildings through a grant, and also to offer individuals “soft” loans for purchase of machines and equipment to restart their businesses. The project will be implemented in the way that will provide the amount of approximately 750.000 EUR (or nearly 60%) of the donation to be used as a grant for completion of the reconstruction of the damaged commercial buildings and for restart of the production providing for services or agricultural activities (this refers to only 81 beneficiaries who have qualified). The  remaining funds, of up to 1.3 million EUR, will be utilised through grants of restricted loans upon favourable conditions for the purchase of machines and equipment, and the provision of services, out of which the minimum of  12%, will also be given in the form of grants. In this context, it is important to emphasise that a total of 3.4 million EUR will be required to complete the revitalisation process for the qualified 81 legal entities. The remaining amount (above the 1.3 million EUR) is to be offered in the form of loans upon the same conditions provided by the interested commercial banks and other credit institutions. According to a preliminary analysis, the aforesaid 81 beneficiaries will create 283 new jobs. In the same context, another donation of 400.000 EUR by the Government of the Kingdom of Denmark should be mentioned, implemented through the project by the Danish Council for Refugees. The project, which was completed in 2004, was aimed at supporting, among other things, the economic independence of returnees (former internally displaced persons and refugees) and socially vulnerable members of communities in the intervention areas, as well as making an overall contribution to the process of the return and reintegration of internally displaced persons and refugees in Macedonia. Based on specific criteria, 181 beneficiaries were selected from the municipalities of Tetovo, Tearce and Izvor. These beneficiaries were given agricultural machines, livestock or professional equipment, mostly in the form of grants. Aware of the importance of the process of economic revitalisation of the former crisis areas, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia defined it as a strategic priority and therefore envisaged the initial sum of 10 million MKD budgetary assets for this purpose in accordance with the economic situation in the country and with the intention of increasing it in the second half of the year. Other projects by the Government of Republic of Macedonia are being analysed. One part of the donation provided by the Government of the Republic of China will be utilised for this purpose, in accordance with the signed bilateral Agreement on Economic and Technical Cooperation.   At the same time, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia will intensify its activities regarding the establishment of an adequate institutional structure within the General Secretariat, to ensure better coordination and management of the process of economic revitalisation of the former crisis areas. 
