I. ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS 

40. Please provide information on how, and to what extent, the right to education is guaranteed in legislative and practical terms. Please comment on the allocation of resources and institutional framework in place to facilitate the exercise of this right. 
Article 44 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (”Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03) establishes that everyone has the right to education, that education is accessible to all under equal conditions and that primary education is compulsory and free. Furthermore, citizens have a right to establish private schools at all levels of education, with the exception of primary education, under conditions determined by law (Article 45). The Constitution guarantees the autonomy of universities, while the conditions of establishment, operation and termination of the activities of a university are regulated by law (Article 46). Paragraph 4 of Amendment VIII replacing Article 48 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia stipulates that members of communities have the right to instruction in their language in primary and secondary education, as determined by law. In schools where education is carried out in another language, the Macedonian language is also studied. In accordance with Article 3 of the Law on Primary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 44/95, 24/96, 34/96, 35/97, 82/99, 29/02, 52/02- consolidated text, 40/03, 42/03, 63/04 and 82/04), primary education in the Republic of Macedonia lasts eight years and is compulsory for all children aged seven to fifteen. Primary education is organised and realised in primary schools, and it can also be organised and realised in healthcare institutions, educational-corrective institutions and correctional facilities, in accordance with this Law.  Special primary schools and classes are organised within primary schools for students with special needs, depending on the kind and extent of special needs. For the purpose of achieving greater social inclusion of this category of students, classes in primary schools can include two students with special needs. 
Primary education for adults can be organised in primary schools, in institutions for adult education, and in other institutions. Primary musical and ballet education can be organised in a primary school or other institutions in accordance with the Law on Primary Education.  The Law amending the Law on Primary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 63/04), in application from 01.09.2005, stipulates that primary education will last nine years and that it will be compulsory for all children aged six to fifteen. Compulsory primary education covers one preparation year, four years of class teaching and four years of subject teaching. According to Article 3 of the Law on Secondary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 44/95, 24/96, 34/96, 35/97, 82/99, 29/2002, 52/02- consolidated text, 40/03, 42/03 and 67/04) everyone has the right to secondary education, under equal conditions established in this Law. Discrimination on the basis of gender, race, skin colour, ethnic and social origin, political or religious affiliation, property and social status, is not allowed. Students who have completed primary education are enrolled in secondary education; however, for a certain kind of education (vocational training lasting up to two years and talented students in art education) students with incomplete primary education may enrol, undertaking to complete primary education at the same time. Secondary education students can opt for: general programme education, vocational education, or art education. Students with special education needs are educated according to adapted programmes for appropriate professions or for work training. The right to higher education is regulated with the Law on Higher Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 64/00 and 49/03), providing that the citizens of the Republic of Macedonia, under equal conditions, have the right to education in higher education institutions in the Republic of Macedonia (Article 6). The Law provides for an opportunity for foreign citizens to be educated at the universities in the Republic of Macedonia, where with the reciprocity principle they can be educated in the higher education institutions in the Republic of Macedonia under the same conditions as the citizens of the Republic of Macedonia. Persons without citizenship also have the right to higher education, under conditions established by law and ratified international acts. The Law on Higher Education provides the normative and legal assumptions for exercising the right to education. In addition, it establishes the basic requirements for enrolling for undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral studies, where the Law recommends that enrolment conditions and criteria be closely determined by a rulebook of universities. In order to carry out in practice these legal provisions and to exercise the right to higher education, universities announce competitions for enrolling students for undergraduate studies, master studies, i.e. doctoral studies, containing the criteria and requirements for the enrolment of candidates. At the state higher education institutions, universities, in establishing the competition requirements for the enrolment of students in their first academic year, provide an appropriate and a fair access of citizens from non-majority communities in the Republic of Macedonia by establishing an additional quota as determined by a decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. At the same time, universities have adopted rulebooks dealing specifically with the requirements and criteria for enrolment at undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctoral studies – an obligation arising from the Law on Higher Education. The Law establishes the rights of students in the course of their university studies, such as the right to choose the kind of studies undertaken; the right to study a number of academic programs at the same time; the right to continue their studies at another higher education institution if the one where they are enrolled has ceased working; the right to choose and to be chosen as a student representative in the bodies of the higher education institution; the right to transfer from one to another higher education institution, i.e. academic program and thereby use the benefits of the credit system; and other rights. The Law provides for special privileges determined by the statutes of the universities pertaining to students with no parents, physically disabled persons, mothers with children younger than six years, and persons in hospital care. Every university establishes a student attorney, whose competences are laid down by university statute, for the purpose of protecting student rights. According to the Law on Higher Education higher education is realised in higher education institutions which can be state-owned or private. A state higher education institution is established by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia with a law, while  private institution can be established by a domestic or foreign legal or natural person with the approval of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. According to the Law on Higher Education, (Article 36), a university can be established if there are five accredited faculties and higher schools, at least three of which are faculties. A faculty can be established if, in accordance with Article 35 of the Law on Higher Education, the following requirements are satisfied: established area of study; provided premises and equipment; a sustainable level of funding and provided teaching, scientific and associate staff.  In order to establish a private higher education institution, in addition to the requirements laid down by Articles 35 and 36 of the Law on Higher Education, the founder must submit financial guarantee for compensation of funds paid by the students if the private institution terminates its work. Establishment requirements are closely regulated with a Rulebook for Norms and Standards for Establishing Higher Education Institutions and Performing Higher Education Activities (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 33/03), which upon the proposal of the Inter-university Conference is adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  The establishment procedure commences with a project for establishing a higher education institution developed by the founder and submitted to the Accreditation Board in order to obtain an accreditation decision. The Government forms a primary commission which conducts the preparatory work, after which the founder submits a request to the Ministry of Education and Science in order for it to inspect the satisfaction of the requirements and adopt a decision for starting operation. Afterwards the institution is registered in the Registry of Higher Education Institutions, followed by incorporation of its bodies and entry in the Court Register, whereby the institution becomes a legal entity. The supervision of the legality of the work of the higher education institution is conducted by the Ministry of Education and Science, while the Agency for Evaluation conducts an external evaluation of the quality of the higher education institution and its work. Most higher education institutions are joined in the four universities: the Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, the St. Clement of Ohrid University in Bitola, the South East Europe University in Tetovo, and the State University in Tetovo. Recently the private Faculty of Social Sciences in Skopje was accredited, and it does not belong to any of the abovementioned universities. About the structure of the education system, for more details see 18_I_AThe means for funding primary/secondary education are secured from the State Budget, and can also be provided from the unit of the local self-government, as well as from other sources (endowments, presents, legacies, etc.). The Ministry of Education and Science allocates the funds to the final beneficiaries and controls their purposeful use. The allocation of the funds to the beneficiaries in the field of primary/secondary education for particular purposes is carried out on the basis of:   Criteria for allocation of the funds to primary/secondary education;   Criteria for allocation of funds for material expenses in accordance with the approved funds for primary/secondary education from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, and  The Programme for investment construction and maintenance of buildings in primary/secondary education. The amount of the funds required for primary/secondary education for each budget year is established by the Ministry of Education and Science, whereas the Ministry of Finance, i.e. the Government and the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia determine the funds in accordance with the macroeconomic policy, i.e. the projections for revenue and expenditure in the central budget. In order to achieve decentralisation in funding primary/secondary education, the funds for primary/secondary education will be provided in accordance with the Law on Budgets of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 79/93, 3/94, 71/96, 46/00, 11/01, 93/01, 46/02, 24/03 and 85/03), the Law on Enforcement the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, and the Law on Financing the Local Self-Government Units (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 61/04).  The financial decentralisation will be carried out in two stages. In the first stage, in the course of 2005, the funds for building maintenance will be transferred to the local level, while in the second stage, starting from 2007, the funds for employee salaries and investments will be transferred to the local level by block grants. The funds for exercising the right to education at the state universities are provided from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia and from other sources determined by law. The starting point for funding state universities is their annual financial plans. Furthermore, Article 89 of the Law on Higher Education provides a possibility for state universities to introduce co-financing of academic expenses by students, unless budget funds are received for those education purposes. In practice, this legal opportunity is used at the universities, and apart from students within the state quota, they enrol students who co-finance their studies because they cannot enrol within the state-funded quota due to the limited numbers. 






366/453 
Programme expenditure according to end-of-year accounts 




Expenditure from other sources according to end-of-year accounts 

Year Primary education (12) Secondary education (13) Higher education (14) Student standard (15) University student standard (16) Total budget expenditure (end-of-year accounts) % of realised budget of RM % of GDP Expenditure also financed by revenue from bodies Donation expenditure Expenditure for self-financed activities Expenditure for loans Total expenditure for other sources 1996 4.359.909.621 1.596.417.231  1.186.948.181  177.658.354  195.355.511 7.516.288.898 21,06 4,26 

1997 4.260.266.472 1.612.095.000  1.197.022.928  180.000.600  230.676.000 7.480.061.000 18,07 4,02 

1998 4.497.892.523 1.707.041.819  1.267.481.569  182.260.427  234.999.976 7.889.676.314 18,49 4,05 

1999 4.544.361.255 1.742.817.457  1.295.742.494  204.806.186  234.903.328 8.022.630.720 16,12 3,84   582.972.068 0  582.972.068 2000 4.557.296.639 1.732.968.280  1.235.538.757  198.429.637  312.099.960 8.036.333.273 13,93 3,40  1.567.075.198 0 1.567.075.198 2001 4.309.538.545 1.734.025.647  1.191.706.967  198.933.327  352.019.017 7.786.223.503 12,98 3,33   802.522 1.609.761.217 0 1.610.563.739 2002 4.882.943.962 1.906.000.328  1.131.615.496  198.487.639  534.039.985 8.653.087.410 11,92 3,55  17.548.286 17.275.141 1.986.840.246 0 2.021.663.673 2003 5.228.063.356 2.002.554.830  1.101.149.693  169.809.312  336.428.697 8.838.005.888 15,66  24.015.074 52.398.550 1.887.750.362 
1.964.163.986 
Year GDP Realised Budget of RM 1996 176.444.000.000 35.693.034.346 1997 186.019.000.000 41.393.297.310 1998 194.979.000.000 42.662.958.915 1999 209.010.000.000 49.761.209.035 2000 236.389.000.000 57.689.326.703 2001 233.841.000.000 59.978.000.000 2002 243.970.000.000 72.565.262.000 2003 not announced 56.429.608.501 *For 1996, 1997 and 1998 other sources of financing are not presented separately. *For 1999 and 2000 expenditure financed by revenue from bodies (631) and donations (785)  is accumulated in expenditure for self-financed activities (787). Budget for 2004: 

Budget for 2004 Expenditure financed by revenue from bodies Donation expenditure Expenditure for self-financed activities Total expenditure for 2004 primary 5.249.000.000 27.614.000 20.500.000 391.540.000 5.688.654.000 secondary 1.969.230.000  60.686.000 115.123.000 695.191.300 2.840.230.000 higher 1.110.547.000 135.877.000 1.167.561.000 2.413.985.000 Education funding in the Republic of Macedonia, as stated above, is largely provided from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, as much as 81%, whereas other sources (revenue from bodies, donations, self-financed activities) provide for 19%. On average, 3,5% of GDP and 13% of the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia are allocated for education.  The structure of expenditure by programmes is as follows: primary education accounts for 55-60%, secondary education for 21-23%, higher education for 13-15%, student standard for 2-3%, and university student standard for 4%. The greatest part of expenditures is for salaries - 82%, for goods and services - 8%, current transfers - 9%, and purchasing capital means - 2%. In continuity, the funds intended for material expenditure and investments have not been sufficient to cover school needs (heating, utilities, materials, current and investment maintenance, etc.). Overall education expenditure nominally has a 3% upward trend, however, in respect of programmes, in recent years expenditure for primary and secondary education has increased, whereas in higher education, student standard and university student standard have a decreasing trend with regard to expenditure. The education budget for 2005 is restricted and it will remain on the same level as 2004. It is expected that with the decentralisation process, the municipalities (part of them) will, in addition to the funds they obtain from the budget as block grants for primary and secondary education, use their additional means, within their possibilities, to take part in covering education expenditure.  In future budget projections special attention must be dedicated to allocating more funds for education, in particular for material expenditures and capital investment, in order to overcome the current situation and provide conditions for better quality instruction. The general institutional framework of the education system of RM (in application from September 2005) is provided in the figure below. 

41. Elaborate on the legislative and administrative structures in place to ensure effective protection of the rights of the child. 
Article 42 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03) stipulates the particular protection of motherhood, children and minors. The Article determines the prohibition for employment of minors under 15 years of age, as well as the employment of minors in work which is detrimental to their health and morality. At the same time minors have the right to particular protection at work. Article 40 of the Constitution determines particular care for parentless children and children without parental care.   Republic of Macedonia applies the following ratified international conventions:    The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (“Official Gazette of the SRM”, No. 15/90);   Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 44/03);   Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 44/03);   The Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (“Official Gazette of the SFRY”, No. 07/91);   The European Convention on the Exercise of Children’s Rights (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 12/02);   European Convention on the Legal Status of Children Born Out of the Wedlock (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 12/02);   European Convention on Recognition and Enforcement of Decisions concerning Custody of Children and on Restoration of Custody of Children (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 12/02);   European Convention on the Adoption of Children (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 12/02);   Convention Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 13/02); The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia establishes the institution of Ombudsman competent to protect the constitutional and legal rights of citizens when they are violated by state administrative bodies or other bodies and organisations with public authorities. The institution of Ombudsman has been operating since 1997. A special Department for Children’s Rights Protection has been operating within the legal and constitutional competences of the Ombudsman. This Department is a member of the European Network of Ombudsmen for Children (ENOC).  A National Plan for the Children's Rights (for more details see I_H_11) is currently being prepared by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (with the participation of all ministries - the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy; the Ministry of Education; the Ministry of Justice; the Ministry of Health; the Ministry of the Interior; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the Agency for Youth and Sports; the Information Agency; the Education Development Bureau and Associations of Citizens). Children’s rights and interests are particularly protected in the national legislation by the following regulations:   Law on Family (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 80/92, 09/96, 38/04 and 83/04- consolidated text);   Law on Social Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 50/97, 16/00, 17/03 and  65/04);   Law on the Protection of Children (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 98/00, 17/03 and 65/04);   Law on Labour Relations (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 80/93, 03/94, 14/95, 53/97, 59/97, 21/98, 25/00, 34/00, 50/01, 25/03, 40/03 and 80/03 - consolidated text);   Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 37/96, 80/99, 04/02, 43/03 and 19/04); Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04);  Law on Misdemeanour Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97 and  35/97);   The Law on Execution of Sanctions (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 03/97, 23/99 and 74/04). The Law on Family determines that parents are free to decide and plan their offspring, but are obliged to provide their child(ren) optimum conditions for healthy growth. Children in Macedonia born in or out of the wedlock are equal concerning their relations, rights and duties with the parents and closer relatives. The parental relation begins with the child’s birth or his/her legal adoption. The parental right ends by the child's legal age (18 years of age), by the child's marriage before his/her legal age and by adoption. The parental right of a child over 18 years of age may be continued by a court's decision in a non-trial procedure, if the child cannot take care of him/herself due to hindrances in his/her intellectual development. The parental right pursuant to the Law on Family comprises the rights and duties of parents to take care of the personality, rights and interests of their juvenile children and children under extended parental care. The parental right equally belongs to the mother and the father. The parental right contains the rights and duties related to supporting juveniles, caring for their life and health, education, schooling and training, and their properties and property rights.  The children have a right to be represented in the legal system by their parents. Juvenile children have a right to live with their parents. Children may live apart from their parents when it is in their interest or in the interest of both the parents and the children. Children have a right to maintain direct contacts with the separated parent or other close relatives of the deceased parent, or the parent whose parental right has been revoked or who has been hindered to carry out his/her parental right. The Law on Family determines the competences of the Social Work Centre to undertake measures and implement forms of protection for the personality, rights and interests of juvenile children. These are the forms of protection that have been stipulated:   Supervision on the exercise of the parental right;  Custody;  Adoption and   Protection from family violence. Additionally, it specifies a chapter regulating the supervision on the exercise of the parental right in the part regulating rights and duties of parents and children. The Social Work Centre undertakes the following measures for the protection of personality, interests and rights of juvenile children:   Notifies the parents on the shortcomings in education and development of the child, offers them assistance for the adequate development and education of the child, advises them to visit adequate counselling, health, social or education institution with or without the child;   Regulates the personal relations of the child with the separated parent. The Centre may temporarily prohibit such relations if they are irregular or to the child’s detriment (irregular and unjustified non-payment of child support, or non compliance with the Centre’s decision that regulates personal relations); may keep or take away the child from the parent who has prevented the child's contacts with the separated parent and entrust him/her to the separated parent for a certain period of time;   Adopts a decision on a continuous supervision over the exercise of the parental right;     May decide to take away the child from the parent and entrust him/her to the other parent, another person or institution, if the child has been neglected concerning his/her education or in case of a serious danger to the child's correct development and upbringing;   The Centre may place a child in an institution upon the request of the parent, the Public Prosecutor or the guardian, or on the basis of its own knowledge if the child's conduct has been disturbed;   As regards the child’s property, the Social Work Centre may oblige the parent to inform the child on how to manage his/her property or may demand a court protection of the property or a court decision giving the parent a right to custody of the child;   In the event of the parent’s neglect or abuse of his/her parental right, a procedure may be initiated before a competent court against the parent to revoke his/her parental right; a proposal to the Court may be filed by the Social Work Centre, the other parent or the Public Prosecutor. Abuse or a severe neglect of the parental right occurs when the parent physically or emotionally abuses the child; sexually harasses the child; encourages the use of alcohol; drugs or induces the child to socially unacceptable conduct; has left the child unattended for longer than three months and has not supported him/her; or if in any other way the parent severely violates the child’s rights. A juvenile without parental support (if the parents are deceased, have disappeared, are unknown or cannot be traced for longer than a year) or a juvenile whose parents have not been carrying out their rights and duties regardless of reasons is placed under custody. The procedure on custody, protection measures, rights and property of the juvenile, appointing a guardian, and supervising the guardian in performing his/her custody duty is carried out by the Social Work Centre as an exclusively competent body for custody issues. The Social Work Centre is also authorised to continue to support a person after the expiry of custody due to legal age if he/she while under custody and as a result of justified reasons has not been able to prepare for independent life and work. A juvenile may be entrusted to a special-case guardian in the event of a dispute between the child and his/her parents in order to sign certain legal acts or when they have conflicting interests. The parent may dispose of a juvenile’s property, transfer it, encumber it, or relinquish from a gift or inheritance, only with a permit issued from the Social Work Centre. The Law on Family regulates the adoption of juveniles (until they turn 18 years of age) only when such protection is to the best of their interest. The adoption procedure of a juvenile is strictly formal by determining the adoption conditions, modes and procedures on adopting, rights and duties of the adopter and the adopted and the termination of adoption.  Pursuant to the Law there are two types of adoption: full adoption which establishes a parent-child relation between the adopter and the adoptee as in relations between a natural born child and a parent; and incomplete adoption establishing parent-child relations between the adopter and adoptee. The adoption is allowed only upon a statement of the child's parent, after the child reaches three months of age. The parent submits the statement to the competent social work centre. The Law prescribes that adoption is possible without a parent’s statement in case he/she has been declared unfit for work or parenthood, or in case his/her residence has been unidentified for longer than one year. Adoption may also be established for a child placed in an institution or a foster family without the parent's consent if he/she has not attended the child within 6 months from the time he/she had been obliged to take the child.   By the amendments of the Law on Family - in June 2004 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 38/04 and 83/04- consolidated text), the expert part of the procedure and the decision-making on adoptions have been separated. The amendments also envision a single registry on a state level. Expert teams within social work centres implement the expert part of the adoption procedure and prepare an expert opinion on the fitness and motivation of persons who have filed for an adoption of a juvenile, their personal features and their capability of parenthood. The social work centre is in charge of parentless juveniles and children without parental care and decides upon the form of their protection. It submits a proposal to the Commission on the most eligible adopters and a proposal to place the child in the family of the potential adopters for an adaptive period. The Commission on Establishment of Adoptions within the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy establishes the adoption and keeps the registers of adopters and adopted children. The Commission comprises 5 members with the following educational background: graduate social worker, graduate lawyer, psychologist and pedagogue with 15 years of work experience in the field and personal and professional capabilities for performing the post. The Commission members are appointed by the Minister of Labour and Social Policy. The Commission keeps a register on all potential adopters and a register on all adopted children on a state level; inspects documents of adoption cases; adopts a decision on a mandatory adaptive period of the child into the family of potential adopters; reviews the Centre’s proposal on the child placement in adopters' families with the option to change it and propose other adopters. The Commission formally establishes the adoption. The amendments to the Law determines the ceiling of the adopter's age, hence the age difference between the adopter and the adoptee must not be greater than 45 years. The Law stipulates the following exceptions: when a sibling of an already adopted child is being adopted and when the child is adopted by a married couple if there is age limit between the child and one of the adopters. The amendments to the Law on Family establish that juveniles are protected when they are victims of family violence through determined measures and activities undertaken by the social work centre.  The Law on Social Care determines concrete forms of protection when a child's living conditions in his/her family are unsatisfactory. The Social Work Centre makes a decision on institutional or non-institutional protection, implements expert and concrete measures depending on the child's age and needs.  Day Care Centres are considered non-institutional protection which offer work and production activities, work therapies and other activities for physically or mentally disabled children. Supporting children in foster-families is a developed form of protection in the Republic of Macedonia. This form of protection has been implemented for a long period of time and is constantly developed and promoted. The process of deinstitutionalisation is supported by fostering children in foster-families and this practice has shown good results. Children with disabilities are also placed in foster families; hence their number in specialised institutions has decreased. Foster families receive a monthly compensation for every fostered child and temporary aid in forms of donations.  Institutional protection is carried out in the Children’s Home for Parentless Children and Children without Parental Care “11 October” in Skopje, where children are fostered from 3 years of age to their becoming capable of independent life, and not later than 6 months after their secondary school graduation. Newborns up to three years of age are fostered in the Newborns and Infants Home in Bitola. In Skopje there is an institution for fostering moderately mentally challenged children which offers them accommodation, care, food, and educational and work training depending on their individual capabilities. Physically disabled children are fostered in an institution in Banja Bansko, where they are offered accommodation, food, care, cultural and social activities and elementary education. Their further education is provided in the existing educational system. Children with severe mental disabilities are fostered in the Special Institute in Demir Kapija. Parentless children and children without parental care, pursuant to The Law on Social Care, are eligible for a continuous financial aid, health care (if not provided), and right to accommodation (which has fallen under the authority of municipalities with the new decentralisation law). The Social Work Centre pursuant to the Law on the Protection of Children decides on the right to children’s benefits, special benefits and benefits for a newborn.  The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy has undertaken planned measures and activities on the protection of homeless children through the implementation of the Programme on the Protection of the Socially Excluded Persons. This programme is aimed at keeping records of all children, undertaking measures on working with parents in order to raise the level of their parental duty and responsibility. In cases of evident parental neglect a procedure on revoking the parental right is initiated and the child is placed into an institution or a foster family. There are activities under way for social strengthening of children through their incorporation into programmes of day care centres. The Law on Labour Relations determines special protection of employees under 18 years of age that may not perform heavy and physical duties, underground or underwater work, or other work that may pose risk or be detrimental to their health and life. This Law also regulates the right to part-time work of one of the parents of a severely disabled child if both parents are employed or in case of a self-supporting parent. Juveniles in the Republic of Macedonia may be prosecuted for crimes and misdemeanours when they reach 14 years of age. Criminal procedures for juveniles have been regulated in special chapters of the Criminal Code and the Law on Criminal Procedure. The same principle applies to the misdemeanour procedure. The criminal procedure against a juvenile offender is carried out in accordance with the following principles:   The criminal procedure is initiated upon the request of the Public Prosecutor;   For every such procedure the Public Prosecutor notifies the Social Work Centre as a competent body for custody and requests opinion and a proposal for pronouncing, extending or revoking the measures ruled by the court;   A juvenile may not be tried in his/her absence;    The juvenile is summoned through the parent or the legal representative;   In the course of undertaking activities in the juvenile's presence, and especially upon his/her interrogation, the competent bodies are obliged to handle the matter carefully, taking account for the child's mental development, his/her sensitivity and personal traits, in order to avoid any detrimental effects to his/her development from the criminal proceeding;   The juvenile must be represented by a defender in the event of a criminal act punishable with imprisonment of 5 years or over, and in the event of other criminal acts as assessed by the judge for juveniles.   No person may be released from testifying in a criminal proceeding against a juvenile offender. The Public Prosecutor may decide not to request an initiation of criminal proceedings for a juvenile offender which is punishable with a sentence of up to 3 years of imprisonment or a fine. The Public Prosecutor requests an opinion from the competent Social Work Centre on the initiation of proceedings against a juvenile. Aside from the facts related to the criminal offence in the course of the preparatory procedure against a juvenile, the facts on his/her age, mental development, environment and conditions in which he/she lives and other circumstances related to the juvenile's personality are especially established. The parents or the guardians are heard concerning the circumstances and a report is obtained from the competent social work centre.  The social work centre co-operates with the Public Prosecutor and the court in the course of the criminal procedure against juveniles as well as in proposing measures and in monitoring their execution. The Social Work Centre monitors the effect of the execution of measures through the process of the overall re-socialisation into the family, daily activities and behaviour, inclusion into the education system and through preparation of a Working Programme for each individual child.  The criminal procedure against a juvenile offender is performed by a judge for juveniles who also conveys the preparatory procedure. In procedures before basic courts and appellate courts, verdicts are brought by a council comprising one judge and two lay judges. Lay judges are selected from professors, teachers, educators and other persons with experiences in educating juveniles. A juvenile offender may be sentenced with educational measures (rebuke or sending them to a disciplinary centre), intensified supervision by a parent, other family or a custodial institution; institutional measures (sending them to an educational institution and to a house of education and correction); security measures (compulsory psychiatric treatment and confinement in a health institution, compulsory treatment for alcoholics and drug addicts and prohibition of driving a motor vehicle); and by exception juveniles may be sentenced to juvenile imprisonment.   After pronouncing any of the education (correctional) measures of intensified supervision, the court may prescribe one or more special obligations to the juvenile if it deems them necessary for the more successful execution of the pronounced measure, such as: to apologise personally to the damaged person; to correct or compensate the damage caused by the crime; to go to school regularly; not to be absent from his/her workplace or accept training; prohibition on using alcoholic drinks, narcotics and other psychotropic substances; to visit appropriate health institution or counselling service, etc.  The court, as an alternative measure may punish juvenile offenders with community work from 5 to 100 hours. The court decides which measure shall be pronounced. The court takes into account the juvenile’s age, his/her mental and social characteristics, motives to perpetrate a crime, environment, if he/she has criminal record and other relevant information. All data are processed by the competent custodial institution – the Social Work Centre, which gives a proposal to the court. The court always pronounces the mildest measure that can influence the juvenile and prevent him/her from perpetrating crimes.  The Law on Misdemeanour determines that juveniles who have reached 14 years of age may be punished for misdemeanour and be sentenced to educational measures, while juveniles of 16 years of age may be punished with educational measure, and by exception with a fine or imprisonment. The Social Work Centre participates in the procedure on determining a misdemeanour procedure against a juvenile by submitting an opinion to the court about the juvenile’s personality. The Centre also has a right to be informed on the entire procedure. The execution of the pronounced measures and punishments to a juvenile offender has been regulated by the Law on Execution of Sanctions. The aim of executing educational measures is to provide a proper development of the juveniles by their protection, supervision, and education. The court entitles the Social Work Centre to convey the educational measure and in accordance with the type of the measure to use adequate methodology, to perform a social supervision of the execution or to send the juvenile into an adequate institution. The State Social Work Institute carries out the expert supervision over the execution of educational (correctional) measures. The social work centre monitors the measures of intensified supervision. The institutional measures are carried out by sending the juvenile to an educational institution or to a correction institution where primary education and other types of expert training for juveniles may be organised.  Juveniles serve prison sentences in a special juvenile prison, separately from adults. Male and female children are separated. The Criminal Code stipulates criminal acts where children and juveniles are protected. A qualified form of the act has been prescribed for crimes of murder, inducing a suicide or abetting a suicide, abduction, and in cases when the act has been carried out against a juvenile. Special criminal offences are a sexual attack upon a child, pandering and enabling sexual acts, showing pornographic materials to a child and incest. The Criminal Code contains special chapters on crimes against marriage, family and youth. These criminal acts encompass extra-marital life with a juvenile, taking away a juvenile, change of family situation of a juvenile, deserting a helpless child, neglecting and mistreating a juvenile, not paying sustenance and serving alcoholic drinks to juveniles. According to the annual statistical report of the State Statistical Office in the course of 2003, 287 crimes against marriage, family and youth were reported before the courts in the Republic of Macedonia, and more specifically:   Taking away a juvenile – 50;   Neglecting and mistreating a juvenile – 30;   Not paying sustenance – 177;   Other crimes - 30. In the course of 2003, a total number of 183 perpetrators have been convicted of crimes against marriage, family and youth:   Taking away a juvenile – 24;   Mistreating and neglecting juveniles -  26;   Not paying sustenance  -  115;   Other crimes – 18. 
42. How is domestic violence treated in your legislation and in judicial practice? 
Domestic violence was for the first time treated in the Macedonian civil legislation with the amendments to the Law on Family of June 2004 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 80/92, 09/96,38/04 and 83/04- consolidated text). The novelty introduced with the amendments was the treatment of domestic violence in a civil law act.  Pursuant to Article 1, the Law governs the following: marriage and family; relations in marriage and family; specific forms of protection provided for family; disturbed relations and violence in marriage and family; adoption, custody, sustenance; and court procedure in marital and family disputes. Article 2 of the Law stipulates that the State shall provide protection for the marriage and the family against disturbed relations and violence therein. By Article 5 of the same Law a new Article 33-a has been added under which any form of violence in marriage and in family is prohibited.  Within the meaning of the Law, Article 94-b defines domestic violence as follows: Violence in marriage and family means any conduct by a family member who, by using force, threat or intimidation causes body injuries, commits emotional or sexual abuse or material, sexual or working exploitation of another family member. Paragraph 2 of the same Article determines that such conduct shall be regarded as violence if committed: by one marital partner against the other marital partner who have lived or used to lived in marital or non-marital union or in any other form of union as family, or if they have joint child; by brothers or sisters; half-brothers or half-sisters; against a child; against elderly family members and against family members partially or fully deprived of their civil capacity.  By the Amendments to the Law on Family, Article 94-c, paragraph 2 sets forth that a victim of the domestic violence may be any family member, regardless of gender or age. Perpetrator of domestic violence may be a former or current marital or extra-marital partner; a person living or having lived in union with the victim; person having joint child with the victim; a person in blood relationship of up to the fourth degree or an in-law of up to the second degree of these persons, i.e. one that has been in a marital, non-marital or any other form of lifetime union with these persons. Article 94-d underlines the role of the Social Work Centre, namely: the Social Work Centre, when it has learnt of disturbed family relations or domestic violence, ex officio or upon a request of a family member, undertakes measures for protection of family or persons who have been victims of domestic violence. The Social Work Centre, when it has learnt of any form of violence in a family and of serious threat for life or health of a family member, undertakes the following measures:   Provides necessary accommodation of the person victim of violence that may last up to 6 months, with a possibility of its extension for another six months;   Provides the necessary health care;   Provides the necessary psychological and social intervention and treatment;   Guides him/her to the adequate counselling office;     If the family includes a child in a regular school, provides assistance for the continuation of his/her regular education;   Notifies the law-enforcement body;   Provides any form of legal assistance and representation;   Initiates proceedings before a competent court;   If necessary, files a request before the court for pronouncing temporary measure of protection;    Undertakes other measures that it considers necessary in order to resolve the issue. The envisaged measures are primarily aimed at protection of the victim and other family members from further domestic violence. With a view to implementing the provisions of the Law, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (MLSP) has already put in operation four day-care centres for victims of domestic violence as separate organisational units within the respective Social Work Centres. The programme for the development of this type of protection envisages extension of the network of such centres. Practical implementation of the Law has been at the initial stage and therefore limited number of actions has been registered.  Undertaking of protection measures is mandatory in case victim of domestic violence is a juvenile child or a person deprived of civil capacity. The Social Work Centre shall learn of the committed domestic violence from citizens, official or legal persons who are obliged without delay to submit notification thereof.  Domestic violence has been for the first time treated separately in the Macedonian criminal legislation with the Law Amending the Law on the Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 19/04) by which provisions on domestic violence were introduced. Namely, pursuant to Article 122 of the Criminal Code, domestic violence has been defined as maltreatment; rude insults; endangering safety; causing body injury; sexual or other psychological or physical violence causing feeling of insecurity, danger or fear against a marital partner, parent, child or another person living in marital or non-marital union or joint household, as well as against former marital partner or persons that have joint child or have been in close personal relations. Provisions on domestic violence have been incorporated as qualified forms of the basic criminal offences in the following chapters of the Criminal Code: Crimes Against Life and Body (within the criminal offences murder, momentary murder, body injury and grave body injury); Crimes Against Freedoms and Rights of Persons and Citizens (within criminal offences coercion, unlawful arrest and endangering security); and Crimes Against Sexual Freedom and Sexual Morality (within criminal offences sexual attack upon a child and mediation in conducting prostitution). The Law on Family regulates the initiation of a regular civil procedure in order to provide for court protection, regardless of whether criminal proceedings have been instituted against the perpetrator of domestic violence. The Social Work Centre is the sole institution authorised to submit before court a request for initiation of procedure for pronouncing temporary measure for protection against domestic violence, with an obligation for mandatory submission of such request in cases of violence against a juvenile child or person without civil capacity. Requests on behalf of persons of legal age and persons with civil capacity shall be filed only upon consent by the victim of the domestic violence. The Social Work Centre shall enclose with the request the minutes and the report on the undertaken actions. It may also enclose a proposal for proclaiming temporary measure, along with draft-measure. The Law prescribes the following temporary measures that the court may pronounce to the perpetrator of domestic violence (one or more at a time):   Prohibition of threats that he/she shall commit domestic violence;   Prohibition of maltreatment, disturbance, telephone calls, contacts or other modes of communication with a family member, whether direct or indirect;   Prohibition for him/her to approach the dwelling, school, working or another place regularly visited by a family member;   Order for removal from the home regardless of the ownership, pending the final decision of the competent court;   Prohibition for possession of fire arms or other weapons, or an order for its confiscation;   Obliging him/her to return objects necessary for fulfilment of the everyday requirements of the family; 
  Pronouncing of mandatory sustenance of the family; 
  Order for the defendant to attend adequate counsel;   Order for mandatory medical treatment, if abusing alcohol or other psychotropic substances or in case of a disease;   Obliging him/her to reimburse the medical and other expenses incurred due to the domestic violence;    Any other measure which the court deems necessary to ensure safety and well-being of the other family members. Proposal for initiation of a court procedure before the Social Work Centre may be filed by a marital partner; parents or children or other persons living in marital or non-marital union or joint household; former marital partner or persons having close personal relations against whom domestic violence has been committed, regardless of whether a complaint has been lodged in criminal proceedings. A parent, custodian or legal representative may file a proposal on behalf of a juvenile child, a person with restricted civil capacity, a person that has been deprived of civil capacity, or a person under extended parenting right. The proposal shall be submitted to the competent Social Work Centre, depending on the place of residence of the victim of domestic violence.  
The Amendments to the Law on Family regulate the procedure for pronouncing temporary measures for protection against domestic violence, the composition of the court, course of the proceedings and legal remedies against court decision. Article 279-a sets forth that a single judge shall decide on the pronouncing of temporary measure for protection against domestic violence. After a request has been received under Article 94-g of the Law, the court shall schedule hearing. Pursuant to Article 279-b, public shall be excluded from hearings in this proceedings.  Article 279-c determines the manner of action of the Social Work Centre, namely: The Court shall act immediately upon a request by the Social Work Centre for pronouncing temporary measure under Article 94-g and shall render its judgment within seven days from the day of the receipt of the request.  By derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, the Court shall decide within three days from the day of the receipt of the request in case there is reasonable suspicion that serious danger exists for the life and health of a family member.  Article 279-d provides for the presence at the hearing of the perpetrator and the victim of domestic violence, as well as a Social Work Centre representative. The Law stipulates that other persons may also be summoned by a court judgment. Article 279-e sets forth that temporary measure for protection against domestic violence may last up to one year. In case domestic violence continues beyond the expiry of the measure, the Social Work Centre may submit a request for extending some of the measures. The court may request notification from the Social Work Centre on the implementation of the pronounced measure. Upon a proposal by the Social Work Centre, the court may extend, annul or amend its decision. The court shall forward a copy of its decision to the parties, the Social Work Centre, the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the law enforcement bodies. A complaint filed against the court decision shall not prevent its enforcement.  As regards the court decision on the pronounced temporary measures for protection against domestic violence, the Social Work Centre has the following competences:   Monitors the implementation of the pronounced measure and notifies the court on the course of its enforcement;   May submit a proposal to the competent court for annulment of the pronounced measure prior to the expiry of the period for which it has been pronounced, if it assesses that the measure has fulfilled its aim;   May submit a proposal for alteration of the pronounced measure or its extension, if it assesses that it has been inadequate or that it will fulfil the required objectives, however in a longer period of time. In the enforcement of the protective measure, the Social Work Centre cooperates with citizens, legal persons and organisations. The Law includes penal provisions, as well, for subjects for whom the Law prescribes obligation for mandatory reporting on domestic violence with the competent Social Work Centre. Thus, Article 279-i determines the following fines: A fine of 5.000 to 10.000 MKD shall be imposed on a person who shall fail to act in accordance with obligations under Article 94-d, i.e. who shall fail to notify with no delays the Social Work Centre of the knowledge for domestic violence; A fine of 100.000 to 200.000 MKD shall be imposed on a legal entity that shall fail to act in line with the aforementioned obligations. A fine has been also prescribed for the person in charge of the legal entity.  In the court practice so far, one temporary measure for protection has been pronounced, which is obviously due to the short period of time since the adoption of the Amendments to the Law on Family. Following the Law Amending the Law on the Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 19/04), domestic violence has been treated as a criminal offence against life and body punishable with fines and sentences of six months to life imprisonment. Initiation of criminal proceedings before court is done pursuant to the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04). Every child in the Republic of Macedonia is entitled to health care pursuant to the Law on Health Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 38/91, 46/93, 55/95 and 10/04) and the Heath Insurance Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 25/00, 34/00, 96/00, 50/01, 11/02 and 31/03), which regulate the relations and rights under health insurance, procedure for benefiting from the health care and the health care system and organisation.  In case of domestic violence, family members victims of violence exercise the health care and health insurance rights in adequate health care facilities depending on the health care needs: in primary health care; with family doctor; in health care facilities for children under six years of age; in health care institutions for pupils and youth; in general medicine facilities; in occupational medicine institutions; in institutions of women health care; in emergency medical service; in adequate specialist or consultative service or hospital at the secondary or tertiary level. The placement and provision of health care for the victims of violence has been regulated by the provisions of the Law on Family, i.e. it falls within the competence of the Social Work Centre. The registration, records and manner of provision of health care for victims of domestic violence have been conducted within the health care system in accordance with the existing legislation. In case of violence, the child shall benefit from the health care and health insurance rights in the adequate health care facility in accordance with the health care needs, namely: in primary health care institution; with family doctor; in health care facilities for children under six years of age; in health care institutions for pupils and youth; in emergency medical service; in adequate specialist or consultative service or hospital (children’s unit) at the secondary or tertiary level. In order to provide for health care of appropriate quality for children in general, and specifically in case of violence, when the need of good-quality health care is even greater due to the physical and mental trauma in children, the health care institution has to fulfil all the conditions prescribed in the Rulebook on the Premises, Equipment and Personnel Requirements for Setting up and Operation of Health Care Organisations. Every health care worker is obliged in line of duty to identify, register and report to the police any case of violence against a child, after providing the child with the necessary medical assistance. Every case of violence has been encoded with the appropriate category of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems – 10 Revision (ICD-10) and has been registered in the medical documentation of out-patient polyclinics or hospitals, i.e. in physician’s report on the causes of death in case of a death, in accordance with the following legal regulations: Law on Health Care; Law on Keeping Healthcare Records in the Health Care; Programme for Statistical Healthcare Research; and the Law on State Statistics. In the healthcare statistics, individual cases of violence need to be recorded in general. In cases of involvement of children, the following categories have been encoded and registered under ICD-10: X60-X84 – Intentional self-harm; X85-Y09 – Assault; Y10-Y34 – Event of undetermined intent; Y35-Y36 – Legal interventions and operations of war; T74 – Maltreatment syndrome; Y06 – Neglect and abandonment; Y07 – Other maltreatment syndromes. On the basis of these, collective reports with aggregate data have been prepared. These reports have been of particular importance for identification of risk factors and reasons for violence against children, as well as for undertaking intervention programmes for prevention of violence against children. Since the adoption of the Law Amending the Criminal Code of the Republic of Macedonia, there have been 16 criminal cases subject to court decision registered before the basic courts in the country. 
43. Is there specific legislative protection for the rights of the elderly? 
Article 35 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03) guarantees the right of assistance to citizens who are infirm or unfit for work. Article 40 of the Constitution determines that children are responsible for the care of their old and infirm parents. The rights of the elderly in the Republic of Macedonia have not been regulated by a separate law, but provisions on the protection of the rights of the elderly are contained in a number of distinctive laws and regulations.   The elderly are provided social protection in order to overcome social risks they face due to their age and health. Social protection is also provided if they are financially insecure and without family care, as stipulated in The Law on Social Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 50/97, 16/00, 17/03 and 65/04). The elderly are entitled to rights of institutional and non-institutional protection in the context of the services and measures of social protection and social work. Institutional protection encompasses the accommodation in nursing institutions, such as:  Elderly homes;   Nursing homes for disabled adult persons;   Nursing homes for persons with moderate and severe mental disabilities. The elderly usually utilise the service of accommodation in an elderly home. There are four institutions for accommodation of the elderly in Kumanovo, Skopje, Prilep and Bitola, with 505 beneficiaries. These institutions provide alimentation, healthcare and cultural and entertainment activities for the elderly. The Law on Social Care passed in 1997 enables the operation of the private sector in this domain. There are three private elderly homes in Macedonia with 120 beneficiaries and the procedure for their inclusion into the network of public institutions for social protection has not yet started. With the Law Amending the Law on Social Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 65/04) the procedure for establishment of elderly homes and including the private sector as an investor and provider of this type of services has been regulated. Non-institutional protection encompasses:   The right to social service through detecting the problem, offering possible solutions and determining measures of protection;   The right to home nursing and assistance, which is provided to old and infirm persons that cannot take care of themselves;   The right to day care is provided to old and infirm persons through services concerning the alimentation, day care, culture and entertainment and hygiene maintenance;   The right to accommodation in a care-giving family. The practice hitherto has proved that non-institutional protection of the elderly has not been developed enough. In order to bring these services closer to the elderly and to assist them in overcoming problems regarding their every day needs, the Law on Social Care has been amended and has allowed the option to natural persons to carry out home care and assistance services, as well as the option for the participation of citizens' associations in the establishment of day care centres for the elderly. With the realisation of such projects, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy has been encouraging the process of deinstitutionalisation of this beneficiary category as well as the pluralism of service providers in the area. The social protection system provides permanent financial assistance to elderly without financial security by way of financial benefits to a third person for assistance and care; healthcare if the persons have not been ensured; as well as one-time financial benefit if the persons are in social crisis. Pursuant to the Law on Family, elderly who have been revoked or restricted their civil capacity are protected by being placed under guardianship with a guardian who can take care of their health, interests and property.  The Law on Family regulates the obligation for the support of close relatives. The children are responsible for the care of their parents if they are unfit for work and do not have personal property and funds to support themselves. If legal-age children do not carry out their responsibility for the support of their parent(s), the parent’s right is exercised by filing a lawsuit to the competent basic court. The court, by derogation may refuse the parent’s request for support if he/she had been revoked his parental right. 
44. Does specific legislative protection for the rights of persons with disabilities exist? Are there measures designed to ensure their independence and social and occupational integration? 
Article 35 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03) determines that the state provides particular protection for disabled persons, as well as conditions for their inclusion in the social life. Rights of disabled persons are protected in the national legislation by the following regulations:   Law on the Protection of Children (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 98/00, 17/03 and 65/04);   Law on Primary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 44/95, 24/96, 34/96, 35/97, 82/99, 29/02, 40/03 and 42/03).   Law on Secondary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 44/95, 24/96, 34/96, 35/97, 82/99, 29/2002, 52/02- consolidated text, 40/03, 42/03 and 67/04).    Law on Higher Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 64/00 and 49/03).   Law on Employment of Disabled Persons (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 44/00 and 16/04).   Law on Health Insurance (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 25/00, 34/00, 96/00, 50/01, 11/02 and 31/03).   Law on Social Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 50/97, 16/00, 17/03 and 65/04).   Law on Civil War Invalids (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 33/76, 25/79, 11/81, 04/85, 12/89, 37/89, 17/91, 38/91 and 81/99).   Law on Spatial and Urban Planning (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 04/96, 08/96, 28/97, 18/99 and 53/01).    Rights of disabled persons are also regulated in by-laws:    Rulebook on Determining Modes of Exercise of the Right to Remuneration for Part Time Work Due to Nourishment of a Severely Disabled Child (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.53/98).   Rulebook on Assessing and Determining Specific Needs of Persons with Physical and Mental Disabilities (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 30/00).   Rulebook on Standards and Norms for Spatial Planning and Designing Facilities (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 02/02). A National Strategy for the Equalisation of Rights of Persons with Disabilities has been adopted in the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 101/01). This strategy has been largely based on the UN Resolution - Standard Rules on the Equalisation of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities 48/93.  The national strategy encompasses the overall development and specific needs of persons with disabilities in the area of health and social care, education, rehabilitation and all other segments of social life, with an emphasis on family and the development of personality, prevention, raising awareness, rehabilitation, availability of services and accessories, culture, recreation and sports, religion, information and research, assessment of programmes for persons with disabilities, expert staff to work with persons with disabilities and international co-operation. A Coordinative Body for Equalisation of Rights and Opportunities of Persons with Disabilities has been established to implement the National Strategy. This body comprises representatives of all ministries that deal with the issue of persons with disabilities, as well as academic institutions and representatives of national associations of persons with disabilities. The activities of the Coordinative Body are aimed at: initiating changes in the legislation and by-laws on the rights of persons with disabilities; proposing initiatives with regard to creating a policy on the protection of rights of disabled persons, particularly in the area of social and health care; education; employment; coordination of operations and organisations of persons with disabilities through organising fora, submitting initiatives, etc. In accordance with the Law on the Protection of Children, the Republic of Macedonia provides particular protection for children with physical and mental disabilities (a special financial benefit) from the state budget. The Law also stipulates that the municipality may provide additional protection. The Law provides conditions and opportunities for placing such children in kindergartens depending on the type and level of their disability, with an emphasis on the special attention in admitting children, adjustment of programmes, additional expert assistance and special programmes, as well as staff’s expertise. The Law on Amending the Law on the Protection of Children (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 65/04) prescribes that children with physical and mental disabilities may be placed in kindergartens by a finding and opinion of an adequate expert institution. The legislator has envisioned the option of including children with special needs into focus groups. Primary education of children with special needs is carried out pursuant to the Law on Primary Education. The Law stipulates that children with disabilities may acquire primary education in primary schools, special primary schools, special classes in primary schools and in specialised institutions of the primary education. Children with long-term illnesses may be educated in special classes that are opened in hospitals.  Students with special educational needs may also exercise other rights. Such is the right to free transportation from the home to the school for both the student and his/her parent/guardian. Students that cannot be offered transportation are offered free accommodation in dormitories and alimentation or accommodation in foster families. Special schools also offer special education programmes. The Law envisions individual and group forms and methods of education of students with special needs in primary education.  A special opportunity is the respective Ministry’s participation in the publication of books in limited number of printed copies for students in special schools. Pursuant to the Law Amending the Law on Primary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 63/04) children with physical and mental disabilities are referred to as children with special educational needs. Article 27 of the Law introduces the descriptive grading which creates possibilities for the inclusion of children with special educational needs into the primary schools. The secondary education is performed pursuant to the Law on Secondary Education. The Law prescribes that the education process may be carried out in a polymorphic mode in a class, groups or individually. Thus persons with disabilities may exercise their rights. Article 43 of the Law introduces plans and programmes for secondary education of students with special educational needs. These students shall be educated in accordance with adjusted programmes for respective occupations or for job training. Article 51 stipulates that students with special educational needs may be included, registered and placed in accordance with the type and level of their disability. Secondary education may be available to a person not older than 25 years of age. Pursuant to the Law Amending the Law on Secondary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 67/04) children with physical and mental disabilities are referred to as children with special educational needs (Article 24). The Law also envisages the secondary school graduation exam in accordance with curricula on respective occupations or educational profiles (Article 30). With the current changes and decentralisation and pursuant to Article 53, four special secondary schools shall continue to operate as state secondary schools.  The Law on Higher Education provides a provision regulating the right to education of persons with disabilities. The Law stipulates: Students, Ph.D. students and specialisation students without parents, first or second degree visually and hearing impaired persons, mothers with children of up to 6 years of age and hospitalised persons have a right to special benefits determined by the statute of the higher education institution.     The state prohibits discrimination against or exclusion of persons with special needs within regulations covering social security, social assistance and social protection. Social security and particularly disability insurance has been intended for establishment or recovery of working abilities of persons with special needs thus they would be able to make their living on the basis of what they earn. Working abilities are often established or recovered through the system of vocational training. Certain remunerations may be acquired out of the work on the basis of social security, in case of illness, disability, etc. Pursuant to the Law on Employment of Persons with Disabilities the Minister of Labour and Social Policy has adopted a Rulebook on the Criteria and Modes of Allocation of Funds from the Special Fund on Providing Conditions for Employment of Persons with Disabilities, which determines a one-time grant for:    Full-time employment of a disabled person;   Job adaptation for the disabled person;   Procurement of equipment necessary for the employment of the disabled person; and   Adaptation of premises for the disabled person. The Law also prescribes funding for vocational training of both unemployed person with disabilities and employees with disabilities for the purpose of either employing them or placing them to other posts.  The Law on Employment of Persons with Disabilities also stipulates that pension and disability insurance funds, health insurance and fees for employment of persons with disabilities shall be provided from the budget of the Republic of Macedonia. Furthermore, the Law prescribes that employees at sheltered workshops who are not disabled are exempted from paying personal income tax and pension, and disability insurances shall be covered by the budget of the Republic of Macedonia. Sheltered workshops are exempted from paying profit tax and all other fees related to profit. The Law also introduces the method of affirmative action in order to equalise the employment opportunities of persons with disabilities at the open labour market, which essentially enables their involvement into the open society and the world of labour. Consequently, the current legislation provides that:    Legal entity not having a status of a sheltered workshop may receive grants from the Special Fund to provide full time employment to a person with disabilities as well as adaptation of workplaces and premises for persons with special needs.    Sheltered workshops may be granted funds from the Special Fund to provide full-time employment of a person with disabilities, adaptation of workplaces and premises, and procurement of necessary equipment for the employment and operation of the disabled person.   A person with disabilities who is an independent entrepreneur may be granted funds from the Special Fund to provide his/her full-time employment, adaptation of workplaces and premises, and procurement of necessary equipment for the employment and operation of the disabled person.  A one-time grant of 20 average salaries (as paid in the month prior to the employment) may be granted for the purpose of employing a disabled person with the following disabilities: visual, hearing, vocal and language impairment, physical disabilities, mild mental disabilities, combined disabilities, and psychoses. As regards employment of visually impaired person with over 97% visibility damage and a physically disabled person with over 90% of disability, an amount of 30 average salaries (as paid in the month prior to the employment) shall be granted.  Pursuant to the Law on Employment of Persons with Disabilities the employer is entitled to a one-time grant from the Special Fund in order to provide adaptation of premises for persons with disabilities. Such grants may amount to 30 average salaries in the Republic (as paid in the Republic prior to the submission of the request). The employer may also be entitled to a grant amounting to 50 average salaries in the Republic for procurement of special equipment intended for persons with disabilities (in accordance with the number of new employees); and a grant amounting to 50 average salaries for adaptation of workplaces and premises in order to suit the technological process to the needs of the disabled person (in accordance with the number of newly employed persons with disabilities).  The Law on Employment of Persons with Disabilities prescribes that 15% of the total funds realised from the current employment fee shall be used for employment of persons with disabilities, financing special employment needs, adaptation of workplaces and premises and procurement of equipment and other adaptations. These funds are allocated in a sub-account of the Employment Agency (the Special Fund). Concurrently, the funds required for vocational training of unemployed and employed persons with disabilities shall be secured from the Special Fund. 
Laws and regulations concerning health insurance provide particular provisions that facilitate the use of health care by persons with disabilities. Such persons are exempted from health fees on all levels of healthcare (primary, secondary and tertiary). They are also exempted from paying fees while acquiring medical accessories, with an exception of particular accessories for which they are required to pay 10% of their total value.  The state has also undertaken activities for the socialisation and professional integration of persons with disabilities. The Republic of Macedonia has been implementing a project with the World Health Organisation on the early intervention and assistance to children born with disabilities or with risks to their health. This project has been implemented by several ministries. The Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Labour and Social Policy have established a network for a prompt intervention in children with risks as well as for providing assistance to families with disabled children.  Serious efforts have been made to include these children in regular schools as well as to deinstitutionalise and replace specialised institutions for such children with day care centres and foster families. Citizens with physical or mental disabilities are entitled to institutional and non-institutional protection services, as has been envisaged with the social protection system. Citizens who are unfit for work and financially insecure are entitled to permanent financial assistance. Persons who are incapable of taking care of themselves and satisfy their basic necessities of life are entitled to a financial benefit for a third person assistance and care. These beneficiaries are also entitled to healthcare.  An employed parent is entitled to part-time employment remuneration for nourishment of a disabled child. This right may be exercised by one of the parents if they are both employed, or by a single parent of a child not accommodated in an institution. These benefits are paid through the Social Work Centre. Another institutional protection is the right to training for working and manufacturing activity and placement in a social protection institution. The development of the non-institutional care has contributed to the process of deinstitutionalisation in this area. Pursuant to the Programme of Social Inclusion of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy a network of day care centres for disabled children is being developed. Concurrently, the state has been developing the placement of these children in foster families and is working on finding ways to support biological parents so that they would be able to keep their children.   In addition, the state has been establishing a system of rehabilitation institutions. Programmes developed and implemented in these institutions provide for an optimum level of independence of children with special needs. Hence, these programmes take into account the type and level of disability, and based on individual needs they enable their social inclusion and provide for equal development opportunities. Rehabilitation programmes provide for acquiring basic skills up to higher education. Rehabilitation programmes are realised in the beneficiaries’ places of residence. In exceptional cases and within certain time limits the rehabilitation may take place out of the beneficiary’s place of residence by accommodating him/her in a dormitory. The social protection system also provides funding and donations for procuring necessary accessories to enable the social inclusion of children with special needs particularly in the education process and professional life as well as for independent and full participation in every day life and informal groups. The accessories should either be free or affordable to families of children with special needs. In addition, while selecting such accessories, special attention should be paid to the child’s gender, his/her age and particularities of his/her needs. Hence accessories are adequate to the type and level of disability. The state has been securing the inclusion of children with special needs into processes of creative work and has facilitated their participation in cultural events. All creative artistic and intellectual capabilities of children with special needs have been realised both for personal purposes and for creating cultural goods of the community's interest. These persons are entitled to unhindered attendance of cultural events at theatres, museums, cinemas and libraries.  The invalids from civil war are entitled to a benefit for a third person assistance and care, healthcare, professional rehabilitation and orthopaedic instrument. The Law on Physical and Urban Planning stipulates mandatory standards and norms on physical planning and design of facilities in the course of the preparation of urban plans. These standards have been laid down in a Rulebook on Standards and Norms on Physical Planning and Design of Facilities. The Rulebook prescribes the implementation of special parameters in the course of designing objects in order to enable unhindered access to persons with disabilities. The Rulebook also regulates the use of wheelchairs, stairs, ramps, public transportation stations and stops, universal elevator, public telephone booths, universal electronic installation and signalisation, sports and public facilities, etc., in order to provide conditions for accessibility of these persons to public facilities. 
45. Please indicate what steps have been taken to implement the European Social Charter since its ratification by the Republic of Macedonia. 
The Republic of Macedonia ratified the European Social Charter and the Protocol amending the European Social Charter in December 2004 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 89/04). By the ratification of the Charter, Republic of Macedonia expressed its commitment to bring itself into line and to implement in practice the established standards in the area of social insurance and social protection. In that sense, Macedonia will endeavour to fully align with the standards established in the Charter, by developing and promoting the standards and rights and by implementing them in practice.  In accordance with the existing standards set forth in the regulations in the area of social insurance and social protection, Republic of Macedonia has decided to accept, besides the Part I, the following Articles of Part II of the Charter:  Article 1: The right to work Article 2: The right to just conditions of work Article 5: The right to organise Article 6: The right to bargain collectively Article 7: The right of children and young persons to protection, with the exception of Item 5 Article 8: The right of employed women to protection Article 11: The right to protection of health Article 12: The right to social security Article 13: The right to social and medical assistance Article 15: The right of physically or mentally disabled persons to vocational training, rehabilitation and social resettlement Article 17: The right of mothers and children to social and economic protection Domestic regulations are considered to be to a large extent in line with the Charter in the areas covered by the aforementioned Articles. Bearing in mind the ongoing continuous process of reforms in social insurance and social protection – such as the regulations in labour legislation, health insurance legislation; pension and disability insurance, social protection, protection at work and other regulation - it has been envisaged that if non-compliance with the Charter is determined, appropriate amendments will be made to the existing regulations or new ones will be adopted to ensure their harmonisation with the Charter’s standards. A number of laws have already been harmonized  with the EU legislation. In the course of adoption, special emphasis was given to fundamental values determined in the Charter and to the compliance of the new regulation therewith.  
