G. HUMAN RIGHTS – HORIZONTAL ISSUES 

1. Please provide succinct information on your constitutional order, your legislation or other rules governing the area of human rights, and their compatibility with the relevant international conventions. 
Like most European democracies, the Republic of Macedonia has opted for constitutionalism. The provisions pertaining to individual rights and freedoms in the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03) are very similar to those in the Constitutions of other European countries. The Constitutional provisions in this segment have been inspired by the international and regional human rights instruments. Rights and freedoms proclaimed in the Constitution have been rightfully considered its greatest quality and an evidence of the degree of democratisation achieved in the Republic of Macedonia. Promotion, enhancement and protection of basic human rights and freedoms are among the highest political commitments of the Republic of Macedonia. On a national level, this commitment entails consistency in the implementation of policies accepted regionally and globally, which have been transposed into international human rights instruments. Article 118 of the Constitution sets forth that once the international instruments are approved in the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, their provisions become part of the domestic law and may not be changed by national laws. The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia was adopted on 17.11.1991. In the very beginning of its preparation, it was subject to assessments in the segment of human rights and minority rights by the EU Arbitration Committee composed of presidents of nine constitutional courts and former presidents of member-countries of the European Union. The Committee was chaired by Mr. Robert Badinter. The intention was to verify the level of Constitutional regulation and protection of human and minority rights, as a pre-condition for the recognition of the country’s independence. According to the Committee’s arguments, the Republic of Macedonia successfully passed the evaluation. Macedonia and Slovenia were pointed in the Committee’s Report (published 11.01.1992) as the only countries among the former Yugoslav Republics that meet the conditions required for their recognition as independent states.  Article 8 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia includes, among the fundamental values of the Constitutional order, the basic freedoms and rights of the individual and citizen, recognised in international law and determined with the Constitution, as well as the respect of the generally accepted international legal norms. Rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia and by the ratified international conventions have been incorporated into the domestic legislation and are enjoyed by all persons under the jurisdiction of the Republic of Macedonia. Their exercise is conducted directly, on the basis of the Constitution. Conditions and manners of their exercise may be prescribed by a law only if explicit constitutional authority exists thereto and only within such authority.  In Chapter II governing the Basic Rights and Freedoms, the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia includes civil and political rights, as well as economic, social and cultural rights. In the system and the substance of fundamental freedoms and rights, the Constitution corresponds fully with the solutions incorporated into the ratified international human rights conventions.  
In the segment of civil and political rights, the Constitution guarantees the following: 
  The principle of equality of citizens before the law and the right to equal legal protection has been stipulated in Article 9 of the Constitution. It includes the anti-discriminatory clause under which citizens of the Republic of Macedonia are equal in their freedoms and rights, regardless of their gender, race, colour of skin, ethnic or social background, political or religious conviction, property or social status.   Right to life has been guaranteed with Article 10 of the Constitution. It determines the inviolability of human life and prohibits the imposition of death penalty. The right to life may not be restricted even under state of war or emergency in the Republic of Macedonia. No one shall be deprived of the right to life on the basis of a court decision for having committed a serious punishable act. This constitutional provision is fully aligned with the provisions on abolition of the death penalty contained in the Protocol No. 6 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (of 28.04.1983).  The right to life, however, is not absolute in any country, and this includes the Republic of Macedonia. Namely, a number of exceptions exist in relation to the general prohibition of deliberate deprivation of life. Thus, the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms allows for deprivation of life in cases when the use of lethal force by authorised person is absolutely necessary: in defence of any person from unlawful violence; in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of a person lawfully detained; or in an action lawfully taken for the purpose of suppressing a riot or insurrection. Similar stipulations concerning the deprivation of one's right to life exist in the Republic of Macedonia. These instances are enumerated in the  Law on Internal Affairs (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 19/95, 55/97, 38/02, 33/03 and 19/04). In accordance with the opinions of the European Commission on Human Rights, there are certain restrictions in the Republic of Macedonia of the right to terminate pregnancy, while not violating the right of a pregnant woman to private life, as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention.   Prohibition of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, slavery or forced labour, have been incorporated in Article 11 of the Constitution. It guarantees the irrevocability of the physical and moral integrity of a person. The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia regards the physical and moral integrity as inviolable categories, in the same way as life and freedom. For that purpose, the Constitution forbids any form of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, as well as any form of forced labour. Under the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, the physical and moral integrity of a person must be respected under all circumstances, both by the law enforcement officials and by individual citizens. The Constitution protects every person from any form of ill-treatment, whether free or in detention. Citizens have also been protected against any form of mistreatment during peaceful rallies, if not applying means of force.  These Constitutional provisions prohibiting torture are identical with the provisions prohibiting torture in the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Consequently, the Republic of Macedonia has fully accepted the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment adopted in November 1987 by the Council of Europe.   Right to liberty and security of person has been included in Article 12 of the Constitution. Its provisions guarantee the inviolability of human freedom and determine the cases and conditions under which liberty of a person accused for a criminal offence may be restricted. The Constitution treats the right to liberty as an irrevocable right, that is a right that may not be arbitrarily restricted. Under the Constitution, this right can be restricted only by a court decision and in a procedure determined by law. Anyone who is arrested shall be brought before a judge immediately, and within a maximum of 24 hours. The judge shall decide on the legality of the deprivation of liberty. A person unlawfully or unjustifiably deprived of liberty has a right to legal redress and other rights determined by law.   Although the right to a fair trial has not been explicitly mentioned in the Constitution, it has been guaranteed in a number of its provisions pertaining to the presumption of innocence of a person indicted for an offence (Article 13, paragraph 1); to the right to legal redress in case of unlawful conviction (Article 13, paragraph 2); to the right to a counsel of his own choosing and other rights of a person under suspicion that he/she has committed a criminal offence (Article 12). The prohibition of double jeopardy has been determined in Article 14, paragraph 4 of the Constitution. No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again in criminal proceedings for an offence for which he/she has already been finally acquitted or convicted in accordance with the law.  The key components of the concept of a fair trial have been elaborated in detail in laws governing civil and criminal procedure which guarantee an adequate and fair opportunity to a person to present his/her arguments and evidence at a public hearing with a view to adversarial argument before an independent and impartial court.   The principle of punishment only pursuant to law has been incorporated in Article 14, paragraph 1 which explicitly determines the principle of legality as a basic principle in punishment of perpetrators of criminal offences and in Article 52, paragraph 4 which forbids the retroactive effect of laws. No one may be punished for an offence which has not be declared an offence punishable by law prior to its being committed, and for which no punishment had been proscribed.   The right to respect of private and family life and inviolability of home has been guaranteed by several articles of the Constitution. Article 25 provides general guarantees for the respect of privacy of a person’s personal and family life and his/her dignity and reputation. A number of specific aspects of privacy have been given special constitutional protection. The freedom and privacy of correspondence and other forms of communication have been guaranteed in Article 17. It allows only for derogation of privacy of correspondence. In order to allow for introduction of certain special investigative measures required for the fight against organised crime, this Article of the Constitution has been amended. Pursuant to this Amendment to the Constitution, only a court decision may, under terms and by procedure prescribed by law, authorise non-application of the principle of inviolability of correspondence and other forms of communication, in cases where it is indispensable to prevent or reveal criminal acts, to carry out a criminal investigation or where required in the interests of security and defence of the Republic. Article 26 guarantees the inviolability of the home. The right to the inviolability of the home may be restricted only by a court decision when a detection or prevention of criminal offences or protection of the health of citizens is concerned. For the realisation of these goals, the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, Article 18, guarantees the security and confidentiality of personal data.    Article 16 of the Constitution guarantees the freedom of conviction, conscience, thought and public expression of thought, speech, public address and public information. Freedom of religious confession has been guaranteed by Article 19 of the Constitution. The Constitution guarantees the freedom of public expression of thought, while putting this right in relation to the freedom of conviction and conscience. Furthermore, the Constitution guarantees the freedom of speech and public address as concrete forms of the exercise of right to expression. As a basic instrument of democracy, the right to expression may not be restricted by any superior interests of the society or of the ruling elites. In this regard, the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia is a step beyond the European Convention, as the latter restricts this right by the duties and responsibilities that it involves, which may often be interpreted rather broadly.   The right to peaceful assembly and association has been covered by the guarantees for freedom of political association and activity of citizens (Article 20), the right to assemble peacefully and to express public protest without prior announcement or a special licence (Article 21), as well as by the guarantee of the right to establish trade unions and the right to strike (Articles 37 and 38). The right to peaceful assembly entails a right of citizens to assemble peacefully and to express public protest without a prior announcement or special authorisation by the responsible state bodies. This right may only be restricted in case of a state of emergency or war in the Republic of Macedonia.   The right to participation in public affairs, the right to vote and the right to equal access to public offices have been guaranteed in Article 2; Article 8, paragraph 1, subparagraph 5 and Articles 22 and 23 of the Constitution. The right to vote in the Republic of Macedonia includes all the characteristics of the right to vote in other democratic countries: it is a general and equal right which is exercised directly and by secret ballot.   The freedom of movement and freedom to choose one’s place of residence have been guaranteed by Article 27 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, which also determines the restrictions to this right. This constitutional provision corresponds with Article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
In the segment of economic, social and cultural rights, the Constitution guarantees the following: 
  The right to ownership of property and the right to inheritance, which have been guaranteed by Article 30; Article 31 provides for a possibility for aliens to acquire the right to property under conditions determined by law. The right to ownership of property entails a right of every natural or legal person to freely dispose of his/her property. No person may be deprived of his/her property, except in the public interest and under conditions determined by law. These provisions comply with the European Convention on Human Rights. However, the Constitution goes a step beyond the Convention, as it includes a provision under which a compensation for a seized property may not be lower than its market value.   The Constitution also guarantees the right to work, as well as the rights deriving from employment (Article 32), which have been further elaborated in law and collective agreements. As regards the European Social Charter, the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia fully incorporates the elements of the right to work stipulated in this document. Hence, from the normative aspect, there is no discrepancy between these two documents when the right to work is in question. The aforementioned substance of the right to equal conditions for work in the European Social Charter have also been stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia and the new labour legislation. With regard to this right, there is a legal conformity between the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia and the European Social Charter. However, problems exist on a practical level. Part of the employees may not exercise this right in all its elements as in transitional environment, labour has been significantly undervalued in comparison with the capital.   The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia guarantees the right to protection at work. This right has been elaborated in detail in the labour legislation, with all elements of this right included in the European Social Charter (Article 3). Numerous regulations exist on the safety and protection at work, similarly as the numerous measures stipulated for the control over the application of these regulations. In practice, however, there have been numerous examples of violation of these regulations and measures, and hence violations of the right to protection at work. Pursuant to the Constitution, every citizen of the Republic of Macedonia has a right to adequate remuneration. The wording right to appropriate remuneration is more neutral in relation to the one used in the European Social Charter – a right to a fair remuneration. Unlike the Constitution, the European Social Charter regulates in more details the substance of the right to a fair remuneration. Namely, remuneration has been defined as sufficient earning for a decent standard of living for the worker and his/her family; workers have been recognised the right to an increased rate of remuneration for overtime work; men and women workers have been recognised the right to equal pay for work of equal value; and all workers have been recognised the right to a reasonable period of notice for termination of employment. In practice, the right to a fair remuneration has been distorted for large number of employees as their remunerations are insufficient for a decent standard of living for themselves and their families.   The right to social protection and social insurance of citizens, and the special right to social protection enjoyed by special categories of citizens, have been guaranteed by Articles 35 and 36. The right to social protection entails a right of specific category of citizens to social welfare benefits in cases of unemployment or low wages or pensions. Funds for this kind of social protection are provided by the state, in a manner determined by law or by a collective agreement. This right becomes particularly emphasised in environment of high unemployment and low remunerations for large number of workers.   The Constitution also guarantees the right to health insurance (Article 39) and the right to a healthy environment (Article 43);    The right to marry and found a family, as well as the particular protection of family as guaranteed by Articles 40 and 41 of the Constitution;    Rights of children have been incorporated in Article 42 of the Constitution and Article 40, paragraph 4 which stipulates particular care for parentless children and children without parental care;   The right to education and related rights and freedoms have been guaranteed in Articles 44, 45 and 46, whereas freedom of scholarly, artistic and other creative work has been stipulated in Article 47; The status and rights of members of communities have been initially determined in the Preamble, and further set forth in Articles 7, 8, 9, 48, 56, 69, 77, 78, 86, 104 and 114 of the Constitution. On more details concerning the rights and status of members of communities, please refer to the answer to question I_J_2 and I_J_3Exercise of human rights in practice requires more critical judgment than the one concerning their legislative regulation, as the practical exercise of human rights is a much more difficult task than their legislative proclamation. The Republic Of Macedonia, ever since its independence, has been carrying out a continuous legal reform aimed at the protection and implementation of rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the International Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, and other international human rights instruments.  Numerous laws have been adopted for this purpose, including the Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 37/96, 80/99, 4/02. 43/03 and 19/04), Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04), Law on Execution of Sanctions (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 3/97, 23/99 and 74/04), Law on Courts (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/95, 45/95 and 64/03), Law on the Public Prosecutor’s Office (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 38/04), Law on the Judicial Council of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the  Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 80/92, 50/99 and 43/03), Bar Law (“Official Gazette of the  Republic of Macedonia”, No. 59/02), Law on the Ombudsman (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 60/03), Law on Family (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 80/92, 09/96,38/04 and 83/04- consolidated text), Law on Social Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 50/97, 16/00, 17/03 and 65/04), Law on Local Self-Government (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 5/02), Law on Political Parties (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 76/04), Law on Religious Communities and Groups (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 35/97), Broadcasting Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 20/97 and 70/03), Law on Public Gatherings (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 55/95) etc. International standards have been incorporated in all these laws. An integral part of the legal reform has been the analysis of the harmonisation of the domestic legislation with international standards. In that respect, ratification of the conventions for the Republic of Macedonia has been not only a formal obligation and a goal in itself, but also an initiation of a continuous process of implementation of international standards at a national level. This entails an existence of a compatible and developed domestic legislation. The analysis of the compatibility of legal regulation commences during the ratification procedure of a specific international document. At this stage, possible incompatibilities are detected and solutions and measures for their overcoming are considered.   The best example of this is the comprehensive analysis of the domestic legislation conducted in 1996, prior to the ratification of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (for more details see I_G_2).  Apart from the ratification procedure, the harmonisation is also conducted during the procedure of adoption of the laws, as early as the stage of the preliminary draft text, and at all stages of drafting. Particularly helpful in this regard has been the long-time practice of consultations and expertise established with the Council of Europe, dating back to the period prior to the formal accession of Macedonia to the Organisation. The process of harmonisation includes also the regular review of the existing laws that is conducted by the competent institutions with a view to their updating. Macedonia also initiates a review of specific laws or a group of related laws on the basis of the conclusions and recommendations of particular bodies i.e. controlling mechanisms established by international conventions, which have pointed to such need in the course of the state reports on the implementation of the obligations under the conventions (for more details see I_G_4).  The Judgments of the European Court of Human Rights also serves as a basis for harmonisation of the domestic legislation (for more details see I_G_2).  Protection of human rights has been guaranteed in Article 50 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, according to which: Every citizen may invoke the protection of freedoms and rights determined by the Constitution before the regular courts and before the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia, in a procedure based upon the principles of priority and urgency. The criminal and legal protection of the freedoms and rights of the individual and citizen is among the most efficient forms of protection in case of violation of human freedoms and rights. The Criminal Code, under a separate chapter Crimes Against Freedoms and Rights of Individuals and Citizens, stipulates the following criminal offences: violation of the equality of citizens (Article 137), violation of the right to use own language and alphabet (Article 138); coercion (Article 139); illegal deprivation of freedom  (Article 140); kidnapping (Article 141); torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Article 142); endangering security (Article 144), violation of the inviolability of the home (Article 145); unlawful search (Article 146); violation of the confidentiality of correspondence and other parcels (Article 147); unlawful publication of personal writings (Article 148); abuse of personal data (Article 149); prevention of access to a public information system (Article 149-a); unauthorised disclosure of a secret (Article 150); unauthorised wiretapping and audio recording (Article 151); unauthorised recording (Article 152); violation of the right to a legal remedy (Article 153); prevention of publication and distribution of published materials (Article 154); prevention or obstruction of a public gathering (Article 155); violation of the right to strike (Article 156); violation of the copyright and related rights (Article 157). Besides before regular courts, citizens may also exercise direct protection of freedom and rights before the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia. Namely, pursuant to Article 110, paragraph 1, subparagraph 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, the Constitutional Court protects the freedoms and rights of the individual and citizen relating to the freedom of conviction; conscience; thought and public expression of thought; political association and activity; and the prohibition of discrimination of citizens on the grounds of gender, race, religious, ethnic, social or political affiliation.  This instrument is known as a Constitutional Complaint and thus far, the Constitutional Court has decided upon nearly eighty petitions for human rights violations.  When deciding on the compliance of laws with the Constitution, i.e. on the compliance of by-laws with the Constitution and laws, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia has, in a number of instances, abolished specific provisions of laws and other regulations which have constituted violation of rights and freedoms as guaranteed by the Constitution. 
For the protection of constitutional and legal rights of citizens in case they have been violated by the state administrative bodies and other bodies and organisations with public mandates, the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia establishes the institution of the Ombudsman.  
2. Provide a list of human rights conventions and related protocols ratified by the Republic of Macedonia along with the date of signature and ratification. Include details of any reservations which have been made to those treaties and any declarations recognising the right of individuals to petition committees established by the conventions. In addition, please specify what national legislation and provisions have been adopted to ensure compliance with the obligations flowing from these conventions. How are these implemented and monitored? 
Basic human rights and freedoms, recognised in the international law and determined by the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03), constitute a fundamental value of the constitutional order of the Republic of Macedonia. In line with the commitment to respecting and promoting human rights and freedoms as a basis for the development of democracy in the country, Macedonia is a party to numerous international human rights instruments of the United Nations and the Council of Europe, including the controlling mechanisms established for the purpose of implementation of their provisions.  Table I_Annex_03 includes a list of international human rights treaties to which the Republic of Macedonia is a party. Macedonia has inherited the majority of the United Nations instruments by way of succession procedure from the former Federation (SFRY), on the basis of Article 5 of the Constitutional Law on the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 52/91 and 04/92). This was regulated by a Government Decision of 20 September 1993 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 57/93). The reservations made by the SFRY to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in relation to Articles 12 and 21, were withdrawn.  Among the conventions acceded to since the independence, the Republic of Macedonia has made reservation to the right guaranteed with Article 2 of the Protocol No. 1 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Pursuant to Article 45 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, the right of parents to provide education and teaching for their children in accordance with their religious and philosophical convictions could not be realised through a system of private primary education. Citizens, pursuant to the Constitution, have a right to establish private schools at all levels of education, with the exception of primary education, in accordance with law. In relation to the European Convention on the Adoption of Children, Macedonia has made reservation to Article 7 (1) pertaining to the age of the adopter, as the Convention prescribes that the age of the adopter shall neither be less than 21 nor more than 35 years of age. Pursuant to the latest changes in the Law on Family (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 38/04), adopter in the Republic of Macedonia may be a person at the age of 18 to 45 years.  Macedonia has recognised the right of individual petition before the competent United Nations bodies on alleged violations of rights as guaranteed by international conventions. In that sense, the Republic of Macedonia has, by a declaration, recognised the competence of the following:   The Human Rights Committee - to receive and review complaints by individuals claiming to have been subject to violations of rights as guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which has been taken over by succession from the former SFRY;   The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women - to decide on individual complaints submitted on the basis of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, ratified by the Republic of Macedonia on 17.10.2003;   The Committee on the Elimination of the Racial Discrimination - to receive and consider communications by individuals claiming to have suffered violations of rights as guaranteed by the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which has been taken over by succession from the former SFRY;    The Committee against Torture - to review individual complaints submitted on the basis of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which has been taken over by succession from the former SFRY.  During the ratification of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the Republic of Macedonia submitted Declaration recognising the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights, pursuant to Article 34 of the Convention.  In the legal system of the Republic of Macedonia, the relation between the domestic and the international law is a constitutional issue and has been regulated in line with the monistic theory. Pursuant to Article 118 of the Constitution, international treaties ratified in accordance with the Constitution are a part of the domestic legal order and may not be changed by law. Consequently, within the hierarchical structure of legal norms, international treaties stand above the domestic legislation.  
The ratification procedure of an international document is preceded by a review of the compatibility of the legal regulation which points to the legal implications. In this sense, prior to the 1996 ratification procedure of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the Government undertook a comprehensive analysis of the compatibility of the domestic legislation with the provisions therein. Additional relevant basis for reviewing the Macedonian legislation and for its approximation with the internationally accepted standards is the case law of the European Court of Human Rights. In the procedures in cases against Macedonia conducted thus far in the Strasbourg Court, there have been no violations established that would point to the need of change of certain legal provisions or practice.  The Government has supplemented the preventive action in the area of human rights by continuous consideration of the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights. A number of amendments to several domestic laws in recent years have been a result of the Court’s interpretations in cases against other High Contracting Parties. As part of the criminal law reform, and in order to ensure unimpeded compliance with the decisions of international bodies for human rights protection, a possibility was introduced for re-opening court procedures in cases of violation of international obligations by applying extraordinary legal remedies. Namely, pursuant to Article 392 of the Law Amending the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 44/02), the extra-legal remedy reopening of the proceedings has been introduced, following a pronounced judgment of the European Court of Human Rights, relating to the violation of human rights as guaranteed in Article 6, paragraph 1 of the European Convention.Similarly, the Government, through the Public Prosecutor’s Office, may submit an extraordinary legal remedy request for protection of legality for violation of obligations under international treaties.An integral part of the process of harmonisation of the domestic legislation has been the long-time practice of expertise and consultations established with the Council of Europe.  In addition, the Republic of Macedonia has been implementing in the domestic legislation the recommendations of the competent bodies, i.e. of the monitoring mechanisms established with the international conventions given in the reports on the country’s implementation of the obligations under the conventions. In that respect, the legal framework for gender equality in the field of political participation has been improved; as part of the criminal legislation reform, the institute of alternative measures of punishment has been introduced; domestic violence has been incriminated; criminal and legal protection against discrimination has been improved; the National Committee on Children’s Rights has been established which prepares the National Plan on Children’s Rights; and a reform of the system of juvenile justice is underway (for more details see I_G_4). As elaborated above, the Government has played an important role in the implementation and the monitoring of the obligations under international conventions. However, bearing in mind the direct application of international agreements in the domestic legal system, the judiciary has been awarded key role. The constitutional concept of the rule of law, therefore, insists on the independent position of courts before which, by applying ordinary procedural and legal means in a fair procedure, the protection of basic rights and freedoms has been exercised as well as control over political authorities through law. The unbreakable link has been emphasised between the remedies for protection of a right and the right itself. Effective remedies of protection of rights and freedoms have taken the precedence over declarative commitments. Apart from the regular courts, an important role in the protection of human rights has been awarded to the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia, the Ombudsman, the Standing Inquiry Committee for Protection of Freedoms and Rights of Citizens within the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. 
3. What is the rank of these conventions in your domestic legal system? 
International human rights conventions are ratified by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03), and as such they are part of the domestic legal order and may not be changed by law (Article 118 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia). International treaties are paramount to domestic laws. This has been regulated by the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia in a way that it prohibits the alteration of international treaties by domestic laws.  International treaties in Macedonian legal order are sources of law, hence individuals can cite provisions of international treaties, and courts and administrative bodies are compelled to directly implement them (Article 98 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia). Moreover, human rights instruments enjoy even higher legal power than other international treaties. This is also reiterated in Article 8, paragraph 1, subparagraph 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, which determines that one of the fundamental values of the constitutional order of the Republic of Macedonia is the respect of the basic freedoms and rights of the individual and the citizen, recognised in international law and set forth in the Constitution. 
4. What steps have been taken to co-operate with UN bodies dealing with human rights issues, including visits by UN special mechanisms (such as special rapporteurs), reporting to Treaty bodies and responding to Treaty body recommendations? 
a) Co-operation with UN bodies: The design and implementation of the policy of promotion and protection of human rights and freedoms in the Republic of Macedonia is a transparent process, both towards the domestic and the international public. Accordingly, the state demonstrates a high degree of preparedness and openness for co-operation with international organisations, working on human rights related issues. In fact, the situation with the exercise of human rights and freedoms in the Republic of Macedonia has been continually analysed and monitored from the moment the country gained independence, not only through the regular mechanisms of different international organisations, but also through the numerous extraordinary mechanisms and special mandates. The openness for cooperation with the international community has proven to be the right policy, in light of the fact that, in general terms it has contributed to realistic consideration of the advantages and weaknesses of the situation of exercise of human rights in the Republic of Macedonia and has significantly influenced the setting of priorities and criteria for action, aimed towards their harmonisation with the European and universal standards in this  field. The policy of co-operation with the UN bodies has always been transparent, continuous and comprehensive. This applies both to the cooperation under special procedures – whether thematic or by country, of the Human Rights Committee (as the most relevant decision-making body in this area, globally), and to the co-operation with the treaty bodies, as key mechanisms for the implementation of international treaties for protection of human rights. 
b) Visits by UN special mechanisms: b1) Special rapporteur for the former Yugoslavia of the UN Human Rights Commission Starting from 1992, the Republic of Macedonia cooperated with the Special Rapporteur of the UN Human Rights Commission for the former Yugoslavia - a special mechanism established under the Resolution 1992 /S-1/1, as a reaction to the large scale violations of human rights and numerous grave breaches of the International Humanitarian Law in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia. The situation in the Republic of Macedonia did not provide for any grounds for establishment of this special procedure, but as a part of the territory of the former Yugoslavia, it was covered by this mandate, as well. Over the following five years, while Macedonia was within the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, the Government regularly cooperated with the successive holders of that mandate (Mazowiecki and Rehn), until 1997, when the State was taken out of the Resolution of the Human Rights Commission. The cooperation with the Commission continued through the Technical Cooperation Project, concluded between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the High Commissioner for Human Rights.  b2) High Commissioner for Human Rights The situation with the respect of human rights in the Republic of Macedonia was again in the focus in the period between 1999 and 2002, during the Kosovo refugee crisis, which affected the region, and in the context of the 2001 crisis in Macedonia. Considering that these were situations in which the activities of all special mechanisms for protection of human rights within the UN system were intensified, in light of the increased risk of large-scale violations, the interest for international presence in the State grew significantly. Macedonia has once again proven and confirmed its cooperativeness with the international community and preparedness to actively participate in the establishment and strengthening of the peace in the State and in the Region.   In this respect, in the spring of 1999, the Republic of Macedonia has supported the Interim Special Mission of the UNHCR Office, the purpose of which was independent verification of the allegations of serious violations of human rights, which, according to the claims, took place in Kosovo, FRY. The then-High Commissioner for Human Rights, M. Robinson, sent a mission to the Region, and from 2-4.05.1999 was personally present in the Republic of Macedonia. In relation with the 2001 developments in the Republic of Macedonia, the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights, M. Robinson joined the initiatives and activities of the international community to consolidate the situation, and sent her Special Envoy (H. Amneus) to the Republic of Macedonia (17-20.09.2001) to review the possibilities to help the Government in the given circumstances. This occasion was used to revise and finalise the previously agreed Project on Technical Cooperation in the area of Human Rights between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Office of the High Commissioner (initiated in 1996), which contains: 1) introduction of topics in the area of human rights in the curricula for primary  and secondary education and training of teaching  staff; 2) strengthening the civil society; 3) establishment of a National Committee on Human Rights and development of a National Action Plan; 4) strengthening the Government’s capacity to prepare the reports of the Republic of Macedonia under UN Conventions in the area of human rights. Several Project segments are currently in the stage of implementation. b3) Special thematic rapporteurs (visits)  The Republic of Macedonia supports and cooperates with the thematic rapporteurs of the UN Commission for Human Rights, positively responding to the expressed interest to visit the country, and carefully taking into consideration their recommendations and suggestions towards improved protection of human rights. Furthermore, in consistency with its transparent policy in this field, and following the international trend, in the course of this year’s 60 Session of the Human Rights Committee, the Republic of Macedonia, extended an standing invitation to all special thematic procedures (later accompanied by a written invitation). By this, the Republic of Macedonia has become one of the fifty Member-States of the UN that have already sent open invitations to the thematic procedures. Thus far, there has been direct cooperation with the following thematic rapporteurs of the UN, who have expressed their interest in visiting the Republic of Macedonia:   In 1999, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions visitedRepublic of Macedonia as a part of the Special Mission of the High Commissioner for Human Rights for the Region. The purpose of the mission was from the territory of the Republic of Macedonia to monitor the large-scale violations of human rights in Kosovo, through interviews with the Kosovo refugees. Macedonia facilitated and assisted the realisation of this mission, in line with its commitment to peaceful and political solution for the problem.    In January 2003, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders H. Jilani, visited the Republic of Macedonia and presented the visit report before the Human Rights Commission in the course of this year’s session (15.03-23.04.2004). In this area, a visible progress has been achieved in terms of the legislation, especially by starting the procedure for enacting the Law on Free Access to Information of Public Interest (passed the first reading in the Assembly), as well as in terms of the political climate in which the human rights defenders work in the Republic of Macedonia.  b4) Special thematic procedures (correspondence) The correspondence with the special thematic rapporteurs is a significant aspect of the cooperation and is of special interest in terms of acquiring an objective picture about the exercise of the human rights. Consequently, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia carefully reviews all cases communicated by individual thematic rapporteurs, containing allegations on violation of rights of individuals by the state, and regularly submits the relevant information and positions regarding such cases. In the recent years, several special rapporteurs have addressed the Government with such requests:    The recent UN Human Rights Commission Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance, A. Amor monitored the situation with the exercise of the freedom of thought and expression, conscience and religion in Macedonia. On the basis of petitions received by concerned parties, in 1997 he requested information from the Government about the opportunities for alternative community service of the conscription military service, within the context of the right to conscientious objection to military service, as a legitimate right and an international standard. The Government presented the situation at the time regarding the exercise of the conscientious objection to military service and later initiated amendments to the Law on Defence (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 42/01, 05/03), which was harmonised with this international standard.  That same year, the Special Rapporteur A. Amor, requested information on the allegations about banning the entry of the Serbian clergy into Macedonia. He received an exhaustive Report about the specific cases, about the solutions provided in the Law on Religious Communities and Religious Groups (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 35/97) as well as about the essential issues in the relation between the Macedonian Orthodox Church and the Serbian Orthodox Church.  Last year, this Special Rapporteur requested the Government to present its views regarding the arrest of Zoran Vraniškovski, former Bishop Jovan, as well as regarding several other incidents of which he was informed. The competent institutions, this time again, timely informed the Special Rapporteur about the activities undertaken regarding the case. In line with its commitments, the Government will cooperate with the new Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance, A. Jahangir.   In 2000, the Special Rapporteur Against Torture, N. Rodley requested information on alleged exceeding of authorities by the police. The reply of the Government was detailed and contained the requested information about all mentioned cases.   In late 2003, the UN Human Rights Commission Special Rapporteur on Promotion and Protection of Freedom of Thought and Expression, the Special Rapporteur on extra judicial, summary and arbitrary executions and Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders, sent an urgent joint appeal to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in relation to the information they had received about the threats against the life of the journalist Zoran Božinovski and the life of his two daughters. The Government informed them about the case and about the measures undertaken to ensure the freedom of thought and expression, the right to life and security of the person, as well as the other rights under the mandate of these three special rapporteurs.   
c) Treaty Bodies – submission of reports The cooperation with the UN bodies, established under international human rights treaties, for implementation of their provisions, is exceptionally important and serious obligation for every  State, which has undertaken such obligation by ratifying the respective Convention.  The Republic of Macedonia is a party to six out of seven fundamental UN Conventions in the area of human rights (for more details see I_G_2). The accession to the six conventions was done by forwarding a notification on the succession with regard to the former Yugoslav Federation. The Seventh Convention, on the Right on Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, is considered by the competent institutions.  In line with the obligation to submit initial reports, and thereafter periodical reports on the legal, administrative and other measures undertaken to implement the rights guaranteed by the ratified treaties, the Republic of Macedonia has, thus far, submitted initial reports on the implementation of five of such conventions. Four initial reports have been reviewed by the respective Committees. One of them remains to be considered. The preparation of the periodic reports is in progress. Republic of Macedonia is in delay with responding to certain reporting obligations under UN human rights conventions and the Government is aware of that. However, the reasons for the delay are not owed to the lack of will for cooperation or of the political will for dialogue with the respective Committees. In fact, the delay is a result of the objective circumstances on one hand, but also of subjective, mainly technical deficiencies, on the other. The internal and external political events and processes taking place in the State, from the moment it gained its independence until the present time, owing to which the human rights situation in Macedonia has been analysed and monitored by numerous extraordinary mechanisms of all international organisations, in a longer period, should in particular be taken into consideration in this context. This, at the same time, required exceptional and extraordinary involvement of the available resources of the state institutions. On the other hand, the regular reporting is a serious and complex process, which requires highly, qualified and trained personnel, as well as excellent inter-ministerial coordination. From the institutional viewpoint, and based on the hitherto practice of preparing the reports, the main body in charge of activities for the fulfilment of this obligation is the Unit for Human Rights, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where the process commences, is coordinated and completed, where the Reports are consolidated and finalised. This Unit also prepares and defends the Reports in the dialogue with the committees. Having in mind the difficulties in ensuring continuity of the work, in maintaining the capacity, quality and quantity at a satisfactory level, or to overcome the material and financial difficulties, as one of the possible solutions, the Government has proposed that the Project for Technical Cooperation with the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights foresee an activity to strengthen the capacity of the government services participating in the preparation of the reports, especially the Unit for Human Rights at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Skopje, the negotiations on implementation of part of their activities are under way. 
d) Implementation of Recommendations by the Committees The Republic of Macedonia seriously approaches the implementation of the Recommendations and the Conclusions in the findings of the Committees, made on the basis of the reviewed Reports and the dialogue with the Government. It considers them to be valuable guidelines towards improvement of the legislation or the practice in the respective areas, as well as towards general advancement of human rights protection, as a whole.         The situation with regard to submitted and reviewed Reports on each of the Conventions separately, as well as with regard to part of the implemented Committees’ Recommendations is as follows: 1.  The Initial, the Second and the Third Periodical Report under theInternational Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discriminationreviewed before the Committee against Racial Discrimination in 1997.  On the basis of the Committee Recommendations, the Republic of Macedonia issued a Declaration, pursuant to Article 14 of the Convention (for more details see I_G_2) by which it recognised the jurisdiction of the Committee to receive and review petitions by individuals, under the jurisdiction of the State, who claim to be victims of violation of the rights guaranteed by the Convention.  In the framework of the legislative reform, the criminal law protection against discrimination has been improved in general. In this respect, the amendments to the Criminal Code of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 37/96, 80/99, 04/02, 43/03 and 19/04), of March 2004, with regard to protection from discrimination, have helped achieve the following:   In respect of the criminal offences Violation of equality of citizens (Article 137) and Violation of the right to use the language and alphabet (Article 138) criminal liability of legal persons has been introduced for committing crimes referred to under point 1 of these incriminations.    The criminal offence Endangering the Security (Article 144) introduces a new Paragraph, which enhances the criminal law protection against actions of discrimination, committed through the IT system.   A new incrimination has been introduced– Crime against Humanity.    A new Article 407-a has been introduced –concerning the criminal offence – Approval or Justification of a Genocide,  Crimes against Humanity or War Crimes, which provides a qualified form of the offence, committed through IT system. 2.  The Initial Report under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was reviewed before the Human Rights Committee in 1998. Some of the Recommendations implemented in the meantime are related to the promotion of the gender equality in the  field of the political life. Thus as part of the legislative activity for improvement of the gender equality, in 2002, in the Law on Election on Representatives in the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos.  42/02, 50/02 and 46/04) , Paragraph 3 of Article 37 was adopted, which provides that in the lists of nominated candidates each gender must be represented by at least 30%. In addition, an important segment in the reform of the criminal legislation is the incrimination of the Domestic Violence. The Article 122 Sub-paragraph 19 of the Law Amending the Law on Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 19/04), adopted in March 2004 provides a definition of this incrimination. The following Articles sanction perpetration of family violence related crimes:  Article 123 - Murder, Article 125 - Momentary Murder, Article 130 – Bodily Injury, Article 131 – Severe Bodily Injury, Article 139 – Coercion, Article 140 - Unlawful deprival of liberty, Article 144 – Endangering Security, Article 191 – Intermediation in Prostitution and Article 188 – Sexual Assault Against a Child.  3.  The Initial Report under the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment was reviewed before the Committee for Prevention of Torture in 1999. The progress made in the respect and implementation of the prohibition of torture and related rights and freedoms will be in greater details elaborated in a separate question, especially within the context of the activities and cooperation with the Committee for Prevention of Torture of the Council of Europe (for more details see I_H_11 and I_H_12).  4.  The Initial Report under the Convention on the Rights of the Child was reviewed before the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2000. As a result of the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, but in conformity, also, with the obligations defined at the World Summit for Children, in 2001 a National Committee was established with a mandate to develop, and then to ensure the implementation of the National Action Plan for Protection of the Rights of the Child in the Republic of Macedonia. The Action Plan being a strategic State Document will provide the guidelines for implementation of the planned governmental activities in the forthcoming ten-year period containing the legal and the administrative measures, which should be undertaken to promote the position of the children below the age of 18, in all areas of their life. In this respect, the Plan will cover the areas such as education, healthcare, social security, legal protection, entertainment and living culture. The finalisation of the first Preliminary Draft of the National Action Plan is under way. In the reform of the criminal legislation, the Government took account of the recommendations of the Committee of the Rights of the Child and the UN Minimum Standards on the Administration of Juvenile Justice (Beijing Rules), UN Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (Riyadh Guidelines) and the UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty. In this respect, the Law Amending the Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 19/04) of March 2004 introduced alternative methods of sanctioning.  In addition to the aforementioned, the Government implements activities related to drafting of a Law on Juvenile Justice. Drafting of the Law was preceded by empirical analysis of the problems of children at risk and efficiency of measures undertaken in connection with juveniles. This will be in greater detail elaborated in a separate Question on the Rights of the Child, which will also comprise other areas listed in the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (for more details see I_I_41). 5.  The Initial and the Second Combined Report under UN Convention on Discrimination against Women was submitted to the respective Committee in May 2004, and it is planned that it will be reviewed at the session of the Committee in July 2005. 6.  Macedonia has still not submitted the Initial Report under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The drafting of this Report is under way. 

5. What steps have been taken to ratify and implement into domestic law the Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court? 
Strongly committed to developing International Criminal Law, as supranational law and to the functioning of the international criminal justice system, since the very outset, the Republic of Macedonia has supported the idea for establishment of the International Criminal Court (ICC), signing the ICC Statute and making the necessary preparations for its ratification. An analysis of the Constitution and of the substantive and procedural criminal law has been made, while the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04) has been amended, by introducing provisions on enforcement of sentences of the International Criminal Court.  On 30.01.2002, the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia adopted the Law Ratifying the Statute of the International Criminal Court (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 20/02). Hence, the Republic of Macedonia assumed the general obligations for full cooperation with the ICC in terms of implementation of investigations and prosecution for crimes under the ICC competence, as set forth in Chapter 9- International Cooperation and Judicial Assistance- of the ICC Statute. In accordance with Article 87 paragraph 1 (a) of the ICC Statue, the Ministry of Justice is the body to which ICC requests and other communication is transmitted, considering that the judicial assistance is related to submission of evidence, data and information and hearing of witnesses.  The Law Amending the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 74/04) introduces novelties in Article 505, envisaging that judgements of international courts shall be executed in accordance with the treaty establishing that particular court and ratified in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia. The criminal law Chamber of the basic court, competent in terms of territorial jurisdiction, adopts a judgement confirming its authenticity and enforceable character and determining the manner of execution of the sanction and other measures. Namely, domestic courts may approve the request of the foreign body requesting execution of a criminal law  judgement of a foreign or an international court, if this is so determined by an international treaty or on basis of reciprocity and if the sanction is also pronounced by the domestic courts in accordance with the Criminal Code of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 37/96, 80/99, 04/02, 43/03 and 19/04) .  Aimed at implementing the provisions of the Statute in the domestic legislation, under the amendments to the Criminal Code new criminal offences have been introduced: Article 403-a sanctions  Crimes against Humanity for which at least 10 year or life imprisonment is prescribed; Article 416 - a), b) and c), is related to Organising Group and Inciting to Perpetration of Genocide and War Crimes;  Command and Other Superiors’ Liability; and Liability of Subordinates for the Crime Committed under Orders of Superiors; there are also novelties introduced in respect of Crimes Against the Judiciary regarding Presentation of False Evidence (Article 366-a) and Unduly Influence on Witnesses (368-a). 
6. Is there an Ombudsman with general competence in the field of human rights, the rights of women and protection of minorities? If so, provide a description of the relevant legislation, as well as statistics on the total number of cases received by him in recent years, the number of recommendations he has made, and the number of his recommendations which have been implemented by the relevant authorities. 
In accordance with Article 50, paragraph 1 and 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01and 84/03), every citizen can invoke the protection of freedoms and rights before the courts and the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia, in a procedure based upon the principles of priority and urgency. The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia also introduces the institution of Ombudsman. In accordance with Article 77 of the Constitution, the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia elects the Ombudsman whose authority is to protect the constitutional and legal rights of citizens when those rights are violated by state administration and by other bodies and organisations with public mandates. The Law on the Ombudsman (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 7/97) laid down the conditions on his/her election and dismissal, as well as his/her competence and conduct. As a result of the signing of the Framework Agreement, which expanded the scope and protection of rights of members of ethnic communities, the Constitutional Amendments replacing or amending several articles from the original text of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia regulate the special rights of the ethnic communities. As a result of the constitutional changes, the Law on the Ombudsman has also been subject to amendments. The new Law on the Ombudsman (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 60/03)  strengthened the role and importance of this institution, expanded its competences, and brought it closer to the citizens by establishing offices in six other cities in the Republic of Macedonia.  The new Law on the Ombudsman provides novelties pertaining to the election of the Ombudsman. Pursuant to the Law, the budget of the Ombudsman is adopted as a separate part of the overall budget by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. The Ombudsman may also establish offices in the form of regional organisational units. Furthermore, the Ombudsman is obliged to undertake activities to protect the principle of non-discrimination and equitable representation of the communities in public bodies on all levels as well as in other areas of public life, at the same time having at dispose adequate resources and personnel that shall enable his/her service and execution of authorities. 
According to the provisions of the Law on the Ombudsman, the Ombudsman shall be elected by the Assembly with majority vote of the total number of the members of the Assembly, within which there must be a majority of the votes of the total number of representatives who belong to communities not in the majority in the population of the Republic of Macedonia. Another novelty in the law is that the Ombudsman has been defined as a body protecting the citizens' constitutional and legal rights that have been violated by state administrative bodies or other bodies and organisations with public mandates. The Ombudsman pays special attention to the protection of the principle of non-discrimination, and equitable representation of the members of communities in public administrative bodies, local-self government units and public institutions and services.  Pursuant to the provision in Article 29 of the Law on the Ombudsman, the Ombudsman may execute his/her competence by visiting and inspecting the public administrative bodies and other bodies and organisations with public mandates, as well as in government bodies, self-government units and public institutions and services.  It is important to note that Amendment 12 stipulates establishment of a Committee on Inter-Community Relations comprised of 19 members elected by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, of whom 7 members each are from the ranks of the Macedonians and Albanians Representatives in the Assembly, and one member each from among the Turks, Vlachs, Romas, Serbs and Bosniaks. If any of the communities do not have elected representatives in the Assembly, the Ombudsman shall appoint the relevant representatives of those communities as members of the Committee, in consultation with the respective communities.  With regard to protection of citizens' rights, the Ombudsman, apart from protecting the citizens' constitutional and legal rights when they have been violated by state administrative bodies and other bodies and organisations with public mandates, also acts upon complaints lodged by members of communities who claim their specific rights guaranteed by the Constitution and other laws in the Republic of Macedonia have been violated.  Hence, the Ombudsman also acts upon cases when members of communities claim their rights have been violated with regard to expressing their ethnic and religious affiliation; the use of languages and alphabets before state administration and local self-government bodies; the education rights (elementary, secondary and higher); electoral rights; rights pertaining to execution of the census in the Republic of Macedonia; rights pertaining to police procedures (granting citizenships, issuing personal IDs, issuing travel documents, the abuse of competences of official persons); discrimination, unequal treatment and disrespect due to affiliation to any of the communities, or other violations of rights. According to the Law, the Ombudsman is independent, autonomous, professional and qualified in performing his authority, and he/she performs operations under his/her competence in accordance with the Constitution and the Law on the Ombudsman, as well as in accordance with international legal acts on human freedoms and rights. The Ombudsman does not make final and binding decisions. It is a controlling mechanism that monitors the operations of state administrative bodies and organisations with public mandates regarding the implementation of the Constitution and laws when the citizen exercises his/her right. Should the Ombudsman determine violation and unlawfulness, he/she tenders his/her proposals and instructions on remedies. Apart from providing assistance to citizens in order to exercise their constitutional and legal rights, the Ombudsman’s interventions assist both public organisations and state bodies in improving their operations for the more successful implementation of citizens’ rights. It is important to note that Article 8 of the Law on the Ombudsman stipulates that the Ombudsman’s position is incompatible with the performance of other public offices, profession or membership in a political party. The procedure before the Ombudsman is initiated by lodging applications that may be submitted personally at the Ombudsman’s Office; by mail; orally followed by minutes at the Ombudsman's Office; or by phone, fax or electronic mail. The Ombudsman may also initiate a procedure upon his/her own initiative; however the consent of the citizen whose legal and constitutional rights have been violated is required for the continuation of the procedure. At the same time, the Ombudsman must adhere to the principle of privacy and secrecy of the petitioner's data. The Ombudsman may undertake a number of activities stipulated in the Law on the Ombudsman. He/she may request explanations, information or evidence from bodies and organisations on the allegations in the submission; enter the official premises and perform direct inspection into the subjects and operations under the competence of the body; interrogate an elected or appointed person, an official person or any other person that could provide concrete data on the procedure; request opinions from academic and expert institutions; and may request modification of the submission from the petitioner.  If the Ombudsman ascertains that citizens’ constitutional and legal rights have been violated pursuant to the provision of Article 32 of the Law on the Ombudsman, he/she may give recommendations, proposals, opinions and instructions on the remedies for the established violations; may propose a renewed procedure in accordance with the law; may initiate a disciplinary procedure against an official or competent person; and may file a request to the competent public prosecutor for initiating a procedure for determining criminal liability.  Pursuant to Article 33 of the Law on the Ombudsman, the Ombudsman may request an interim delay of the enforcement of an administrative act until a second-instance body adopts a decision or until the competent court rules on the matter. The competent bodies to which these requests have been filed are obligated to immediately, and not later than three days from the day of reception of the request, adopt the decision on the interim delay of the administrative act to the Ombudsman. If the body or organisation does not inform the Ombudsman on the implementation of his/her proposals and recommendations, or if it partly accepts them, the Ombudsman may directly inform the higher body, the competent ministry, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia; may inform the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia with a special report, or may publish the case.  In 2001, out of 1107 received complaints, the Ombudsman found a violation of constitutional and legal rights of citizens in 318 cases, on which he/she submitted opinions, recommendations or suggestions. State administrative bodies complied with 186 and acted upon the instructions and recommendations given by the Ombudsman. In 2002, a total of 1878 complaints were filed to the Ombudsman’s Office, in 552 of which it was determined that constitutional and legal rights of citizens have been violated. The competent bodies were therefore given recommendations, opinions or suggestions on how to act in order to remove the irregularities and unlawfulness from their operations. In 329 cases public administrative bodies accepted the Ombudsman’s interventions. In 2003, the Ombudsman received a total of 2605 complaints, and in the course of acting upon the matters, the Ombudsman established a violation in 550 cases. In 356 of those cases the Ombudsman’s interventions were respected by relevant bodies, and hence the petitioners’ constitutional and legal rights were exercised.   In the course of 2004, by 31.09.2004, the Ombudsman’s Office received a total of 1542 submissions, and in the course of acting upon the matters, the Ombudsman determined a violation of rights in 196 cases, for which adequate proposals were submitted and competent bodies have complied with 89 of them. Although there has been an increase of applications every year, the violations found have been almost identical. However, there has been a positive trend and attitude on compliance with the decisions of the Ombudsman and a greater accountability on the part of the public administration.  It is important to note that Article 36 of the Law on the Ombudsman stipulates that the Ombudsman shall report to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia at least once a year on the level of respect, promotion, and protection of the constitutional and legal rights of citizens, as well as on the adherence to the principles of non-discrimination and equitable representation of members of communities. The Ombudsman’s report must be published in the media. The Ombudsman may also initiate a procedure for assessing the constitutionality of laws and constitutionality and legality of other regulations if, in line of his duty, he/she appraises that they are not in compliance with the Constitution. 
Violations established in the last four years 
Violations 2001 2002 2003 31.09 2004 inclusive Area Given opinionssuggestionsrecommendationsActions taken un thintervtion of the Ombudsan tions not taken upothe intervention of the Ombudsan Given opinionssuggestionsrecommendationsActions taken un thintervtion of the Ombudsan tions not taken upothe intervention of the Ombudsan Given opinionssuggestionsrecommendationsActions taken un thintervtion of the Ombudsan tions not taken upothe intervention of the Ombudsan Given opinionssuggestionsrecommendationsActions taken un thintervtion of the Ombudsan tions not taken upothe intervention of the Ombudsan Pension and disability insurance 28 17 11 26 24 34 30 Health care 21 13 17 13 15 12 Property  33 16 17 84 15 69 113 73 40 57 15 42 Finances   Consumers’ rights 32 19 13 28 14 14 39 28 11 24 14 10 Labour rights 57 21 36 60 24 36 59 23 36 26 17 Police procedures 17 14 25 12 13 41 27 14 22 12 10 Court procedures 20 18 13 10 21 18 Education, science, culture and sport 10 Customs  Children’s rights 23 18 37 28 30 30 Social rights 12 13 34 28 Urban planning and construction  38 22 16 37 28 51 21 30 Minority rights Housing  13 186 157 29 88 71 17 Environmental rights Rights of servicemen and conscripts Other  12 10 
T O T A L 318 186 132 552 329 223 550 356 194 196 89 107 

7. Which resources and personnel are available to enable the Ombudsman to carry out his office? Is his budget voted separately? 
Pursuant to the Law on the Ombudsman (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 60/03), the organisation and operation have been regulated with the Rules of Procedure of the Ombudsman and the Rulebook on Organisation and Systematisation of Posts. The internal organisation has been systematised so that operations are carried out in three organisational units: Analytical Unit; Records, Documentation and Information Technology Unit; and Administrative, Technical and Financial Issues Unit. In addition, a special Department for Children’s Rights Protection has been operating within the institution in the last four years, and hence special attention has been given to the protection of children's rights. Executives in the Analytical Unit that act and decide upon complaints have been divided into five groups with several areas of competence. The Ombudsman and his/her deputies aided by three advisers (graduate lawyers) are in charge of the groups. It has been assessed that this organisation and manner of operation provides for qualified, efficient and continuous execution of functions in Ombudsman’s competence and monitoring of conditions in different areas. By 01.09.2004, the Ombudsman has been carrying out all his/her constitutional and legal competences with 32 executive officers, 17 of which have been performing operations related to investigations following complaints in various areas; three officers have been performing information technology, records and documentation operations; and 12 have been in charge of administrative and technical matters. Out of 32 employees, 19 are female and 13 are male. Five of them are managerial civil servants, 13 are expert civil servants, five are expert-administrative civil servants; 10 are employees without a status of civil servant, of which five are officials. According to ethnic affiliation, two are Albanians, two are Serbs, one is Vlach and 27 are Macedonians. After all the posts have been filled, by the end of 2004 and in 2005 the total number of employees is expected to be 69, of which 45 Macedonians, 17 Albanians, 1 Turk, 2 Roma, 1 Vlach, 2 Serbs and 1 Bosniak. Given the increased inflow of complaints, especially in the second half of 2003, and the expanded competence, authorities and organisational system under the new law, there is a need of additional premises, staff, technical and other equipment, both in the Skopje office and in the new decentralised offices. Preparatory activities to be carried out this year have already been planned. When staffing, pursuant to constitutionally and legally determined principles, special attention shall be paid to the equitable representation of ethic communities' members in this institution, which fall under direct constitutional and legal competence of the Ombudsman. On 01.09.2004, a senior associate on financial matters was appointed, and on 15.10.2004, six state advisors, four clerks and two drivers were employed in the six regional offices. Following the completion of training at the Ombudsman's office, the appointed state advisors have started working in the regional Ombudsman offices in six cities throughout Macedonia on 01.11.2004.  The six new deputies of the Ombudsman are expected to be appointed by the Assembly very soon.  Pursuant to Article 48 of the new Law on the Ombudsman, the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia provides funds for Ombudsman’s operations. The Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia votes separately on the part of the Budget provided for the Ombudsman. The Budget of 2004 has provided funds for additional premises in Skopje and for premises of the six decentralised offices, as well as funds for employment of 37 additional employees. The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Canadian Embassy Development Department and the Embassy of Italy have provided funds for procurement of computers and office equipment, and seven vehicles, six of which have been intended for the new regional offices. Other donations are expected for renovation and adaptation of premises, procurement of software, material and educational aid to employees, organisation of seminars, etc. 
8. Is access to all official documents granted to the Ombudsman? Is he entitled to suspend the execution of an administrative act if he determines that the act may result in irreparable prejudice to the rights of a person? If so, how is this implemented in practice? Does the Ombudsman have the right to contest the conformity of laws with the Constitution and, if so, how is this implemented in practice? 
The Ombudsman is obliged to obtain all essential facts and evidence while investigating allegations of received complaints or when initiating a procedure. Pursuant to Article 27 of the Law on the Ombudsman (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 60/03) state administrative bodies, other bodies or organisations with public mandates or local-self government units and public institutions are required to cooperate with the Ombudsman and upon his/her demand provide all evidence, data and information without regard to their confidentiality. On the other hand, the Ombudsman is obliged to keep a state and official secret in a manner and under conditions prescribed by law or other regulation. Experiences hitherto show that the Ombudsman has been practising his/her legal duties unhindered.  The Ombudsman may request an interim delay of the enforcement of an administrative act until a second-instance body adopts a decision or until the competent court rules on the matter, if he/she assesses that such enforcement shall create irreparable damages to the right of interested persons (Article 33 of the Law on the Ombudsman). In the period from 01.01.2002 to 30.09.2004, according to data from Annual Reports of the Ombudsman’s Office, the Ombudsman filed 21 requests for interim delay of the enforcement of administrative acts. One of these requests has not been abided by and therefore the Ombudsman (since all legal preconditions were fulfilled) pressed charges against an official and responsible person in the administrative body to which a request had been filed. Article 30 of the Law on the Ombudsman specifies that the Ombudsman may submit a proposal to the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia to review the constitutionality and legality of laws and other regulations or by-laws. From 01.01.2002 to 30.09.2004, the Ombudsman, either upon his/her initiative or acting upon complaints, submitted 5 initiatives to the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia to review the constitutionality of certain regulations. The Court has accepted two of them and has revoked the disputed regulations. 
9. Are there decentralised offices of the Ombudsman? 
The Law on the Ombudsman (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 60/03) that entered into force on 01.10.2003, prescribes the establishment of six new offices organised as decentralised organisational units of the Ombudsman with a view to an improved execution of duties under the Ombudsman's competence (Article 44). The Law stipulates that such offices shall be opened in the cities of Tetovo, Kichevo, Štip, Strumica, Kumanovo and Bitola. The six offices shall be administered by Ombudsman’s deputies elected by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia upon the Ombudsman’s proposal. The proposal of electing six new Ombudsman deputies is expected to enter parliamentary procedure as soon as possible, thus the offices and their functioning will be complete. The civil servants following the training at the Ombudsman’s Office have already started working in the decentralised offices on 01.11.2004. The offices have been equipped with full office and IT equipment. Thus, all prerequisites for successful operations have been created.  
