II. YOUTH AND EUROPEAN VOLUNTARY SERVICE 

1. What measures have been taken or will be taken by your authorities with a view to the provision of facilities and adoption of policies to assist young persons, in particular the disadvantaged or those handicapped in terms of social exclusion or membership of minority groups, to integrate more fully within society? How decentralised are the structures for youth employment on a local level – the level closest to young people – and what are the plans for the future? 
In the Republic of Macedonia the right to education is guaranteed by the Constitution, and education is accessible to everyone under equal conditions. Hence, primary education, in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 44) and with the Article 3 and Article 8 of the Law on Primary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 52/02 – consolidated text, 40/03, 42/03 and 63/04), is compulsory and free of charge for all children by rule from 6 to 14 years of age. For the members of the communities there is organised instruction in their mother tongue or it is studied as an optional subject. Thus, in the Republic of Macedonia the instruction is carried out in four languages of instruction: Macedonian, Albanian, Turkish and Serbian, whereas, in certain primary schools, the Vlach, Romany and Bosnian are studied optionally, however, the representation of these languages is insufficient with regard to the needs of the communities. In accordance with the Law on Secondary Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 52/2002 –  consolidated text, 40/03, 42/03 and 67/04), apart from the high schools, vocational, and secondary art schools, the secondary education is also organised for students with special educational needs, via the syllabi and curricula for the secondary education. Within the secondary education for students with special educational needs, the students are being educated according to adequate curricula for vocational and job-oriented education. Within the secondary education for students with special educational needs, the students’ placement is made in accordance with the type and the degree of their developmental disadvantages. More precise regulations on the number of students with special educational needs in groups are brought by the Minister. Students with special educational needs can enrol as full-time students in the first year of public schools, if they are younger than 25 years of age.  The Ministry of Education and Science co-finances the publishing of textbooks with small number of copies for the students with special educational needs.  In order to achieve the quality requirements for the students with special educational needs, the schools’ infrastructure should be improved. Special efforts are being undertaken by relevant authorities for the members of the Roma community, whose integration within in the society is evidently difficult. In order to stimulate Roma students to proceed their further education at the secondary schools, in 2004 the Bureau of Development and Promotion of the Education in the Languages of the Representatives of the Communities, i.e. the Ministry of Education and Science in cooperation with SOROS and USAID, provided grants for scholarships for 200 Roma students who have enrolled in the first year of secondary education. Moreover, assistance is also provided for Roma students for improving their performance by introducing mentor instruction.  In order to encourage the representatives of minority communities in continuing their education at the higher education institutions, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia each year decides on quota of positive discrimination i.e. “National Minority Quota”, whereby 20-25% of the enrolled students at the state universities should be from the representatives of the minority communities. With reference to the pupils’ and students’ standard, the Ministry of Education and Science each year announces an open competition for talented pupils and students, who are awarded grants for pursuing their further education and broadening their knowledge, so that they would be wholly integrated within the society. The scholarships offered by the Ministry of Education and Science are awarded regardless of the students’ ethnic origin. After graduating, the scholarship holders may request a certificate by the Ministry of Education and Science. The certificate provides them with the priority for employment. For students with lower social status the Ministry of Education and Science provides students books.   In order to assist and stimulate the young people, the Ministry of Education and Science also provides a financial assistance that covers their tuition fees or travel cost to the destination of their study.  In accordance with the Decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, scholarships are also awarded to students from Macedonian ethnic origin citizens of the Republic of Bulgaria, the Republic of Greece and the Republic of Albania, and who study at the “Ss. Cyril and Methodius” University of Skopje, at the “St. Clement of Ohrid” University of Bitola, as well as at the Faculty of Theology in Skopje. The Youth and Sports Agency via the Youth Sector’s activities, subsidises the youth non-governmental organisations by allocating small grants for youth projects, according to determined criteria on annual basis, and in accordance with the strategic goals and priorities within the current year.  Within the frames of the cooperation of the Youth and Sports Agency with the international institutions, directed towards inclusion of the young people with special needs and the marginalised youth, as well as towards the decentralisation of the youth projects and meeting the youth needs at a local level, the Project for Children and Youth Development is being implemented, which is funded by the World Bank. The primary goal of this project is considerable enhancement of the social cohesion among the young of risk groups, and of different social and cultural background.  The project examines the approaches based on the representation of the community in supporting the adolescents and the young of different risk groups (from 15 to 24 years of age). Moreover, it prevents their marginalisation, thereby reducing their exposure to social deviances and conflicts, and strengthening the institutional capacity on a central and local level in order to encompass children and youth issues. The project consists of two components: Youth and Institutional Development. Within the Youth component, the project is managing 24 youth centres – Babylon, the programmes of which incorporate the young from 10 to 24 years of age. The centres provide informal education by offering free courses in English, in computer science, life-oriented skills, journalism, debating, creativity and sport activities.  The Institutional Development component supports:   strategic dialogue and strategy development which will involve and promote the programmes proposed by decision-making entities and local communities;   establishment of mechanisms for monitoring the social trends that have an impact on young people, as well as the degree of satisfaction of the beneficiaries of these activities and programmes;   programmes on raising the awareness of the decision-making entities in the youth sphere and in the local communities. One of the most significant outputs of this project with regard to the sustainability of the youth initiatives is implementation and enforcement of the package ofdecentralisation laws. The Babylon children and youth centres have introduced new youth programmes on human (children and youth) rights, i.e. programmes on raising the awareness for children and youth rights; local programmes on drug abuse prevention; communication skills; healthy lifestyles, and on sexual education for secondary school students and the young from 20 to 24 years of age. In December 2004, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopted National Youth Strategy of the Republic of Macedonia. The consultation process of preparation of the Strategy incorporated 100 youth NGOs that represent about 150,000 young people from our country; 10 ministries, representatives of the Government; as well as 15 foreign and domestic foundations, partners, institutions and donors.  As an integral part of the document on the policies of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy with regard to the social exclusion, the document on the Programme for Social Exclusion Prevention contains separate programmes for respective target groups that encompass the young persons, in particular the disadvantaged or the handicapped in terms of social exclusion.  The programmes are being realised in: Day-care centres for drug addicts/families of drug addicts; Day-care centres for children on streets; Centres/Shelters for family violence victims.  The active employment policies of the Republic of Macedonia encompass the unemployed persons, regardless of their vocational education and age. Hence, special active youth support measures have been undertaken to promote voluntary work, whereby the young can undergo training for an independent carrying out of various forms of voluntary work in the domain of medicine and law. In order to achieve full emancipation and integration of the Roma in the society, the Republic of Macedonia has been included in the international project “Roma Inclusion Decade 2005-2015”. The line Ministry that is in charge of the government activities for the Roma Decade is the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. Within its activities with regard to the Roma Decade, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy has drafted a National Strategy on Action Plans for the Roma in several areas: education, employment, healthcare and housing. The Action Plan on Education, drafted by the National work group, encompasses all levels of education: pre-primary, primary, secondary and higher education. With regard to the fact that raising the economic status, i.e. employment is one of the key segments in improving the Roma emancipation and integration, the Employment Agency is included in the Roma Decade activities. Hence, special measures have been undertaken to raise the awareness of the Roma pertaining to their rights and duties as unemployed or employees, via offering information and counselling in the work clubs. The objectives of these activities are improving the competences of the Roma in terms of their easier entry in the labour market, promoting a more active attitude towards job seeking and employment. Due to the low level of qualifications and competences of the Roma population, it is necessary to include them in all kinds of vocational training. Therefore, the Employment Agency is making efforts for facilitating the inclusion of the Roma within these training programmes, in terms of retraining and additional training. 
2. What measures have been taken/planned to promote greater social involvement of young persons within the framework of the social and institutional democratisation process? 
The inclusion of young people in the process of social and institutional democratisation in Macedonia represents a scope of activities and engagements of a young person in the educational system, the science, the culture, the work practice as well as the self-education, the specialisation and improvement. A Ministry of Youth and Sports has been established in December 1998 by virtue of the Law Amending the Law on Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 63/98). The Ministry of Youth and Sports has been transformed into Youth and Sports Agency by virtue of the  Law on Organization and Work of the State Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 58/00). The Youth and Sports Agency performs duties that are related to care for the psychological and physical development of the youth and their protection from addiction diseases, prostitution, crime and other socio-pathological phenomena; cares for the status of the youth; stimulation and aid for various types of youth organising,; undertakes activities for creating conditions for keeping in the Republic of Macedonia the talented and capable young people, and also creates conditions for stimulating them to return in the Republic of Macedonia; monitors the sport and sport-recreational activities in the field of sports, monitors the development of the top sports, and performs other duties established by the law. The Youth and Sports Agency has a capacity of legal entity. With the aim of enforcing the anticipated competences of the Youth and Sports Agency, in cooperation with the Ministry of Education and Science, there are Youth Offices which are led by secondary school students in all the secondary schools in the Republic of Macedonia. The Youth Offices work in accordance with the Programme which is brought by the secondary school students themselves, who are active in the offices. The main goal of the Youth Offices is to enable greater social activity of the secondary school students, as well as their complete disposal of their free time. After adoption of the National Youth Strategy of the Republic of Macedonia in December 2004 the process of setting up of the interdepartmental body, as implementation body of  the Strategy, composed of representatives of the ministries and NGO-s has been started. The Youth and Sport Agency will preside at the same, and the monitoring of the process of implementation of the strategy in accordance with the action plan will be under its competence. The duration of the Strategy implementation will be in a period of five years from the day of its adoption. Within the framework of the non-governmental sector the Secondary School Students’ Union functions as non-governmental, non-party, non-profitable and non-political organization which stands behind the rights and the interests of the secondary school youth, independent of their ethnic, religious, sex, social or any other affiliation. It has been formed in 1991 under the name of Secondary School Students’ Association, and it is the first organisation of this kind in the Balkans and broader. By virtue of amending the Law on Associations of Citizens in 1996, the Secondary School Students’ Association is renamed into Secondary School Students’ Union. The representatives of all the secondary schools in Macedonia (90) represent the General Assembly of the Secondary School Students’ Union, which is convened on regular basis, with the aim of informing about their attitudes, establishing projects and their planning, and also for the purpose of electing the remaining managing roles. This means that the General Assembly delegates and elects the members of the Executive Board as well as the President and the Vice-President of the Secondary School Students’ Union, the Secretaries, the Advisors and the other positions that facilitate the work of a non-governmental organization representing 90 000 secondary school students. In 1994 the Secondary School Students’ Union is accepted as an equal member of the OBESSU (Organising Bureau of European School Student Unions), under the constitutional name of the Republic of Macedonia. Otherwise, this organization has been formed by the Council of Europe and the European Commission with the aim of uniting the secondary school students of whole Europe, as well as defining their mutual needs, interests and problems and the ways to solve them. That is an umbrella organization the management of which consists of Secretary General and Executive Board, as well as General Assembly in which every member has its own representative. The Secondary School Students’ Union permanently cooperates with the OBESSU and with all the member organizations as well as with secondary school students from the countries where there still are not organizations which represent their interests, with the aim to help them. The Ministry of Education and Science has developed a partnership relationship with the Secondary School Students’ Union, maintaining permanent communication with regard to the crucial questions related to the secondary school students’ population, and particularly in : introducing of school-leaving examination, students’ standard, quality of teaching, professional orientation etc. The Law on Higher Education (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 52/02- consolidated text, 40/03, 42/03 and 63/04) provides that the students take part in the managing of the institutions of higher education, in accordance with this Law and the Statute of the institution of higher education. They are also active through students’ organizations and function within the framework of each faculty at the universities in Skopje, Bitola and Tetovo. The Assembly represents the highest body for decision making, which is composed of the delegates of every faculty. The number of the representatives in the Assembly depends on the number of students at each faculty (1 delegate per 500 students). The competence of the Assembly is to adopt, bring, review, discuss and verify various acts proposed by the Executive Board. The members of the Executive Board are elected by the Assembly from the members of the Association on proposal made by the President and every member has rights, duties and responsibilities for the work and the development of the Association. The Executive Board is a body for execution of the conclusions of the Assembly and realisation of the work programme planned for the Students’ Association. The President represents the Students’ Association before the competent bodies and the public, manages the work of the Executive Board and the Assembly. He/she is elected at the direct elections that are held, and every student of the universities has the right to vote. Every student who gains support of at least five faculties’ associations (one of which should be the home faculty) is entitled to run for election. The Students’ Association at the University of “Ss. Cyril and Methodius” – Skopje, together with the Students’ Association at the University of “St. Clement of Ohrid” – Bitola under the name of National Students’ Union of Macedonia is a full member of the ESIB (European Students’ Union) with its head office in Brussels. From 01/01/2000 to 2001, in the Executive Board of the ESIB, a member of Students’ Association of the University of “Ss. Cyril and Methodius is co-opted. Since 20/03/2000 at the Congress held in Tripoli, the Students’ Association of the University of “Ss. Cyril and Methodius has been accepted as a full member of IUS (World students’ Union – International Union of Students). At the same time the Students’ Association of the University of “Ss. Cyril and Methodius carry out regular contacts and participate in mutual projects with the students’ unions of the countries in the region. The Ministry of Education and Science has a partnership attitude toward the Students’ Association on equal basis, which is confirmed through permanent communication and consulting about the key issues that are related to the students’ population. At the present moment, the most current are the discussions about the system of students’ standards support, the evaluation in the higher education, the possibility to advance in studies etc. 
3. What measures have been taken/planned to facilitate the mobility of volunteers from the EU, including candidate countries, for long-term activities (6 months to 12-18 months) in terms of residence permits, insurance, etc.? 
The mobility of the European Union volunteers is inter alia provided by the express issuance of a document – receipt on the need and the type of their engagement in the realisation of the educational activities, no matter at which level of education they are engaged, , which further on enable them to obtain permits for stay in the Republic of Macedonia for the period of time required. At the time being, the volunteering is not governed by a separate law. The stay of the European Union volunteers and States Candidates is regulated in accordance with the Law on Residence and Movement of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 36/92, 26/93 and 45/02) There is an initiative for bringing the Law on Volunteering which will define the basic notions as: volunteering, volunteer services, volunteer, user of volunteer services, expenditures compensation, contract on volunteering, rights to social security and international volunteering. The bringing of the Law is envisaged by virtue of the National Strategy for Youth of the Republic of Macedonia, which enforcement is in its final phase. 