II. POSTAL SERVICE 
A. General legal framework 

1. To what extent is your legal framework regarding postal services aligned with the relevant Community acquis (Directive 97/67/EC as amended by 2002/39/EC)? Please provide details about the license regime; universal service provision; reserved area; requirements for tariff principles; transparency and separation of accounts for service providers; standards for quality monitoring for postal services. 
The Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02) was prepared according to the Directive 97/67/EC of the European Parliament and the Council on common rules for the development of the internal market of Community postal services and the improvement of quality of service. Directive 2002/39/EC is not implemented in the Law, because the Law was prepared and enacted in 2002, before the new Directive was adopted, whilst the transposing of this Directive is connected with the operations of the PE “Makedonska posta”, i.e. from the period when this enterprise will achieve positive economic – financial results. Pursuant to Article 7 of the Law on Postal Services, the Universal Postal Service is provided by the Principal Postal operator – the PE “Makedonska posta”, which at the same time represents a Concession Act for the PE “Makedonska posta”. Within the scope of universal services, pursuant to Article 9 of the Law, it is established that the PE “Makedonska posta” performs reserved postal services for postal items with weight up to 350 grams. Pursuant to Article 18 of the Law, non-reserved postal services for postal items with weight over 350 grams can be provided by another legal entity according to conditions prescribed by Law, i.e. by entering into a Concession Agreement, awarded by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The provision of courier services requires a licence, which is issued by the Minister of Transport and Communications (Articles 13 and 14 of the Law). Pursuant to Article 10 of the Law, it is determined that the Government of the Republic of Macedonia approves the tariffs for reserved postal services provided by the PE “Makedonska posta”. Article 11 of the Law determines that the Minister of Transport and Communications may stipulate a special method for separation of accounts for reserved postal services from other services. The quality of postal service operations is regulated by Article 8 of the Law and is referred to standards and criteria concerning the postal items delivery. Secondary legislation for postal services, derived from the new Law on Postal Services, is currently in preparation, such as: Rulebook on General Conditions for Postal Services Operations; Rulebook on Numbering of Postal Services and Rulebook on Organisation of the Postal Network in the Republic of Macedonia. The Rulebooks are expected to be adopted in the first quarter of 2005. 
2. Do you have any plans to modify the existing legislation and/or to restructure the postal services? Please give details and timetables. 
The new Law on Postal Services, envisaged to be enacted by 2007, shall transpose the Directive 2002/39/EC, providing for reduction of the scope of reserved postal services, i.e. reduction of the current weight of 350 grams of postal items. Due to the need of economic strengthening of the PE “Makedonska Posta”, it is necessary to maintain the weight of 350 grams for reserved postal items until 2007, which will provide for positive performance of the operations of PE "Makedonska Posta" and successful operations after 2007 with other operators in a competitive environment. 
B. Universal Service Obligations (USO) 

1. What is the scope of universal service in your country? 
Pursuant to the Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02) Article 7, paragraph 3, Universal Postal Service means minimal extent of postal services which are continuously performed on the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia, with determined quality and affordable prices for the customers. The Universal Postal Service includes receipt, sorting, transport and delivery of postal items up to 2 kg and of parcels up to 31,5 kg, such as: regular postal items (letters, postal cards, printed material,cécograms, small parcels, and similar); registered postal items (registered letter-post items, letters of value, parcels, postal money orders, cable money orders); Express Mail Service (EMS) postal items, and other postal items and services that contain goods with or without indicated commercial value. 
2. What are the access and delivery conditions? 
Pursuant to Article 2 of the Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02), the Universal Postal Service is carried out through public postal network access points, which means any type of facilities, including mail boxes located in public places or in the premises of the Universal Postal Service provider, where the postal items can be mailed by the users. The Principal Postal Operator (PPO) receives and delivers postal items in all inhabited places in the Republic of Macedonia at least once each working day, and on Sundays and public holidays the mail is delivered through the service on duty (Article 8 of the Law). In terms of the relevant distance, areas of the PPO network units are divided into:   Closer area of network unit where receipt and delivery is carried out at least once a day;   Wider area of network unit where receipt and delivery of postal items up to a particular weight or value and notification for receiving postal items exceeding the determined weight or value is carried out at least three times a week; and   Widest area of network unit where receipt and delivery of postal items up to a particular weight or value and notification for receiving postal items exceeding the determined weight or value is carried out at least once a week. 
3. Are postal services exempted from VAT? 
Pursuant to Article 23 of the Law on Value Added Tax (“Official Gazette of RM” No 44/99), postal services and sale of stamps and envelopes for mass mailings with printed stamp sold by nominal value of the stamp, are exempted from VAT. 
4. What are your standards of quality of service (target objectives for transit time performance)? 
Pursuant to Article 8, paragraph 5 of the Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02):   All postal items delivered on a closer area of the postal network unit should be delivered in the course of the working day following the mailing day;   All postal items delivered on a wider area of the postal network unit should be delivered in the course of the second working day following the mailing day; and   All postal items delivered on the widest area of the postal network unit should be delivered at least once a week after the mailing day. 5. Are there exceptions to the USO? Please specify. 
According to Article 7, Paragraph 4 of the Law on Postal Services, as well as the Directive 97/67/EC, Paragraph 18, courier services and the document exchange service are not part of the Universal Postal Service. 
C. Licensing and authorisations regime 

1. How is the licensing regime applied in your country, in particular the granting, supervision and withdrawal of general authorisations and licenses? 
For performing non-reserved services, within the universal postal service, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (Grantor), pursuant to Article 18-26, grants concessions. Concessionaire can be any natural and legal persons entered in the trade register of the Republic of Macedonia, including foreign legal entities with a subsidiary registered in the trade register of the Republic of Macedonia. The terms, procedures and conditions for awarding concessions are regulated with the Law on Postal Services and the Law on Concessions (“Official Gazette of RM” No 25/02 and 24/03). The awarding of the concession is conveyed through public tender, and is implemented either as procedure for awarding concessions through open invitations or procedure for awarding concessions through limited invitations. The interested entities submit technical and economic-financial bid based on which a ranking list of bidders is prepared, and negotiations are further taking place with the first-ranked bidder so as to determine the conditions for the concession agreement. The procedure for awarding concessions for performing non-reserved postal services is prepared, organised and implemented by the Commission established by the Grantor. The Commission shall prepare tender documentation which shall include aspects of the Law on Concessions, as well as the following aspects: type of postal service to be granted for concession; the area of postal service operations; general and special terms of postal service operations; commencement and duration of concession; supervision over the concession activity; methods for dispute resolution, etc. The Concession Agreement precisely determines the concession period, which shall not be longer than 20 years. The concession may be transferred completely or partially, with prior written consent of the Grantor, under conditions prescribed with the Law on Concessions and the Law on Postal Services. The awarded concession for performing non-reserved postal services can be transferred to another entity through submission of request by the entity that was granted a concession and by the entity to whom the concession is to be transferred to the Ministry of Transport and Communications, based on which the Grantor shall conclude an agreement with the Concessionaire to whom the concession was transferred. The concession can be terminated pursuant to the conditions stipulated in the Law on Concessions and in cases determined with the Concession Agreement. The inspection supervision over the execution of the Concession Agreement, concluded in accordance with the Law on Postal Services, is carried out by the state inspectorate of transport, through postal traffic inspectors. In case the postal traffic inspector determines a violation of the rules regulating rights and obligations as regards the provision of postal services, prescribed with the provisions of this Law, relevant secondary legislation and the concession agreements, he/she shall reach a decision ordering removal of the determined irregularities and deficiencies within a specified time period. The courier services, pursuant to Articles 13-16 of the Law, can be carried out by foreign and domestic natural and legal entities as postal operators, based on a licence granted by the Minister of Transport and Communications. In order to be granted a licence for courier services, the concerned entities shall submit a request to the Ministry of Transport and Communications, which shall include the name, address of the applicant, company registration document, description of and manner for performing the service, date of commencement with the service operations, list of international standards for delivery of items, proof of technical and financial competence for performing service with respective quality. The licence is granted for a period of five years, with a right to be extended. 
D. Reserved area 

2. Are reserved services operated as a de facto monopoly or defined through your postal services legislation? 
Article 9 of the Law on Postal Services regulates the reserved postal services operations, which are carried out both de facto and de jure. According to the Law, reserved postal services include postal items that weigh up to 350 grams and PE Makedonska posta has monopoly over these items within the universal postal service, whilst postal items that weigh more than 350 grams are liberalised and can be delivered by other operators which have been awarded concessions for performing postal activity. In addition, courier services are also liberalised, and within the framework of the market of postal items delivery in the Republic of Macedonia, they are carried out by world reputable operators for courier services such as: DHL, UPS, FedEx, TNT. 
3. In case of the latter situation, how are the relevant requirements defined in national legislation? 
Pursuant to Article 9 of the Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02), within the framework of the universal postal service, reserved postal services that consist of receiving, collecting, sorting and delivering postal items, including direct mail, provided that these items are up to 350 grams, are provided only by the Principal Postal Operator (PPO – PE “Makedonska posta”). The reserved postal services are provided only by the PPO in order to ensure funds for provision of the Universal Postal Service on the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia, including non-profitable inhabited places, as well as for construction, maintenance and improvement of the public postal network. The public postal network is used by PPO, and if other operators use it, they are obliged to pay fees for using the public postal network. Non-reserved postal services, within the frames of the Universal Postal Service, besides PPO can be provided by other postal operators, based of concessions. 
E. Universal Service Provider (USP) 

1. How are the obligations of the USP defined in your country? When was the relevant legal framework adopted and what form does it take? 
The Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02), adopted on 16.07.2002, defines the obligations of the Universal Service Provider (USP). Pursuant to Article 7 of the Law on Postal Services, the Principal Postal Operator (PPO – PE “Makedonska posta”) is the only Universal Postal Service Provider on the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia. The provision of Universal Postal Service should offer a service which shall be available for all customers on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia under equal conditions and without any form of discrimination due to political, religious or ideological reasons. In addition, the service should guarantee confidentiality and safety of postal items, and is not to be interrupted or terminated, except in the case of a Force Majeure. According to Article 7 of the Law on Postal Services, the Universal Postal Service means a service that includes receipt, sorting, transport and delivery of postal items up to 2 kilograms and of parcels up to 31,5 kilograms, such as: regular postal items (letters, postcards, printed material, cécograms, small parcels and similar); registered postal items (registered letter-post items, letters of value, parcels, postal money orders, cable money orders), EMS postal items and other postal items and services that contain goods with or without indicated commercial value. The Universal Postal Service related operations should provide equal access for all customers to the public postal network which provides services in connection with the relevant distance of their permanent residence, including the public mail boxes and official premises of PPO. 
2. How is the provision of the universal service by USP supervised, in particular regarding the granting of any exceptions or derogations from the universal service requirements? Is this supervision exerted by an NRA (National Regulatory Authority) or other supervising national authorities? 
Pursuant to Articles 55 and 56 of the Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02), supervision over provision of universal services is conveyed by the State Transport Inspectorate, a body within the Ministry of Transport and Communications, through its inspectors responsible for postal traffic.  In case the postal traffic inspector determines violations of the regulations governing the rights and obligations regarding provision and assurance of postal services, he/she shall order, by way of decision, a removal of the determined irregularities and faults within a specified time period. 
3. Is partial or full privatisation of the USP envisaged? 
According to the Transitional and Final Provisions of the Law on Postal Services, the PE “Makedonska posta” may be restructured into a Joint Stock Company in state ownership, according to the Law on Public Enterprises (“Official Gazette of RM” No 59/96, 06/02 and 40/03), the Company Law or any other applicable legal provisions. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia may decide to privatise the Joint Stock Company through selling or transferring all or part of the shares, in one or more transactions. The possibilities for partial or complete privatisation of the PE “Makedonska posta” are currently being analysed. More importantly, pursuant to the Law on Postal Services, there is a possibility for introduction of competition in the operations of postal services within the Universal Postal Service for postal items with weight over 350 grams, for which the Government of the Republic of Macedonia can award concessions through a public tender procedure. 
F. Tariffs for Universal Service 

1. Describe the tariff structure for the Universal Service and the way in which this is defined, including any relevant legal provisions. 
Pursuant to Article 10 of the Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02) the tariffs for reserved postal services operations are determined by the PPO and the Government of the Republic of Macedonia gives its consent on those tariffs. The prices should be realistic and all customers are to have equal access to the services offered on the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia. The prices are to be determined on the basis of PPO expenditures for performing postal services, so that the PPO can develop the postal network and invest in new technologies that shall contribute towards improvement of the services, as well as to meet the customers’ demands. The tariffs referring to postal services that are not within the framework of the reserved postal service are not subject of consent by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The postal services' tariffs are based on determination of the starting price for a regular letter with 20 g weigh, and subsequently the tariffs are determined on a weight basis as well as the type of delivery of postal items, whether: regular, registered, letter of value or express mail. 
G. Accounting 

1. Are systems for the supervision and control of accounting requirements for universal service providers (systems for cost accounting and accounting separation) already in place? If not, what are the time schedules for their implementation? 
Pursuant to Article 11 of the Law on Postal Services, the Minister of Transport and Communications shall prescribe onto the PPO (Principal Postal Operator) a special method for separate accounting systems for reserved services, in a competitive environment, as well as for courier services. Until now, the Minister has not adopted an act for separate accounting systems for reserved services. The cost accounting separation for particular services of the PE "Makedonska Posta" is still not applied. Due to the fact that there is no other provider of non-reserved services within the scope of universal services, there is no need of introducing separate systems for cost accounting and accounting separation systems. The introduction of a new postal operator for providing of postal services within the scope of universal services shall provide for introduction of a separate accounting system. 
H. Quality of Service 

1. Who sets the quality standards for service providers and supervises them? 
Quality standards of service providers are prescribed with the Article 8 of the Law on Postal Services. The Rulebook on general conditions for postal service operations is currently in an enactment procedure. These regulations determine the areas of postal items delivery, which contributes towards reaching equal quality for all service beneficiaries in terms of relevant distance of their permanent address, as well as the time limit for delivery of the postal items. The quality standards are supervised by the Ministry of Transport and Communications through its postal traffic inspectors. 
2. Is the performance of the universal service providers (measuring quality of service against the standards set for domestic and cross-border mail and ensuring corrective action is taken when necessary) periodically monitored? If not by the National Regulatory Authority (NRA), by whom? 
Pursuant to Article 55 of the Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02), the Ministry of Transport and Communications monitors enforcement of the Law and its secondary legislation, as well as implementation of international agreements concluded, or acceded to, by the Republic of Macedonia in the field of postal traffic. The State Transport Inspectorate of the Ministry of Transport and Communications, through the postal traffic inspectors, performs inspection supervision as regards regulations derived from the Law, implementation of Concession Agreements, as well as licences issued pursuant to the Law. In case inspectors determine breach of regulations they shall bring a decision ordering removal of determined irregularities and deficiencies within a specified time period. During supervision, the postal traffic inspector is authorised, pursuant to Article 57 of the Law, to monitor the quality of service relating to receiving, sorting, conveying and delivery of postal items, to control the technical-technological organisation and postal network functioning, to temporarily prohibit the use of postal network capacities in case certain irregularities are established, to control the mail boxes and the application of the price list for performing postal services, as well as to prohibit the operations of a postal operator which is not a holder of concession or licence. The State Transport Inspectorate performs regular supervision and control of enterprises providing postal services as regards the quality of service relating to receiving, sorting, conveying and delivery of postal items in national and international postal traffic, as well as technical-technological organisation and postal network functioning and control of the application of the price list for performing postal services, etc. During 2003, 62 controls were executed, including 55 of the Postal Network Units of the Public Enterprise “Makedonska Posta”, and 55 reports were prepared in connection with the situation on site. Based on those reports, 48 decisions were adopted, by which this enterprise was obliged to remove the determined irregularities and deficiencies within a specified time period, as well as to inform, within a specified time period, the State Transport Inspectorate of the undertaken measures. The PE “Makedonska Posta” did not lodge any complaints against the decisions of the inspectors. 
I. Complaints procedures 

1. What main measures have been taken to establish complaint procedures? 
Article 61 of the Law on Postal Services provides that, if the postal traffic inspector, during a supervisory inspection, determines irregularities and violations in provision of postal services, he/she brings a Decision, against which the unsatisfied party may lodge a complaint, within eight days from the day of receipt of the decision, to the Minister of Transport and Communications, who decides in a second degree. The complaint against the Decision shall not withhold the execution of the Decision. 
J. National Regulatory Authority 

1. Has a Postal Market NRA (National Regulatory Authority) been established? If not, are there plans in this respect and what is the time schedule? If yes, is it an autonomous body? To what extent is it independent from universal services providers? How and to what extent is its operational independence ensured? 
A separate Regulatory Body for the regulation of the Postal Service Market, has not been established in the Republic of Macedonia yet, and the functions of such a body are conveyed by the Ministry of Transport and Communications pursuant to the Law on Postal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 55/02). In that context, the Ministry of Transport and Communications acts as a Regulatory Authority and implements the policy of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia concerning the national and the international postal traffic, proposes to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia as regards undertaking measures for gradual and controlled liberalisation of postal services operations, monitors and analyses the implementation and the development of universal postal services and other postal services and proposes undertaking of certain measures. Furthermore, the Ministry controls the process of implementation of approved tariffs for universal postal services, supervises and controls the enforcement of this law and relevant secondary legislation, as well as international agreements concluded, or acceded to, by the Republic of Macedonia, establishes the postal services development strategy, including the temporary steps for introduction of competition, and other issues determined by the Law on Postal Services. The establishment of a Postal Market National Regulatory Authority is not a mandatory obligation of the Republic of Macedonia, which is also the case in other European states. However, by the end of 2007, the functions of regulatory authority for postal services shall be transferred by authorisation to another existing regulatory authority. 
2. Please provide information on the organisation of the Authority, including the number of its staff. Do you have any plans to strengthen the human resources (in terms of full-time equivalent) dealing with postal services available to this body? 
Within the frames of the Ministry of Transport and Communications, the Postal Traffic Department is the body responsible for regulation of activities dealing with postal services. The Department has three employees (Head of Department and two officials), and there are no plans as regards strengthening of human resources. 
3. Has the NRA been assigned responsibilities similar to those defined in the postal acquis in respect to European NRAs? 
The Ministry of Transport and Communications, as a National Regulatory Body in respect to postal traffic, has competences which are similar and within the frames of those defined in the postal acquis of the European national regulatory bodies (NRAs). 
4. What are the nomination procedures and terms of office of the NRA's head? What are the NRA's powers? 
The question cannot be answered due to the fact that there is no independent national regulatory body in the Republic of Macedonia. 
5. Are there several regulatory bodies dealing with different aspects of postal services, e.g. specific regulatory issues, tariff regimes and prices, market competition, etc.? 
The question cannot be answered due to the fact that there is no Independent National Regulatory Body in the Republic of Macedonia. 