I. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 
A. Basic data 

Please provide basic data on the current state of the telecommunications services market in your country. The indicators should be chosen so as to enable the Macedonian market to be presented in a similar way as appears for candidate countries in the regular reports[1] on the implementation of the EU regulatory framework. The reference date is either 30 June 2004 (for status data) or calendar year 2003 (for cumulative data). For further guidance concerning the requested indicators please refer to the reports published for the candidate countries on the web-site of DG INFSO at: http://europa.eu.int/information_society/topics/ecomm/all_about/international_aspects/main_areas_work/eu_enlargement/index_en.htm Sections 4, 5 and 6 of the reports are the relevant parts and the meaning of abbreviations used in the reports are explained in section 7. A questionnaire used to compile these reports is available from the Commission upon request. 
Basic data on the current state of the telecommunications services market are given in Annex, see 19_Annex_ 01
B. Legislative and institutional framework 

1. Please describe the legislative framework of the sector, with reference to current and planned primary and secondary legislation. 
The Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 33/96, 17/98, 28/00, 04/02 and 37/04) regulates the terms and conditions according which the telecommunications activities are performed. The 1998 amendments to the Telecommunications Law provided conditions for privatisation of JSC Macedonian Telecommunications (JSC MT), defined the exclusive rights in certain segments, introduced competition in mobile telephony and Internet services, defined the scope and conditions for providing universal telecommunications service, regulated the issue of granting concessions for telecommunications services, defined radio frequency spectrum management, use and control, as well as the procedure for using radio stations and terminal equipment, as well as the inspection supervision issue. In addition, the 1998 amendments to the Telecommunications Law provided for establishment of a regulatory body for telecommunications – the Telecommunications Directorate, as a legal person, within the Ministry of Transport and Communications. Pursuant to the 2004 amendments to the Telecommunications Law, competition was introduced in the provision of cable television services, with which, it is implemented the obligation of the Republic of Macedonia undertaken by the Stabilisation and Association Agreement for introduction of competition and liberalization as of 01.05.2004. The 2004 amendments to the Law contain provisions that provide higher level of protection of users of telecommunications services in respect of the restriction to the availability of free-of charge services, receiving free of charge detailed bill, etc. Based on the Telecommunications Law, the following secondary legislation was enacted:   Rulebook on Interconnection of Public Telecommunications Networks (“Official Gazette of RM” No 69/99);    Rulebook on Universal Services (“Official Gazette of RM” No 106/00);   Rulebook on Numeration (“Official Gazette of RM” No 47/99 and 39/02);   Plan on Radio Frequency Allotment (“Official Gazette of RM” No 62/97); etc. The new Law on Electronic Communications shall be enacted during the first quarter of 2005, and it shall regulate the communications area based on the European legislation, more precisely, the directives, decisions and recommendations from the reform packages of the European Union, such as: Directive 2002/19/EC on access to, and interconnection of, electronic communications networks and associated facilities (Access Directive); Directive 2002/20/EC on authorisation of electronic communications networks and services (Authorisation Directive); Directive 2002/21/EC on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services (Framework Directive); Directive 2002/22/EC on universal service and users' rights relating to electronic communications networks and services (Universal Service Directive); Directive 2002/77/EC on competition in the markets for electronic communications networks and services; Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on Privacy and electronic communications); Decision 2002/676/EC on a regulatory framework for radio spectrum policy in the European Community (Radio Spectrum Decision); Regulation 2000/2887/EC on unbundled access to the local loop; Directive 98/48/EC amending the Directive 98/34/EC laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations; Directive 98/84/EC on the legal protection of services based on, or consisting of, conditional access; Directive 98/61/EC amending Directive 97/33/EC with regard to operator number portability and carrier pre-selection; Directive 98/10/EC on the application of open network provision (ONP) to voice telephony and on universal service for telecommunications in a competitive environment; Directive 92/44/EC on Leased Lines; Directive 97/33/EC on interconnection in Telecommunications with regard to ensuring universal service and interoperability through application of the principles of Open Network Provision (ONP). The new Law shall provide liberalisation and competition in all segments of the telecommunications' market; non-discriminatory conditions for access to the PSTN network by new operators and service providers; objective criteria and reasonable prices for interconnection and leased lines; provision of universal service with obligatory minimal package of services; protection of users of the telecommunications services; establishment of an Independent Regulatory Body (Agency) for telecommunications, and other issues related to fully regulated telecommunications' sector. The new Law on Electronic Communications and secondary legislation that will arise from it shall completely regulate the communications area in the Republic of Macedonia. 2. Please describe the current and planned institutional framework of the sector, with reference to government bodies, the role of the parliament and possible parliamentary committees and the role of representative organisations of public and private sector players and of consumers. 
Pursuant to the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 33/96, 17/98, 28/00, 04/02 and 37/04), the Ministry of Transport and Communications and the Telecommunications Directorate are authorised to regulate the activities in the telecommunications sector. The Ministry of Transport and Communications implements the policy of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in the telecommunications sector; coordinates telecommunications activities; promotes development of competition; adopts a Plan on Radiofrequency Bands Allotment upon a proposal of the Directorate; prepares and adopts a list of universal services; enforces decrees of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for telecommunications operations in a case of a military or emergency situation or in case of a force major; co-operates with administrations of foreign countries; coordinates radiofrequencies on an international level; represents the Republic of Macedonia in international negotiations, international organisations and conferences in the telecommunications area. The Telecommunications Directorate conveys the following activities:   Provides access for the users to public telecommunications networks and public telecommunications services on a non-discriminatory basis;   Undertakes measures and prevent public telecommunications networks and providers of public telecommunications activities from engaging in anti-competitive conduct;   Controls the prices and the quality of public telecommunications services pursuant to the provisions of this Law;   Analyses and submits regular reports to the Ministry of Transport and Communications relating to development of the telecommunications domain in the Republic of Macedonia and abroad;   Submits proposals to the Minister of Transport and Communications as regards the awarding of concessions;   Submits proposals to the Minister of Transport and Communications as regards the amounts of fees prescribed by this Law;   Issues licences for telecommunications activities prescribed with this Law;   Approves use of radio stations and terminal equipment used in the Republic of Macedonia, and issues approval certificates;   Determines the standards for interconnection of telecommunications networks in a case when public telecommunications operators are not able to reach an agreement; and  Performs inspection supervision. The Sector for Communications as competent Sector of the Ministry of Transport and Communications is responsible for preparing draft-laws in the domains of telecommunications, broadcasting and postal traffic and further on, the Ministry of Transport and Communications submits them to the Government. First, the Secretariat-General of the Government reviews the legislative projects, which are then further reviewed by the Committee for Political System and by the Committee for Economy Policy, and afterwards the concerted texts are reviewed on a Government session. The Government submits the proposed draft-laws to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, which reviews them on a plenary session based on a prior parliamentary procedure of review by the Committee for Transport, Communications and Environment and the Committee on Legislation and Legal Affairs, where amendments can be proposed. In the process of preparation of legislative projects, the Ministry of Transport and Communications has established a practice of consultation and providing direct participation of the public telecommunications operators, the providers of public telecommunications services and representatives of the associations of private electronic media, associations of consumers and other associations and institutions, in order to review all relevant aspects. Pursuant to the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications, the Ministry competent for electronic communications and the Electronic Communications Agency are responsible regarding the regulation of activities in the field of electronic communications. The Ministry responsible for the electronic communications domain: implements the policy of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in the field of electronic communications; prepares legislation related to the field of electronic communications in co-operation with the Agency; performs activities concerning the development of electronic communications and information technology. The Minister competent for the activities from the field of electronic communications prepares the National Strategy for Development of Electronic Communications and Information Technology; promotes the development of competition in the field of electronic communications and in increasing the access and use of electronic communications and information technology determined by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia; coordinates and harmonizes activities in the field of electronic communications and information society; enforces Decrees for performing activities in the field of electronic communications in state of emergency or war; recommends to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia the manner and timing of implementation of the European "E-112" single emergency call number in the Republic of Macedonia; represents the Republic of Macedonia in international organizations in the field of communications and information society, negotiates and signs bilateral and international agreements in the field of communications and information society on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. Furthermore, according to the new Law, a Electronic Communications Agency shall be established as an Independent Regulatory Body in the electronic communications area. The competences of the Agency are listed in the Draft-Law which are as follows: supervision, control and monitoring of the performance of the electronic communications network operators and the service providers; ensuring interconnection between electronic communications networks on non-discriminatory terms based on approved referential offers; conducts registration with notification on the operators of electronic communications networks and to the providers of electronic communications services; issues radio frequencies approvals; assigns numbers and series of numbers to the operators of public communications networks and the providers of public communications services; prepares and administers public tenders for allocation and use of radio-frequencies; controls the prices for communication services and undertakes measures, in cases where an operator, either alone or jointly, holds a dominant position in the relevant market for communication services; controls the tariff regimes laid down in the existing concession agreements; cooperates with competent institutions in the area of broadcasting and competition; adopts and implements the secondary legislation as well as implements the national and international standards and technical regulations etc. TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.
3. What are the legislative and regulatory provisions to ensure fair trading and consumer protection in the sector? 
The Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 33/96, 17/98, 28/00, 04/02 and 37/04) and the Law on Protection of Competition (“Official Gazette of RM” No 04/05) regulate the issues related to protection of rights of consumers. Pursuant to the Law on Protection of Competition, in order to protect the consumers, the Commission for Protection of Competition may request from the telecommunications sector operators to deliver data related to their economic and financial situation and to their business relations and connections. In addition, during working hours it may review the trade books and other business documents of the operator. Owners of enterprises or their duly authorised representatives (telecommunications operators) are obliged to deliver the requested data, to make available their trade books and other business documents for review and to allow access to all relevant business facilities. The Law on Protection of Competition does not exclude the telecommunications sector from its application. This means that in case the providers of telecommunications services violate the competition rules, a competition body shall be authorised to act, which body is designated as the Commission for Protection of Competition, pursuant to the provisions of the Law on Protection of Competition. Generally, this type of behaviour is demonstrated through misuse of the dominant position during establishment of prices for services, unequal market treatment and denying access to using networks or infrastructure facilities. These procedures shall protect market competition and users of services. Article 7 of the existing Telecommunications Law provides for protection of the users of telecommunications services. Namely, the public telecommunications in the internal and the international telecommunications traffic are accessible to every user under non-discriminatory, objective and transparent terms and conditions, except in case of limitations associated with the capacity of the service provider. The user has the right to receive uninterrupted, efficient and regular service, and is compensated by the public telecommunication operator or the public telecommunication service provider for any shortcoming in the quality of the public telecommunication service the user receives. The Fixed Public Telecommunications Operator, owner of a public telecommunications network, based on previously defined conditions and upon a request of a user of public telecommunication service, is obliged to provide leased lines, through its network, for which a fee is charged. The provider of public telecommunications service, within the scope of services and upon a written request of the user of telecommunication services, is obliged to provide limitation of service availability free of charge. After a period of six months the limited service can be re-established free of charge. The Fixed Public Telecommunications Operator is obliged to provide free of charge access to phone numbers for emergency calls from any telephone terminals and public payphones, according to the Telecommunications Networks and Services Numeration Plan of the Republic of Macedonia.  Upon a written complaint of a user of telecommunications services, the provider of public telecommunications services is obliged to provide the user with itemized service review for the period covered by the bill, free of charge. Any unauthorised access of users to telecommunications networks and terminal equipment is prohibited. Pursuant to the Telecommunications Law, the users have the right to submit complaints concerning the fee charged for providing telecommunication services in case they are unsatisfied, upon which the Telecommunications Directorate, pursuant to legal obligations, may perform inspection supervision / control and examination of the bills, and in case it is determined that users have been damaged, the Directorate, based on a written record, may order the operator to undertake corrective actions and to make a compensation in the next bill for services. Users have the right to have the fees for public telecommunication services invoiced in a way which is easy to understand. Providers of public telecommunications services must enter into an Agreement with users of services / subscribers for connection to telecommunication networks and providing of public telecommunications services. The Agreement must include the following: providing of telecommunications services and connection to networks, quality of services, initial connection fee amount (if envisaged), conditions for payment of monthly bills (invoice) and consequences in case of a failure to fulfil this obligation, rights and obligations of the contracting parties and terms of termination of the agreement. Secondary legislation is currently in preparation, which shall thoroughly define the general terms for providing public telecommunications services in the Republic of Macedonia by the providers of public telecommunications services, shall regulate the relations between providers and users, shall determine the basic rights and responsibilities of providers of public telecommunications services and of users that result from their contractual relations based on using / providing public telecommunications services, and shall provide protection of users of public telecommunications services. The new Law on Electronic Communications shall provide protection of users of communications services through transparent publishing of decisions on prices and tariffs that are being applied, data and information that must be published by operators, as well as information that must be published by the Electronic Communications Agency. Concerning the subscription agreements, concluded between operators and end-users, the Draft-Law prescribes the elements to be included in the agreement, which shall provide protection of users / subscribers. In addition, provisions are foreseen on protection of quality of public communications services, providing users’ rights for tone dialling and calling line identification, users’ right to being registered in telephone directories, as well as end-users’ rights to obtain an itemized bill up to a certain level, which shall provide an opportunity for the users to confirm and control their using of telephone services and the charged fee amount. Furthermore, provisions are foreseen concerning the right to an appeal and complaint as regards the access and methods of providing services, provisions concerning limiting or terminating access to public telephone network without consent of the user (in case of upgrading, modernisation, maintenance activities, or in case of irregularities or damages occurred), as well as provisions concerning the impact of the public as regards defining criteria and measures for the electronic communications market by the Agency.  TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.
4. What are the regulatory instruments and procedures for data security and the protection of privacy in the sector? 
Regulatory instruments and procedures concerning security and protection of privacy of data are prescribed with the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 33/96, 17/98, 28/00, 04/02 and 37/04). Telecommunications networks and facilities must be designed, built, used and maintained in a manner that shall not cause interference in operation and utilisation of other telecommunications networks and facilities (Article 64 of the Law). Telecommunications networks and facilities owners and operators shall not interfere with the operation of telecommunications networks and facilities of other owners and operators (Article 8 of the Law). Owners and operators of telecommunications networks and facilities and providers of public telecommunications services are obliged, within technical possibilities, to secure inviolability of the privacy of messages, especially referring to inviolability of the privacy of transmitted messages in state of emergency. Persons that have access to the content of messages transmitted by telecommunications networks and facilities are forbidden to disclose / communicate the information to unauthorised persons. If inviolability of the privacy of messages is not provided, especially as regards the inviolability of privacy of messages in state of emergency, or in case the content of messages is disclosed to unauthorised persons, the Telecommunications Law foresees misdemeanourmeasure, which gives ground for the Telecommunications Directorate to initiate misdemeanour procedure against the violator according to the Law on Misdemeanours (“Official Gazette of RM” No 15/97). The protection of privacy of messages does not refer to messages which, according to international agreements concluded by, or acceded to, the Republic of Macedonia or according to national regulations of the Republic of Macedonia, are regulated as exceptions from this obligation (Article 10 of the Law). 

Concession Agreements concluded between the Ministry of Transport and Communications and the operators regulate the issue of confidentiality of communications and information regarding subscribers and foresee that the Concessionaire must introduce efficient procedures and put maximum efforts to guarantee the inviolability and confidentiality of subscribers’ communications, as well as to introduce procedures for confidentiality of business secrets and personal data concerning the subscribers. The Concessionaire shall provide a printed directory or directories of subscribers, and their updated versions, printed on an annual basis, for the geographic area or areas determined by the Concessionaire, which shall include all subscribers of telecommunications services, excluding those who have specifically requested not to be included. The Directory, at minimum, shall include, in standard format, names of the subscribers of a particular area, the correct abbreviation of their address as indicated by the subscribers, their telephone numbers, as well as a list of local, national and international calling numbers and numbers for urgent and operational services. While providing services from the information technology domain that include transmission of information by telecommunications networks, the transfer and the assurance of access shall include automatic, intermediate and transitional saving of the transmitted information during the process of the transmission, with a single goal of performing the transmission by telecommunications networks, on condition not to keep the information / data longer than necessary so as to complete the transmission.  The services of the information technology domain shall be used according to the procedures prescribed by a special Law for information of relevant public authorities for assumed illegal activities that have been undertaken, for information provided by the users of services or obligation to forward them to the relevant authorities upon their request, and for information that enables identification of the subscribers with whom they have a saving agreement. (Articles 7-a, 7-b, 7-c, 7-d of the amendments to the Telecommunications Law No 04/02). The new Law on Electronic Communications shall regulate issues concerning privacy and confidentiality of communications, whereas the operators are obliged to take appropriate technical and organisational measures for protection of their networks, to warrant the subscriber for identification and restriction of presentation of calling-line identification of incoming and outgoing calls, to delete or to make the subscribers’ traffic data anonymous, as well as not to present the location data of the subscribers in case they are not relevant for realisation of telephone traffic. In addition, it shall be ensured that subscribers are given the opportunity to determine whether their personal data are included in the public directory of subscribers or the data is fully restricted. TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.  
5. What are the mechanisms for market surveillance and for dispute resolution in this regard? 
The Telecommunications Directorate, pursuant to the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 33/96, 17/98, 28/00, 04/02 and 37/04), the Ministry of Economy through the State Market Inspectorate and the Commission for Protection of Competition, pursuant to the Law on Protection of Competition (“Official Gazette of RM” No 04/05) regulate the issues concerning market surveillance and resolution of disputes on the telecommunications market. The Commission for Protection of Competition, pursuant to the Law on Protection of Competition, adopts decisions in case of preventing, limiting and disrupting competition. The decisions of the Commission may be appealed, upon which the Commission for second instance disputes will decide. An administrative dispute may be initiated before the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia against the decisions of the Commission. In addition, non implementation of the decision of this body is considered a breach, subject to fines which are to be imposed onto the legal entity and the responsible person thereof, in a court proceeding. The Telecommunications Directorate is responsible for market surveillance and for adopting decisions and orders, pursuant to the Telecommunications Law. The provisions of the Law on General Administrative Procedure (“Official Gazette of the SFRY” No 47/86) shall apply to all issues related to the procedure before the Telecommunications Directorate, which are not regulated by the Telecommunications Law. Decisions adopted by the Director of the Telecommunications Directorate are not final and binding. An appeal can be lodged, within a period of eight days as of the date of receiving the decision, to the competent Commission of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for resolution of second instance disputes. The appeals against these decisions do not postpone their execution. In case a party does not comply with the adopted decision of the Telecommunications Directorate or with the decision of the competent Commission of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for resolution of second instance disputes, the Telecommunications Directorate may, through its telecommunications inspectors, seal the telecommunications equipment or premises, or initiate a misdemeanour procedure in the Court of First Instance (Basic Court), pursuant to the Law on Misdemeanours (“Official Gazette of RM” No 15/97). The Draft-Law on Electronic Communications foresees the Electronic Communications Agency, to be responsible for resolution of disputes between operators of communications networks and communications service providers. The dispute resolution procedure is initiated ex officio or upon a request of one of the concerned parties. In the process of resolution of disputes, the Agency is obliged to take into account the provision of an efficient competition and protection of the interest of market users, as well as to publish the decisions in regard to disputes, having in mind not to disclose business secrets of the concerned parties. Furthermore, pursuant to the new Law, operators of communications networks and communications service providers shall be able to settle in writing and agree whether the resolution of disputes shall be by means of mediation or arbitrage according to methods and procedures as prescribed by law. TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.
6. Of which relevant international organisations does your country hold membership? 
The Republic of Macedonia is a member of the following international institutions:   International Telecommunications Union (ITU);   European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT);   European Telecommunications Standardisation Institute (ETSI);   International Satellite Communications Organisation (INTELSAT);   European Satellite Communications Organisation (EUTELSAT);   International Satellite Organisation (INMARSAT);   European Broadcasting Union (EBU);   European Telecommunication Network Operators’ Association (ETNO);   World Trade Organisation (WTO) and other organisations. 
C. Policy and regulatory frameworks 

1. Please describe the policy for the telecommunications sector. If a strategy document covering the sector exists, please provide a copy in an EU language. 
According to the determination of the Republic of Macedonia for integration in the European Union and the obligations from the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Ministry of Transport and Communications are making continuous efforts so as to adapt and accept the EU legislation and standards in the telecommunications area, as well as to implement them into a national regulatory framework, in order to speed up the process of liberalisation and deregulation of telecommunications as well as inclusion in the global information society. The new Law on Electronic Communications, prepared by the Ministry of Transport and Communications, currently ongoing a procedure in the Assembly, shall include solutions compatible with the directives, regulations and recommendations of the reform packages of EU. The Ministry of Transport and Communications in 2005 shall prepare and propose to the Government a document – Strategy on Development of the Electronic Communications and Information Society, which shall determine the dynamics of realization of activities in this field on a long-term basis. The liberalisation of the telecommunications commenced with enactment of the Telecommunications Law in 1998, which was prepared according to the EU requirements for reforms in the telecommunications sector. The Law, in addition to the conditions for privatisation of the public telecommunications operator, established the conditions for introduction of competition in the telecommunications services market. Subsequently, secondary legislation was enacted relating to regulation of the issues of frequency spectrum management, interconnection of public telecommunications networks, numeration and addressing of telecommunications networks, as well as provision of universal service for telecommunications. In addition, the Law created a basis for establishment of the Telecommunications Directorate as a national regulatory body. The Law provided for establishment of a free market for mobile telephony, Internet services and other types of telecommunications services through awarding concessions according to determined criteria, exclusive of the fixed telephony area where due to the requirements for equal development of quality telecommunications infrastructure on a national level, the fixed incumbent operator was granted an exclusivity period until 31.12.2004. 
2. What is the timetable for legislative approximation to the acquis communautaire? 
The new Law on Electronic Communications, to be enacted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia during the first quarter of 2005, shall regulate the overall telecommunications area on new basis, approximated with the directives, decisions and recommendations contained in the reform packages of the European Union, such as: Directive 2002/19/EC on access to, and interconnection of, electronic communications networks and associated facilities (Access Directive); Directive 2002/20/EC on authorisation of electronic communications networks and services (Authorisation Directive); Directive 2002/21/EC on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services (Framework Directive); Directive 2002/22/EC on universal service and users' rights relating to electronic communications networks and services (Universal Service Directive); Directive 2002/77/EC on competition in the markets for electronic communications networks and services; Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on Privacy and electronic communications); Decision 2002/676/EC on a regulatory framework for radio spectrum policy in the European Community (Radio Spectrum Decision); Regulation 2000/2887/EC on unbundled access to the local loop; Directive 98/48/EC amending the Directive 98/34/EC laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations; Directive 98/84/EC on the legal protection of services based on, or consisting of, conditional access; Directive 98/61/EC amending Directive 97/33/EC with regard to operator number portability and carrier pre-selection; Directive 98/10/EC on the application of open network provision (ONP) to voice telephony and on universal service for telecommunications in a competitive environment; Directive 92/44/EC on Leased Lines; Directive 97/33/EC on interconnection in Telecommunications with regard to ensuring universal service and interoperability through application of the principles of Open Network Provision (ONP). The process of approximation and harmonisation of our legislation with the European legislation concerning electronic communications is a dynamic process containing a time-frame for implementation of certain activities depending on the development of the telecommunications market, the economic capacity of citizens and business and the interest for introduction of new telecommunications operators and providers of telecommunications services. It is estimated that within a period from six to seven years the legislative approximation with the acquis communautaire shall be completed. 
3. What is the policy and timetable for liberalisation and privatisation in the sector? 
The politics of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia concerning liberalisation and privatisation of the telecommunications sector is regulated by the following acts:   Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 33/96, 17/98, 28/00, 04/02 and 37/04);   The Stabilisation and Association Agreement, concluded between the Republic of Macedonia and the European Communities and their Member States – concluded on 09.04.2001, entered into force on 01.04.2004; and   The Law on Ratification of the Protocol of Accession of the Republic of Macedonia to the World Trade Organisation. The 1998 Telecommunications Law amendments enabled the introduction of liberalisation in certain segments of the telecommunications sector, such as: mobile telephony, data transfer and Internet services, according to the principles of the European Union concerning telecommunications liberalisation. According to the Law, all telecommunications activities are performed by concessions and by concluding concession agreements between the Minister of Transport and Communications as a Conceder, and the Concessionaire. In the Republic of Macedonia, after the Telecommunications Law was enacted in 1998, 10 concessions for data transfer and Internet services were awarded, and one concession was awarded to JSC Kosmofon in 2001, as the second GSM operator. The issue of privatisation is regulated with the provisions of Articles 84 – 90 of the 1998 Telecommunications Law, pursuant to which the Government of the Republic of Macedonia shall privatise the existing Public Telecommunications Operator (PTO) through selling a part of its shares, in one or more transactions to a strategic investor selected through a public international tender procedure; furthermore, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia shall retain the right to own a “Golden Share”. JSC Macedonian Telecommunications (JSC MT) was privatised in December 2000/January 2001, according to the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 17/98). The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the European Communities and their Member States entered into force on 1 of April 2004. According to Article 95 of the Agreement, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia is obliged to harmonise the national legislation with the EU acquis concerning the telecommunications sector, as well as to provide liberalisation in this domain one year after the entry into force of the Agreement. As a result, the Telecommunications Law, according to which JSC MT was granted exclusive rights until 31.12.2005, was amended and JSC MT was granted exclusive rights until 31.12.2004. Namely, pursuant to Article 14 of the Law Amending and Appending the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 37/04), the duration of the exclusive rights of JSC MT was accordingly shortened and they have ceased on 31.12.2004. Until that date, the existing PTO had exclusive rights to provide fixed voice telephony services, telegraphy services, telex services, public pay phone services and leased line services and to construct, own and operate fixed public telecommunication networks. Furthermore, according to the Broadcasting Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 20/97 and 70/03), cable operators had exclusive/monopoly rights to perform cable radio/TV services in selected areas, which was also modified with the amendments to the Telecommunications Law, according to which it is determined that the number of concessionaries for cable/TV services in a particular area is not limited (Article 14, Paragraph 4 of the Law Amending and Appending the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 37/04). This provides for termination of the exclusive rights and enables competition in the provision of cable radio/TV services, which means practical implementation of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement. Due to the fact that the exclusive rights of JSC MT were terminated, the telecommunications market in the Republic of Macedonia, as of 01.01.2005, is open for new operators and service providers for fixed voice telephony, international telecommunications traffic and for constructing and operating the telecommunications infrastructure. In order to provide complete liberalisation and competition in all segments of the electronic communications market, a new Law on Electronic Communications was prepared. According to the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications, the owner of the public communication network – JSC MT is obliged to provide the subscribers of telephone services of its network with access and possibility to select another operator that provides services in the international and the national traffic. Furthermore, the Draft-Law enables portability of subscriber number if the subscriber is changing the operator or provider of public telecommunication services, as well as the possibility for access to subscriber lines of other operators and providers of communication services. The Draft-Law foresees the following deadlines for the incumbent fixed telecommunications operator JSC Macedonian Telecommunications:   The operator is obliged, within 15 days from the day of entry into force of this Law, to adopt and to publish a reference offer for interconnection and/or access;   The operator is obliged, within 90 days from the day of entry into force of this Law, to adopt and to publish a reference offer for unbundled access to the local loop;   The operator is obliged, within 6 months from the day of adoption of this Law, to establish accounting separation of the activities related to interconnection and/or access;    The operator is obliged, within 6 months from the day of entry into force of this Law, to enable access and utilisation of specific network facilities;   The operator is obliged, until June 2005, to provide option on selection of operator and pre-selection of operator; and   The operator is obliged, within 2 years from entry into force of this Law, to provide option of subscriber number portability. After the initial delay of the preparation of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications (according to the Programme for Approximation of the National Legislation with the EU Legislation for 2004, the Law was envisaged to be enacted in the fourth quarter of 2004), the Law has entered a procedure in the Assembly, and is expected to be adopted in the first quarter of 2005. In order to accelerate the adoption procedure, the Government has decided to propose the Law to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia in a shortened procedure. At the same time, TAIEX expertise was requested regarding the Draft-Law, whereas possible interventions will be integrated as amendments. 
4. What is the current stage of sector liberalisation? Please provide information on: a) infrastructure, including “alternative” infrastructure; b) use of cable television for telecommunications; c) reserved services, liberalised services. 
a)  JSC Macedonian Telecommunications is the only public fixed telecommunications operator with concession for providing of fixed voice telephony services, telegraphy services, telex services, public payphone services and leased lines services, as well as to build, own and operate fixed telecommunications networks. The public fixed telephony network covers the following: public telephone switches (100% digital) in all cities and settlements in the state, built subscribers’ fixed telephony network, built optical and radio network of transmission systems between public telephone switches in the state and international telecommunications centres.  Two concessions for mobile public telecommunications networks and mobile public telecommunications services with GSM 900 technology were granted to JSC Mobimak and to JSC Kosmofon.  The public telecommunications service for data transfer, including the Internet service, is provided on a concession basis by 5 Internet service providers, which are as follows: MT Net, Unet, On Net, Sonet and MOL. One concession was awarded to JSC Link Telekom for providing of public telecommunications service for data transfer – paging service. After the introduction of telecommunications' liberalization, telecommunications networks of the JSC Electric Power Company of Macedonia and the PE “Macedonian Railways”, which have their own networks with optical and other types of cable systems, shall be used as alternative infrastructure on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. 
b) 65 concessions were awarded on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia for distribution of radio and television programmes or other telecommunication signals through cable radio- and television- networks (excluding provision of voice telephony services). The cable radio- television network, besides broadcasting of radio and television programmes, as of 01.01.2005 shall be used for providing of other types of telecommunications services, including voice telephony and Internet. 
c)  Reserved services as monopoly rights to JSC MT are: fixed voice telephony services, telegraph services, telex services, public payphone telephony services, leased line services and building and operating fixed and public telecommunications networks.  Other types of telecommunications services, such as data transfer and Internet services have been liberalised and are carried out on a competitive basis. The new Law on Electronic Communications, after its enactment, shall provide for liberalisation of the telecommunications sector in the Republic of Macedonia as regards the infrastructure part, including the alternative infrastructure. 
5. What is the situation and policy as regards universal service obligations? 
The universal telecommunications service is regulated with the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 33/96, 17/98, 28/00, 04/02 and 37/04). The Law determines the minimum scope of telecommunications services, i.e. it determines the initial set of universal services (Article 21 of the Law). The Law prescribes, the Minister of Transport and Communications to adopt the regulations related to provision of universal services and the procedure for collecting fees for those services. The regulations for providing universal services refer to the following: identification and description of the universal services; procedures to be used for selection of universal service providers through public tenders or other forms; warranting availability of universal service for disabled persons; methods determining the maximum prices for universal services; introducing a mechanism to compensate the providers of telecommunications services that provide universal services.  The initial set of universal services, i.e. the minimal scope of universal services consists of: access to fixed voice telephony service; access to emergency calls; access to public payphones and telephone operators; access to operator and information service. Pursuant to the Law, the Minister of Transport and Communications may change and extend the list of universal services by amending the secondary legislation for universal services. The draft-Law on Electronic Communications defines the following issues: provision of universal service through a minimal number of services by ensuring access to all users regardless of their geographic location; ensuring a sufficient number of public payphones; as well as ensuring access to information in the single directory and directory enquiry services. Pursuant to the Law, the Electronic Communications Agency shall select one or more universal service providers by initiating a public tender procedure. During procedure of selection of universal service providers, the Agency shall take into consideration the principles of effectiveness, objectivity and transparency. Furthermore, when certain services under the universal service are not sufficiently present or are not present at all, the Agency shall conduct a tender proceeding for selecting a provider of such services. The Agency signs the agreement with the universal service provider after the completion of the tendering procedure and after the previously given approval by the minister competent for issues regarding electronic communications. Furthermore, the Agency shall monitor changes and level of prices of services that fall under universal service, which must be equal throughout the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. Universal service providers may offer special prices or packages for subscribers, with low incomes and/or special needs that differ from those provided for other subscribers. The Agency also prescribes the technical requirements for the quality of universal service, the technical parameters and their measuring and the minimum quality requirements. In addition, according to the Law, the universal service provider has the right to compensation in case the costs for provisions of universal service are higher than the real costs. The Agency prescribes the method of calculating real costs by taking into consideration the EU recommendations concerning the universal service. TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.
6. Please describe the competence, structure and degree of independence of the regulatory body for telecommunications. Also provide information on its establishment, budgetary and human resources and administrative powers. 
The Telecommunications Directorate was established on 27.11.2000, as a body within the Ministry of Transport and Communications and functions as a legal person, according to the Law on Organisation and Operation of the State Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of RM” No 58/00) and the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 33/96, 17/98, 28/00, 04/02 and 37/04). The Telecommunications Directorate is managed by a Director, appointed and relieved of duty by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia upon a proposal of the responsible Minister for a term of office of five years, who may be reappointed for a second five-year term, but may not be appointed for more than two terms. The Telecommunications Directorate has 94 employees in 7 Departments and 24 Divisions, which are as follows: Department for Communications (Division for Telecommunications Networks, Services and Standards and Division for Information); Department for Radio-communications (Division for Fixed and Mobile Radio Systems and Division for Satellite Systems and Broadcasting); Department for Legal, Human resources and Supply Related Affairs (Division for Legal Affairs, Division for Human resources, Inspection Division in Skopje, Štip and Bitola, and Experts Administrative Division); Department for Financial Operations (Division for Plans and Analysis and Division for Financial Operations); Department for Control and Monitoring of Radiofrequencies (Division for Control and Monitoring of Radiofrequencies in Skopje, Štip and Bitola); Department for Technical Inspection (Division for Technical Inspection in Skopje, Štip and Bitola and Division for Maintenance of Fixed and Monitoring Stations); Department for International Co-operation (Division for Monitoring the International Regulation and Euro-integration and Division for Implementation of International Regulation). The 94 employees allocated in the above-mentioned sectors are of the following educational structure:   43 employees with University degree (23 Bachelors in Electrical Engineering, 5 Bachelors in Economy, 5 Bachelors in Law and 10 degrees of other faculties) 
  5 with post-secondary degree 
  46 with high school education The Telecommunications Directorate, pursuant to Article 18 of the Telecommunications Law, is financed by revenues from charged fees for using frequencies, numbering and supervision fees. The revenues received from the charged fees are primarily used to defray the expenses for the activities of the Directorate, and the excess is deposited into the budget of the Republic of Macedonia. The annual funds for the activities of the Directorate are approved by the Minister of Transport and Communications, which funds must be sufficient to carry out in a satisfactory manner the activities of the Directorate, within the framework of its authorisations. The annual budget of the Telecommunications Directorate for 2003 was 77.455.000 MKD.  The activities and businesses in the field of telecommunications, pursuant to Article 4 of the Telecommunications Law, are performed on a basis of a permit, and some activities or businesses regarding the field of telecommunications are performed on a basis of a concession. Pursuant to Article 18 of the Telecommunications Law, the Telecommunications Directorate has the following responsibilities: Issues licenses for telecommunication activities prescribed by the Telecommunications Law;   Approves the utilisation of radio stations and terminal equipment used in the Republic of Macedonia and issues certificates of approval;   Approves the standard contract between public telecommunication operators, public telecommunication service providers and users;   Allocates numbers and ensures that the numbers are used efficiently and that numbers and ranges of numbers are allocated to public telecommunication operators and to public telecommunication service providers pursuant to objective criteria and non-discriminatory terms and conditions;   Manages, regulates and assigns frequencies, prepares radio communication plans, designates frequencies for transmission and reception, inspects and monitors radio communication networks, and ensures that radio stations and devices of a type that has not been approved are not used; Decides upon disputes in a first instance arising between public telecommunication operators, telecommunication service providers and users of telecommunications services, in accordance with the Telecommunications Law; Investigates violations of this Law, the provisions and regulations that implement this Law, the licenses, concessions and permits issued pursuant to this Law; ensures the confidentiality of information obtained during these investigations; determines whether violations have occurred and, if so, initiates relevant procedure; and   Carries out any other functions necessary for implementation of the provisions determined in this Law. Pursuant to the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications, an Electronic Communications Agency shall be established as an independent regulatory body, which shall commence with operations from the date the members of the Commission are appointed (not later than 60 days from the date when this Law enters into force), and from the date the Director is appointed (within 30 days from the day of establishment of the Commission). The Agency is established as independent, autonomous and non-profitable legal entity with public authorisations. The Agency, in its work and in taking decisions within the scope of its competencies, is independent and not subordinated to any state body or other public legal entity or trade company engaged in operations in the field of electronic communications and shall be impartial towards them. The work of the Agency shall be public. Pursuant to provisions of the new Law, the Agency is accountable to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia and is obliged to submit an annual report on its work to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. Bodies of the Agency shall be the Commission and the Director. The President and members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia upon a proposal of the Committee on Election and Appointment Issues of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, whilst the Director of the Agency shall be appointed by the Commission on a public tender. The Director shall be professionally full-time engaged employee in the Agency. Candidates for President and members of the Commission shall be proposed under the condition that they are holders of a university degree in the fields of electrical engineering, law or economy, with professional knowledge and experience of more than five years, and relevant knowledge of the electronic communications sector, whilst the Director, in addition to the previously mentioned, has to possess organisational and managing abilities. In connection with the issue of organisation and employment as regards the Agency, the Law prescribes, with the Statute of the Agency, to be regulated the internal organisation and the terms and conditions for employment with the Agency in accordance with the Labour Relations Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 80/03). Provisions of the Law on Civil Servants shall not apply to the employees of the Agency. Pursuant to provisions of the new Law, the operation of the Agency shall be financed through: revenues of the fees stipulated in this Law; donations, loans and other types of financial and technical assistance. The Commission adopts an Annual Financial Plan of the Agency and submits it to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia for approval. TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.
7. Can decisions of the regulatory body be appealed? If yes, describe the procedure and its results over the past 1-2 years. 
Pursuant to Article 80 of the Telecommunications Law, the decisions adopted by the Director of the Telecommunications Directorate are not final and effective. Appeals against decisions brought by the Director of the Telecommunications Directorate, upon a proposal of the telecommunications inspector, can be submitted to the Commission for second instance disputes of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, within a period of eight days as of the date of receipt. The appeals against these decisions do not postpone their enforcement. The dissatisfied party has the right to institute an administrative dispute with the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia. As of the date of establishment of the Telecommunications Directorate, more precisely in a period of four years, 440 decisions for prohibition of operations were adopted by the responsible inspectors, which mean temporary confiscation of the equipment and devices. Furthermore, 86 verdicts were reached by competent courts, out of 414 filed misdemeanour charges. In connection with the appealed decisions of first instance, almost each one of them was verified by the Commission for second instance disputes of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. According to the provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications, which is in parliamentary procedure, related to resolution of disputes, the Agency initiates a dispute resolution procedure ex officio or at the request of one of the parties in the dispute. The Agency shall apply the provisions of the Law on General Administrative Procedure (“Official Gazette of the SFRY” No 47/86) to the dispute resolution procedures. The Agency is obliged to resolve the dispute within 42 days from the date of receiving the proposal for initiation of a dispute resolution procedure.The Agency is obliged to publish decisions relating to disputes. An appeal against the decisions of the Director of the Agency may be submitted by the dissatisfied party to the Commission within eight days from the date of receipt. The Commission is obliged to decide upon the appeal within fifteen days from the date of receipt. An adminsitrative dispute may be initiated against the decision of the Commission before the Supreme Court. The procedures before the Supreme Court are urgent and the Supreme Court rules on them with priority. TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.8. How does the allocation of frequencies and numbers/codes take place? Please indicate where relevant the involvement by CEPT and ITU. 
The allotment of frequencies is carried out pursuant to the Plan for radio frequency band allotment in the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No 62/97) and according to the Plans for allotment of specified bands. The Plan for radio frequency band allotment was prepared and harmonized with the International Rulebook on Radio Communications of the International Telecommunications Union – ITU and decisions and recommendations of the European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations – CEPT. The Plan for allotment of radio-stations which operate within the framework of particular radio services defines the conditions for operations of the radio-stations, regarding the standards of theEuropean Telecommunications Standardization Institute – ETSI, as well as national regulations that administer their operations. The frequency allotment for certain services is carried out pursuant to Regional Agreements with frequency allotment plans, such as the Stockholm Regional Agreement 61 (ST 61), Geneva 75 and Geneva 84. The frequency allotment to users is carried out according to the provisions of Chapter 6 – Radio-communications – of the Telecommunications Law. Two types of licences for radio-stations are foreseen to be issued, such as: the Licence to procure and install a radio station, which provides the owner the right to procure / import and install the radio station, and the Licence for radio station operation, which is issued after completion of technical inspection. The technical inspection is carried out in order to certify whether the radio station has been properly installed according to the approved geographic coordinates and technical characteristics, that is, to establish whether the specific type of radio services and radio stations have been in compliance with the prescribed norms and standards. Pursuant to the Telecommunications Law, the Minister of Transport and Communications adopts the Plan for numeration of telecommunications networks and services in the Republic of Macedonia, upon a proposal of the Telecommunications Directorate. The Telecommunications Directorate prepares controls and monitors the Plan for numeration of telecommunications networks and services in the Republic of Macedonia, allocates numbers and ensures their efficient use; the numbers and bands are allocated to the public telecommunications operators and telecommunications services providers in accordance with objective criteria and non-discriminatory terms and conditions. The Plan for numeration of telecommunications networks and services in the Republic of Macedonia, which is adopted as a secondary legislation (“Official Gazette of RM”, No 47/99 and 39/02), implements the international numeration recommendations of ITU-T, ISO and IEC, such as: the recommendations .164, .121, .118, .167, .212, .214, Q.704, W.708, .35 of ITU-T and ETS 300 523 ISO standard. Pursuant to the Telecommunications Law, the Telecommunications Directorate charges annual fees for utilisation of allotted numbers and series of numbers for public telecommunications networks and services, starting from the date of allotment. The fee is defined in points based on the purpose of the series of numbers, as well as the length of allotted numbers. According to the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications, the Electronic Communications Agency prepares and administers the Plan for allocation of radio frequency bands, in line with the international acts in the radio-communications domain, and also prepares and administers the Plan for assignment and utilization of radio frequencies, which has to be conformant to the Plan for allocation of radio frequency bands The Agency is obliged to keep a Main Frequency Register of existing frequency assignments that are used in the Republic of Macedonia and shall make relevant portions of the Register of assigned frequencies publicly available. Natural persons or legal entities may only use specific radio frequencies on the basis of a decision of the Agency authorizing them to use such frequencies according to terms and procedures prescribed by Law. The numbers and series of numbers of the Numbering Plan may be used on the basis of a decision of the Agency. The numbers are allocated according to terms and conditions as prescribed by Law. TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.
D. Description of sector 

1. To what extent is there a separation of regulatory and operational competencies (including ownership control)? 
The regulatory and operational functions and competencies are completely separated. The Ministry of Transport and Communications, according to Article 17 of the Telecommunications Law, implements the policy of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in the telecommunications area, coordinates the telecommunications activities and prepares the draft-laws and secondary legislation. The Telecommunications Directorate, as a regulatory body for telecommunications, performs its activity ensuring equal treatment for all telecommunications operators and providers of telecommunications services on the basis of objective, non-discriminatory and transparent procedures, in order to provide quality telecommunications services for the customers. The Telecommunications Directorate is a legal entity within the Ministry of Transport and Communications. Pursuant to the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications, the Ministry responsible for the electronic communications domain, implements the policy of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in the field of electronic communications; prepares legislation related to the field of electronic communications in co-operation with the Agency; performs activities concerning the development of electronic communications and information technology. Furthermore, pursuant to the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications, within the scope of its activities, the Agency promotes efficient competition in the field of electronic communications networks and services, supporting capacities and other services. JSC Macedonian Telecommunications (JSC MT) is a telecommunications operator which had monopoly over the voice telephony and infrastructure until 31.12. 2004. JSC MT is a telecommunications company whereas 51% of the shares are owned by the strategic investor MATAV, a Hungarian company; the Government of the Republic of Macedonia holds 47,125% of the shares, and the remaining 1,875% of the shares are owned by IFC (International Finance Corporation) – Affiliation of the World Bank.  2. What are the number of operators and the types of authorisation? Please provide information for the following sub-sectors: a) public voice telephony (PSTN, alternative infrastructures, e.g. utilities); b) public land mobile communications (analog and digital non-GSM, GSM, DCS 1800, UMTS, paging); c) private land mobile telecommunications (e.g. taxies, transport, emergency services); d) satellite communication; e) data communication; f) cable television. 
a)  JSC MT is a public fixed telecommunications operator with the right to build, own and operate public fixed telecommunications networks and to provide services of voice telephony, telegraphy, data transfer, leased lines and other types of services, pursuant to the Concession Agreement valid until 31.12.2018. 
b) 
  There are no public mobile operators in the Republic of Macedonia that operate in the non-GSM band 
  There are two 2 public mobile operators in the Republic of Macedonia that operate in the GSM band: JSC Mobimak, pursuant to the Concession Agreement valid until 31.12.2018, and JSC Kosmofon, pursuant to the Concession Agreement valid until 31.12.2023. 
  No mobile networks were realized in the frequency band DCS 1800 and UMTS in the Republic of Macedonia up to date.   JSC Link Telekom is the sole provider of paging services in the Republic of Macedonia, operating on a basis of a concession for data transfer. 
c) Private land mobile communications (radio-communications networks for own needs): approximately 150 taxi associations, one system of JSC Electric Power Company of Macedonia; one system of PE “Macedonian Railways”; 20 systems of other beneficiaries; one system of the Red Cross of the Republic of Macedonia. There are 150 taxi associations in the Republic of Macedonia that use radio systems,the JSC Electric Power Company of the Republic of Macedonia uses radio communications system, as well as the PE “Macedonian Railways”, PE "Makedonija pat", JSC Makpetrol and other public and private sector users. 
d) 
  JSC Macedonian Telecommunications (JSC MT) constructed a satellite centre connected to the EUTELSAT and INTELSAT systems.   Concession was awarded to Elsacom – Italy, as a part of GLOBALSTAR, which is an operator for GMPCS.    There are several VSAT networks in the Republic of Macedonia.   The PE Macedonian Broadcasting has BSS landstation for connection to the EBU. 
e) Six concessions were awarded in the Republic of Macedonia for provision of public telecommunications services for data transfer, out of which five are foreseen for provision of Internet services, and one for paging services. The concessions are valid for a period of five (5) years. The Minister of Transport and Communications, upon a proposal of the Telecommunications Directorate, awards the concessions. 
f) Prior to the adoption of the Law Amending and Appending the Telecommunications Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 37/04), concessions for cable operators were granted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia upon a proposal of the Broadcasting Council, pursuant to the Telecommunications Law and the Broadcasting Law, and so far, 65 concessions for cable operators on specified areas have been granted. According to the Law Amending and Appending the Telecommunications Law, the issue related to the cable radio-television service was liberalized and harmonized pursuant to Article 70 of the Stabilization and Association Agreement with EU as regards the introduction of competition in this field. 
3. What are the manufacturers and manufacturing activities for network equipment and terminals in your country? 
  "DASTO LLC. – Skopje" designs and manufactures telecommunications equipment (antenna systems, connectors, splitters);   "MAKPETROL-TEAS AD – Skopje" designs and manufactures radio-communications equipment and electronic meters;   "High Tech Corp – Skopje" designs and manufactures communications equipment and circuit boards: and   "Cable factory – Negotino" manufactures electricity- and telecommunications- cables. 
4. Which is/are the main public telecommunications operator(s)? Please refer to: a) ownership and control of the operator; b) type of authorisation; c) principal subsidiaries; d) revenue/net income; e) number of employees; f) number of main lines. 
4.1 a) JSC Macedonian Telecommunications (JSC MT) is the Fixed Public Telecommunications Operator which had exclusive rights in the area of voice telephony and as regards building and operating the fixed public telecommunications network until 31.12.2004. JSC MT is privatised telecommunications company, whereas 51% of the shares are owned by the strategic investor MATAV, a Hungarian company; the Republic of Macedonia holds 47,125% of the shares, and the remaining 1,875% of the shares are owned by the IFC (International Finance Corporation) – Affiliation of the World Bank. 
b) Pursuant to the Concession Agreement, JSC MT is authorised to provide the following public telecommunications services on the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia and between places in and outside of the Republic of Macedonia:   Fixed voice telephony services;  Telegraph services;  Telex services;   Public payphone services;   Leased lines services;   Public services for data transfer;  Paging services;  VAT services;   Information services;    VSAT and other types of satellite services; as well as   To build, lease, own, develop, maintain and operate fixed public telecommunications networks, public networks for data transfer and cable radio- and television- networks. According to the terms and conditions stipulated in the Concession Agreement, JSC MT had the exclusive rights, until 31.12.2004, to provide following public telecommunications services:   Fixed voice telephony services, including, but not limited to, voice transit traffic; fixed voice telephony services provided through VSAT and other fixed satellite equipment, or through protocol TCP/IP, or any other given substitute for the particular protocol that exists within that specific period;  Telegraph services;  Telex services;   Public payphone services;   Leased lines services; and   To build, lease, own, develop, maintain and operate fixed public telecommunications networks, including, but not limited to, capacities between mobile switching centres, between mobile switching centres and any point of connection to the fixed public telecommunications network, between switching centres for data transfer and between switching centres for data transfer and any point of connection to the fixed public telecommunications network. During the period of exclusivity, the management and directing of international public telecommunications services, as determined above, which originate from, or end in, or transit through the Republic of Macedonia, may be provided exclusively by JSC MT. The Concession period is valid until 31.12.2018. 
c) JSC MT has no subsidies. 
d) The income of JSC MT in 2003 was 16,9 billion MKD on a level of a group. 
e) In JSC MT in 2003 there were about 3.000 employees. 
f) JSC MT has a total of 525.000 main lines in its PSTN network. 4.2 The Republic of Macedonia has two main mobile (GSM) operators that operate on a basis of awarded concessions within the GSM band, with a possibility to extend the GSM 1800 band as follows: 
a) JSC Mobimak is a daughter company 100% owned and controlled by JSC MT. 
b) Pursuant to the Concession Agreement, JSC Mobimak is authorised to provide the following public telecommunications services on the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia and between places in and outside of the Republic of Macedonia:   Cellular mobile telephony services;   DCS 1800 mobile telephony services; and   GSM mobile telephony services; as well as   To build, lease, own, develop, maintain and operate mobile public telecommunications networks. The Concession period is valid till 31.12. 2018. 
c) JSC Mobimak has no subsidies. 
d) The total income of JSC Mobimak in 2003 was 7.223.577.483 MKD. There were about 390 employees in JSC Mobimak in 2003. 
f)  JSC Mobimak has about 515.000 pre-paid mobile subscribers and about 105.000 post-paid subscribers. 4.3 
a) JSC Kosmofon is 100% owned and controlled by OTE, Greece. 
b) Pursuant to the Concession Agreement, JSC Kosmofon is authorised to provide the following public telecommunications services on the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia and between places in and outside of the Republic of Macedonia:   Cellular mobile telephony services;   DCS 1800 mobile telephony services;    GSM mobile telephony services;   VAT services (including any type of telecommunications services, as well as voice and non-voice telecommunications services, such as mobile services for data transfer and Internet services for mobile subscribers); and   To build, lease, own, develop, maintain and operate mobile public telecommunications networks (including installation, development, operation and maintenance of central stations and base stations and other equipment), and after 31.12.2004 to build, lease, own, develop, maintain and operate telecommunications facilities between mobile switching centres and between mobile switching centres and points of connection to fixed public telecommunications networks. The Concession period is valid until 31.12. 2023. 
c) JSC Kosmofon has no subsidies. 
d) The total income of JSC Kosmofon in 2003 was 410.689.476 MKD. 
e) There were about 270 employees in 2003 in JSC Kosmofon. 

f) JSC Kosmofon has about 145.000 pre-paid mobile subscribers and about 11.000 post-paid subscribers. 
5. What strategic telecommunications alliances exist in your country? Please provide information on partners, shareholders, fields of activity and the approvals by the competition authorities. 
The Strategic partner of JSC Macedonian Telecommunications (JSC MT) is the telecommunications operator MATAV – Hungary with 51% of the shares. The Concessionaire JSC MT is a public fixed telecommunications operator, which, pursuant to the Concession Agreement from 2000, concluded with the Ministry of Transport and Communications, has the right to build, own and operate the public fixed telecommunications network, as well as to provide services such as: voice telephony, telegraphy, data transfer, leased lines and other types of services. JSC Mobimak is a GSM operator, 100% owned by JSC MT. The Concessionaire JSC Mobimak is a public mobile telecommunications operator, which, pursuant to the Concession Agreement from 2001, concluded with the Ministry of Transport and Communications, has the right to build, own and operate the public mobile telecommunications network, as well as to provide mobile telephony services. JSC Kosmofon is a GSM operator, owned by OTE, Greece. The Concessionaire JSC Kosmofon  is a public mobile telecommunications operator, which, pursuant to the Concession Agreement from 2001, concluded with the Ministry of Transport and Communications, has the right to build, own and operate the public mobile telecommunications network, as well as to provide mobile telephony services. 
6. What type of cost accounting system is used by the main public network operator(s)? Is it mandatory to use this in justifying their prices? How are retail prices regulated? How are wholesale prices (i.e. for interconnection) regulated? 
Pursuant to Article 19 of the Telecommunications Law, prices for public telecommunications services offered on a competitive basis shall be established by public telecommunications operators and telecommunications service providers. Telecommunications services operators and public telecommunications service providers shall establish the price for services which are not subject to competition on the basis of the following principles:   Prices must be based on costs and, for similarly situated users, must be non-discriminatory;   Prices must be structured and their levels set as to attract investments into the telecommunications sector; and   The regulations and recommendations of international organisations of which the Republic of Macedonia is a member, shall be taken into consideration while establishing prices. The Telecommunications Directorate may establish a special price regulation regime applicable to a public telecommunications operator or a public telecommunications service provider, unless otherwise stipulated in the Concession Agreement, in the following cases:   Where there is only one public telecommunications operator or public telecommunications service provider or where the public telecommunications service provider has dominant position in the service market;   Where a single or dominant public telecommunications operator or public telecommunications service provider fully-subsidises a competitive network or service from the revenues of the network or services as to which it is the sole or dominant provider;   Where a particular public telecommunications service is not fully competitive, or where a particular public telecommunications service is not subject to pricing on a fully competitive basis. Pursuant to the Concession Agreement, JSC MT has submitted to the Directorate a proposed cost accounting system which demonstrates and provides an opportunity to the Directorate for verification, on a reasonable basis, of the compliance of the Concessionaire with conditions of the Agreement. The proposal is prepared according to the international accounting standards and provides for bookkeeping of the investments, incomes and expenditures resulting from providing of public telecommunications services and public telecommunications networks within the scope of exclusivity awarded with the Telecommunications Law, as well as concession services and networks that do not fall in the scope of exclusivity awarded with the Telecommunications Law and other Concessionaire related activities. Pursuant to existing regulations of the Republic of Macedonia, public mobile telecommunications operators are not obliged to implement a specific cost accounting system. Retail prices are regulated in a way that allows for free establishment of prices according to market conditions. Wholesale prices (for interconnection) are regulated by Interconnection Agreements concluded between public telecommunications operators. According to the new Law on Electronic Communications, operators with significant market power in a relevant market are obliged to keep separate accounting records for interconnection and/or access related activities. Operators with significant market power shall be obliged upon a request of the Agency to submit accounting records, including data on revenues received from third parties, which may be published by the Agency in order to contribute to a competitive and open market. If the Agency deems that there is lack of effective market competition, it may impose on an operator with significant market power obligations that the service prices shall be based on real costs, which means that the cost accounting system is obligatory for the purposes of price controls. Furthermore, the Agency may impose obligations onto an operator with significant market power in a specific retail market relating to regulation of retail services, if it determines that a relevant market intended for end-users is insufficiently competitive and if the wholesale regulated market did not yield the expected results. The Agency may prescribe one of the following methods of retail rate regulation: retail price capping (price cap regime); regulation of individual tariffs; cost orientation of prices; orienting prices towards those on comparable markets. The Agency may also specify and/or approve the format and accounting methodology to be used by such operators in the process of retail rate regulation. TAIEX expert is currently revising the initial provisions of the Draft-Law on Electronic Communications.
7. Please provide information on the number and type of ISDN users and of internet users. Is there a regulatory body for the use of the internet? Can cable operators provide internet to their subscribers? How are prices for internet use determined? 
There are 10.500 ISDN Basic rate users in the Republic of Macedonia, out of which 7.000 are business users, 3.500 are residential users, and 350 are ISDN Primary rate business users. There are 126.000 Internet users in the Republic of Macedonia, out of which 64.000 are natural persons, 12.000 are legal entities and 50.000 are pre-paid users (source Telecommunications Directorate). There is no separate regulatory body for use of the Internet in the Republic of Macedonia. The regulatory functions in all areas of telecommunications are carried out by the Telecommunications Directorate. Cable operators, through cable radio – television networks, distribute radio – television programmes according to conditions prescribed in concession agreements. According to the Law on Amending and Appending the Telecommunications Law, enacted in 2004, the cable operators can provide Internet to their subscribers, whereas upon a request of the cable operators changes in the concession agreements can be made for providing this type of services. The prices for use of Internet are determined by the Internet providers on a competitive basis in accordance with Article 19 of the Telecommunications Law. 