II. CULTURE 

1. What, if any, are the support systems in the following fields: artistic creation, innovative cultural projects, improvement of skills for artists and cultural operators, cultural cooperation with other countries? 
Support for artistic creation and innovative cultural projects is implemented by means of:   funds from the budget of the Republic of Macedonia, through the Ministry of Culture, in accordance with the Law on Culture (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 66/03);   funds from the local self-government, in accordance with the Law on Culture and the Law on Local Self-government (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 5/02);   certain tax and customs privileges for the culture, according to fiscal and customs regulations under the competence of the Ministry of Finance – the Law on Value Added Tax (“Official Gazette of the RM” Nos. 44/99, 59/99, 86/99, 11/00, 8/01, 21/03, and 19/04), the Profit Tax Law (“Official Gazette of the RM” Nos. 80/93, 33/95, 43/95, 71/96, 5/97, 28/98, 11/01, 2/02, 44/02 and 51/03), the Law on Property Taxes (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 61/04), the Personal Income Tax Law (“Official Gazette of the RM” Nos. 80/93, 3/94, 70/94, 71/96, 28/97, 8/01, 50/01, 52/01, 2/02, 44/02 and 96/04), the Customs Law (“Official Gazette of the RM” Nos. 21/98, 21/98, 26/98, 63/98, 86/99, 25/00, 109/00, 31/01, 4/02, 55/02 and 42/03);   funds from sponsorships, donations and other sources. 
Support by the Ministry of Culture for Artistic Creation and Innovative Cultural Projects 
In accordance with the Law on Culture, a Council on Culture was established within the Ministry of Culture, as a professional and consultational body that serves the Minister of Culture, comprised of certain eminent artists and experts from the field of culture and the public social life, and chosen on the basis of their level of expertise and competence as well as an appropriate and equal representation of citizens belonging to all communities. The Minister of Culture establishes other bodies and appoints external collaborators for the preparation of the Annual Programme or the implementation of certain projects of national interest for the culture. These bodies are formed for the purpose of all activities and consist of competent experts from certain areas upon whose proposals the Minister of Culture adopts the Annual Programme for Achieving National Cultural Interests which is based on previously announced open competitions and which is in accordance with the strategy and priorities established in the National Programme for Culture for the Period 2004-2008 (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 31/04), see 20_Annex_02According to the Law on Culture (Chapter: The Financing of Culture, Articles 58 – 68), any artist or any legal or natural person may apply with projects in all domains: exhibitions, organisation of colonies, performances, music events, concerts, book publishing, filmmaking, innovative and alternative projects etc. The Law on Culture (Articles 13 – 17) establishes a special form of support for independent artists with which, if the artist performs the creative activity professionally and as his/her sole profession, and if he/she is registered for performing artistic activity, he/she receives the status of an independent artist and enjoys the rights from the employment status. In order to ensure advantageous conditions for creation for the independent artist, he/she is granted – on the basis of an open competition – monthly allowances from the funds of the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, for paying healthcare, pension, and disability insurance, and for the personal income tax; this allowance is approved by a decision of the Minister upon proposal by a special Committee which evaluates the requests submitted in an open competition and takes into account the principle of appropriate and equal representation of citizens belonging to all communities.  The artists are also supported through purchase of their works, support of deficient professions through training, specialisations etc. 
Support by the Local Self-government Units for Culture  
Local self-government units can finance programmes and projects, according to the Law on Culture (Article 7, Paragraphs 2 and 3, and Article 68) and the Law on Local Self-government (Article 22, Paragraph 1, Point 5), aimed at: institutional and financial support of cultural institutions and projects; fostering folklore, customs, old artisanship and similar cultural values; organising cultural manifestations and; stimulating various specific forms of creation. Due to the current limited financial resources, however, the municipalities participate in the financing of a very small number of projects. With the application of the Law on Financing Local Self-government Units ("Official Gazette of the RM" No. 61/04) starting from year 2005, greater participation of municipalities in the financing of culture and the implementation of decentralisation in the culture is expected. Tax and Customs Privileges for Culture 
Besides the financing of culture that is of national interest from the budget of the Republic of Macedonia through the Ministry of Culture, the public support for culture is also implemented through indirect state measures, especially through certain tax and customs privileges in the culture. The Law on Value Added Tax stipulates that the turnover of institutions in the domain of culture and of other taxpayers which perform cultural activity is exempt from the Value Added Tax, provided that the institutions and/or persons that perform cultural activity have received an appropriate opinion by the Ministry of Culture. A preferential tax rate of 5% is imposed on the turnover of publications instead of the general rate of 19%, with the exception of carriers of sound and video for which the general rate of 19% is applied.  The Profit Tax Law stipulates that donations and sponsorships for cultural purposes are recognised as expenditure in the tax balance sheet amounting to 3% of the total income, under the condition that they are donated to public institutions financed by the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia. The Law on Property Taxes stipulates that a property tax is not paid for the immovable property that is proclaimed by the law as cultural heritage, and that cultural institutions are exempt from the inheritance and gift tax. The Personal Income Tax Law stipulates that the artists who have revenues based on copyright are exempt from the personal tax – in the amount of 25% to 60% under the category of recognised expenditures, depending on the kind of activity (e.g. for sculpting works – 60%; for painting works – 50%; for classical music, ballet, theatre and film performances – 30%; for modern and folk music – 25% etc.) The personal income tax is not paid for income based on cultural awards, and scholarships for pupils and students granted by state bodies and foundations. The Customs Law stipulates that the following are not subject to customs duties: printed material; objects and materials from the field of culture imported on the basis of international agreements; goods that are not produced in the Republic of Macedonia, are used for non-profitable cultural activity, and are not intended for sale purposes; objects imported by museums, galleries and the National and University Library that are intended for their activities; objects exhibited on fairs and exhibitions; objects intended for cultural and art events and filmmaking; works of art imported by the artists as their own work; awards and other objects received on foreign exhibitions, performances, etc., and goods received from foreign donors. The above-stated customs and tax measures, however, do not provide enough privileges and stimulations to the culture. Although it can be recognized that there is a legal basis in the Republic of Macedonia for tax stimulation of sponsorships for the implementation of projects and programmes in the field of culture, and that sponsors are partly relieved from the profit tax depending on the funds invested in culture, in practice the investments in culture are unfortunately still quite insignificant.  The Improvement of Skills for Artists and Cultural Operators 
The enhancement of skills of artists and cultural operators is performed through programmes offered by public institutions, but also through a special open competition of the Ministry of Culture for supporting the professional enhancement of skills of scarce professions and young talents: post-graduate studies and specialisations in the field of culture for talented young artists; scarce artistic and special profession cadres in culture that study abroad, in universities and enrolled in post-graduate studies that are not present in the educational system of our country; scarce professions in the field of management, promotion, education, and communications in the domain of culture. International cultural cooperation 
The Ministry of Culture leads an active international cultural cooperation and is integrated into the most important international governmental and non-governmental organisations that operate in the field of culture. The Republic of Macedonia is active in multilateral cooperation, is a member of UNESCO, is a member of many specialised organisations of international and regional nature, is an associate member of the Intergovernmental Agency for Francophony, and so on. With the country’s membership in the Council of Europe, conditions were created for our participation in cultural programmes within the domain of the Council of Europe, as well as within the framework of the Central European Initiative. The Ministry of Culture, in cooperation with UNESCO, organised the Regional Forum on the subject “Dialogue Between Civilisations,” which is one of the latest significant activities of the UNESCO National Commission. The Republic of Macedonia has signed 8 agreements on cooperation in the field of education, culture, and science; 6 agreements on cultural cooperation; 5 programmes of cultural cooperation; 3 treaties; 2 memoranda and; 1 protocol on cultural cooperation. The Ministry of Culture supports the regular activity and international cooperation of cultural institutions, non-governmental organisations, and individuals who are members of international organisations and associations, such as ICOMOS, ICOM, ICCROM, ITI, IFLA, EBLIDA, FIAF, EURIMAGES, FIPRESCI, AICA, IOF, PEN, WIPO etc., as well as the participation of experts at international conferences and meetings abroad. According to the priorities established with the National Programme for Culture for the Period 2004-2008, see 20_Annex_02, the Ministry of Culture will continue to stimulate and strengthen bilateral and regional cultural cooperation, as well as the programmes and projects of UNESCO, Council of Europe, European Union, and other international organisations and associations in the field of culture. 2. What, if any, are the support programmes in the field of literary creation and translation? 
According to the Law on Culture - Consolidated Text (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 66/03), publishing activity means publishing of publications with artistic, scientific and educational content, on paper or in electronic form, in significant number of copies, multiplied by printing, replication, copying or otherwise, if they are intended for public use. Funds for financing programmes and projects from the field of literary creation and translation that are of national interest are provided from the budget of the Republic of Macedonia. The Ministry of Culture, for the purpose of achieving national cultural interests, announces public competitions for programmes and projects of national interest during the ongoing year for the following year, within the funds determined by the Budget. Upon a proposal of the committees and the external associates responsible for the preparation of the annual programme, and in accordance with the strategy and priorities determined in the National Programme for Culture for the Period 2004-2008, see 20_Annex_02, the Minister of Culture adopts an Annual Programme for Achieving National Cultural Interests, which is published in the public informative media. The National Programme for Culture for the Period 2004-2008, has established priorities in publishing and literature, and those are, above all, the support of major editions of fundamental cultural importance for the Republic of Macedonia, the publication of the Monolingual Dictionary and bilingual dictionaries in the languages of all communities and in the languages of the nations of the Balkans, translations of the Macedonian literature and the literature in the languages of the communities into world languages, and translations of world literature into the Macedonian language and the languages of the communities. Publications of national interest that are financed within the framework of the publishing programme, and that take into account the aforementioned priorities are: monographs, professional literature for research, poetry, translations from classical languages, critiques, essays, fiction, and others. Special attention is paid to domestic authors, to translations of works published in the Macedonian language and the languages of the communities in the Republic of Macedonia into world languages – which are important for the affirmation of the culture of our country – and to initial editions of young authors. Electronic publishing, programmes of associations in this area, and magazines are also supported by this programme. The financing of literary creation is based on preliminary criteria set by the Rulebook on Financing Programmes or Projects for Separate Activities in Culture (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 61/04), adopted by the Minister of Culture. Every year, special open competitions are implemented for the purchase of published products that were not financially supported by the Ministry of Culture (usually two competitions). The purchased copies are also intended for the enrichment of the library book collection. Between 10 and 100 copies of a book are bought, depending on its price. The Annual Programme for Achieving National Cultural Interests also supports prominent manifestations of international character, such as: the Struga Poetry Evenings, the Seminar on the Macedonian Language, Literature and Culture, the Seminar of Literary Translators, the PEN Conference, and other prominent manifestations. 3. What, if any, are the support programmes in the field of cultural heritage? 
The Republic of Macedonia has a rich cultural heritage from all historical periods. On the territory of the country, 11.364 objects belonging to immovable cultural heritage (archaeological sites, churches, monasteries etc.) and 319.106 museum objects (archaeological objects, icons, medieval manuscripts etc) have been recorded. According to the Law on Culture - Consolidated text (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 66/03) and the strategy and priorities determined in the National Programme for Culture for the Period 2004-2008, see 20_Annex_02, the Ministry of Culture also finances the “Programme on Protection of the Cultural Heritage,” within the framework of the “Annual Programme for Achieving National Cultural Interests” and on the basis of programmes and projects previously obtained in an open competition.  The finances within this programme are primarily allocated to the programmes of the institutions for protection of the cultural heritage, i.e. institutes for the protection of cultural monuments which, according to the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage (“Official Gazette of the RM” Nos. 20/04 and 71/04), should be transformed into preservation centres as institutions competent for the immovable cultural heritage; the museum programmes, the programmes of libraries, and the programmes of the Cinematheque of the Republic of Macedonia being institutions competent for the movable cultural heritage. The Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage for the first time also regulates the protection of the immaterial cultural heritage, i.e. the spiritual cultural heritage. Most of the funds of the Programme for the Protection of the Cultural Heritage are allocated for the preservation and restoration function of these institutions, primarily for preservation of archaeological sites, architecture, fresco-mural painting, icons, iconostasis, paintings, and other. A considerable amount of the funds is also allocated for the preventive protection of sacral and profane objects. Certain other functions are also financially supported, such as the inspection of the conditions of cultural monuments, the maintenance of records, the valorisation, re-valorisation, and preparation of project documentation.   In spite of the efforts invested, however, the Macedonian cultural heritage is not protected to a satisfactory extent, one of the essential reasons for this situation being the limited financial resources. As a consequence, out of the total number of physical interventions on registered objects, the regular preservation procedure has been fully completed on very few cultural monuments. With regards to the resources for financing the monument fund from other sources, it can be stated that donations from individuals are still very modest and rare. In recent years, however, owing to the support of foreign foundations and investments of foreign capital in joint research (especially in the museum activity), certain positive preliminary results are noticeable. Special attention is paid to the protection of Ohrid and its surroundings, which figure on the UNESCO list of the world heritage thanks to their cultural and natural wealth.  Considering the importance of the protection of cultural heritage, one of the special priorities set by the National Programme for Culture for the Period 2004-2008, see 20_Annex_02, is the preparation and adoption of a long-term strategy for the protection of the cultural heritage by all competent state bodies and professional (specialized) institutions. 
4. What legal regime applies to book pricing? Are there any fixed price regulations? 
Until the year of 1995, when the privatisation of all state-owned publishing companies was allowed, publishing companies enjoyed the status of state enterprises, receiving regular financial support from the state for the publishing division, and even for salaries. The emergence of many new publishers was a characteristic of the post-privatisation period, when the number of legal entities registered for performing publishing activity reached around 300. As a consequence, the funds allocated for publishing were increased, both in the Macedonian language and in the languages of the communities, namely Albanian, Turkish, Vlach and Roma. Prices of books in the Republic of Macedonia are formed freely on the market, meaning that there are no special regulations on pricing. The prices of books in the Republic of Macedonia are rather high when the standard of living of the citizens as well as their purchasing power are taken into account. This situation is a result of the small market, due to which the publishers print the editions in small print runs, which again raises the prices of books. With the support from the Ministry of Culture, on average around 250 to 300 publications are published per year, while the total number of publications which were published in the Republic of Macedonia in 2003 was 1106. At the same time, more and more books are exhibited on international fairs. The Law on Value Added Tax ("Official Gazette of the RM" Nos. 44/99, 59/99, 86/99, 11/00, 8/01, 21/03 and 19/04) stipulates that the turnover and the import of publications (books, brochures and similar printed material; newspapers and other periodical publications; children picture-books; sketching and drawing books for children, as well as cartography products of any kind, with the exception of publications which are intended mostly for advertising purposes and publications of pornographic content) are charged with preferential tax rate of 5% instead of the general rate of 19%. Within the framework of the Annual Programme for Achieving National Cultural Interests, in accordance with the strategy and priorities determined in the National Programme for Culture for the Period 2004-2008, see 20_Annex_02, and based on an announced open competition, the Ministry of Culture supports projects in the field of publishing activity for the publication of books and magazines, and at the same time stimulates the purchase of books, which also increases the library book collection. Books are purchased at a retail and not at a beneficial price, in the amount of around 10 to 100 copies of each separate title.  In addition, the Ministry of Culture finances the purchase of books for libraries, both national and local, which enriches the library book collection of these institutions and ensures citizens access to books. 5. What legal regime applies to the sale and movement of cultural goods? 
According to the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage (“Official Gazette of the RM” Nos. 20/04 and 71/04), both immovable and movable cultural heritage can be subject to the right of ownership.  In that sense, cultural heritage may be owned by: the state; local self-government units and/or; other legal entities or natural persons (Article 10, Paragraphs 1 and 2). According to Article 242 of the Law on Property and Other Real Rights (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 18/01), foreign legal and natural entities have the same rights as domestic entities in terms of acquiring ownership rights to movable goods. For that category of entities (foreign) there are no special limitations regarding the acquisition of ownership rights over movable cultural heritage or other protected movable goods.  With regards to the immovable cultural heritage and to other protected immovable heritage, as well as for other categories of immovable goods, the acquisition of ownership rights by foreign legal and natural entities is conditioned by reciprocity (Article 243). According to Article 10, Paragraph 3, of the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage, cultural heritage or goods that are reasonably believed to be cultural heritage that are found on land or in water, regardless as to whether already extracted or not, are considered to be in state ownership. The following is also considered to be in state ownership:   movable cultural heritage that is abandoned by the owner;   immovable cultural heritage the right to which has been relinquished by the owner in an unquestionable manner (by statement);   cultural heritage of an unknown owner, for a period of 10 years (for immovable goods) or 3 years (for movable goods), from the day when the decision on appointing a custodian of that property was brought. Article 51 of Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage imposes a general prohibition on the transfer of ownership over a state cultural heritage of exceptional importance. Any violation of this Article is a criminal offence, punishable according to Article 266-a of the Criminal Code, for which an imprisonment between one and five years is possible. In this case, the following are considered incriminating activities: selling, donating and the permanent ownership transfer in any other way of the subject category of goods. In addition, the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage (Article 50) imposes other general prohibitions, in particular:   a prohibition on gaining possession of excavated objects or other found objects which represent a cultural heritage or a good under temporary protection;   a prohibition on purchasing, pledging, acquiring by other means, hiding or the dealership of an object which represents cultural heritage or a good under temporary protection, known to have been attained by a punishable act;   a prohibition on illegal gaining possession of another person's object which represents  cultural heritage or a good under temporary protection, entrusted (to a person) to look after;   a prohibition on the usurpation of another person's cultural heritage or other protected immovable good. Consequently, violations of the aforementioned general prohibitions are incriminating and punishable according to the Criminal Code. Those criminal acts are: usurpation (Article 225), severe theft (Article 236, Paragraph 3), embezzlement (Article 239, Paragraph 4), damage to objects owned by other persons (Article 243, Paragraph 2), covering up (Article 261, Paragraph 3) and usurpation (Article 265). Article 140 of the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage stipulates and regulates the first purchaser right relating to a protected good. This right is bestowed to Republic of Macedonia by the Administration for the Protection of Cultural Heritage. This right can be exercised within 30 days from the day of submission of a written offer. This right is also applies in the case of sale by force. The exercise of the first purchaser right is described in more detail in Article 141 of the Law, which stipulates that the Republic of Macedonia has the right to submit a lawsuit and to request cancellation of the purchase agreement if the first purchaser right was not observed. The lawsuit can be submitted within 90 days, and no later than 5 years after the day of the conclusion of a purchase contract, provided that an amount of money equal to the real price is deposited. The key elements of the protection regime in regards to the import, export and carrying abroad have already been stated in Chapter 1: FREE MOVEMENT OF GOODS (for more details please see 01_IV_B_4). Chapter 25: CUSTOMS UNION (25_II_16), refers to and explains an Article of the Customs Administration Law that authorises the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia to perform control of the export, import and transit of goods eligible for measures for the protection of cultural goods. Article 95 of the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage regulates the issue of exchange and cession (renunciation) of protected movable goods.  In that context, the stated provisions stipulate a possibility for the exchange or temporary or permanent cession of a movable cultural heritage and any other protected movable property for the purposes of the completion of collections or provision of efficient protection and better presentation. In such cases, the exchange or cession can be performed only upon approval of the Administration for Protection of Cultural Heritage, with the exception of the archive fund. For the archive fund, according to Article 17 of the Law on the National Archives Material (“Official Gazette of the SRM” No. 36/90 and “Official Gazette of the RM” No. 36/95), the approval for exchange or for cession is granted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  With regards to the archive fund, exchange and cession can be performed only with related institutions in the country or abroad, while with regards to other types of protected goods – with public institutions for protection and other holders of public and private collections in the country or abroad. Exchange and cession can be performed only with regards to certain pieces of protected goods, in cases explicitly listed in Article 95, Paragraph 2, of the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage: if they are not proclaimed as cultural heritage of special importance; if they belong to the same series, if they are of the same or similar type, and if there is a large number of them; if there are no other limitations stipulated by this Law. The Law also stipulates an obligation for keeping records of requests and offers relating to exchange and cession, into which only an offer for a protected good acquired by legal means can be entered. The offer for exchange and cession is accompanied by a complete technical and legal documentation on the offered good. Article 92 of the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage regulates the question of origin verification of the good that is subject to purchase or to other means of acquisition. Suspicious offers are subject to special observation, and the public books on movable cultural heritage can enlist only goods of a verified origin for which no suspicion exists that they could originate from illegal or unsupervised excavations, theft, illegal export or import or other illegal activities. In addition, the same Law regulates the issue of control over antiquity trade (Article 94). Namely, antiquity traders are obligated to maintain a register on the origin of goods, of conforming structure, and to issue orderly documents of sale. In a special section (Section 7), the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage regulates the issue of protection of the cultural heritage from illegal acts, i.e. the security protection of the cultural heritage (Articles 102 – 105). These provisions stipulate preventive measures and measures of counteraction (Article 102), as well as adoption of special plans for security protection (Article 104). At the same time, adoption of a National Action Plan on the prevention of crime against cultural heritage is envisaged on a national level. That plan is adopted by the Government, upon a proposal of the National Cultural Heritage Council (Article 103). Besides other competent bodies, the Administration for Protection of Cultural Heritage performs security protection activities relating to the cultural heritage, through authorised officials for safety of the cultural heritage who are, organised in a special organisational unit. These officials have special authorisations (Article 105). 6. What legal regime applies to the preservation of cultural heritage? 
The regime of protection and conservation of the cultural heritage is established by Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage (“Official Gazette of the RM” Nos. 20/04 and 71/04) and by special laws on particular types of cultural goods: the Law on National Archives Material (“Official Gazette of the SRM” No. 36/90 and “Official Gazette of the RM” No. 36/95), the Law on Museums (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 66/04), and the Law on Libraries (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 66/04). The protection of cultural heritage in the Republic of Macedonia is based on the following key determinations (essential elements of protection):   the cultural heritage is of fundamental value to the Republic of Macedonia and is protected under all circumstances;   the protection of cultural heritage is of public interest and its performance is mandatory on the entire territory of the country;   cultural heritage is protected according to its value, importance and degree of endangerment, regardless of the time, place and manner of its creation or by whom it was created and in whose ownership or control it is, and regardless of its secular or religious nature, which creed belongs to, or whether it is registered or not;   by enlisting, proclaiming or other means of applying protection, registration and labelling of cultural heritage, the form of ownership or the owner cannot be changed;   immovable properties are protected together with their immediate surroundings, through the establishment contact zones;   cultural heritage is used according to its nature and purpose and in accordance with the purposes of protection; immovable cultural heritage is used for the active life inside it and as a factor of sustainable development (Article 5). According to Article 6 of the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage, the protection of cultural heritage is performed especially by means of:   executing administrative and professional operations that are important for realizing public functions and the rights and obligations of citizens and legal entities with regards to the cultural heritage;   organising a network of specialised institutions, advisory and coordination bodies, on a national and on a local level;   establishing a National Strategy on the Protection of Cultural Heritage and its efficient implementation;   developing protection awareness;   setting up and promoting a compatible National Information System on cultural heritage;  stimulating non-governmental organisations and private initiatives in this area;   the mandatory integration of cultural heritage into the physical and urban plans and into the plans and programmes for the protection of nature and the environment, as well as with the treatment of cultural heritage as a factor of sustainable economic and social development;   efficient risk management to which the movable cultural heritage is exposed; In the system of protection of the cultural heritage of the Republic of Macedonia, subjects of protection have a clearly defined position. Thereby, pursuant to Article 7 of the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage:   the state and its bodies and public services have the main duty and responsibility to realize the protection the cultural heritage;   local self-government units and their bodies and public services are responsible for realizing the protection of cultural heritage within their competencies as determined by law;   owners and other holders of cultural heritage are responsible for the maintenance, safekeeping, cherishing, and proper utilisation of the cultural heritage;   citizens are obligated to respect the cultural heritage and to take care of it. In addition to the previous stipulations, the founding principles of the regime of protection of the cultural heritage established by the aforementioned law imply:   a general prohibition of damage and destruction of cultural heritage and other protected goods (Article 51, Paragraph 1), the violation of which is a criminal offence, punishable according to Article 264 of the Criminal Code;   a general prohibition on the requisition, repression, assault and utilisation of cultural heritage for military purposes (Article 54), incriminated accordingly as a war crime, punishable according to Article 404 of the Criminal Code;   the authorisation of actions of integrity breach in relation to protected goods, in an administrative procedure by the public authorities, with clearly distinguished competencies on that basis;    professional supervision and other forms of professional control over individual phases of processes in the area of cultural heritage protection;   the exercise of special rights and obligations of holders of protected goods;   special restrictions on the rights of holders, based on the regime of protection;   preventive and corrective measures on: the protection of cultural heritage from unlawful acts; protection in the case of armed conflict or natural disasters; and protection from the consequences of pollution and improvement of the quality of the environment in protected areas;  inspection supervision;   sanctions for offences against the cultural heritage (a total of 66 offences). Archaeological excavations and research are under the regime of licences (Article 55). They are issued to certain entities (legal or natural) that have the right to perform such activities (Article 56), if they meet the stipulated conditions (Article 58). Foreign citizens may also be holders of licences for archaeological excavation, under certain conditions, and exceptionally independent foreign i.e. international archaeological missions may be allowed (Article 57). Special obligations are determined for licence holders during the research (Article 59). The law also warrants the right of scientific ownership, which gives priority to the scientific processing of findings and to the publishing of research results, within three years of the conclusion of research. In addition, the use of metal-detectors and other detection equipment during archaeological research is under the regime of permits (Article 63). That permit, as well as the licence for archaeological research, is issued by the Administration for the Protection of Cultural Heritage within the Ministry of Culture. The Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage also regulates the matter of accidental discoveries, especially the obligations of the accidental discoverers (Article 65), the identification of accidental discoveries (Article 66), the archaeological supervision (Article 67), and the right to a reward for an accidental discovery (Article 68). With regards to the integrated protection of the cultural heritage, the following key elements of the protection regime have been established:   a balanced relation between physical and urban plans on the one side and acts on protection of the cultural heritage on the other side (Article 70);   the establishment, verification and approval of protection and conservation foundations, regarded as a compulsory basis for plans (Article 71);   the obligation to harmonise the planned solutions (Article 72);   the creation of special urban projects for protected goods (article 73);   the determination of protection and conservation conditions (Article 74);   the issue of a protection-conservation consent for projects and other technical documentation relating to immovable cultural heritage of exceptional importance, as well as an opinion on projects for other protected goods (Article 75);   the placement of certain specific actions and situations under an authorisation regime, such as: relocation (Article 76), abandonment (Article 77) and demolition of protected goods (Article 78), but also research and exploitation of raw minerals on locations where protected goods are present and in their immediate surroundings (Article 80). With regards to conservation and restoration, i.e. immediate protection of cultural heritage, the established regime of protection means:   authorisation of conservation research (Article 82);   expert control over conservation projects (Article 86);   authorisation of conservation-restoration works through issuing a conservation permit (Article 87);   performing conservation supervision (Article 89);   halting the operations and withdrawal of the conservation permit in certain cases (Article 90);   expert control (i.e. technical reception) over performed operations (Article 91); The prescribed rights and duties of holders of protected goods, as well as the restrictions on their rights are an integral part of the protection regime (i.e. preservation of the cultural heritage). The Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage stipulates the following special rights of the holders of protected goods:   the right to professional assistance (Article 123);   the right to compensation of exceptional costs for keeping, maintenance, and implementation of warranted protective measures (Article 124);   the right to fair compensation due to restrictions of the protection regime (Article 125);   the right to the public presentation of private collections (Article 126);   the right to tax privileges and other privileges (Article 127);   the right of deposition of protected movable property (Article 128). The same Law imposes the following duties onto the holders of protected goods:   reporting the goods and reporting every legal and physical change (Article 129);   the safekeeping, maintenance, and implementation of the warranted protective measures (Article 130);   the return of the invested public assets in the case of an ownership transfer of the protected good (Article 131);   allowing research and the implementation of protective measures (Article 132);   cession of protected goods for cultural manifestations (Article 133);   making the protected goods available to the public, in a special manner (Article 134), including ensuring accessibility for the disabled persons (Article 114);   notifying the new holder about the status and protection regime of the protected good (Article 135). The stipulated legal regime also comprises the following special restrictions on the rights of holders:   appointing a custodian of the protected good (Article 136);   transfer of movable goods for the purpose of protection (Article 137);   designating the means and the purpose of utilisation of the protected good in special cases (Article 138);   restoring the previous condition (Article 139);   the right to mortgage (Article 142);   expropriation (Article 143). In addition to the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage, the Law on Museums, and the Law on Libraries also regulate in detail the protection of museum and library goods. The Law on Museums stipulates, among other things, the mandatory insurance of public museum items. The insurance funds are provided by the founder, and the insurance is concluded with an insurance company (Article 30). This law also stipulates the manner of insurance, i.e. by issuing a Government guarantee for foreign exhibits and exhibitions of exceptional value, if the condition for their presentation is a previously concluded insurance contract or if the insurance costs with the insurance companies are exceptionally high, and the owner concurs to accept the Government guarantee as a form of insurance (Article 32). Similar legal solutions regarding the library goods are contained in the new Law on Libraries. At the same time, however, according to both laws, the abovementioned form of insurance is not applicable to exhibits and exhibitions organised for commercial purposes. 7. What legal regime applies to the cession of rights (exclusive or otherwise) to exploit aspects of cultural heritage (e.g. digitisation of art collections)? 
One of the fundamental purposes of the protection of cultural heritage, as in accordance with its purpose and significance, is to satisfy the cultural, scientific, educational, aesthetic and other needs of the citizens and the society, according to Article 4, Paragraph 1 of the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 20/04 and 71/04). According to the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage, performing business activity with protected goods is under the regime of prior approval (Article 121). The approval is issued by the Administration for the Protection of Cultural Heritage. Approval is also needed in the case of change of activity, i.e. an alteration of the purpose of the business premises. The name, form or other recognisable features of a protected good may be used for advertising purposes, as an element of a logo and for manufacturing souvenirs or other items for commercial purposes, in a manner fitting to the purpose or significance of the good, on the basis of a prior consent by the Administration for the Protection of Cultural Heritage. The Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage stipulates, among other things, the specific aspects in connection to the utilisation of state cultural heritage by a concession (Articles 117 – 120). Thus, an immovable cultural heritage of exceptional importance in state ownership, with the exception of exempted goods, can be subject to a concession if it is or can be used for: housing; performing catering, tourist, trade, artisan or other service activity; performing a genuine or similar production activity; performing activities in the fields of education, science, informing, healthcare, sport, recreation and culture, with the exception of  activities for the protection of the cultural heritage (Article 117, Paragraph 1). The following cannot be subject to a concession: reserved archaeological zones and other unexplored or insufficiently explored archaeological sites; memorial structures, landmarks and places connected to important events or persons; spiritual or other places connected to customs, beliefs or special traditions; facilities intended for the safekeeping and the exhibition of movable cultural heritage (museums, galleries, buildings of archives, libraries etc.), as well as monument centres (Article 117, Paragraph 2). Any domestic or foreign legal or natural entity that meets the conditions stipulated by Article 118, Paragraph 1, of the Law may become a concessionaire. A concession is granted for a period of 10 years for production activity and 15 years for service activity, with the possibility of extending the period for another 5 years. Supervision over the implementation of the concession agreement is performed by the Ministry of Culture, through a special Board, which includes one representative from the municipality where the concessioned good is located and from the non-governmental organisation from the cultural heritage protection area (Article 120). The Concessionaire has the status of a holder of cultural heritage, with rights and duties stipulated by the Law and the concession agreement (Article 118, Paragraph 2). For matters not regulated by the Law on Protection of the Cultural Heritage, provisions of the Concessions Law ("Official Gazette of the RM" No. 25/02) apply. The documentation on the cultural heritage as well as the cultural heritage itself, are available to the public (Article 114). The documentation on the cultural heritage and its protection is available for the use of official, scientific and educational purposes, for publishing, and for other justified reasons. As a rule, only copies of the documentation are given for utilisation purposes, while the original documentation can be obtained solely in exceptional cases, under the condition that the requesting party makes and pays for a protective recording, and under other conditions stipulated by the relevant secondary legislation (Article 116). The methods of keeping documentation on the cultural heritage, for the purpose of its digitalisation, i.e. keeping the documentation in electronic form, among other things, will be regulated by a special rulebook to be adopted by the Minister of Culture. For the time being, keeping documentation in electronic form is not mandatory, and because of insufficient material capacities, it is not practiced in the institutes for the protection of the cultural monuments as yet. The special laws, the Law on National Archives Material (“Official Gazette of the SRM” No. 36/90 and “Official Gazette of the RM” No. 36/95), the Law on Museums (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 66/04) and the Law on Libraries (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 66/04), also regulate the issue of the utilisation of respective types of cultural heritage, among other things. Thus, the Law on Museums regulates the issue of producing museum and commercial copies of museum items. A museum copy may be produced only by the competent museum, when required for security reasons, if the conditions for keeping the museum item on exhibition display are unsatisfactory or if the item is given to another museum, i.e. when a need for exhibition thereof in another museum arises. No more than five museum copies of one museum item can be produced, and for each of these copies a certificate is issued. The museum copy cannot be used for commercial purposes (Article 27). Commercial copies can be produced by legal or natural persons, upon prior consent from the museum, in a manner and under conditions defined by the museum. A commercial copy is produced in dimensions different from those of the museum item. At the same time, museum items and their documentation can be reproduced (on photographs, on a computer or by other means) under the same conditions set for producing commercial copies (Article 28). In case of the production of merchandise, labels or designs that contain photographs or graphical representation of the museum item, however, a consent by the Administration for the Protection of the Cultural Heritage is also required (Article 29). According to the Law on Libraries, the library material can be reproduced in library copies for non-commercial purposes, in accordance with the regulations on copyright and related rights (Article 28). However, if a library good is in question, as a type of movable cultural heritage, for the purpose of its conservation and presentation, this Law envisages the possibility of copying the library good in no more than 3 copies (Article 29). According to the Law on National Archives Material, the archive fund is available for use after the expiration of the defined period, and at the latest after 20 years from its creation, except in certain exceptional cases when that period may not be longer than 150 years (Article 21). An archive item may be used only exceptionally, if it was not reproduced or if such is the requirement of the scientific method (Article 22). The utilisation of the archive material does not require any compensation, except in cases when special services are necessary (photocopying, microfilming, excerpts, transcripts etc.). 
8. What systems are in place as regards statistics pertaining to the cultural sector? 
General Information In the Statistical Research Programme (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 69/03), besides the State Statistical Office as the key institution, other ministries and institutions are also involved. Together with the State Statistical Office, they constitute the system of official statistics. The State Statistical Office is sole the provider of official statistical data in the field of culture. In some cases, however, especially when the subject of observation is not within the scope of the official data of the State Statistical Office, administrative or other research with elements of statistical approach is occasionally performed by: the Ministry of Culture (keeping records for its own purposes and within its competencies), certain institutions which perform activity in the field of culture, as well as commercial entities performing research activities. The State Statistical Office as the Key Provider of the Statistics in the Cultural Sector 
The main system of collecting, processing and publishing statistical data from the area of culture is provided by the State Statistical Office, in accordance with the Law on State Statistics (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 54/97) and the Statistical Research Programme. Data on the cultural (and audio-visual) sector are collected by a unit operating within the Social Statistics Sector. The cultural aspect in the realization of these activities is surveyed by the system institutions carrying out these activities: theatres, philharmonic orchestras, orchestras, libraries, museums, archives, commercial entities performing publishing activity, commercial entities – organisers of art exhibitions and fine arts colonies, workers educational centres, cultural centres, memorial centres, scout centres, associations of citizens etc. The field of culture and the audio-visual sector cover a wide range of activities envisaged in the National Activity Classification, harmonised with and comparable to the Classification NACE Rev.1, a statistical standard of the European Union. The implementation periods relating to the culture statistics vary for different cultural activities: the data on the activity of art and culture societies are collected every five years; the data on the activities of libraries, archives, museums, workers educational centres and other cultural centres on a three-year basis; and the data on the remaining cultural (and audio-visual) activities – theatre, fine arts, publishing, filmmaking and broadcasting – are compiled annually. Most of the data is available both on the national level and on the level of the smallest territorial unit – the municipality (NUTS 5). Within the State Statistical Office there is a Unit for the Standard of Living, which regularly performs a survey on household consumption, thus enabling the national monitoring of data relating to funds spent on culture by households and by individuals. Statistics from the area of the cultural sector can be found in bilingual (Macedonian-English) publications of the State Statistical Office, such as:   statistical briefs (quick and brief statistical information);   statistical reviews (where more detailed results of specific research or data on culture in general are published);   “Macedonia in Numbers” – a paperback edition;   “Statistical Yearbook” (comprehensive publication which contains the data and a brief methodology explanation of every research conducted by the State Statistical Office);   Other special publications. 