III. INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND ADMINISTRATIVE CAPACITY 

1. Please provide a brief description of the authorities responsible for the programming and implementation of EU and other assistance in your country. The description should also include a brief overview of tasks and responsibilities for each authority. 
Since gaining of independence, the Republic of Macedonia has been a beneficiary of the donors’ assistance. The intensive donor activity in recent years has created a need for building a system which would provide long-term, centralized, governmental, efficient, rational and sustaining coordination, as well as to provide:   Improvement of assistance programming and appropriate defining of donor’s policy (systematic evaluation of priorities; global and departmental strategic planning; defining of political directions for efficient and planned allocation of foreign assistance; formulating projects, their successful and timely realisation; and their monitoring);   Improvement of domestic and foreign irredeemable assistance coordination (through intensifying liaisons and contacts between the line ministries, the Government and the donors, and correct channelling of foreign assistance according to the Government priorities);   More harmonised and coordinated appearance in front of the donors, which ensures avoiding discrepancies in presenting the strategy, the policy and its implementation dynamics. The National System for Coordination proved to be a need and an expression of the country’s maturity to represent itself in front of the donors and the international financial institutions with unified attitudes towards the country’s policy, strategy and its priorities. At the same time, the National System for Coordination is also necessary for the purpose of synchronising the requests and avoiding duplicating, overlapping or repeating the assistance. That is the only way for achieving maximum effects via correct channelling of the foreign and domestic resources, and achieving of the expected results in a given time frame. The experience from the several years’ functioning of the National System for Coordination of Foreign Assistance leads to an ascertainment that a successful coordination is not possible without an active participation of the country’s authorities – the Government of the Republic of Macedonia – and the donors, as well as a highest level of bilateral or multilateral understanding between them. The National System for Coordination of Foreign Assistance (the organizational structure of the National System for Coordination of Foreign Assistance is given as a supplement at the end of the answer) consists of five levels with separate competencies on every level, or more precisely: I.  The Government of the Republic of Macedonia - President  Determines the strategies, creates the policy, determines and gives guidelines via different departmental documents for representing in front of the donors, and decides on issues of national importance. II. National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance – Deputy President  With a decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, one National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance (NCFA) is appointed and functions as a deputy of the President of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, authorised for coordinating the European integration process.   The main tasks of the NCFA is responsibility of the coordination, synchronisation and consistency of the whole assistance granted to the Republic of Macedonia on all bases; to presides with the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers; to take care of the implementation of the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers’ and the Government decisions; to establish direct contact with the donor‘s main offices; to present the previously harmonised standpoints of the Committee, i.e. the Government.  
Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers (FACCM) 
The Deputy President of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in the same time National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance, is authorised for coordination of the European integration process, and presides with the Committee. The Committee consists of:    The Deputy of the President of the Government of Republic of Macedonia responsible for the implementation of the Framework Agreement.   The Minister of Finance;   The Minister of Foreign Affairs;    The Minister of Economy; the Minister of Internal Affairs; and    The Minister of Education and Science.  The ministers competent for certain Sectors, who are not members of the FACCM are invited to participate in the Committee's work, depending on the theme or area discussed. This structure of FACCM is conditioned by the contacts of its members with some of the donors (e.g. the Minister of Finance is responsible for negotiations with the international financial institutions, and with some of the bilateral donors, while the Minister of Foreign Affairs is responsible for contact with the larger number of bilateral donors, etc.)        The Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers provides political and strategic guidelines for foreign assistance, taking into consideration the established departmental policies and priorities, and takes care of the inter-departmental assistance coordination. III. FACCM’s Coordinative Technical Group   The Coordinative Technical Group consists of the officially nominated representatives of the ministers which are members of the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers. The Coordinative Technical Group is responsible for:   The technical preparation of the contents which would be a part of the Agenda of the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers’ sessions.   The survey of projects from the viewpoint of duplication with similar, already financed projects or announced by different donors;   Harmonisation of the orientation at an operative and technical level;   Preparation of proposals for conclusions, recommendations and decisions for the needs of the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers; and   Monitoring of the realisation of the adopted conclusions, recommendations and decisions of the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers. Department of Foreign Assistance Coordination within the Sector for European Integration Operational service of the National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance and the permanent Secretariat of the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers, as well as a contact for transfer of data, information and proposals between donors' initiatives and the needs and priorities of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia which are defined by the Committee of Ministers, and directly connected with the Ministry of Finance. The Department manages the Central Database of the Government of Republic of Macedonia (CDAD). IV. Ministry of FinanceThe Ministry of Finance carries out:   The obligatory registration and keeping records (contact with the Central Database of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia) of all the scheduled and harmonised projects ready for implementation, prior to their realisation;   Ensuring complementariness with the budget of the Republic of Macedonia, and implementing procedures relating to import, customs clearance, VAT, etc.   Monitoring and supervision of the usage of all funds received as assistance for the Republic of Macedonia, and provides implementation of the public procurement procedures established by law. V.  Project implementation Is done by the ministries, other state institutions, local self-government, non-governmental organisations, and other assistances’ beneficiaries who coordinate the project implementation under their competencies. An inseparable and, at the same time, very important instrument of foreign assistance coordination is the Central Donor Assistance Database (CDAD) of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  The Central Database of the Government of Republic of Macedonia for foreign assistance enables detailed project analysis, monitoring the project implementation dynamics with a clear overview of the sectors involved with the intervention on bilateral and multilateral basis, through collection of complete and updated data on those activities, and at the same time providing their broad accessibility.  CDAD enables avoiding assistance overlapping, a clearer overview of the assistance allocation priority sectors, and avoiding assistance channelling into non-productive sectors. The database represents a basis for creating policies, reaching decisions, negotiations with the donors and donor’s conferences.  Prior to starting the procedures for VAT return and customs exemption, all the projects implemented in the Republic of Macedonia are registered within the Central Database for Foreign Assistance of the Government of Republic of Macedonia.   It should be pointed out that in the recent years, taking into consideration the clearly expressed strategic determination of the Government of Republic of Macedonia for full membership in the European Union, the trend of intensive donors' activity moves in the direction of assistance in the priorities of the country in the process of European integration. For this purpose, the Government of Republic of Macedonia makes efforts for coordinating foreign assistance through efficient functioning of the National System for Coordination of Foreign Assistance. The assistance used by the Republic of Macedonia may be reviewed by the type of donors (bilateral, multilateral, international financial institutions) and the types of assistance which a particular department gets from the donors.   The European Union has been the biggest multilateral donor of the Republic of Macedonia since gaining independence. The European Union assistance is implemented through the financial instruments PHARE (national and horizontal, multi-user programmes), OBNOVA and CARDS (national and regional programmes) with the aim to help implementing the priorities in the European integration process.  Apart from these, the country has also used macro financial help and budgetary support; the refugee crisis aid; loans from the European Investment Bank; assistance via the rapid reaction mechanism for overcoming the consequences of the internal crisis in 2001. The Republic of Macedonia has for a longer period of time been participating in the European Commission programmes for implementing projects through the TEMPUS and CAFAO offices, and INTERREG A and B. After the Thessalonica Summit in 2003, the European Union has expanded the possibilities for using assistance through participation in the work of the EU Programmes, joining the work of the EU Agencies, using of the Twinning mechanism and TAIEX, the New Neighbourhood Programmes, etc.       The activities of the bilateral donors and the international financial institutions are also of great importance, especially pointing out their role and support in the integrative processes in the Republic of Macedonia, through granting irredeemable assistance and favourable loans. Being very important for the successful usage of donors' assistance, the assistance programming and implementation are in the focus of the attention of the National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance (NCFA), and the Sector for European Integration - Department for Foreign Assistance Coordination. Here a special emphasis is put on programming and implementation of EU assistance, as well as on the assistance provided by some bilateral donors. Namely, the Deputy President of the Government of Republic of Macedonia for European integration, the National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance, and the Department for Foreign Assistance Coordination, in cooperation with the relevant ministries and the European Commission, coordinates the process of:   Preparing of strategic documents which are defining the country’s priorities which shall be financially supported in mid-term plans, taking into consideration the priorities of the National Strategy for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union, the European Partnership Action Plan, as well as the National Programme for Legislation Harmonisation. The last of those documents is the CARDS National Strategic Document 2002-2006, on the basis of which the two Biannual Indicative Programmes 2002-2004 and 2005-2006 respectively, have been prepared.     The preparation of the CARDS Annual Action Programmes for the period 2002-2006.    Implementation of the projects of all Annual Action Programmes.   Also, the Deputy President of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia responsible for European integration in the role of a National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance:    Signs the annual financial agreements on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia;   Participates in resolving the problems which occur during the projects implementation. The line ministries and the other state institutions are not only responsible for the preparation of departmental policies, but also for successful programming and implementation of the projects in partnership with the European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR). More precisely, by a joint initiative of the European Commission and the National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance, representatives of the relevant General Directorates of the European Commission are accomplishing mission in the Republic of Macedonia in which all the ministries are involved.  At the same time, the National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance, taking into consideration the priorities in the strategic documents, starts the negotiations with the European Commission until a list of priorities is agreed upon, which is then approved by the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers and by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, and later by the relevant entities in the European Commission. The same procedure is carried out throughout the programming at project level in cooperation with EAR. During project implementation, the ministries are following the European Commission rules for the way of implementing projects, carrying out public procurement procedures, preparing reports in certain project stages, and use the results that have followed from the projects. Finally, the Ministry of Finance provides complementariness with the budget of the Republic of Macedonia and carries out the procedures relating to import, customs clearance, VAT, etc. At the present moment, a partner in the programming and implementing EU assistance at annual level is the European Agency for Reconstruction. The Republic of Macedonia makes and will be making efforts to overtake the package of projects financed by the European Union in December 2006, before the mandate of the European Agency for Reconstruction expires, and from the beginning of 2007 to ensure a complete participation in the new Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance as a country candidate for EU membership.       The coordination of bilateral donors is accomplished via the National System for Coordination of Foreign Assistance. Considering the national priorities, as well as the interest of the bilateral donors for assistance in a certain sector, lists of potential projects are prepared annually, which are later approved by both parties according to the agreed procedures.   The assistance of the international financial organisations, such as the World Bank, the IMF, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Investment Bank, the Development Bank at the Council of Europe, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development, is carried out through cooperation and coordination with the Ministry of Finance. More precisely, the Ministry of Finance participates in the negotiations for granting loans, irredeemable assistance or conclusion of arrangements, while the implementation of assistance from these institutions is carried out through the line ministries.   The regional policy in Republic of Macedonia is in its initial stage of legal and institutional establishment. In the following period there are plans for creating appropriate administrative capacities which, apart from preparing quality projects, will concern themselves with providing national co-financing, will develop capacity for project implementation, and also for monitoring and evaluation.   The coordination at the Government level and between the ministries is a cross cutting issue with the questions 2 and 5 from Chapter 21, section III – Institutional framework and administrative capacity, (see 21_III_2 and 21_III_5).  Chapter 21      Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 