32/57 


























































































































































Government of the Republic of Macedonia President Deputy President of the Government - National coordinator for foreign assistance Coordinative Technical Group of FACCM  - representatives of the ministersGeneral Secretariat/Sector for European Integration -Foreign Assistance Coordination DepartmentCentral Donor Assistance Database of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia - CDAD Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers (FACCM) - A Deputy President of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for coordination of the European integration process and  National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance - presiding with the FACCM - A Deputy of the President of the Government of Republic of Macedonia responsible for the implementation of the Framework Agreement. - The Minister of the Interior  - The Minister of Foreign Affairs  - The Minister of Finance - The Minister of Economy - The Minister of Education and ScienceMinistries Other state institutions Local self-government Other beneficiaries of assistance NGO Ministry of Finance  - Technical - Database -Communication - Registering - Financial effe- VAT, custom- Control - implemen- Strategies - Policies - Priorities - ProgrammesComCoordination cts tation 
CompIII IV 














II 2. What overall staff levels (also breakdown per organisation if available) are involved in programming and implementation of EU assistance in your country? 
The structure of staff involved in the process of programming and implementation of the EU assistance, is the following:   Vice President of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in charge of European integration and a National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance (for more details, please refer to question 1, Chapter 21, section III: Institutional framework and administration capacity (see 21_III_01)).     Sector for European Integration - Department for Foreign Assistance Coordination. One of the competencies of the Sector, apart from the overall coordination of the European integration process, is the foreign assistance coordination, i.e. the coordination of programs’/projects’ implementation. The total number of employees in the Sector for European Integration is 68 (full-time employed, and part-time employed, via contracts or projects), while in the Department for Foreign Assistance Coordination 9 employees are being engaged (for more detail, please refer to question 13, Chapter 30, section C (see 13_C_13)). For the purpose of more efficient foreign assistance coordination, the Sector for European Integration has liaisons with 7 other ministries: the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Local Self-Government, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Interior, and the Ministry of Transport and Communications, with the main aim to maintaining regular contacts with the Sector for European Integration, and assisting in efficient monitoring of the Sector projects' implementation.     A network of liaisons with all the ministries (with the exception of the Ministry of Defence) cooperating with the Sector in data supplying for the Central Database of foreign assistance within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.   A network of sectors/departments for European integration at the ministries’ level. One of the activities of these sectors and departments is the foreign assistance coordination, i.e. the programming and implementation of EU funded projects. The officers in these departments are to enable realisation of the sector’s priorities for European integration through development of actual projects.     The Ministry of Finance is the authority with certain competencies in the EU assistance programming and implementation, especially in the aspect of aligning the EU funds with the national budget. The Ministry of Finance also regulates the manner and procedures for securing finances for VAT refund, and carries out all the other activities regarding the customs and other import taxes relief, pertaining to the donor's assistance.   The competent ministries, the Sector for European Integration, the European Reconstruction Agency, and the Delegation of the European Commission participate in the work of the Administrative Committees formed within the separate projects. Decisions regarding the implementation of the projects are brought by the Committees, and the reports (the initial, the quarterly and the final) prepared by the consultants engaged for the projects, are also considered and approved there.   All the inefficiencies that have been noticed during the programming and implementation of programs or projects will be corrected in the near future, prior to the complete introduction of the Decentralised Implementation System. Namely, the Sector for European Integration and the Ministry of Finance has started negotiations with the European Agency for Reconstruction in November, 2004, for initiating a project within the Annual Action Program 2005 for re-establishment of the Decentralised Implementation System in the next two years. The project is aimed towards creating a complete functionality of the system by the end of 2006, so the Government of the Republic of Macedonia would be able to provide a complete participation in the implementation of the new Instrument for pre-accession assistance by the start of 2007. For that purpose, in the next two years, all the ministries and other state institutions which implement projects should form Implementation Agencies and Project Implementation Units sufficiently staffed with trained personnel, which will be able to work independently for the projects’ needs, according to the EC procedures. The establishment of the (Sector) Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects will have great significance, as well as the National Authorised Officer 33/57 from the Ministry of Finance, which will implement the financial management of projects, simultaneously providing permanent communication of donor’s assistance with the national budget, especially when securing national co-financing is concerned.    
3. Has (Is) training been (being) organised for staff in EU assistance programmes? 
One of the necessary pre-requisites for efficient work with the EU technical assistance and programs, are well trained professional staff in this field. With the acquiring of the PHARE program beneficiary status in 1996, the Republic of Macedonia has started enhancing the capacities of the civil administration for EU technical assistance management and implementation.  With the intensifying of the European integration process, the need for systematic upgrading of the knowledge and skills of the civil servants directly involved with the European integration process has become emerged.   For that purpose, in 2000, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has adopted a “Strategy for EU training of Civil Servants in the process of aligning the Republic of Macedonia with the EU” as basic framework for defining target training groups and training areas. The realisation of the Strategy, transposed in real operating plans and supported by the budget of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the bilateral donors, has started successfully.  One of the priority target groups for training within the Strategy for EU training and the Operational biannual training plans are the civil servants directly involved within the process of coordination of the European integration process and who are at the same time responsible in practice for working with the programming and implementation of the EU assistance.  The Sector for European Integration, being a coordinator of the civil servants’ EU training, has organized 33 trainings in the country for a total of 852 participants, from which 90% are civil servants. In the same period, it has provided participation in several EU seminars and summer schools abroad for 22 civil servants. Apart from the mentioned trainings, provided by the Sector for European Integration, the ministries and the other civil administration bodies have participated in numerous EU trainings through bilateral projects. Since 1996, more than 1.500 civil servants have participated on EU seminars.  The following table lists the trainings carried out with this target group organised by the Sector for European Integration. 
Trainings organised by the Sector for European Integration in the Republic of Macedonia for civil servants - coordinators of the European integration process and the work with EU assistance 
Type of training   Topic of the training  Time table  Number of participants  
Seminar  General EU Training  Mart-June (once a week – 15 lectures), Skopje  12 Seminar  Stabilisation and Association Agreement – Changes and Challenges in the EU Approximation Process  June 6-7, 2001, Skopje  10 Seminar Introduction to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and the European Law December 10-12, 2002, Skopje  23 Seminar  Introduction to EU and the Functioning of the European Institutions  December 19-20, 2002, Skopje  23 Seminar General EU and European Integration Training  March 5-7, 2003 24 Seminar  The Slovenian Experience with the EU Integration Process  April 2-4, 2003, Skopje   94   Seminar  The Experiences of the Central-European Countries with the EU Integration Process and the Use of the Pre-Accession Funds March 19-20, 2004, Skopje  55 Lectures  New Financial Perspective 2007-2013 and the Accessibility of the EU Funds for Social and Economic Development July 9, 2004, Skopje   54 10 Workshop  New  Financial  Perspective  2007-2013  and  July 9-10, 2004, Mavrovo   22 34/57 the Accessibility of the EU Funds for Social and Economic Development 11.  Workshop  Preparing a Manual of EU Funds for Economic and Social Cohesion and the Republic of  Macedonia September 27, 2004, Skopje   24 Participation of civil servants on trainings abroad, provided by the Sector for European Integration.   
Summer School on EU EU Training – 8th Intensive Seminar on EU July  1-21,  2001,  European  College, Brugge, Belgium    Summer School on EU Second Summer School on EU for the South-Eastern European Countries    July 6-19, 2002, Blagoevgrad, Republic of Bulgaria  Summer School on EU Third Summer School on EU for the South-Eastern European Countries   July 6-18, 2003, Blagoevgrad, Republic of Bulgaria   Summer School on EU Fourth Summer School on EU  July  4-16,  2004,  Blagoevgrad,  Republic of Bulgaria   Summer School on EU Intensive Course on EU June 27 – July 17, Brugge, Belgium   Summer School on EU Seventh Summer School, Economic and Social Cohesion: the Challenges for the New EU June 9-23, Limerick, Ireland   
Total number of participants  362 
Intensifying and enhancing the process of EU approximation with gradual opening of new instruments and programmes for support of the European integration process and the preparing of the Republic of Macedonia for membership in the EU, imposes the need for distinctly defined topics of training aiming towards efficient program work.  For that purpose, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, through the Sector for European Integration being the coordinator and implementer of the EU training Strategy, will envisage and provide implementation of appropriate training in this field with the future training plans, and will train a greater number of civil servants and active participants for the work with the pre-accession programs and assistance.   
4. Have the relevant organisations ever prepared human resources or organisational development strategies? 
One of the key objectives of the process of public administration reform initialised in 1999 in the Republic of Macedonia is the development and development of professionally competent and efficient public administration.  The reform of the public administration, with the adoption of the Public Administration Reform Strategy, implemented with an Action Plan for public administration reform through adoption of the basic legislative framework (The Law on Civil Servants – Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 59/2000, 112/2000, 34/2001, 103/2001, 43/2002, 98/2002, 17/2003, 40/2003, 85/2003, 17/2004, 69/2004; The Law on the Government of the Republic Of Macedonia – Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 59/2000, 12/2003; the Law on Organisation and Operation of State Administration Bodies – Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 59/2000, 44/2002; the Law on Local Self Government – Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 5/2002; and others), and the establishment of an institutional structure for managing and implementing of the reform process (Department for Civil Administration Reform, Civil Servants Agency), has made a significant progress in the efforts for establishing a professional civil service. The Law on Civil Servants (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 112/2000) regulates the issues relating to training and professional development of civil servants and the development and promotion of human resources within the civil administration, at a general level.  With this law, the Civil Servants Agency was formed as an autonomous government body carrying out professional, administrative and other matters relating to the status, rights, obligations and responsibilities of the civil servants, and has a horizontal competency for creating, implementing and coordinating the human resources management processes. 35/57 The Civil Servants Agency, pursuant to this law, has also a prescribed competency to coordinate activities regarding the civil servants’ professional development and training (Article 7, Paragraph 2, Item 6), as well as to promote their efficient and effective work (Article 7, Paragraph 2, Item 10).  Chapter III of the Law on Civil Servants - Rights and Obligations of Civil Servants – stipulates that every civil servant has a right and duty for professional development and training in accordance with the needs of the body where they are employed (Article 24, Paragraph 1). The professional development and training of civil servants is implemented on the basis of an annual programme adopted by the body where they are employed, upon a prior opinion given by the Civil Servants Agency (Article 24, Paragraph 2). The secondary legislation also stipulates the obligation of the civil administration bodies to have relevant organisational units for managing human resources within their organisational framework, which, among other things, shall also care about the preparation of annual training programs for the civil servants in the particular institution, and about their implementation.  In these annual programs, the bodies should precisely establish the needs, areas, themes and types of knowledge and skills which should be improved for all the groups and vocations of civil servants.  The Law on Civil Servants has set the minimal general legal framework for regulating the training and the professional development of civil servants, and represents basis for developing a detailed system for civil servants' training, as well as for defining of a national policy on civil servants’ training. For that purpose, in June 2004 the Civil Servants Agency, in close partnership with the other public administration bodies, has started with preparation of a strategic document entitled "The System of Civil Servants' Training in the Republic of Macedonia”. At the moment, consultations about this document have been opened for the implementation of procedures for its verification at the level of a national strategy, between the Agency and the competent entities in the Republic of Macedonia. This means that, in the following period, with its verification as a national strategic document, it will grow into a key and essential instrument in the process of creation of policies for promotion, management and development of human resources in the public administration of the Republic of Macedonia.  The document shall define the national policy on training, establishing the training objectives, its content, the system of coordination of the training activities in the public administration bodies, i.e. the annual training programs relating to establishing the wider strategic objectives.    With the establishment of the National System for coordination of the activities for training and professional development of civil servants, the Civil Servants Agency, pursuant to the legal competencies, will start carrying out its coordinative function regarding this issue. Considering the training coordination competency of the Civil Servants Agency, since its formation it has continually been developing and providing generic training for all civil servants in the Republic of Macedonia. In the context of strengthening the capacities of the civil servants and successful implementation of the European integration process, the adoption of the Strategy for EU Training of the Civil Servants had an exceptional significance in the process of approachement of the Republic of Macedonia to the EU (Government of the Republic of Macedonia, May 2000), being the starting point for organisation and implementation of training in the area of European matters. The Strategy defines objectives, target groups for training, training areas, methods, manner of funding, managing and coordination of the EU training, evaluation and monitoring of the implemented training.  The implementation of the Strategy on EU Training is carried out through actual Operational Training Plans. Until now, two biannual Operational EU Training Plans have been adopted the first for the period of 2001-2002, and the second for the period of 2003-2004. The Second Operational Plan on EU Training is near the end of implementation. The training activities designed with the plans follow each other, and they are in accordance with the identified needs for EU training of the Macedonian 36/57 civil servants, and the priorities of the European integration process. The operational plans determine the civil servants’ target groups with priorities for training, as well as the training topics.   The activities implemented within the implementation of the Strategy on EU Training are complementary with the activities of the Civil Servants Agency implemented in the area of civil servants' training as a coordinator of the civil servants' training. For more details about the training implemented within the Operational Plans, please refer to question 3, Section 3, Chapter 21, (see 21_III_3). 
5. How is co-ordination between the authorities or bodies at the central level assured (arrangements foreseen for ensuring inter-ministerial co-ordination)? 
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia nos. 38/01; 98/02; 9/03; 47/03; 64/03; and 67/03), the materials that the Ministries and the other state administration bodies are submitting to the Government for consideration, discussion and adoption are previously submitted to the competent, relevant and interested state administration bodies for an opinion. Depending on the nature of the materials they are submitted obligatorily to:  the Ministry of Finance – all the materials that have fiscal implications, as well as the materials regarding disposition of the state funds and financial operations, or which regulate the financial and material obligations of the country and the municipalities, as well as the regulations that contains financial provisions;    the Ministry of Justice – the materials regarding matters in the area of state administration and penal policy;    the Ministry of Defence – the materials relating to defence matters;    the Ministry of Foreign Affairs – the materials regarding foreign affairs and foreign policy;    The Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning – the materials regarding environment and physical planning, and    The Secretariat for Legislation – the proposals for adoption of laws, preliminary draft laws and draft laws, as well as other regulations and acts. The request for obtaining opinion on the materials, as well as the answers to such requests, are signed by the minister or the state secretary, or the director managing the autonomous state administration body, or a managerial civil servant authorised by them.  The materials on which there is no opinion delivered are not considered at Government or its working bodies’ sessions. In the case of urgent matters, the materials may be submitted to the Government without the required opinions, as well as without being previously considered by the General Collegium of State Secretaries. In such a case, the body proposing the material informs the Government about the reasons for not obtaining the opinions. The Government decides whether it shall consider the materials without the opinions delivered by the ministries, the Secretariat for Legislation and the General Collegium of State Secretaries. The proposals for adoption of laws, preliminary draft laws, draft laws and other materials prepared upon Government's request by a special commission, a scientific or professional institution, or by individual experts and scientists are submitted by the Government for an opinion to the competent ministry and the Secretariat for Legislation. For such regulations, other acts and materials, the General Secretary of the Government provides an opinion from the relevant ministries and other state administration bodies prior to the sessions of the Government's working bodies. The ministries and other state administration bodies which have received a request to deliver an opinion on the material are obliged to submit their opinions in writing, not later than 10 days after the receipt of the materials. In the case of issues requiring urgent definition of view or urgent decision upon request of the Government, the ministries and other state administration bodies are obliged to submit their opinions within 5 days,. The ministries and other state administration bodies coordinate and cooperate with the General Secretariat of the Government for the execution of the tasks stemming from the Government Annual Work Programme. With a view to implement the Government Annual Work Programme, the General 37/57 Secretariat participates in reviewing the contents of the materials and acts submitted to the Government by the ministries and the other state administration bodies. In the cases when the ministries and other state administration bodies have different opinions and views on the materials and acts submitted to the Government, for the purpose of resolving such issues, the General Secretariat of the Government cooperates and coordinates with the ministries and other state administration bodies and considers the consequences of such issues on the established policy and their influence on the Government’s strategic priorities. 
Collegium of State Secretaries  
For the purpose of achieving coordination in the preparation of Government's sessions, for examining the degree to which the materials and acts are ready to be considered at the Government sessions and for consideration of their professional aspects, as well as for the implementation of the Government’s strategic priorities, a Collegium of State Secretaries was formed. The Collegium of State Secretaries is chaired by the Secretary General of the Government, and in case of his/her absence, by the Deputy Secretary General. The General Collegium consists of the General Secretary of the Government, the State Secretaries of the ministries, and the Secretary of the Secretariat for Legislation and State Advisors in the Government appointed by the Government’s General Secretary. When materials and matters which are within the competence of the autonomous state administrative bodies are discussed, the directors of those bodies participate in the work of the General Collegium. In case of absence of the State Secretary, a civil servant holding a position not lower than a Head of Department may participate in the work of the General Collegium based on prior written authorisation by the Minister.  As a rule, the General Collegium holds its session on a precisely specified day of the week before the date set for the Government or its Committee's sessions. The materials which are discussed at the sessions of the General Collegium are proposed for the agenda of the second next Government session. As an exception, materials which are put on the agenda of the next Government session may also be discussed if they are of urgent nature and there should be no delay. The General Collegium reviews whether the materials are in a final form to be proposed for the Government session and discusses their professional aspects and problems, and considers other matters regarding the improvement of the efficiency of the Government's work, and it establishes positions in the form of opinions. The established opinion is further recommended to the relevant ministry or other state administration bodies for inclusion in the text of the regulation, i.e. the material, or, if the matter is urgent, to the competent Government working body. A list of issues is prepared by the General Secretariat and the State Secretaries to be discussed at the future General Collegium’s sessions. At the beginning of every General Collegium session, the state secretaries are informed about the implementation of the conclusions of the previous Government session.  In the case of different opinions of the participants in the General Collegium, the opinion of the majority of the present participants is adopted. The State Secretary is obliged to inform the Minister about the adopted position or opinion. If the competent Minister is not satisfied with the professional opinion, he/she informs the General Secretary of the Government to resolve the disputed issue with the competent Government working body. When the General Collegium assesses that the material is ready for the Government session, it recommends it for a Government session, on a previously delivered opinion of the competent standing Government working body. The General Collegium may assess and propose certain issues which are in the competence of the Political System Committee to be considered at a session of the Committee for Economic System and Current Economic Policy, or of the Committee for Human 38/57 Resources and Sustainable Development, and vice versa, as well as of the other Government working bodies. 
Government working bodies 
The Government forms working bodies (standing or ad hoc) for discussing and establishing views on issues within the competence of the Government, for delivering opinions and for preparing proposals in order to resolve certain issues. The last phases of the coordination are the discussion on the materials at a regular Government session. (See 21_Annex_02 and 21_Annex_03). (For more detailed description of the Government working bodies’ competencies and activities and the Government functioning, please see the answer to question 1727, section/subsection/point C: Government and Public Administration; Chapter I: Political criteria (see I_C_05)) (For more detailed description of coordinating EU assistance between the central and regional levels, please see the answer to question 6, section IV, Chapter: 21 (see 21_IV_06)) (For more detailed description of the coordination for more balanced regional development between the central and the regional levels, please see the answers to questions 1 and 3, section II, Chapter: 21 (see 21_II_0121_II_03)) 
6. How is co-ordination between the central level and the regional/local level assured? a) Are there regular co-ordination meetings? b) Who participates in these meetings? c) How often are they organised? 
a), b) and c) 
The National System for Coordination of Foreign Assistance (explained in detail in the answer to question 1, Chapter 21, Section III, Institutional Framework and Administration Capacity (see 21_III_01)) envisages a central role of the National Coordinator for Foreign Assistance in the process of coordination of foreign assistance to the Republic of Macedonia. Other ministries are also invited to the regular sessions of the Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers (FACCM), which are held monthly or when needed, depending on the topic of discussion. For that purpose, and in accordance with the competencies of the Ministry of Local Self-Government in the coordination of the decentralisation process and in the providing of a balanced regional development, the Minister of Local Self-Government is invited to participate in the work of the FACCM.     The Minister of Local Self-Government holds regular coordination meetings with the Association of the Local Self-Government Units and the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas (the Bureau’s competencies are elaborated in the answer to question 3, Chapter 21, Section II, Legal Framework on Regional Politics (see 21_II_03)) where the priorities for the local government development, set out at a central level, and the priorities defined at a local level are being harmonised.   At the time being, the coordination between the national and the local level in the Republic of Macedonia is not being carried out in a regular and structured manner.   During the programmed period of 1996-1999, when there was a component for cross-border cooperation with the Republic of Greece within the PHARE programme, the working group held regular meetings on the cooperation at the programming and project implementation level. Namely, with the aim of enhancement of the cooperation with the Republic of Greece and efficient usage of the European Union Funds intended for that purpose, a working group consisting of government institutions representatives, as well as representatives of the municipalities from the border regions, 39/57 was established. This working group met regularly in order to provide a successful implementation of the cross-border cooperation projects.       At the present moment, the coordination between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the municipalities is realised on a project level – mainly for projects within the CARDS programme, which provides technical assistance for the municipalities in the European integration process, as well as for the projects relating to the local infrastructure development. It means that the Ministry of Local Self-Government, through the Project Implementation Unit, organises ad-hoc coordination meetings with the representatives of the Association of the Local Self-Government Units and with the representatives of the municipalities in order to monitor the projects’ implementation.   Municipalities also, have a significant role in the participation of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Commission’s initiatives INTERREG III A, and in the New Neighbourhood Programmes, the latest EC initiative. Namely, for the needs of these programmes, the Government cooperates with the municipalities from the regions bordering Republic of Greece and Republic of Bulgaria in preparing of joint programme documents, whereas the cooperation of the border region municipalities is carried out for the purpose of concrete preparation and joint application for EU funds. Technical level meetings for efficient monitoring of these initiatives are held with participants of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and of the municipalities, aiming to form common attitudes and appropriate representation of the priorities in front of the partners.   
IV. PROGRAMMING (PARTNERSHIP, MONITORING, EVALUATION) 

1. Does a National Development Plan/Regional Development Plan(s) exist? If yes, for what period and what are its main features in terms of socio-economic analysis, strategy formulation and objectives, priorities of investment, concrete measures to be taken as well as implementation arrangements? 
Since gaining of independence, to the present day, the Republic of Macedonia has pass through a hard and long process of complex economical and political reforms aimed at building of a modern democratic society with a developed market economy system. However, during the transitional period, things did not develop the way we wished for. The Republic of Macedonia has been hit by several external shocks (trade blockades, economic sanctions from neighbouring countries, armed conflicts) which supplemented by certain faults in the implementation of the structural reforms, had their negative impact on the economic development dynamics of the country. Taking into consideration the non-existence of basic prerequisites for adequate planning of the mid-term and long-term development in this period, the economic policy was focused on the process of providing macroeconomic stability.  For this purpose, a comprehensive Stabilisation Programme has been adopted by the end of 1993, which has been prepared and implemented with technical and financial help by the international financial institutions, first and foremost by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. With a strict and successful realisation of this Programme, macroeconomic stability has been quickly achieved, and it is also successfully maintained in this period. The stabilisation and normalisation of the economic trends created initial conditions for appropriate conceptualisation of the country’s development in mid and long-term.  In 1997, on request of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, the Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts (MASA), with the support of UNDP and the Vienna Institute for Comparative Economic Studies, has prepared and published a National Strategy on the Economic Development of the Republic of Macedonia by 2010, with a special accent on the development of certain areas until 2020. This document contained a long-term vision and global strategic guidelines for achievement of efficient and sustainable development of the country. 40/57 Bearing in mind the global character of the Strategy, the need for preparation of a document for a more complex elaboration of the mid-term development, i.e., the period up to the year 2003 emerged. Considering all this, the Government prepared and adopted a mid-term development document named: Framework Programme for Economic Development and Reforms – Macedonia 2003 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 49/2000). Together with the Programme, a Summary of Measures and Activities for the Realisation of the Programme has been prepared, with specific tasks and holders, and the dynamics of their realisation.  The Programme contains two basic parts elaborating the macroeconomic policies and the reforms, as well as two annexes containing the matrix of measures and activities with established deadlines per holders, as well as the macroeconomic indicators for the period referred to, in the document. At the same time, a special accent is put on the reform processes in all areas and at all levels. However, considering that immediately after the adoption of this document, or, more precisely, in 2001, the political and security conditions in the country deteriorated, the prerequisites on which the document was founded have changed significantly. Nevertheless, in spite of the short-term slowing down of the reforms, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia continued with a decisive implementation of the planned activities in the area of reforms.  The Government of the Republic of Macedonia has begun with the preparation of the Sustainable Development Strategy of the Republic of Macedonia, with a timeframe for adoption of this document by the end of the year 2005. The preparation of the Report on the Millennium Development Goals for the period to 2015 is also in the final stage, which, among other things, encompasses the areas of poverty reduction and human development, being especially relevant and important for the development of the Republic of Macedonia. Apart from this, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has instructed the Ministry of Finance to prepare a Programme of the Social and Economical Development of the Republic of Macedonia for the period of 2005-2015.  The Government has also prepared a National Strategy for the Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the European Union as a document in which the basic goals, the guidelines and the priorities in the process of acquiring membership in the Union have been set, defining the basic conceptual framework and the priorities in the accession process. The Strategy intends to define the specific approach of the Republic of Macedonia towards its integration, in accordance with the circumstances and the conditions for functioning of this process. The Strategy is a document covering three timeframes: firstly, a summary of the current situation in the country regarding the implementation of certain elements of the EU legislation and the adoption of the regular practices implemented in the EU is elaborated; secondly, the obligations taken with the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) are listed, at the same time describing the manner in which the Republic of Macedonia plans to fulfil them and the manner in which they will actually contribute to the realisation of the goals for complete integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the political and economic life of Europe; and thirdly, the perspective of accession to EU is described, which will mean not only aligning and implementation of policies in a much broader environment than the one defined by the SAA, but also transformation of some of the existing elements in the SAA into a much deeper form of integration. All these documents will represent a starting point for elaboration of the National Development Plan, which will unite the established development policies, priorities and goals per certain sectors and regions. At the same time, the preparation of this document will also mean taking over a large number of activities, including these:  Informing the public and promotional activities for creating interest and providing inclusion of all the relevant participants; Acquainting the participants with the guidelines and the manner of preparation of the Development Plan in accordance with the European Commission criteria; Establishing a consistent legal framework for providing appropriate planning and implementation of the development measures; Enhancing the participants’ capacity with the purpose of appropriate implementation of the programme; 41/57 Incorporating  certain regional and sector development programmes; Establishing of partner relationships through inclusion of a wide circle of interested subjects (non-governmental organisations, social and economic partners); Establishing institutional and financial structure for the implementation of the National Development Plan; Providing alignment between the National Development Plan and the EU recommendations.   On the basis of the National Development Programme, Regional Development Programmes shall be prepared,  (See 21_Annex_0121_Annex_02 and 21_Annex_03). 
2. If no, do you envisage preparing such a plan(s) and for what period? What is the timetable for the preparation of the National Development Plan? 
It is expected that by the end of the year 2005 the preparation of the draft document, incorporating the relevant regional policies, will be completed. The preparation of the operational plans for implementation of the National Development Plan, i.e. the elaboration of the regional and sector projects, is planned to be carried out in the course of 2007.  This document will determine the holders and the time-frames for preparation, while appropriate technical and financial aid shall be requested for its preparation. The main objectives to be achieved through the appropriate implementation of the development programme measures and activities are the following:   Defining of criteria for measurement of the development level of different areas ;   Development of draft regional development plans;   Provision of financial resources for implementation and functioning of the regional policy;   Introduction of instruments for support of the development;   Human resources development. Need for staff for a) central government bodies, and b) regional bodies;   Provision of consistency between the legislation of public procurement, competion, government assistence, environment, and financial control.   Creating conditions for speeding up the economic growth, and resolving the problem of high unemployment rate;    Creating an open, civil, knowledge-based society, personal initiative and responsibility.   Providing a continuity of a legal, socially oriented and politically stable country. 
3. Is there a linkage between the National Development Plan and the process of national investment and budget planning and, if yes, how is it ensured? 
In the absence of a National Development Plan, the linkage between the national investment and budget planning is provided via the Fiscal Strategy, which is a separate triennial document brought by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. This document contains the macroeconomic policies and the mid-term projection of the macroeconomic indicators, as well as the planned mid-term budget frame.  Apart from this, the fiscal strategy includes the expenditures of the prioritised initiatives established by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, depending on the available funds for financing and the predicted budget balance.  With regard to the implementation of development strategies, all the budget beneficiaries participating in the carrying out of the programme (this also includes all the other budget beneficiaries), are obliged to submit their plans for the next budget year to the Ministry of Finance the latest by the middle of July of the current year. In relation to the suggestions, until the beginning of November consultations and negotiations between the submitters of the plans and the Ministry of 42/57 Finance are held, because the Ministry is obliged to submit a Draft Budget for the next year to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia latest by 15th of November. After the adoption of this document by the Government, it is forwarded to pass the regular parliamentary procedure. With the preparation of the National Development Plan (as a basic document for national investment planning) and of the budget of the Republic of Macedonia, the linkage between these two processes will be clearly defined. This document will also clearly define and delimit the institutional and financial structures needed for appropriate implementation of the development plan. Taking into consideration the need of providing financial resources by the state (co-financing), and bearing in mind that the regional policy is governed by the principle of additionality, special attention will be paid to the process of enhancement of the institutional capacity regarding the ability for obtaining the financial resources and their timely use.   
4. Which authority(ies) or body(ies) will be responsible for (or involved in) the preparation of the National Development Plan? 
Bearing in mind that this is an exceptionally complex document which should incorporate the development strategies of all the sectors and should include all the development goals, measures and actual activities for intensifying the economic growth and the approximation of the Republic of Macedonia to the European Union standards, establishment of a special inter-ministerial body in charge of coordination of the preparations and preparing of the plan will be necessary. Apart from the government institutions, other participants will also be actively involved in the preparation of the development plan, primarily experts and scientists as well as representatives of the non-governmental organisations. The National Development Plan provisions’ implementation control will be carried out through the structures within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The preparation of the National Development Plan will be coordinated by the Government via the central services, and will also include the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Local Self Government, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Labour and Social Politics, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, and the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning. Other competent institutions will also participate in the process, as needed. The Association of the Local Self Government Units, the Chamber of Commerce, and the Regional Centres for Support of Small and Medium Sized Enterprises will also have a role in the preparations.  
5. Which are the procedures in place or foreseen for preparing the National Development Plan and for ensuring inter-ministerial co-ordination as well as a wide and effective association of all the relevant partners (regional and local authorities, economic and social partners etc.)? 
Pursuant to the Information on the legal and institutional framework for balanced regional development with a proposed Action plan, appropriate measures for preparation and coordination of the National Development Plan will be established. Enhancing of the appropriate structures for inter-ministerial coordination will be necessary for the preparation of the National Development Plan, as well as finding appropriate forms of cooperation with the non-governmental sector via inclusion of a widest possible circle of interested parties. The process of preparation of this plan will also necessitate preparing of a special document supporting the whole process which will also include definitions of the institutional, legislative and financial structures for the implementation of the National Development Plan. Establishing of adequate working groups consisting of different experts in charge of specifically defined areas will be an integral part of the process, as well as forming of a Consultative body consisting of eminent experts in charge of the professional evaluation of different programmes. The participation and consulting with all the relevant partners (the local self-government, the economy and social committees, the Assembly, the Unions, the Chamber of Commerce, and others) will be provided as well, while the participation of the local self-government will be realised through the alignment of the National Development Plan with the local development plans. (see 21_Annex_0543/57 6. How will it be ensured that the basic principles of programming (decision-making on the basis of objective criteria) will be respected? 
As already mentioned in the answer to the previous question, the planning in the Republic of Macedonia is neither systematically, nor institutionally regulated. Therefore, the basic programming principles will be defined with the special document brought as support to the whole process, and which will also incorporate the objective decision-making measures. Nevertheless, for the purpose of keeping the consistency in the decision-making process, the permanent building-up of appropriate measures and criteria, the building of social awareness, as well as the inclusion of a wide circle of relevant participants assisting in the comprehensive situation analysis as a basis for objective decision-making about the most important goals will be most necessary. According to the EU-Draft General Regulation on Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund all the programming principles will be taken in the consideration in the future. 
7. Is an independent evaluation of the National Development Plan foreseen? 
One of the basic postulates which will be the foundation for creation of the National Development Plan is certainly the respect of the transparency principle in all phases of the process. Therefore, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia will foresee an obligatory independent evaluation of the development plan. Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the European procedures, appropriate technical assistance will be requested for the preparation of the National Development Plan, signing of special contracts with independent consulting firms for performing an independent evaluation of all the necessary documents is foreseen.  
8. Are there entities with sufficient experience and capacity to perform independent evaluations of public investment programs? Do they have experienced experts? 
There are independent institutes and other agencies in the Republic of Macedonia, as well as entities in the private sector with available experienced experts and technical equipment for performing independent evaluation of the public investment programmes. Similar experiences for the evaluation of the public investment programmes have been used in several occasions by now, i.e. international consulting firms have been consulted.  It is evident that the introduction of the new regional policy aligned with the European practice will create the need for enhancing the capacities of the independent bodies for evaluation of public investments programmes. 
9. Is there a monitoring and evaluation system in place in your country to monitor the implementation of programs/projects which are co-financed by the EU? If this is the case, please describe this system (actors involved, allocation of tasks, key data/indicators, collection and transfer of data etc.). 
The system of monitoring and evaluation in the Republic of Macedonia is not completely developed, but nevertheless, the programs/projects financed by the European Union are monitored via the following government entities:   The Government of the Republic of Macedonia is informed about the status of the implementation of the programmes/projects on its regular sessions at least twice a year by the Department for Foreign Assistance Coordination within the Sector for European Integration. At the same time, the relevant ministries are informing the Government about the progress of the implementation of projects that are in their competence.   
 The Foreign Assistance Coordination Committee of Ministers (FACCM) and the Coordinative Technical Group of FACCM monitor the implementation of projects, since it is a part of their competencies.   
  The primary role of the Working Committee for European Integration (presided by the Deputy President of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in charge of the European integration issues and the National Foreign Assistance Coordinator, and consisting of the state secretaries of all the ministries) is monitoring of the European integration process, and 44/57 projects, since they are inseparable entity, and aid in the implementation of the defined European integration priorities.      
 Administrative committees, which are formed at a project level.  
In the period of implementation of the PHARE programme, the Sector for European Integration – Department for Foreign Assistance Coordination regularly organised plenary meetings with participation of all the ministries which implement projects on one side, and the representatives of the European Commission on the other. The experience has shown that those meetings are extraordinarily significant, when discussion of open issues of certain projects is concerned, as well as for passing of certain conclusions on future activities for overcoming the defined problems.   Since the year 2002, when the mandate of the European Agency for Reconstruction has been extended in the Republic of Macedonia, the monitoring and evaluation of the projects is done under EAR supervision.   Regular monitoring of the projects co-financed by the European Union has also been carried out on the meetings of the Council for Cooperation and the appropriate working groups conclusively with the year 2003. The same practice was also kept when the  Stabilisation and Association Agreement entered into force, and with the start of the activities of the Committee for Stabilisation and Association and the appropriate subcommittees formed within its frames. After the several years’ efforts for re-introducing the decentralised system for implementation of EU assistance, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia started to build the capacities of separate ministries for involvement of the process of monitoring as a tool for evaluating the degree of achievement of the project’s goals. In the past years, there was a necessity for every project’s fiche to incorporate objective, measurable and attainable indicators of achievement, with the financial and physical inputs, activities, results, goals and implementation schedule in mind. The lessons learned from the EU programmes implementation point out the weaknesses in the management of projects with unclear goals, implementation of immature projects, an insufficient absorbing capacity of the end users, as well as lack of flexibility during the implementation. All that led to the need of implementing monitoring as a system for early warning, and certainly a great help for re-orientation of the programmes (re-allocation of funds, schedule revision) when is necessary in the design of new programmes/projects. In the future, monitoring of programmes/projects is planned to be developed in a more organised manner with a formation of sector monitoring subcommittees which would meet two times a year, and one common monitoring committee which would meet once a year. The monitoring at programme level would be carried out by the relevant ministries, while the administrative committees would monitor at project level, like in the current practice. The preparation of monitoring reports will be aimed towards preparing the sector subcommittees’ meetings, and towards the common monitoring committee meeting, during which the progress in the programme implementation will be discussed, problems will be identified, as well as certain solutions proposed through different recommendations and deadlines. The National Foreign Assistance Coordinator and the Department for Foreign Assistance Coordination, being the coordinator in the monitoring process, will have the key role in the monitoring mechanism.      The evaluation of the influence of CARDS programmes/projects regarding their goals was always in the hands of the European Union, i.e. the ex-ante, mid-term and ex-post evaluation is done through external teams engaged by the European Commission and, lately, by the EAR. Although the evaluation teams are engaged by EAR, it will be of great importance if the project evaluation reports (with grades of "very satisfactory", "satisfactory" and "unsatisfactory") are widely disseminated, so that they could be taken in consideration for:   Designing of future programmes;    Providing first evaluation of implementation, regarding the enhancement of the programme's efficiency and the quality of the delivering mechanisms;    Informing about the real use of resources, influence, efficiency and effectiveness, as well as for learning lessons for future interventions.    45/57 
10. Which are the sectoral priorities in terms of national public or equivalent structural expenditure (covering areas such as basic infrastructure, human resources, productive environment etc.)? Please provide a detailed breakdown. 
In the last period, the Republic of Macedonia had defined several priorities in the development documents, among which especially significant were: increasement of export; productive engagement of the workforce; restructuring of the national economy in accordance with the market criteria; construction of infrastructural objects according to the needs of the economy and the population, and other sector priorities. Defining the priorities did not mean abandoning the market principles, but it was founded on the criteria and procedures applied in countries with developed market economy. Nevertheless, in the past few years, the main priority of the Government development programmes was resolving the high unemployment problem most of all (employment increase), and in connection to it, the reduction of poverty. For that purpose, the employment policy will be aimed to establish mechanisms for urgent end of the unemployment raising and restoring the disrupted functions of the workforce market. Basic elements of the employment policy will be active incentive measures for investment and employment, the reforms of the workforce market, and the creating of a greater flexibility and competitiveness climate. In order to succeed, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has also prepared a National Employment Action Plan 2004-2005, in accordance with the Government employment strategy, the principles of the employment policy of the European Union, and the guidelines of the European Council. Taking into account that the realisation of these goals is directly linked with the intensity of economic growth, the main priority of the Government policy in the following period will be creating of the conditions for intensifying the Macedonian economy growth rates.   In order to achieve this, a development strategy is needed, based on policies which in accordance with the empirical results will show positive correlation with the growth:    Maintaining low and stable inflation;    Public expenditures control;    Wide openness of the country;    Development of the human factor; and    Pursuing a policy of balanced regional development.  Thereby, it is of great importance that these policies do not disturb the revenue distribution, which will allow consumption of the benefits of the economic growth by the poorer population, also.   Accordingly, priority goals in a short-term projection period are the following:    Increasing the investment activity;    Increasing the domestic savings;    Intensifying the structural reforms;    Creating conditions for development of a competitive private sector;    Upgrading the institutional frame for functioning of the market economy in accordance with the EU defined criteria. Apart from this, taking into consideration the high openness of the Republic of Macedonia towards the world economy, one of the priorities in the following period will be providing of conditions for greater alignment of ratios in the trade and the payments balance. Although the deficit in the current account in the last year was very low and amounted to 3.3% of the GDP (most of all as a result of the high amount of private transfers), in 2004 its level increased again, thereon in accordance with the projections until the end of the year, it will not exceed 6% of the GDP. The consistent and coordinated implementation of the short-term activities, the export incentive measures and the decrease of the trade deficit will be the basis of the economic and development policies (of course, in coordination with the monetary policy), and it should lead to decreasing of the deficit in the current account to the level of 5.5% of the GDP in 2005.   46/57 Because of limited domestic resources, a priority in the following period would also be attracting of foreign direct investments. The investments as one of the driving forces of the entire development, the adoption of worlds market quality and standards, and, above all, the creation of new jobs, have a prominent place in the economic policy measures. In this line, the policies of the Government of the  Republic of Macedonia will be founded on 4 basic principles:   National treatment of foreign investors;   Rule of law and complete protection of the property rights of the foreign investors;   Stable and consistent legislation, i.e. an attractive business ambience, with larger relieves for the new investments; and   Adequate and transparent functioning of all institutions of the system. The Ministry of Economy, with the support of foreign donors and on the basis of successful examples and practices, has also provided an institutional form for support and assistance of foreign investors via establishing off an Agency for Foreign Investments (it should start functioning in 2005) as a independent, highly professional and competent institution with the task not only to attract foreign investors, but also to monitor and continuous support, even in the period after the beginning of projects, i.e. the period after the actual investments. Except the direct foreign investments, great attention will also be paid to the public investments in the country. For that purpose, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has adopted a Programme for Public Investments in the Republic of Macedonia 2004-2006, which defines the mid-term investment strategy in the public sector, considering the state and the needs of infrastructural objects, as well as the opportunities for financing from domestic sources, international financial institutions and donors. This Programme includes projects having an important role in the development of the energy, transport, water management, irrigation, environment, and the non-economic activities sectors. In the following period, the necessity of greater adaptability of workers and enterprises to the dynamic changes in the world economy and the aligning to the "knowledge based economy” is also a priority. For that purpose, the necessary update of the legal framework will be done towards ensuring of larger flexibility for active enhancement of new and "non-typical" forms of working arrangements, flexible arrangements of working hours and for improving the career advancement opportunities. Starting from the significance of the educated workforce as an important segment for improving the business climate, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia will intensify the process of improving the quality and efficiency of the education and training system, by putting the emphasis on the promotion of the professional education and the lifelong learning.  Having in consideration the significant needs of the public sector, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia pays special attention to the rational use and channelling of the funds intended for investments in the public infrastructure through the mid-term Programme of Public Investments as an instrument for planning in continuity. The Programme encompasses investment projects in compliance with the priority needs in the energy, transport, water management, irrigation, ecology and non-economic activities sectors evaluated as having a significant contribution in the country’s development. The temporal scope of the Programme is triennial, whereby the first year is always a budgetary (current) year, and the estimated, i.e. planned needs (expenditures) are included in the two subsequent years. The programme is prepared annually, considering the fact that the implemented changes have to be documented, not only for the realised part of the public investments, but also for the planned activities. 47/57 The current Programme for Public Investments is for the period 2004-2006.  Summary of investments in the public sector for the period 2004-2006 In EUR million Sector 2004 2005 2006 Total Total 270,04   300,80 258,94 829,78* Energy 63,43  44,75  36,22 144,40 Transport 94,64  98,68  92,71 286,03 Water management 18,33  26,17  22,85 67,35 Utilities and Housing 36,31  41,85  13,71 91,87 Environment 11,60  13,73  13,24 38,57 Other economy sectors  5,03   5,06  5,09 15,18 Education and Science  8,39  34,95  34,46 77,80 Health  3,26   1,93  1,93 7,12 Non-economy sectors 29,05  33,68  38,73 101,46 * Data taken from the Programme for Public Investments in the Republic of Macedonia 2004 – 2006 The Programme for the period 2005-2007 should be prepared in the next period. The Programme, apart from the capital investment funds from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, includes the funds secured by the international community, the European Union, the bilateral donors, as well as the funds secured by foreign direct investments, joint investments and concessions. (See 21_Annex_04). 
V. FINANCIAL AND BUDGETARY MANAGEMENT 

1. How will national co-financing in the framework of EU assistance be secured? Please describe the provisions in place, and envisaged. 
National co-financing, within foreign assistance is and will be secured with the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia and the budgets of the local self-government units (LSU), in accordance with the Law on Budgets (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 79/93, 03/94, 71/96, 46/00, 11/01, 93/01, 46/02, 24/03 and 85/03) i.e. in accordance with the Law on Budgets Execution for separate Years (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 85/03) and the decisions for execution of the budgets of the LSGU’s.  To secure national co-financing on time, it is necessary to make appropriate projections for the funds needed during the filling of the budget circular for the next year. Apart from this, the new Law on Budgets, now being in the preparation phase, will enable transfer of assets allocated for co-financing in a period of three years, and there will also be a provision for transfer between different programmes as needed.   
2. Are financial resources for future co-financing of EU programs and projects available (based on realistic economic forecasts)? If, yes, please specify. 
The financial resources for co-financing of the EU programmes and projects are defined with the appropriate signed legislation. They are the basis for planning the yearly amount of these resources in the annual Budget of the Republic of Macedonia. It means that if the Government of the Republic of Macedonia signs an act providing co-financing, the budgetary participation in the realisation of that act shall be an obligation which every institution that is a beneficiary of those resources, registers in its proposed budget calculation. The Ministry of Finance plans this obligation in the annual Budget. The projects financed by the European Union, and co-financed with the budget are: the construction of highway E-75; the reconstruction of the Blace border crossing; the development of infrastructure in the local self government units (first phase); and a total of MKD 20.0 million in 2005 for co-financing 48/57 of our participation in the Communities’ Programme, as well as MKD 8.0 million for co-financing of the agreed projects within the New Neighbourhood Policy (with Bulgaria and Greece). So far there are no funds planned or available for long-term co-financing of other programmes and projects. However, with the passing of the new Law on Budgets, which is in the preparation phase, these projections about the foreseen funds for co-financing EU programmes and projects will be determined for triennial period. 
3. Which are the regional and local, economic and social or other partners from whom national co-financing is expected? How will this national co-financing be secured? 
The national co-financing, within foreign assistance, is provided within the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, the budgets of the local self-government units, as well as with the financial plans of the public enterprises. There is no legal or other limitation for inclusion of other economic or social partners in the entire national co-financing within foreign assistance. This means that if there is an interest or need, other entities might also participate, such as the Trade Unions, private companies, non-governmental organisations, and others. Pursuant to the Information on the Legal and Institutional Framework for balanced Regional Development with a Draft Action Plan adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on 1st of November 2004, the establishment of adequate institutions for Regional Development is planned. These potential institutions will be in charge of planning and implementation of a balanced regional development, lead from central and regional level.  The representatives from the local self-government units (LSGU) of the respective region, from NGOs, and from other interested social partners will be part of these institutions. Consequently, it will be possible for the projections of these regional centres (a total of 8, according to the nomenclature of territorial units for statistics of the Republic of Macedonia), as well as for the projections of the separate local self-government units, to be registered for the resources needed for provision of national co-financing. Certainly, the (Sector) Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects the administrative bodies of the local self-government units, and the Institutions for regional development shall define the goals, the conditions for use and way of presentation and documentation of the planned revenues according to resources, as well as the budget expenditures according to purposes, for financing of their own activities. (See 21_Annex_05) - Resume - Concept on the Legal and Institutional Framework for balanced Regional Development. 
4. Which authority or body has overall responsibility for giving guidance or instructions on financial management? 
A separate (Sector) Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects, within the Ministry of Finance, will have the main responsibility for giving guidance or instructions on financial management in the Republic of Macedonia, according to the new Law on Budgets, and it will carry out the functions of a Central Financing and Contracting Unit. The Sector will manage the EU funds in accordance with the provisions and regulations of the European Commission, and will be authorised and responsible for the projects, from the preparation of the tender to the conclusion of the contract, payment and reporting. For every signed financial agreement with the European Commission, the Central Financing and Contracting Unit will open a separate bank account. 
5. Which are the provisions in place concerning the mobilisation and circulation of financial flows in the framework of EU assistance? 
The provisions in force concerning the mobilisation and circulation of financial flows in the framework of EU assistance are the following:   The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia; 49/57   The Law on Concluding, Ratification and Enforcement of International Agreements (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 05/98);   The Law on Ratification of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the European Communities and their Member States (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 28/01);   The Law on Budgets (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 79/93, 03/94, 71/96, 46/00, 11/01, 93/01, 46/02, 24/03 and 85/03);   The Law on Budgets Execution for separate Years (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 85/03);   The Law on the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 59/00; 26/01 and 12/03)   The Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 19/04)   The Law on Internal Audit in the Public Sector (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 69/04)   The Law on Budgets and Budget Users Accounting (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 61/02 and 98/02)   The Law on State Audit (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 65/97; 31/03 and 19/04)    As well as numerous bylaws, relevant decisions, rulebooks and instructions by the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Ministry of Finance for current and long-term requirements for regulating certain issues (Decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on the Financial Agreement for the Annual Action Plan for the CARDS Programme, etc.) In the next period the provisions concerning the mobilisation and circulation of financial flows will be harmonised with the Council Regulation No 1260/1999 and the Draft General Regulation. 
6. Which are the authorities or bodies through which financial flows pass (audit trail)? Please indicate which functions these authorities or bodies have. 
Financial flows are registered and are passing through the temporary foreign currency accounts of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia (NBRM), the earmarked foreign currency and denar accounts opened by the Ministry of Finance, or with the approval of the Ministry of Finance for opening accounts from other budget institutions within the NBRM, except for EU funds; budget accounting at separate accounting departments of the budget institutions which are beneficiaries of foreign assistance; and the accounting departments of the project units in charge of the foreign assistance implementation. They have obligation to prepare separate closing accounts and to submit them to the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia, which keeps the single account register. The budget institutions are obliged to make closing accounts, which are submitted to the Ministry of Finance to be later incorporated in the Annual Statement of the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, which is adopted by the Government and the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. Moreover, at a request by the foreign donors, the project units are obliged to contract an independent auditor for preparing of an annual audit report, which is then forwarded to the foreign donor. Also, upon the donor’s request the project units are obliged to submit periodical reports on the activities’ progress during the foreign assistance implementation.  In the next period the system of audit trail in the Republic of Macedonia will be harmonised with Commission Regulation No 438/2001. The Minister of Finance, when a need arises, may instruct the Sector for Central Internal Audit to carry out an audit and to prepare an audit report on the implementation of separate programmes and projects. The State Audit Office (SAO), on the basis of the annual action plan, submits a report on the audits performed in the course of the current year, to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, which is later published on the SAO web-site. 50/57 In the period 2000-2002 a Central Finance and Contracting Unit by EU-funded projects within the Ministry of Finance was operating, in which frames the implementation of the projects through a decentralised system for EU technical assistance was implemented. With the expanding of the European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR) mandate, for the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, the competence of this unit was transferred to the EAR, and the unit was dissolved.  The Republic of Macedonia will establish a (Sector) Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects as a body within the Ministry of Finance, and it should be establish in no longer than two years. This Unit will manage the EU funds in accordance with the rules governing the using of EU funds, prepare tenders and contracts, and will carry out payments from a separate account for every donation. Programme Managers will be appointed at the state administration bodies that are decentralised projects’ beneficiaries, which will be responsible for the technical implementation of the projects. The obligations and responsibilities of the person in charge of approving the programmes in the Central Unit and the Programme Managers at all the decentralised projects shall be regulated by signing of an agreement. With the decentralised way of implementation of the programmes, the Programme Manager is responsible to a respective person for approval of the programme for the successful technical implementation of the project, whereas the Central Unit will be responsible for the tender procedures, the accounting, reporting, monitoring and managing of the EU funds.  
7. In particular, which authorities or bodies would be responsible for verifying the implementation of operations, and for certifying the regularity of expenditure to the Commission? 
At the moment, the competencies related to this question are carried out by the European Agency for Reconstruction, whereas in the future the following entities will be responsible for verifying the implementation of operations, and for certifying the regularity of expenditure to the European Commission: (Sector) Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects, within the Ministry of Finance, which will establish direct communication with the Budgets and Funds Department and the Treasury Department, as well as with the institutions responsible for implementation of the programmes. The verification of the implemented activities can be also made by the Central Internal Audit Department within the Ministry of Finance and the State Audit Office. In addition, for every separate programme/project, an independent auditing company will be contracted, and their annual reports will be submitted to the Commission. 8. If applicable, please indicate which functions are delegated to other bodies to be identified. 
At the moment, no functions are delegated to other bodies, but for the purpose of successful implementation of the EU funded projects, the functions for procurement and contracting will be delegated to the (Sector) Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects, with a previously arranged consistency and coordination with the Budgets and Funds Department, the Treasury Department, and the Public Procurement Bureau. At the same time, the competencies of the Central Internal Audit Department and the State Audit Office will have to be expanded in terms of control over the usage of EU funds. Separate functions will be delegated after the inclusion in the pre-accession programmes, i.e. the new instruments (IPA) and the other European Union regional funds. 
9. If applicable, please specify how the concept of adequate separation of functions is respected in the internal implementation structure. 
At the moment, the separation of functions within the internal implementation structure is carried out by appointing of the:   National Coordinator for Assistance (vice-president of the Government) – in charge of EU matters and programming in the recipient country, ensuring the stabilisation and association process, the usage of the European Union financial assistance, as well as of monitoring and evaluation of the decentralised European Union programmes.  51/57   Head of the Sector for European Integration, whereby the Sector for European Integration within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has an operative and technical function for negotiating and coordinating of all EU assistance.    The implementation is carried out through EAR and the competent entity in charge of the relevant programme, whereas the International Finance Department within the Ministry of Finance is partially involved in these activities.  In the future:    National Coordinator for Assistance (vice-president of the Government) – in charge of EU matters and programming in the recipient country, ensuring the stabilisation and association process, the usage of the European Union financial assistance, as well as of monitoring and evaluation of the decentralised European Union programmes.    Person in charge of approving programmes (at the moment, this function is carried out by the Head of the Sector for European Integration) – responsible for the implementation of all, or separate parts of the programmes, which are managed within the decentralised implementation system.   The Head of the (Sector) Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects (which should take over the EAR functions by 2006) in charge of the functioning, i.e. the financial management of the decentralised projects, as well as of financial and administrative project management, in accordance with the EU laws on procurement, decrees and procedures.    Programme Manager – a responsible person at the line ministries and agencies, in charge of the technical implementation of the projects. 
10. Are the authorities or bodies mentioned above subject to internal audit/control? 
The internal audit/control of the EAR operational mission is within direct competence of the European Commission.  In the future, the internal audit control of the Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects will be carried out by the Internal Audit Department at the Ministry of Finance, while the audit of the decentralised units will be carried out by the internal audit departments at the entities to which they belong. The functioning of the internal audit units is elaborated in the answer under Chapter (see ). 
11. If applicable, which is the location of these internal control/audit units? Are these units functionally independent? How is this guaranteed? 
In accordance with the Law on Internal Audit in the Public Sector (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 69/04), the internal audit units are organisationally and functionally independent, and they are obliged to assess the budget beneficiaries’ performance objectively, to draw attention to the possible irregularities and inconsistencies with the legislation, and to propose measures for their removal. With the Articles 13, 14 and 15 of the above-mentioned Law, the organisational and functional independence of the internal audit units is ensured, and it is stipulated that the internal audit units are directly responsible to the head of the organisation, whereas auditors must not carry out other tasks that are not related to the internal audit function.  12. How much staff is available for internal financial control/audit? 
Every budget beneficiary determines the organisational structure of the internal audit unit and the number of employees in it, independently. Pursuant to the Law on Internal Audit in the Public Sector (“Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia” No. 69/04) there is a Central Internal Audit Department at the Ministry of Finance with 11 employees, which carries out the internal audits of the budget beneficiaries that have not established internal audit units, and harmonises the internal audit system. 52/57 13. What are the accounting arrangements for EU assistance? Which authority (authorities) or body (bodies) is (are) responsible? 
Book-keeping, preparation and submission of financial reports is compulsory for all the revenues and other inflow (donations), and expenses and other outflows of the budgets and budgetary users, in accordance with the Law on Budgets and Budgetary Users Accounting (“Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia” No. 61/02), as well as in the line with the accepted accounting principles, the official accounting practice and the international accounting standards for the public sector. The Ministry of Finance will publish the international accounting standards for the public sector in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia.  The Ministry of Finance is in charge of the accounting arrangements for EU assistance. This Ministry will harmonise the regulations on keeping accounting records with the EU regulations relating to this matter.  
14. Do procedures exist to manage irregularities at national and regional level (reporting / claiming system)? 
The procedures for managing irregularities at national and local level are determined with the Law on State Audit (“Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia” No. 65/97; 31/03 and 19/04) and the Law on Internal Audit in the Public Sector (“Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia” No. 69/04). With the acceptance of the audit report, prepared in compliance with the above mentioned laws, the legal representative of the entity that was audited takeover the responsibility for eliminating the irregularities found during the audit (and the auditors inspect the corrections at the beginning of the next audit), which is the first instance of managing irregularities. The annual report of the State Audit Office is submitted to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia not later than 7 months after the period determined for submission of the annual financial reports. If serious irregularities are found on the national level, current audit reports may also be submitted to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. On the local level, the report of the State Audit Office is submitted to the responsible person of the entity (for the respective auditing period) and to the Council of the local self-government unit, which should take the necessary measures within its competence. 15. In case of irregularities, who will be informed first? 
With reference to internal audits in compliance with the Law on Internal Audit in the Public Sector (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 69/04), the manager of the internal audit unit is obliged first to inform the manager of the entity when irregularities are discovered, or a possibility for their occurrence is observed. In case of a state audit, after the auditing is done, an audit report with the findings about the irregularities and the recommendations for their elimination is submitted to the legal representative of the audited entity.  If the state auditor finds that there is a well-founded suspicion that a misdemeanour or a criminal act is perpetrated, they inform the competent bodies for initiating appropriate procedures as soon as possible. 
16. Are there procedures and responsibilities concerning the notification of irregularities to the Commission? 
Procedures and responsibilities concerning the notification of irregularities to the European Commission shall be regulated by a Law on Internal Financial Audit, which will determine that all information about irregularities found by the entities during usage of resources from the European funds or resources allocated by the European Funds with state co-financing will be submitted to the Ministry of Finance without delay, and the Ministry of Finance will forward them to the competent institution of the European Commission.   53/57 All users of European funds will allow the authorised persons and inspectors from the European Commission and the European Court of Auditors a free access to all documentation, offices, assets and personnel.  The State Audit Office does not have a legal obligation to report irregularities discovered during the auditing procedures of the European Commission, but is directly responsible to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. The audit reports of the State Audit Office are accessible to all interested entities, since all of them are published on the Internet. 
17. Is there a guarantee in the rules that at all times the Commission will be informed of irregularities? 
The guarantee of continuous control on the work of the (Sector) Central Unit for Financing EU Funded Programmes and Projects will be the continuous reporting of the external auditor engaged by the European Commission, as well as the cooperation of the Ministry of Finance with the relevant international institutions in the field of internal audit, regulated with the Article 8 of the Law on Internal Audit in the Public Sector (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 69/04).  Regarding the state audit, the publishing of all auditing reports on the Internet is a guarantee that the Commission will be informed about the irregularities. 
18. Are there responsibilities for control and audit at national and regional level? If yes, please provide a description of the competent authorities. 
The State Audit Office is responsible for audit at national and regional level, in accordance with the Law on State Audit (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 65/97; 31/03; 19/04). A state audit, according to this Law, is defined as an inspection of documents, papers and reports on internal controls and audits, accounting and financial procedures, and other records, taking into consideration the reliability and objectiveness of the financial reports for the real financial condition and the result of the financial activities in accordance with the accepted accounting principles and accounting standards, as well as with the INTOSAI international audit standards. A state audit is also the procedure for inspecting the financial transactions which fall under the category of state expenditures in terms of the legal and restricted usage of funds. A more detailed description of the work done by the State Audit Office can be found in the answers to questions (see 28_I_A_128_I_A_2 and 28_I_A_3). 19. What anti-fraud measures (responsibilities, procedures) are in place? 
Pursuant to the Law on State Audit (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 65/97; 31/03; and 19/04), in case the authorised state auditor finds that there is a well-founded suspicion that a misdemeanour or a criminal act is perpetrated, he/she immediately informs the competent bodies (the Public Prosecutor’s Office, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the State Anti-Corruption Commission) for initiating adequate procedure. The competent bodies are obliged to inform the State Audit Office about the measures taken within 90 days. Measures against performed and detected frauds are also taken in accordance with the Law on Civil Servants (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 59/00), by initiating disciplinary, misdemeanour and criminal procedures. There is a Foreign Exchange Inspectorate within the Ministry of Finance that undertakes anti-fraud measures within their competence, in accordance with the law (the Law on Foreign Exchange Operations, “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 34/01, 49/01, 103/01, 54/02, 51/03). 54/57 20. Are there any procedures in place allowing for the collection and submission of the required data with a view to the need to verify within the programming process the respect of the principle of additionality with reference to the level of public or equivalent expenditure in the past? 
The Law on Budgets, which is in the preparation phase, will be aligned with the EU regulations which are implemented in the general budget of the European Union. With the aligned Law on Budgets, the principles of additionality in the programming process and of adopting multi-annual budget documents will be applied.  In the following period, the respect of the principle of additionality will be verified by enhancing the programming capacity, especially with the adoption of the National Development Plan; the administration capacity (by improving the inter-ministerial coordination and by defining the roles and responsibilities of the entities in charge of the management of the resources from the Structural Funds); the financial and accounting management; and  the statistics adaptation with a strict implementation of the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics of the Republic of Macedonia, which is based on the NUTS classification. 
VI. AVAILABILITY OF STATISTICS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STRUCTURAL FUNDS 

1. Please describe which socio-economic data/statistics are available at national and regional level. 
Current situation According to the Statistical Research Programme, the following socio-economic data are available at NUTS ll (The Republic of Macedonia) - the national level and NUTS V - the local level:  
  Population and vital statistics; 
  Social welfare data;   Education;   Culture; and   Judiciary.   The Labour Force Survey provides data on the labour market, and starting from 2004 collects data which will enable calculation of the respective categories at NUTS ll level (national level) and NUTS lll level (regional level).    The Household Consumption Survey is available at NUTS ll level - the national level (Republic of Macedonia). One of the measures for harmonisation with the EU methodologies is redesigning the Household Consumption Survey sample at NUTS lll level - regional level.  Other than the State Statistics Office, institutions that collect data in this sphere are the following: The State Health Care Bureau, the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, the Ministry of Justice, and the Employment Agency. 
Measures for harmonisation with EU Redesign of the Household Consumption Survey sample with the aim of calculating data at the NUTS lll - regional level. Research on the quality and the presentation of available data at the regional level is also needed. There are certain difficulties with the redesign of the sample and with the assessment of certain variables in small areas. 55/57 You may find more detailed socio-economic data in Chapter (see 12) – Statistics. 
2. Are these data/statistics harmonised at the European level (accepted and published by Eurostat)? 
Current situation 
Most of these data are harmonised with the EU methodology, and the rest are being processed for the purpose of further improvement and harmonisation.   The data on population and education are submitted to EUROSTAT, on the basis of regular yearly requests, but they are not published in the EUROSTAT publications. With regard to the measures for harmonisation with the EU standards and the future improvements, as well as to the problems arising from the researches, especially the data presentation at a level lower than NUTS ll, there are more details in Chapter 12, see question 12_1_E_1_1 to question 12_1_E_8_3). 
3. Are (harmonised) GDP data at PPP available on future NUTS level II? 
GDP data at purchasing power parity (PPP) are available at NUTS ll level (the Republic of Macedonia).   Since 1996, the Republic of Macedonia is included in the pilot project of the European Comparison Programme. The methodology used by the State Statistics Office is completely harmonised with the methodologies of OECD and EUROSTAT. The data are submitted to OECD in triennial cycles, where the GDP calculations at purchasing power parity (PPP) are carried out. The last available data on GDP calculated at purchasing power parity (PPP) at NUTS ll level is from 1999. The calculations for the year 2002, prepared by OECD, are in process. The working phases and the timeframe for each phase are defined by OECD. More detailed information on the GDP calculations at purchasing power parity (PPP) may be found in Chapter 12, module 55200 (see 12_1_G_5_2). 
4. Are (harmonised) GDP data at PPP available on future NUTS level III? 
Current situation 
GDP data at purchasing power parity (PPP) is not available at the NUTS lll level.  
Measures for further harmonisation with EU: 
The analysis of the existing data at a lower level, needed for the added value calculation at regional level, is underway, and it is carried out according to the EU methodologies. The regional statistics are anticipated as a future activity in the Statistical Research Programme in the period 2003-2007 published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 69/2003. The initial step in the process will be the added value calculation at regional level, and eventually a complete set of Regional accounts will be composed. The adoption of the methodology for GDP calculation at a lower level is in process. Also, a detailed analysis on the available data is needed, as well as on their presentation at a regional level. Further details on the regional accounts may be found in Chapter 12, module 72101. It has to be pointed out that GDP calculation at purchasing power parity (PPP), module 55200, is coordinated by the OECD, and that the State Statistics Office does not provide independent calculations. Detailed information on purchasing power parity (PPP) may be found in Chapter 12, module 55200. 56/57 5. Are (harmonised) unemployment data available on future NUTS level II? 
Current situation There are unemployment data available on the NUTS ll level (Republic of Macedonia). The data are processed according to the Labour Force Survey, which is implemented since 1996. The Survey is harmonised with the ILO methodological recommendations, and the EUROSTAT recommendations. The registered unemployment in the Republic of Macedonia is also monitored by the Employment Agency. The unemployment rate is calculated only by the State Statistics Office. More detailed information on the Labour Force Survey may be found in Chapter (see 12) – Statistics.  
6. Are (harmonised) unemployment data available on future NUTS level III? 
Current situation Starting with the first quarter of 2004, the Labour Force Survey is implemented quarterly for the first time, and the sample is representative for publishing data on NUTS lll level. The analysis of the acquired data on the regional level is in process, and the data will be published in June 2005.  


57/57 