II. LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK ON REGIONAL POLICY 

1. Does you country have a regional development law? If not, is such a law envisaged? If envisaged, what is the state of affairs and the time-frame? 
No regional development law that would govern this matter in a complex manner for the whole territory of the Republic of Macedonia has been adopted in our country. However, the Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas (Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia No. 2/94, 39/99) is in force, which explicitly regulates the issue of regional area, and it covers 64% of the country's territory. With the aim to provide single regulation of the issues of regional development for the whole territory of the country, and to establish mechanisms for regional development policy, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, on its 28th session held on 1 November 2004, accepted a Conclusion for starting the activities for preparation of legal and institutional framework for balanced regional development, and also adopted an Information on the legal and institutional framework for a balanced regional development with a proposed Action Plan for activities to be undertaken in the next period. Pursuant to this Information the Draft Law on Regional Development should be prepared during the fourth quarter of 2005. Currently, the activities for preparation of legal and institutional framework are defined. (See 21_Annex_05) - Resume - Concept on the Legal and Institutional Framework for balanced Regional Development. 
2. Please provide a list of all directly relevant legislation. 
Apart from the Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas (Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia No. 2/94, 39/99), which explicitly regulates the development of the insufficiently developed areas, there are also other laws which are directly or indirectly relevant for the regional development. a) Legislation which determines the local self-government units’ structure and organisation:   Constitution of Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 52/91)   Law on Administrative Bodies' Organisation (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 58/00)    Law on Local Self-Government (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 5/2002)   Law on the Territorial Organization of the Local Self-Government of the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 55/04)   Law on the City of Skopje (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 55/04)   Law on Local Elections (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 60/04) b) Laws that regulate the financing of the local self-government units and the state aid:   Law on Financing Local Self-Government Units (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 61/2004)   Law on Property Taxes (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 61/04)   Law on Value Added Tax (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 44/99, 19/04)   Law on Budgets (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 79/93, 3/94, 71/96, 46/00,11/01, 93/01, 46/02, 61/02, 24/03 and 85/03)   Law on State Aid (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 24/03)   Decision on criteria, amount, pre-conditions and ways of using the funds for promotion of the economically underdeveloped areas development (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 67/99)   Law on Communal Fees (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 61/2004)   Law on Administrative Fees (amendments to the law) (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 61/2004) c) Legislation that regulates physical planning at national and local level, and establishes economically underdeveloped areas   Law on Physical and Urban Planning (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 4/96, 8/96, 5/97, 28/97, 18/99, 76/99, 53/01, 45/02)   Physical Plan of the Republic of Macedonia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia  No. 39/04)   Decision on establishing economically underdeveloped areas in the Republic of Macedonia for the period from 2003 to 2007 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 28/03 and 2/04) 
3. Please answer the following questions about your regional development legislation. If the answer is affirmative, indicate which law or Government decision is applicable: a) Does your legislation specify one administrative unit or entity responsible for coordination at the national level? Which entity? What is its composition? b) Does your legislation specify one unit, group or entity responsible for decision-making at the national level? Which entity? c) Is it specified in your legislation which unit or group functions as the secretariat that prepares the decisions referred to in question b)? d) Does your legislation specify other responsible administrative units? e) Does your legislation specify decision-making procedures? f) Does your legislation specify at the national level an administrative unit(s) or entity responsible for implementation/management and monitoring of programs/projects? Which? What is the composition of this/these unit(s)? g) Does your legislation specify a decision-making group, council, unit or other entity at the regional level? Which? h) Are the members of this entity specified in your legislation? Are they political appointees or technical, or both? i) Is it specified in your legislation which unit or group functions as the secretariat that prepares these decisions? j) Does your legislation specify at the regional level an administrative unit(s) or entity responsible for implementation and monitoring of programs/projects? Which? k) Is this entity independent from the central level or from the decision-making entity? If no, in what way are they related? 
As already elaborated, there is no law which regulates the regional development matter in a single and complex manner in the Republic of Macedonia. The Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 2/94 and 39/99) is in effect, which explicitly and in segments regulates the issues of regional development. It regulates the development issues on 64% of the total territory of the country, it covers 68% of the total number of settlements in the Republic of Macedonia, and 22% of the total population. Therefore, we think that it is necessary to elaborate the regional development policy which is implemented based on this law and the related decisions of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. Because of the current differences in the degree of development, within the efforts for securing more balanced and sustainable development of certain parts of the country, a policy of promotion of the development of economically underdeveloped areas based on the market principles is implemented in the Republic of Macedonia. Within this policy, the development is specifically supported through creation of conditions for improvement of life quality and for conduct of business activities, and above all through the development of the rural centres, aid for construction of economic and non-economic infrastructure, agricultural development, especially the cattle breeding industry, as well as development of small enterprises for manufacturing and providing services.  The Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas regulates the responsibility of the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas (as a body within the Ministry of Local Self-government), to undertake measures for promotion of the development of economically underdeveloped areas. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia, with a special decision, establishes the economically underdeveloped areas in the Republic of Macedonia for a four-year period. For the period from 2003 to 2007, a total of 1092 settlements are covered, or more precisely: 500 settlements in hilly and mountainous terrain areas; 157 settlements in border areas; 319 settlements in extremely underdeveloped areas; and 116 settlements are established as rural centres. The number of settlements in the economically underdeveloped areas represents 68% of the total number of settlements in the Republic of Macedonia (1700). The total population in the economically underdeveloped areas is 427.382 or more precisely: 109.726 in the hilly and mountainous terrain areas; 61.049 in border areas; 99.260 in the extremely underdeveloped areas; and 197.337 in the rural centres, which represents 22% of the total population in the Republic of Macedonia. The economically underdeveloped areas cover a territory of 16.425,00 square kilometres, which represents 64% of the total territory of the Republic of Macedonia. Although the measures taken as part of the policy for promotion of the development of the economically underdeveloped areas are intended to stop or alleviate the processes of migration, the migration from villages to the cities is particularly present in these areas. There are almost totally abandoned regions in these areas, without any inhabitants (e.g. Mariovo, Azot, Kozjak region, Kopak region), and a large number of settlements with a small, mostly aged population. The Law on Promotion of the Development of the Economically Underdeveloped Areas stipulates that funds in amount of 1% of the gross domestic product will be allocated in the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia annually for the promotion of the development of the economically underdeveloped areas. In spite of such a legal provision, the legally established percentage of funds from the Budget was not allocated in the period since the establishment of the Bureau. Actually, the budgetary funds allocated for this purpose vary from year to year from 0.01% to 0.30% of the GDP. Other than this basic funding source, the Law provides possibilities for using funds from other sources for the promotion of the development of economically underdeveloped areas, such as from dividends on bonds and shares which might be bought with the available funds for promotion of the development of these areas owned by the Republic of Macedonia; from selling of those bonds and shares; share of the revenue that the country would accumulate from concessions, etc. Special foreign credit lines may be used for the promotion of the development of the economically underdeveloped areas through authorised banks in the country.  The allocation of the funds for promotion of the development of economically underdeveloped areas is determined by a Decision on Criteria, Amount, Conditions and Manners of Using the Funds for Promotion of Development of Economically Underdeveloped Areas (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 67/99). Beneficiaries of the funds channelled through the Bureau may be natural or legal persons on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia who wish to carry out investment and other projects in the settlements located in the economically underdeveloped areas. They may submit requests, together with the relevant documents, to the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas. 
a) Does your legislation specify one administrative unit or entity responsible for coordination at the national level? Which entity? What is its composition? 
Considering the already mentioned fact that there is no law in the Republic of Macedonia which regulates the regional development matter in a complex manner, the existing legal framework, more precisely the Law on Organisation and Operation of State Administrative Bodies (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 58/2000), establishes a competence of the Ministry of Local Self-government for proposing the system, the policy, the measures and the instruments for attainment of a more balanced regional development and for promotion of the development of economically underdeveloped areas. The same Law regulates one organisational unit – the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas as a body within the Ministry of Local Self-government, with a legal competence to implement the measures for promotion of the development of economically underdeveloped areas. Four departments are established within the Ministry, of which the Department for Financing and Development of Municipalities carries out the competence for proposing policies for attainment of a more balanced regional development and development of the economically underdeveloped areas. The Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas implements the measures for achievement of a more balanced regional development through two departments, namely the Department of Indirect Measures, and the Department of Project Implementation. 
b) Does your legislation specify one unit, group or entity responsible for decision-making at the national level? Which entity? 
In accordance with the Law on the Government (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 58/2000), the Government of the Republic of Macedonia is competent for taking decisions on the economic and development policy, for promotion of economic development and achievement of a more balanced spatial and regional development, and for more rapid development of the economically underdeveloped areas. However the decision-making process is preceded by a procedure established by the Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas.  Pursuant to the provisions of this Law, the initiatives for implementation of certain investment projects regarding the infrastructure of local public interest and for other purposes are given by the local self-government units. Following the establishment of the priority development needs at local level, such as the investments in the area of local infrastructure and the other needs, by the bodies of the local self-government units, the local governments submit the initiatives to the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas for providing financial support for their implementation. In the following stage, the submitted initiatives are considered by the Bureau, then ranked and classified according to their purpose and priority, and finally included in an annual Program for Implementation of Activities, which is subject to approval by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Ministry of Local Self-government prepares and submits the annual Program for Implementation of Activities to the Government of Republic of Macedonia.  
c) Is it specified in your legislation which unit or group functions as the secretariat that prepares the decisions referred to in question b)? 
The existing legislation establishes the competence of the Ministry of Local Self-government to prepare and propose decisions relating to the Law on Promotion of Development of Economically Underdeveloped Areas. In discharging such legal competence, the Ministry of Local Self-government carries out cycle of communication with the local governments, which consists of collection and consideration of the initiatives submitted by the local self-government units or the local communities. As a next step, the Ministry inspects the geographic or the economic situation of the respective municipality, regardless of whether it is a rural or other type of settlement. On the basis of the established facts and economic indicators, a list of areas that satisfy the legal criteria for being determined as economically underdeveloped areas for a period of four years is defined by the Ministry. After defining the list, the Ministry of Local Self-government submits it to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for approval. Accordingly, it can be said that the Ministry of Local Self-government, in collaboration with the local self-government units, functions as a Secretariat that prepares the decisions in the area of promotion of development of the economically underdeveloped areas.  In addition, the Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas stipulates that a Commission is to be formed for allocation of grant funds for larger economic infrastructure projects and for participation in the permanent share for financing of certain economic investment projects. The Commission delivers an opinion to the Bureau regarding the allocation of those funds. The Bureau reaches a decision on financing only after receiving a positive opinion from the Commission. The Commission is formed within the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas, and it consists of five members appointed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia as representatives of the relevant ministries. 
d) Does your legislation specify other responsible administrative units? 
Following the answer to the previous question, it should be noted that apart from the Ministry of Local Self-government, the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas, as a body within the Ministry, has a legally established competence for implementing measures regarding the development of economically underdeveloped areas. Such competence of the Bureau is regulated by the Law on Organisation and Operation of State Administrative Bodies (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 58/00) and by the Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas.  In this context, the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas takes decisions on financing projects with different purposes.  However, there is a sound legal basis for the local self-government units to carry out activities aimed at achieving the goal of reaching balanced and sustainable regional development. Pursuant to the Law on Local Self-government (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 5/02), the local self-government units , within their competencies, carry out activities related to the local economic development, which means planning of the local economic development, establishing development and structural priorities, carrying out local economic policy, supporting the development of small and medium-sized enterprises, participating in the establishment and development of the local network of institutions and agencies, and promoting partnership. The same Law provides that the local self-government units may cooperate for the achievement of common interests and carrying out common operations within their competencies. The municipalities may join funds and establish common services or common administrative bodies for certain areas, in accordance with the law, which also includes the area of regional development.  In that sense, the local self-government units are given an essential competence related to the promotion of partnerships at local level and of endogenous development, which means that the initiatives should originate from the bottom-up. This should represent the basis for the new regional economic policy in the Republic of Macedonia. 
e) Does your legislation specify decision-making procedures? 
The decision making procedures are defined by the Law on General Administrative Procedure (Official Gazette of SFRY nos. 52/56, 10/56, 4/77, 11/78, 9/86, and the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 44/02) and the Law on Organisation and Operation of State Administrative Bodies (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 58/00), and the Law on Public Procurement (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 19/04). The decisions on allocation of funds for specific purposes are reached in accordance with the Law on General Administrative Procedure.  Pursuant to the Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas and the Decisions, the funds in the Bureau are approved based on the submitted projects. The potential beneficiaries that satisfy the legal criteria submit their requests with the accompanying documents required for reaching a decision, i.e. a main project, a revision of the main project, consents from the relevant ministries, evidence of provided funds, and other documents. The requests are considered by the Department for Project Implementation, where the accounting value proposed by the applicant is checked. On the basis of this, an opinion on approval of the request is prepared for internal use by the Bureau. At the same time, every investment project is inspected on site by the Bureau representatives. After carrying out the activities, the Director of the Bureau issues a decision on approval of funds for participation in the funding of the infrastructure project or some other purpose for which the Commission has previously delivered an opinion (see the answer to subsidiary question c). The Bureau does not have the capacity of an investor; it is only a funding participant. Because of that, the investor or the beneficiary of the Bureau funds, autonomously implements the public procurement procedure according to the Law on Public Procurement, and decides on the basis of the best offer. In the course of the implementation of the project, the Bureau supervises the construction stages on site, and after the construction is finished, it carries out technical inspection before it is used. The funds are disbursed on the basis of submitted payment and other documentation (temporary and final construction situations, cession agreements, etc.). If during the project implementation the funds are misused, the Bureau has a legal right to initiate a procedure for paying-back the misused funds, including a default interest. 
f) Does your legislation specify at the national level an administrative unit(s) or entity responsible for implementation/management and monitoring of programs/projects? Which? What is the composition of this/these unit(s)? 
Pursuant to the Law on Promotion of Economically Underdeveloped Areas, the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas is competent for implementation of the procedures for carrying-out regional development measures. Two departments are established within the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas. Regarding the monitoring of programs, the Ministry of Local Self-government implements the monitoring in the first instance procedure, while at national level the Government of the Republic of Macedonia monitors the policy through the approval of the annual Program for Implementation of the Bureau Activities. The legislation stipulates that the Program and the Report should be discussed by the Commission of Economic System and Current Economic Policy within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, which gives an opinion to the Government. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia has a legal authority to approve the Program and the Report. The Economic Council of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, being a permanent consultative body, also reviews the Program and the Report, on request of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, or on its own initiative, and gives an expert opinion. The opinion of the Economic Council is not binding. The Report on Implementation of the Program for Implementation of Activities of the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas is submitted to the Members of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia for information. Before that, the Report is discussed by the Commission of Macroeconomic Policy and Development within the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. 
g) Does your legislation specify a decision-making group, council, unit or other entity at the regional level? Which? 
There is no complex regional development law in the Republic of Macedonia and consequently no legislation specifying a decision-making group, council, unit or other entity at regional level.  However, the systemic Law on Local Self-government stipulates significant competencies of the local government level, establishing functions in the domain of spatial/physical and urban planning, construction and maintenance of local infrastructural facilities, providing utility services for the citizens, local economic development, management, development and maintenance of public sector institutions, such as those in the area of education, culture and social welfare., The local self-government units shall start carrying out the activities in the area of culture, education, social welfare, etc. in 2005.  For discharging of the competencies referred to as traditional ones, or the competencies in the economic area, the local self-government units adopt programs, such as the Program for arrangement of construction land, the Program of the Road Fund, etc. All the programs are integrated in the draft budget proposal that is submitted for review to the representative body, i.e. the Municipal Council. Within the legally determined deadlines for review and discussion on the proposed budget, the elected representatives in the local council reach a decision on the priorities for the next fiscal year in the form of a Municipal Budget Act, in accordance with the Law on Budgets (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” nos. 79/93, 03/94, 71/96, 46/00, 11/01, 93/01, 46/02, 24/03 and 85/03). Upon entry into force of the Law on Financing of Municipalities, an improvement of program budgeting and consequently municipal strategic planning is expected.  Therefore, it may be said that at local - municipal level of government, the elected representatives in the Municipal Council are competent for reaching decisions on the development within the framework of their legally determined competencies. However, the Law on Local Self-government provides the legal basis for inter-municipal cooperation, which can be used to establish entities at regional - planning level for the purpose of making decisions in the area of planning and implementing the regional development policy. After having established their priorities with the adoption of the local budgets, the municipalities which satisfy the criteria for being supported by the Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas, submit the relevant initiatives to this state entity for implementation of their programs. The procedure for selection of the municipalities to be financially supported by the Bureau of Economically Underdeveloped Areas is elaborated in the previous answers.   
h) Are the members of this entity specified in your legislation? Are they political appointees or technical, or both? 
As in the answer under g), in the Republic of Macedonia there is no legislation for a complex regional development, there are no decision making groups or entities on the regional level, the composition of which can be elaborated under this question. However, pursuant to the Law on Local Self-government, the local level of government has competencies which relate to the development of a given territory. Different development programs, in accordance with the Law on Budgets, are integrated within the consolidated budget adopted by the Municipal Council. The number of members of the Municipal Council depends on the size of the municipality, i.e. it is established with the systemic Law on Local Self-government. The Law on Local Elections (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia no. 60/04) establishes the criteria and manner of election of the members of the Municipal Council at free and direct elections. 
i) Is it specified in your legislation which unit or group functions as the secretariat that prepares the decisions? In accordance with the previously stated fact that there is no law for complex regulation of the regional development on the whole territory of the Republic of Macedonia, and that the regional policy is implemented through measures of development promotion of the economically underdeveloped areas, which cover 64% of the territory of the country, the legislation does not specify entities competent for decision making at regional level, so there are no legally determined relevant decision making entities or groups, except at national level. At municipal, local government level, various programmes relating to the local infrastructure construction, and other established programmes for development promotion, are prepared by the municipal administration of the local self-government units. In that sense, they function as a secretariat that prepares the decisions which are reached by the municipal councils. With regard to the preparation of technical documentation for construction of infrastructure facilities of local public interest, it is most often prepared by professional planning offices based on special request by the municipality. 
j) Does your legislation specify at the regional level an administrative unit(s) or entity responsible for implementation and monitoring of programs/projects? Which? 
In accordance with the current legislation, there is no law which regulates the regional development problems in Republic of Macedonia, so there is no administrative unit or entity competent for monitoring programs/projects at the regional level. Regarding the local level of government, the mayor of the municipality is the competent body for execution of the municipal budget and consequently for the implementation of the policies funded by the municipal budget. However, some municipalities implement certain development programs through the public utility enterprises founded by them, and in that case, the relevant public utility is responsible for the implementation of the actual program. At the end of the budget year, a financial statement of the municipality budget is prepared, which integrates the various programs, including the programs implemented by the public utilities founded by the municipality, and it is submitted to the council for review and adoption. In that sense, the Municipal Council monitors the implementation of programs and decides on acceptance or rejection of the financial statement for the municipal budget. If certain programs are funded by the budget of the Republic of Macedonia as capital grants, the competent body of state administration carries out the monitoring of the usage of the transferred funds. The monitoring of regulation passed by the municipality is carried out pursuant to the Law on Local Self-government, which stipulates that the Ministry of Local Self-government carries out the monitoring of the legality of the regulations passed by the municipalities. If the regulation of the municipality does not comply with the Constitution and law, the Ministry of Local Self-government may decide to withhold the application of the regulation, giving an explanation thereof. This decision is published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia. If the municipality does not harmonise such regulation with the Constitution and the legislation within the legally determined deadline, the Ministry of Local Self-government shall challenge the regulation before the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Macedonia. 
k) Is this entity independent from the central level or from the decision-making entity? If no, in what way are they related? 
As in the answer to the previous question, there is no law which regulates the regional development problems in the Republic of Macedonia in a complex manner; there is no administrative entity for implementation and monitoring of programs at the regional level. At the local level of government, the executive body (the municipality mayor) which is competent for execution of the municipal budgets and for implementation of development programs/projects is independent from the central level of government, within the competencies determined by law. The monitoring of certain programs/projects by the central level of government is carried out in cases when they are financially supported with funds from the Budget of the Republic.  
4. Does your legislation specify a national budget for regional policy and/or for labour market policy? In what form and at what level? 
The laws in the Republic of Macedonia do not specify a national budget for regional policy and for labour market policy, but the financing of the regional policy and the labour market policy is carried out through the relevant programmes of the line ministries and the other civil administration bodies. Namely, the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia provides funds for these policies, or more specifically:   The development of the economically underdeveloped areas is funded for the economic and non-economic infrastructure, for the support of development of industry, agriculture and tourism projects, premiums for opening new jobs in small industrial facilities, and for training of personnel in these areas;    The construction of water supply systems, sewerage systems and water treatment   stations in the local self-government units (LSGU);    The electrification of rural areas;   The local roads’ infrastructure;   The construction of waste dumpsites    The support of projects for establishment of small and medium sized enterprises;    The technical support of projects in the field of energy;   The employment support programme, in accordance with which, the refunding of the legal contributions for new employments is financed;   The employment of disabled persons; and   The retraining and training of unemployed persons. 
5. Does your legislation specify a breakdown of the budget for regional policy and/or for labour market policy between the central level and other levels of government? 
There is no normative solution for a breakdown of the budget for regional policy and for market labour policy among the central level and other levels of government. According  to the Law on Budget (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 79/93, 3/94, 71/96, 46/00,11/01, 93/01, 46/02, 61/02, 24/03 and 85/03), the Law on Budget’s Execution (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 85/03), and the Law on Financing of the Local Self Government Units (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 61/2004), the conditions for financing of these policies are provided both on the central and the local level, i.e. the financing of such projects through appropriate programs is allocated from the Budget of Republic of Macedonia and the budgets of the local self government units (LSGU). The financing of the aforementioned policies is pursuant to the existing legislation for regional and labour market policy.  Also, pursuant to the Information on the legal and institutional framework for a balanced regional development with a proposed Action Plan, adopted at the session of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia held on 1 November 2004, right after the establishment of the relevant administrative structures for regional development and pursuant to the designed Law on Regional Development, legal and structural prerequisites for precise allocation of the budgetary funds for the regional and labour market policy shall be provided. 6. What adaptations are necessary to your legislative framework to ensure compatibility of future operations to be financed by the Structural and Cohesion Funds with the following Community policies and legislation: a) Rules on competition; b) Rules on the award of public contracts; c) Rules on environmental protection and improvement; d) Rules on the elimination of inequalities and the promotion of equality between men and women? 
a) Rules on competition 
Detailed information about the compliance of the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia in the area of market competition with the relevant EU legislation and about the plans for their further harmonisation are given in Chapter 06 – Competition policy – Section I, Antitrust (see 06_I). 
b) Rules on the award of public contracts 
Detailed information about the compliance of the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia in the area of public procurements with the relevant EU legislation and about the plans for their further harmonisation are given in Chapter 01 – Free circulation of goods – Section V, Public procurement (see 01_V). 
c) Rules on environmental protection and improvement 
There are 5 environment laws in the Republic of Macedonia appropriate with the relevant European Union Directives, namely: The Law on Waste Management (Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia No. 68/2004); the Law on Quality of Environmental Air (Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia No. 67/2004); the Law on Nature Protection (Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia No. 67/2004); as well as the Draft Law on Environment and the Draft Law on Waters, which are in the second phase of their passing. They determine the time frames (pursuant to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement) for gradual and complete implementation of the obligations stemming from the transposed EU Directives. Pursuant to the National Program on Legislation Approximation (NPLA), the future activities for the transposing of the other EU Directives in the environmental area are scheduled. For more details, please refer to Chapter (see 22). 
d) Rules on the elimination of inequalities and the promotion of equality between men and women? 
More information about the existing regulations in this area is given in Chapter 13, questions (see 13_II_A_113_II_A_213_II_A_313_II_A_413_II_A_513_II_A_613_II_A_713_II_A_8 and 13_II_A_9). 
7. What adaptations are needed to your legislative framework to allow for multi-annual budget programming with a view to provide the national co-financing for the Structural and Cohesion Funds assistance? 
The legislation approximation to the relevant EU regulations for securing a multi-annual budget planning, in a function of providing resources for national co-financing for the Structural and Cohesion Funds, is in progress at several levels. For that purpose, a new Law on Budgets is in preparation, and it will allow implementing of provisions which would regulate the passing of a middle-term development plan, fiscal strategies and multi-annual (three-year) planning of the budget resources. At the moment, the national co-financing is provided within the frame of the legal process for budget preparation for every following year. Namely, after the adoption of the Fiscal Strategy, which establishes the middle-term projection of revenues and expenditures, as well as the maximum expenditure amount for every budget beneficiary, the proposed budget breakdowns are submitted, where the budget beneficiaries state their needs for funds and national co-financing. In accordance with the determination for acquiring EU membership, provisions for regulation of the legal prerequisites for using foreign funds and providing national co-financing shall be implemented in the Law on Budgets, which is the fundamental law that regulates the public funds management.      Apart from this, pursuant to the Information on the legal and institutional framework for balanced regional development with a proposed Action Plan adopted on the Government of the Republic of Macedonia session on 1 November, 2004, a draft Law on Regional Development is going to be prepared by the end of 2005. De facto, these legal provisions for balanced regional development shall explicitly define the necessary level of structural and cohesion changes, which shall be integrated in the Law on Budgets. 
8. Are there any provisions in the national budget which allow to transfer budgets of national co-financing between programs, funds and years? a) If yes, please describe them. b) If no, are there any plans to introduce such provisions? 

a) With the adoption of the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, each year a certain amount is allocated in the budget of the Ministry of Transport and Communications, as a participation granted by the state in the construction of waterworks and treatment of waste water stations for the settlements of the local self government units, without their obligation to recompense the funds. On the basis of the allocated funds, the Ministry of Transport and Communications publishes a public announcement in the daily press for submitting projects proposal for construction of waterworks and sewage systems, and on the basis of the done evaluations, the Ministry of Transport and Communications prepares and submits a Proposal for a Decision for Distribution of Funds allocated for this purpose, to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, which adopts a final Decision which is published (in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia), and later implemented. The transfer of funds according to the adopted decisions is done by the Ministry of Transport and Communications, which is a competent body of the state administration, directly responsible for the successful implementation of the projects for construction of waterworks and sewage systems in the local self government units. The transfer is carried out upon previously submitted, verified and complete fund transfer documentation for proper use of the funds by the local self government units. Also, funds from the budget of the Republic of Macedonia are allocated for the annual budget of the budget beneficiary - Bureau for Economically Underdeveloped Areas, and they are in use on the basis of the annual program, adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, where the use of the funds is defined. On the basis of the adopted program, the municipality submits requests to the Bureau together with the necessary documents, as well as their designs for allocation of the funds. A Commission, formed by the line ministries (Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, Ministry of Transport and Communication, and Ministry of Economy) decides upon the submitted requests according to the priority list for separate municipalities, for the current budgetary year, in the frames of the funds allocated for this purposes. If the allocated budgetary funds are not spent in the course of the year because of justified reasons, the budget beneficiary may transfer those budgetary funds only upon a prior approval by the Ministry of Finance.  Pursuant to the existing legislation, there are no specific provisions for transfer of budgetary funds within national co-financing between years. The conditions for transfer of budgetary funds between programs in the course of a year are stipulated with the Law on Budgets (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 79/93, 03/94, 71/96, 46/00, 11/01, 93/01, 46/02, 24/03 and 85/03). With the aim of providing transfer of budgetary funds with co-financing between years, the Ministry of Finance will include provisions in the new Budgets Law which will include prerequisites for establishing a middle-term projection of these funds, which shall be further transferred as a plan in the annual budget of the Republic of Macedonia.  
